
THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 5 DECEMBER 1972
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen; you were told by way of
a press release at two o'clock this afternoon that I had called
on the Governor-General, at his request, at 12.15 this afternoon
and had accepted his commission to form a Government.
I gave him the reasons why I believe that there should
be an interim Government formed by the Australian Labor Party
and that for the purposes of that Government two persons would
be enough,. The statement gives the reason, or some of the
reasons, why it was urgent to have a Government to carry out the
mandate that the Party received at the elections last Saturday.
The nature of the matters which I mentioned would show
why ii. would be more effective to have these decisions made by
an interim Government which sympathised with them rather than by
an interim Government which had opposed them. It would be a more
appropriate thing for both the incoming Government and the outgoing
one to have the responsibility of those decisions.
At 3.30 this afternoon Mr. Barnard and I accordingly
waited on the Governor-General and he swore us into the portfolios
which you have. NOW, are there any questions?
MEGAN STOYLES, Mr. Prime Minister, could you please give
us the timetable of when people gaoled under the National Service
Act will be released and also the timetable for ending
conscription?
PRIME MINISTER:. Well, first of all, I'll ask Mr. Barnard to give
the matters which fall to him as Minister for Defence for ending
the call-up.
MR. BARNARD: Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen. As you
know, I have already had discussions with officers from the
Department of Labour and National Service, the members of the
Department of flip Army and I have this afternoon released a
statement which will be available to the Press and which
discontinues the call-up. There will be no furt-her call-up.
Those who have already received a notice of call-up will not be
obliged to act or. them. So, as from today, notices will be
going out to those who have received their call-up notice that
they have no further obligation under the National Service Act. 
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, for the matters which fall
to me for the time being as Attorney-General. Yesterday and
today Senator Murphy, who will be the Attorney-General
when the full Ministry is appointed, has been in consultation
with the officers of the Attorney-General's Department and has
prepared the papers. Instructions have now been given that all
pending prosecutions are to be withdrawn. The Commonwealth
Police have been asked to withhold execution of outstanding
warrants and papers have been prepared for the Governor-General
to remit the sentences, the remaining portion of all prison
sentences, of those who are now in prison and also the
remission of all outstanding fines. Those papers I've signed
them I have told the Governor-General that they will be
submitted to him. At this stage I don't know when or precisely
how they will be submitted.
JOHN LOMBARD, " MELBOURNE SUN": About the blokes who are already
in the Army, national servicemen, what exactly will be the
machinery for giving them the option for leaving the Army. Can
it be done without an amendment to the National Service Act?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll ask Mr. Barnard.
MR. BARNARD: Yes. Again, Mr. Prime Minister, I have already made
a move on this question. What I do want to ensure is that no
national servicemen will be disadvantaged as a result of changes
that we will be making to provide additional benefits to those
who are serving in the armed forces but the machinery has already
been put in motion. I expect that before the end of this week
the necessary regulation will have been provided that will enable
the discharge of those national servicemen who are now in the
armed forces to take their discharge. Now, we would hope that
they will be phased out after they have been advised of the
additional benefits they would receive if they decide to continue
their 18 months service as national servicemen. So they will
receive that advice. Then they can decide whether they will
elect to take their discharge or remain and complete their
18 months. Now the necessary machinery has already dealt with
the requirements and they will be advised before Christmas.
FRANK CHAMBERLAIN, May I ask a question of the Prime
Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister? Sir, does this first
Whitlam Ministry mean that you will have a second Whitlam.
Ministry next week or the week after or is this to be called a
two man dictatorship or is this an unprecedented move? That's
my first question to you, sir, and to the Deputy Prime Minister,
when you say the national servicemen are phased out, sir, do you
mean they are phased out into unemployment or are they phased
into employment by the National Service Department?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, first of all about when there is a full
Ministry appointed. Perhaps I can enlarge on the reasons which
were given in the press statement at two o'clock this afternoon
for having to wait so long before there ca-n be a meeting of the
Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, the Caucus, to elect a Ministfy. 
The elections, which were held last Saturday, are very
close in many electorates and tihe voting is very complex. Under
ti e lw it is not possible t~ o distribute preferences until ten
days after the poll, unless the number of votes which are still
awaiting delivery by post would not affect the result.
Now, the complication in this election is that therp
are a very great number of electoral divisions where previously
there was only one coalition candidate because that candidate
was a Minister and the coalition partner did not oppose
Ministers. In many of these electorates, however,-the Minister
retired and accordingly had both a Country Party and a Liberal
candidate standiing. The number of votes outstanding, therefore,
has to be taken into account in determining whether it is the
Liberal or the Country Party candidate who will be eliminated
first. The Liberal candidate, his preferences would be nearly
certain to go all to the Country Party candidate. If the Country
Party candidate was elimina~ ted first, some preferences would go
to the Labor candidate and so, therefore, it takes probably
the ten days to do it. Furthermore, there are a considerable
number of electorates where the Chief Electoral Officer has already
been told there will be a recount and he advised me yesterday
that in these circumstances he didn't see where he would be
able to give a result in many of these electorptes where the
Labor candidate could be expected to win before Friday of next
week, or even the weekend.
Now, in those circumstances, the Caucus could not be
held at the present time until Monday week and then the Caucus will
have to elect the Ministry and the Caucus will then have to
decide, or the Ministry, if the Caucus so determines, will h~' ve to decide
what will be the new Ministries.
FRANK CHAMBERLAIN: you think you will be automatically elected
Leader, sir, do you?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't heard that I will be opposed but
whoever is the Leader will then have to allocate the Ministers
among the portfolios then to be determined. It may be that not
until tomorrow fortnight, the 20th of December, can a full
Ministry be sworn to take the place of thi--irterim one.
FRANK CHAMBERLAIN: And that will be a secon d Ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it will have to be because it is not just
a question of handing over some portfolios to new members who
have then become Ministers. There will inevitably be some chnnges
in the nature of the Ministries. There are to be some
amalgamations, maybe, but also the Party is committed to creating
several new Ministries. 
MR. BARNARD: The discussions I've had with the officers of the
Department of Labour and National Service have been on the basis
to ensure that their re-employment rights are protected and,
as you know, this is already of course included in the National
Service Act. I wanted to, myself, ensure that their re-employment
rights were protected and the machinery for providing for those
who want to take their discharge will be, at the same time, looked
at by the Department of Labour and National Service to ensure that
the job opportunities are available.
DAVID BARNETT, Last year during the visit to Peking you
told the Chinese Premier, Mr. Chou En-lai that " If my Party wins
the election, you will be able to see the first visit by an
Australian Prime Minister to the Chinese People's Republic and
its sole capital of Peking". Mr. Chou replied; " We will welcome
that". What steps, sir, are you taking to bring about the
recognition of China? When would you like to make this visit?
PRIME MINISTER: Our Ambassador in Paris, Mr. Renouf, has arranged
to meet the Chinese Ambassador in Paris, Mr. Huang Chen, at,
Canberra time, four o'clock on Thursday, a. m. I meant Thursday
morning, and cables have gone to him suggesting the terms upon
which there should be full diplomatic representation by each
country in the other. You ask when to visit. There will be,
early in October, in Tokyo, a Japan-Australia Ministerial Meeting.
It would seem. appropriate before, or after, that meeting for me
to visit Peking.
L. OAKES: Sir, on that subject, I think you have a message from
Mr. Forace from Mr. Chou. Could you tell us the contents of that
message?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I have received the message. I don't think
it would be appropriate for me to state the contents of it.
ALAN REID, Sir, you made employment a very high priority
of your policy speech. Obviously the Parliament cannot meet
until February. Are there any administrative acts that you could
take in the interval to assist the school leavers and alleviate
unemployment and also, sir, if I may ask an unrelated one, a lesser
one, nevertheless interesting, what is going to happen to the
New Year's Honours List?
PRIME MINISTER: First, school leavers. I expect to be seeing
Mr. Crean within the next few days. On Sunday I'll be seeing
both Mr. Dunstan and Mr. Tonkin where unemployment in urban
areas is considerable. As you know, unemployment relief up till
now has been made for rural areas. In those two States there is
the largest percentage of the population in the capitals and
because of this unemployment is worse in those States because
the rural areas bulk less. I'll be seeing them on Sunday.
Mr. Crean I hope to see before then, certainly after that.
Honours Lists. This question is premature, if you don't
mind me saying so. I am making a submission to the Governor-General
on this matter since he raised it with me. 
ALAN BARNES, " THE AGE": When you were Leader of the Opposition,
sir, you...
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Barnes, " Age", and ageless.
ALAN BARNES: When you were Leader of the Opposition, you suggested
that the Liberal Governmen~ t should make a Christmas bonus, give
$ 100 to each. of the pensioners as a means of stimula~ ting the
economy. Does your Government intend to carry through your own
a dvi ce?
PRIME MINISTER: It needs parliamentary action and that cannot be
done this year.
FRANK CHAMBERLAIN: Could you make it retrospective, sir, at
Easter? PRIME MINISTER: That would not enable any boost to spending, though.
JOHN O'FARRELL: But do you still intend to do it?
PRIME MINISTER: I will consult my colleagues on this matter. I
notice it is ore of the things which is suggested in the " Australian
Economic Review" published by the Melbourne University Institute
of Applied Econornio and Social Research.
BENNELL, 7 NETWORK: Sir, you will have a 27 member Cabinet. I
wonder how you are going to get over the legislative delays that
Mr. McMahon recently complained of with his very much smaller
Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: None of my Ministers-will be slow, none of them
will be without political perception.
BROWN," ICOURIER-MAIL": Sir, you have won this election in the
suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne. Apart from rejuvenating these
areas, what priorities do you have for the rest of Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: We have won them in the suburbs of Sydney and
Melbourne because that is where so many people live. We will, in
fact, be aiming to do things which will be of benefit to all
those areas where there are large concentrat4ons of population
and, as you know, we propose to involve local government for the
first time in national financial arrangements. There are
considerable growing areas already in some provincial centres
and we aim, through measures of decentralisatiop and co-operation
with the States, to make more such areas. In proportion to
popula-L-cn we did, in fact, increase in quite a number of such
provincial areas.
MICHAEL SCHILDBERGER, NATIONAL 9 NEWS: Mr. Prime Minister, can
we expect any tax changes before the next Budget or perhaps have
another mini-Budget before the next August Budget? 
PRIME MINISTER: I would not expect there would be any tax changes
other, I would hope, than maybe excise duty on wine and sales tax
on contraceptives.
CHAMBERLAIN: Both eliminated?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
BARNES: Is that an undertaking on the latter? You undertook in
your policy speech to immediately abolish the wine tax.
PRIME MINISTER: I am checking this at this stage to see whether,
as I think can be done, the announcement can be made that
legislation will be brought in retrospective to the date on which
these announcements were made.
MUNGO McCALLUM, " NATION REVIEW": Prime Minister, you have not
only made a number of appointments to your own staff and named a
number of people who are obviously going to be close advisers to
you. A number of men who are obviously going to be important
Ministers in the coming government have also named people who
are going to be important to them and perhaps personal advisers.
To what extent is this going to affect the normal public service
structure? To what extent is this going to mean that you are
in fact running a presidential government with the people who are
really giving you the advice and to some extent making decisions
pulled in from outside both the electoral and public service structure?
PRIME MINISTER: This is not a matter upon which I would presume
to make any decisions before a full Ministry is appointed. This
is an interim Ministry and it will make those decisions which are
urgent to carry out mandates. This is not a matter to which I
have given any consideration. It is a matter which can wait until
the Ministers are elected by the Party and allocated by the Prime
Minister. The objective, if it comes about, is to depoliticise
the public service so that persons who are responsible for carrying
out political decisions will be known to be appointed by a
Minister at his whim and disposable at his whim. The public service,
of course, will be less political if there are such personal
advisers known to be appointed.
CHAMBERLAIN: Prime Minister, specifically following Mr. Mungo
McCallum's question, there are some decisions made by the previous
Government, urban development, decentralisation and what have you,
and an organisvtion calling itself NURDS has been developed and
big appointments been made. Now, do they unwrap thsemselves or do
they go into suspense?
PRIME MINISTER: Here again, it is not a matter where we have to
make a decision at this sto&amp; p. There are some matters in the
urban context which I did undertake in the Party's policy speech
to make, if possible before Christmas, and I will be making these
after consultation with Mr. Uren and, I hope, Mr. Jones on Friday. 
I say I hope because I have not been in touch with Mr. Jones
myself because of the pressure of other things today, but Mr. Uren
will be here on Friday and if Mr. Jones is here we can discuss
still more matters in this context, and NURDA will be among the
bodies which we will consult on these matters which we want to
get under way before Christmas. They invclve, really, letters by
me to the Premiers concerned.
ARMFIELD, " AGE": Mr. Whitlam, under Labor's system of open
government, will members of the armed forces, including the
Military Boards, be able to make public their views on service
matters such as the effects of ending national service?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter of Government policy where it would
be improper for the opinion of any such Boards to be sought or
tendered. The people have decided this matter.
DAVID SOLOMON, " CANBERRA TIMES": Sir, what are your priorities
in the next two weeks? What does your Government in the next two
weeks intend to do and what will be the major priorities of the
Government which will be elected tben?
PRIME MINISTER: I should only say what will be the priorities
of this administration. The priorities of the following one are
for it to determine, for Mr. Barnard and me to share in making.
I have stated three matters in the press statement at two o'clock
this afternoon the abolition of conscription, the reference of
colour television to the Tariff Board ( I am seeing Dr. Cairns on
this matter with the head of the Department of Trade and Industry,
Mr. McKay, at 6 o'clock tonight), the application to the
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to re-open
the equal pay case so that the Commonwealth, which had intervened,
can now state ' support for the case. I have been in touch with
Mr. Cameron about this. I mentioned some matters in foreign
affairs. China I have already answered some questions about.
There are also matters in the United Nations General Assembly
which concludes its deliberations, I think, on the 19th. 
TED BARKER, " WEST AUSTRALIAN": Sir, have you raised the
question of revaluation in your talks with'Sir Frederick
Wheeler, and could you give an indication of what your
government plans on the currency?
PRIME MINISTER: I have not raised it. This is not a matter
which the present Ministry would deal with and, frankly, even
if I had raised it, it would not be proper for me to tell you.
JOHN O'FARLL, " SYDNEY MORNING HERALD?: I was wondering if we
could revert to China? Would you expect Dr. Stephen FitzGerald
would be Australia's first Ambassador to China, and would you want
this man to be our first Ambassador? Would you press him to be
our first Ambassador?
PRIME MINISTER: I noticed that Dr. Stephen FitzGerald has been
nominated in some journals for this purpose. I notice Mr. Ross
Terrill has been nominated by some other journals. -You will
appreciate, ladies and gentlemen, that I could not discuss any
person, man or woman, as a prospective Ambassador or High
Commissioner until the person's name had been submitted to the
receiving country and had approved. Before agr'ement that's for
your benefit, Francois Chamberlain I could not make any comment
on such matters.
KEVIN POWER, 2tJE: Prime Minister, when will the Parliament meet
next year to deal with the legislative content of-your mandate?
Will it be early or will it be in the normal time?
PRIME MINISTER: Here again, it is not a matter upon which this
Ministry would presume to make a decision. It is a matter
certainly for the next administration.
WARREN DUNCAN. Prime Minister, what would be your first
moves towards granting land rights to aborigines, and do you
intend im.' mediately to involve the aborigines in the work of their
department?
PRIME MINISTER: Here again, this is a matter which must wait
until the next administration. .' It is a matter upon which a full,
distinct Minister for Aborigines has to be appointed. I have
already discussed the matter this morning, half past ten, with
Dr. Coombs, among other matters.
CHALMERS. ATN NETWORK: Mr. Prime Minister, will Dr. Coombs be
an adviser to this administration?
PRIME MINISTER: He is.
TRUMBLE. " NEW YORK TIMES": Sir..
PRIME MINISTER: Republican or Dem~ ocrat?
TRtUhBLE: On the fence, Sir. I am at sea, I was a Democrat for
Nixon. In opposition, you and Mr. Barnard both raised the
question of the American military installations in Australia 
with particular reference to the secrecy surrounding them and
then of course there is a question raised in the Labor Party
platform on the matter of foreign administration of bases on
Australian soil. Could you at this time, Sir, indicate the
policy your government will take on these questions?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter upon which no consideration
will be given or really could be given by this interim
administration. I would like to make it plain, however, that
there now need be no secrecy, because Mr. Barnard and I can find
out whatever we want to. The fact'that there has been secre * cy
up till now has not been a condition imposed by any United States
Administration.
BARRON, " SYDNEY SUN": Why did you decide to restrict the present
Ministry to two, why not spread the responsibility a bit thinner
with some of the men you have already described as certainties,
particularly thE Senate Leader and his Deputy?
PRIM~ E MINISTER: The difficulty is, where do you draw the line
on this? There are some people in the. HParliament, the fact that
they are going to be elected is already quite obvious, who are
in the House of Representatives, who have been in the House of
Representatives longer than Mr. Barnard or I and who have been
on the Caucus Executive longer than Mr. Barnard or I. Mr. Crean
has been on the Executive since 1954, Mr. Cameron since 1958.
Obviously if the test of seniority and service is to prevail,
they would be entitled to have priority over anybody else, but
you will appreciate that if I were to choose two persons from
the House of Representatives there would be, what is it, ten
other members of the House of Representatives in the old Shadow
Ministry, all of whom have clearly been re-elected and it would
be invidious for me to presume to pick out which of my House of
Representatives colleagues would be senior in service,
significance, portfolio, and accordingly it was most appropriate
to choose two persons alone. Perhaps I might comment also
there is an appropriateness about having an interim Ministry of
only two because any matters which have to be done by the
Executive Council would require. the Governor-General, who is
not a partisan person, to be present. It is unusual to have a
Ministry of two persons., There is, therefore, the public
safeguard of having the President of the Executive Council
constituting the Executive Council with those two Ministers.
There is, you will notice, no Vice-President of the Executive
Council. CHAMBERLAIN: That means Sir Paul Hasluck has the casting vote?
PRIME~ MINISTER: In the case of disagreement between the
partisan members of the Executive Council. As you know, there
has not been disagreement between the two pattisan members of
the what's the term, the active Ministers, the active members
of the Executive Council, the Minister's Executive Council on
Call, isn't that the term? in the 18 years they have served
in the Parliament together. 
O'FARRELL: Those reasons you have given do not apply to
Senator Murphy or Senator Willesee. Why havn't you included
them as members of' the Executive Council?
PRIDMC-MINISTER: I have mentioned two members of' the House of
Representatives who, by any test, are senior to Senator Murphy
and Senator Willesee.
0O'FA' 7RRELL: Yes, but they are not subject to re-election.
They are there now. They are safe Labor men.
PRIM~' E MINISTER: I think they are all safe Labor men.
MAX 1HAWKINS, " BRISBANE TELEGRAPH": How urgent or how soon
would you or Mr. Barnard wish to consult with the Five Power
partners in South-East Asia and with the ANZUK partners on the
arrangements there, the defence arrangements there, having in
mind the party's proposal that we will withdraw our battalion
group from Singapore in the foreseeable future?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no urgency in this matter for the
present Ministry to determine. The battalion and the brigade
which are in Singapore don't end their tour of duty, I think,
until January 1974. This is a matter which clearly, not only
can, but should be left till there is a f'ull Ministry. -In any
case there is no urgency. As you know, Lord Carrington who was
due to come out here at the beginning of this year, will, in
fact, be coming in January and this is a matter which, among
others, might oe discussed with him.
BILL DARCY, I was wondering if you could tell me
whether you are hopeful that diplomatic relations between
Australia and China will be established there prior to your
visit later next year?
PRIME MINISTER: I would certainly expect so. I mentioned the
Japan-Australia Ministerial Meeting early next October. I would
certainly hope that there would be full diplomatic representations
between the countries, between China and Australia, by then; an
Ambassador resident in each capital.
L. OAKES. " MELBOURNE SUN": Prime Minister, you mentioned earlier
that the urgency of some United Nations matters was one of' the
reasons for the establishment of your interim Ministry. Can
you tell us whether any decisions have been made so far by
your Cabinet on those U. N. matters, what are they, and what
instructions have you issued?
PRIME MINISTER: There are two matters where I made a decision.
One concerned Rhodesia. In Committee, on one resolution
concerning Rhodesia, Australia had abstained, on another,
Australia had opposed, voted against. In each case, when the
resolution now comes to theGGeneral Assembly, Australia will
support, vote in support. On the other matter, concerning the
Sirl Lankan proposal for a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean,
in* Committee Australia had abstained, In the General Assembly,
Australia will now vote in support. 
CHRIS, REEVES. A. T. N. NETWORK: Prime Minister: Can you tell
us please the terms that you have suggested for recognition of
Peking? PRIN. 1E MINISTER: Briefly, the Canadian.
BENNELL: Have you set a timetable, Sir, for the expulsion of
the Taiwanese Ambassador here at the moment.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
CONNORS: Mr. Whitlam, could you give me a run-down of the
likely responsibilities of the new Department of Northern
Development and where its responsibilities may end and start.
geographically? PRIME MINISTER: No, this is a matter upon which I have already
had discussions with the relevant Departmental Heads. It is a
matter upon which Mr. Barnard, Senator Murphy, Senator Willesee
and I will be having discussions with some of our colleagues
also, but we will be involved in the discussion of all the
departments so that we will be in a position to make a
recommendation to the Caucus when it is able to meet, or if it
so wishes, to the new Ministry.
BRUCE MERCHANT. MACQUARIE RADIO NEWS: Mr. Whitlam: Could you
tell me whether you intend to hold a full scale Premiers'
Press Conference here in Canberra, Premiers' Conference before
Christmas? PRIME MINISTER: Nobody had suggested it. I don't believe it
would be possible.
MERCHANT: After Ch ristmas, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no such suggestion. I don't
think I've had' the suggestion, there might be in writing, I~ vve
not seen, I've not had any such suggestion from any of the
Premiers. WARREN DUNCAN. How soon do you think it will be before
your Government has an effect on the soaring land prices, not
only in the major cities, but in the growth areas that you and
the N. S. W. Government have nominated.
PRIME MINISTER: I hope to have discussions, as I said in my
Policy Speech, with the Premiers of Victoria and New South Wales
and Mr. Uren concerning Albury-Wodonga. The Hamer Government
in Victoria has nominated . Klbury-Wodonga. This administration
has been returned, among other things, on the nomination of
Albury-Wodonga. I don't know what approaches might be made by
any other State Government about any other centres. I certainly
would be discussing with Mr. Uren and his Department of Cities
any such matter, particularly this question of land prices. 
12.
BOB BAUDINO. NEWS LIMITED: Can ask this again, twenty six
nations today moved a resolution in the Trusteeship Committee
of the United Nations calling for Australia to prepare a new
timetable on independence for Papua New Guinea. Australia
as late as November 20, gave a timetable saying this would come
in December 1973. Do you propose to update this?
PRIME MINISTER! W Events are moving so quickly in Papua New
Guinea that it is not inconceivable that that date of December
1973 could be reached. It is altogether probable thatPPapua
New Guinea will be fully independent and, one trusts, admitted
to both the United Nations and the Commnonwealth of Nations
before less than two years, no more than two years from now.
You know that Mr. Somare has sent a message to me. This is a
matter where I can repeat what I have said in the Parliament,
what Mr. Somare himself believes, that the term as Minister of
External Territories of Mr. Andrew Peacock made the
development of the progress towards independence of Papua New
Guinea very much easier than any of us could have expected
when some of you came up with some of us at the beginning of
1970 and again, at the beginning of 1971.
CHAMBERLAIN: Relevant to that, Sir, the Queensland Premier
is arguing about the boundaries between Queensland and Papua
New Guinea and says he won't tolerate any Federal interference.
Have you any view on that?
PRIVIE MINISTER: I have. It is well known but I think he can
wait until the full Ministry is appointed. I haven't yet had
time, I hope you will understand, to see what the position is
in the Department of Foreign Affairs on this matter, but quite
clearly, in the interests of good relations between Australia
and Papua New Guinea, this boundary must be made acceptable in
contemporary terms. The last visiting mission of the United
Nations Trusteeship Council to New Guinea reported on this
matter. It is going to receive increasing international
attention. The boundary which has been fixed by agreement
between Australia and Indonesia obviously forms a precedent
for a boundary between Australia and Papua New Guinea.
Queensland is part of Australia. Australia alone has any
international standing.
BRIAN JOHNS: Prime Minister, you mentioned that Dr. Coombs had
given you advice today. I was wondering if you could tell us
has he joined your staff? If he hasn't, is he going to join
it and the conditions on which he would join, because I no * ticed,
and it is a supplenentary question to an earlier question that
Mr. McCallumn asked, and you said that you were trying to
depoliticise the Public Service by making these personal
appointments. I was wondering would he relinquish his other
public service posts by joining you?
PRIME MINISTER: He will be joining my staff. The conditions
are a matter of discussion between him and Sir John Bunting.
I think there were discussions today, but I'm not sure if,
because of the visits to Government House, this has been done
yet. 
13.
MAX HAtWKINS: On regional development. During the campaign,
you also mentioned Townsville as one of the key centres that
you would like to see reasonably developed. Do you still hold
to that view now that you haven't won the seat of Herbert which
you hoped to win?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course. There was never any prospect of
us winning Indi or Farrer, but what I've said about Albury-
Wodonga stands. The significance, why I mentioned Townsville,
of course, was it is a centre whose problems arise, whose
advantages and problems alike arise from the Commonwealth's
very great involvement there. It'd always had the involvement
of the Air Force base, but of course in the last ten years
there has been the upgraded railway from Mt. Isa and the
consequent copper refinery; there has been the Army base;
there are two C. S. I. R. O. Research Laboratories; there is the
University. Accordingly, the demand on services in Townsville
has been brought about by Commonwealth involvement more than in
any centre in Australia other than Canberra itself. The one
particular thing where Townsville is deficient, where the
deficiencies are exceeded only by those of Adelaide, is in the
quantity of the water. Adelaide, of course, has problems of
quality of water as well. The other significance about
Townsville is, of course, that it is the natural point of entry
for one of Australia's greatest tourist attractions, the Barrier
Reef, and is much closer to those countries from which tourists
are most likely to come, Japan and America.
ALAN RAM~' SEY: Prime Minister: I realise that this is not a
matter of pressing urgency for the present administration, but
do you share Mrs. Whitlam's views, publicised views, today on
the legalisation of marijuana?
PRIME MINISTER: I have never discussed it with her. I think I
will leave it to the new Ministry. In general, I would not
expect on this matter any difference in approach from those
which have been adopted or foreshadowed by Mr. Chipp. I would
think this is one of those matters, such asi. Papua New Guinea
under Mr. Peacock, where there will be no great differences
between the outgoing administration and the full Ministry which
will be appointed before Christmas.
PAUL WEBSTER, " THEi AUSTRALIAN": Could I ask whether Australia
will accept a limited form of representation from Taiwan as it
has in Tokyo at present? Secondly, are you going to review
your relations with South Vietnam and Cambodia, and thirdly, do
you intend to seek some form of recognition in Hanoi?
PRIME MINISTER: The last one would not be regarded as urgent
by the prese . vt administration. The middle one, about South
Vietnam, this is not a matter which the present administration
would regard as calling for a decision within the next ten or
twelve days. The first one, the..
PAUL WIEBSTER: Taiwanese representation here in a limited form
as it exists in Tokyo at present. 
14.
FRIKE MINISTER: This would appear a reasonable matter that
there should be unofficial contacts, commercial contacts,
between Taiwan and Australia after full-diplomatic representation
between the People's Repablic and Australia just as there are
still between Taiwan and Japan.
JOHN STUBBS: As Minister of External Affairs~ and Prime
Minister, what are you going to do about our political
appointments of the pre-vious government such as Gordon Freeth
in Tokyo, and Dame Annabelle Rankin in New Zealand? Will you
replace them immediately, or have discussions with them?
PRIME MINISTER: The present administration would not deal
with either matter. If, in the next administration, I'm Minister
for Foreign Affairs, as I expect, I would not think these are
matters of any urgency whatever. I have no reason to believe
that Dame Annabelle Rankin or the Honourable Gordon Freeth
would not carry out the policies of the new government with
complete competence and loyalty. In fact, there was an occasion
for me to send a message today to New Zealand via Dame Annabelle
Rankin and I gave instructions that my personal regards should
be passed to her.
DAVID SOLOMON: Sir, a multi-part question also. First of all,
you mentioned Sir John Bunting. Could you say whether you have
decided to keep him on as Secretary of the Prime Minister's
Department and what other decisions you have made regarding
senior Public Service appointments, and secondly, concerning
open government, what do you intend to do to make open
government a reality, and will you keep by your prior
undertaking to have regular press conferences every Tuesday
in Canberra?
PRIME MINISTER: I asked Sir John Bunting if he would be happy
to continue in his present post, as I would be very happy if
he were to do so. He said he would. I was pleased. It is my
view that, whenever I am in Canberra on Tuesday, I should have
a press conference. I suppose one would still have to work
out what time suited the Press best. It may be that it might
suit sometimes to have them in the morning, sometimes in the
afternoon, but obviously I would take the advice, I would try
to meet the advice, the wishes, of the President of the Gallery
on such matters. Gentlemen, might I just say this; since there are
quite a number of foreign policy issues upon which I have been
asked questions. In the foreign affairs field there are a
number of important questions I would like to discuss with
my colleagues and my policy advisers rather than say things
today which might have the effect of foreclosing some policy
options open -to this administration or the full Ministry.
The change of government, however, does provide a new
opportunity for us to reassess a whole range of Australian
foreign policies and attitudes. In the weeks ahead, I shall,
in consultation with my Ministerial colleagues and my policy
advisers, be reassessing these policies with the general
intention of developing more constructive, flexible and
progressive approaches to a number of foreign policy issues.
I wouldn't want to say more now than that the general direction
of my thinking is towards a more independent Australian stance
in international affairs, an Australia which will be less 
militarily oriented and not open to suggestions of racism;
an Australia which will enjoy a growing standing as a
distinctive, tolerant, co-operative and well regarded nation
not only in the Asian and Pacific region, but in the world
at large. I hope you don't mind me volunteering those comments.
It is an early opportunity of me replying in general terms to
the good wishes that I have received from a very great number
of Heads of Government throughout the world, particularly heads
of fraternal parties, other Social Democratic and Labor
Parties, and Heads of Government in our region. Inevitably it
will take me a few days before I can make an appropriate
individual response to these expressions of goodwill which
have been very heartening indeed. 



FOR PRESS
STATEMENT BY MR. E, G. WILITLAM, Q. C.
I am informed by the Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Ley,
that it may well be the end of next week, i. e. Friday,
December, before the counting can be completed in certain
electorates where the voting is close. In the light of this,
it would not seem possible or proper for the Federal
Parliamentary Labor Party to mee-before Monday, 18 December.
There are certain things which I believe must be put
in hand by the incoming government before then.
One example is action on abolishing conscription.
Another is the reference to the Tariff Board covering
colour television. A third is an application to the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to reopen the Equal Pay
Case so that the new government can support the claim.
There are also several matters in foreign affairs,
including votes in the United Nations General Assembly.
Each of these is urgent. There are other examples.
Accordingly, consideration has been given to ways in
which administration could be ta'., en up immediately by the
incoming government. Therefore, I have today recommended to His Excellency
the Governor-General that he swear my Deputy, Mr. Lance Barnard,
and me to all existing ministerial offices. His Excellency
has agreed and the swearing will take place this afternoon.
This allocation of portfolios is, of course, temporary.
It will operate only until such time as the full Ministry is
selected and can be sworn. I hive given His Excellency an
assurance on this point.
Attached is a list showing the allocation of portfolios. 
Where decisions are to be taken, Mr. Barnard and I
shall, of course, continue to consult with our appropriate
colleagues as necessary.
I have told Mr. McMahon that he and his ministers and
their staffs should feel free to use their present offices and
facilities till the end of next week.
Canberra December 1972 
ATTACHMENT
Portfolios to be administered by Mr. Whitlam
Prime Minister
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister for External Territories
Treasurer Attorney-General
Minister for Customs: and Excise
Minister for Trade and Industry
Minister for Education and Science
Minister for Shipping and Transport
Minister for Civil Aviation
Minister for Housing
Minister for Works
Minister for the Environment,
Aborigines and the Arts
Portfolios to be administered by Mr. Barnard
Minister for Defence
Minister for the Navy
Minister for the Army
Minister for Air
Minister for Supply
Postmaster-General
Minister for Labour and National
Service
Minister for Immigration
Minister for Social Services
Minister for Repatriation
Minister for Health
Minister for Primary Industry
Minister for National Development
Minister for the Interior 



SqS ' TATEMENT NO. 3
6 December, 1972
EQUAL PAY CASE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, this afternoon
authorised a written application to the Industrial Registrar
asking to have the recent hearing on equal pay before the Full
Bench of the Arbitration Commission re-opened.
The application was made after detailed consultations
with Labor's Minister for Industrial Reloations, Mr. C. R. Cameron.
The Commonwealth hopes that its application for a
re-opening will be heard in Melbourne on Friday.
Mr. Whitlam said that if the case were re-opened, the
Commonwealth would give full support to the A. C. T. U. claim
before the Commission on equal pay.
The McMahon Government had opposed the application
seeking a phasing in of new equal pay provisions.
If successful, the new equal pay application would mean
the extension of equal pay to women workers excluded by the
Commission's 1969 judgement on the equal pay question.
Women in industries employing predominantly females
were excluded from the application of that judgement.
The recent A. C. T. U. application, for which
submissions concluded on 29 November, would remove all
discrimination on the grounds of sex.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUS'rIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 2
6 December 1972
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced tonight tha-u
the 25 cents a gallon excise on wine sales would be removed ab
Irom tomorrow. Mr Whitlam signed a remission of the excise under oy-,
late this afternoon.
The promise for the removal of the excise was made -n
Mr Whitlam's policy speech outlining the Labor platform for
last Saturday's election.
When the charge was originally imposed, a special
provision was made to allow its remission under by-law. w4,
this provision used today to have the excise removed.
Legislation therefore is unnecessary.
Mr Whitlam said the government would check to ensu: e
that, with the removal of the duty, the benefit would be passe,-
on to wine consumers.
He added that, because some wine manufacturers palc ciL
in advance of actual sales, provision would be made for dL,' Uy
already paid on wine stili in manufacturers' hands to be 2e. wiit.
He said a regulation under the Excise Act would give
effect to this as soon as possible.
Officers of the Customs Department are working now on
the drafting of the regulation.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 1
6 December, 1972
Immediately upon the return of the Labor Government,
Senator Lionel Murphy, set out to arrange for the release
of seven young men serving eighteen-month gaol sentences under
the National Service Act.
Last night, I signed letters to the Governor-General,
Sir Paul Hasluck, recommending remission of the sentences.
In my letters, I said:
" The effect of these decisions is that all
obligations to render national service will cease and that
there will be no further court proceedings against those who
opposed the scheme. In the recent elections, it was a part
of my party's election programme that this action would be
taken and that a recommendation would be made that Your
Excellency exercise the prerogative to bring about the
release from custody of those offenders against the National
Ser-v. ic Act who are still in custody. It may be assumed that
this was endorsed by the electors and that Your
Excellency's Government has a mandate to take these steps.
The decision havin--been taken not to proceed with pending
prosecutions, it veld not be just to keep in custody those
now serv-ing pris o sentences for offences under the National
Service Act." This mornng the Governor-General exercised the
prerogative of mercy to release the men on my recommendation.
Arrangements have now been made with prison
authorities in the States for the immediate release of the
sevenmen r-hrre. were serving sentences in Victoria, two in
Nevy-out^ i', one in South Australia and one in Western
tralia. The seven are Michael John Payne, Ian Robert Turner,
i chael . h'ristonher Matteson, Michael Kocan, Robert Geoffrey
Scates, Kenneth Joseph McLelland and Robert William Martin.
I firmly believe that this historic decision marks'
the end of peace-time conscription in Australia for all time. 
ATTACHMENT TO PRESS STATEMENT NO. 1
6 December, 1972
The men who will be released from goal today, the names
of the gaols where they have been held and the dates on which
they were imprisoned are as follows:
NEW SOUTH WALES
Michael KOCAN, Mannis Afforestation Camp, 27 April 1972;
Michael Christopher MATTESON, Long Bay, 9 November 1972;
VICTORIA Kenneth Joseph McLELLAND, Pentridge, 8 March 1972;
Ian Robert TURNER, Ararat, 21 January 1972;
Robert Geoffrey SCATES, Pentridge, 26 April 1972;
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Robert William LARTIN, Cadell Training Camp, Renmark, 25 February 1972;
WESTERN AUSTRALI
Michael John PAYNE, Kames Training Centre, Serpentine, 23 October 1972.
i. 



PRESS STATEMENT DECLARATION OF DROUGHT AREAS
Further areas in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland
and Western Australia have been declared drought areas for the
purpose of redeeming Drought Bonds a spokesman for the
Department of Primary Industry announced today. The areas
' i aih~ e Pastures Protection Boards in New South Wales,
Sj.. s s in Victoria and 5 Shires in each of Queensland and
Western Australia. Notice of the new declarations appeared in the
Commonwealth Gazette on 30 November 1972.
" Drought Bonds may be redeemed on account of drought
where the area in which the bondholder's property is located is
declared a drought area for this purpose by the Minister for
Primary Industry", the spokesman said. " Bonds may also be
reedeemed during a period of twelve months after a declaration
is revoked." " Redemption forms may be obtained from the Reserve
Bank or from offices of the Commonwealth Loans Organisation in
State Capital cities."
" Proceeds from redemption of Drought Bonds are
included in the taxpayer's assessable income in the year in
which the Bonds become redeemable."
Canberra. 6 December 1972. 
DROUGHT AREAS DECLARED
New South Wales The Pastures Protection Districts of:-
Bourke Brewarrina Broken Hill
Canonba Condobolin Coonabarabran Coonamble Deniliquin Denman-Singleton
Forbes Hay Hillston Merriwa Molong Mudgee Narrandera Walgett Wilcannia Yass
Victoria The Shires of:-
Bulla Charlton Gordon Kerang Mildura Nathalia Numurkah Swan Hill South Gippsland
Walpeup Waranga
Queensland The Shires of Balonne, Bulloo, Jericho, Mount
Morgan and Paroo.
Western Australia The Shires of Marble Bar, Nullagine, Port Hedland,
Roebourne and Tableland. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 4
7 December 1972
TAKiEOTR FREEZE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, has frozen a taceover
offer by a U. K. company for a controlling interest in a Victorian
valve manufacturer. An interim order has been gazetted today to prevent
the transfer of any shared in the Victorian company for three
months. The Victorian co. pany is M. B. John and Hattersley Ltd.
Its main activity is the design and manufacture of valves and
fittings for pipelines and pressure vessels.
With total assets of about $ 22 million and net tangible
assets of about $ 13 million, it is believed to be the largest
manufacturer of industrial valves in the Southern Hemisphere.
The takeover offer has been made by Pegler-Hattersley
Ltd., the largest manufacturer of industrial valves in the U. K.
Pegler-Hattersley already owns 20.8 per cent of the
issued capital of M. B. John and Hattersley.
On 28 November it invited M. B. John's shareholders to
accept an offer of $ 2.30 a share for up to a further 40.8 per
cent of the Victorian company's issued capital.
This would have given Pegler-Hattersley a 61 per cent
interest in M. B. John and Hattersley.
Mr. . Thitlem has therefore decided to issue an interim
order under Section 13( 6) of the Companies ( Foreign Takeovers)
Act, prohibiting implementation of the takeover offer for three
months. He did this after discussions with Mr. Frank Crean,
and the Treasury.
The order will enable an examination to be made to
determine whether or not the takeover is contrary to the national
interest. The gazettal of the order will prevent the transfer of
any shares in M. B. John and Hattersley from today.
CANBERRA., A. C. T. d~ h
AUBTRALIA 



7
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATET,&amp; N
7 December 19
COLOUR TELEVISION
Considerable controversy has arisen recently over
Government action on the question of tariff assistance for the
Australian electronics industry, regarding particularly the
introduction of colour television to Australia.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today forwarded two
references to the Tariff Board one covering the question of
assistance for colour television receivers and components and
the other a review reference covering electronic and electrical
goods under the tariff boards current review programme.
The decision was made after consultation with Labour's
nominated Minister for Trade Dr. Cairns, the head of the Trade
Department, Mr. D. H. McKay, and the Chairman of the Tariff Board,
Mr. A. Rattigan. Mr. Whitlam said that the reference on colour television
requests the Board to have regard to the Government's desire that
the manufacture or assembly of colour picture tubes in Australia
should not be encouraged at this stage.
The Government has taken this decision because advice
indicated that local production of colour tubes would be a
costly operation and would undoubtedly increase substantially
the level of protection which might be required. This decision
by the Governme.. L' will also assist manufacturers in their
preliminary plWhniig. Mr. Whitlam added that the Board had
been asked to pr.: if-e an early report, preferably by 30 June
1973 but no later than 30 September 1973.
As well a. asking the Board whether assistance should
be accorded the pr,. uction of colour television receivers, Mr.
Whitlam said that the Board has also been asked for advice of
what rates of duty or other assistance arrangements would be
needed to sustai. n in Australia the manufacture of colour
television receivers with low, medium and high content.
Dr. Cairns said after the meeting that the review
reference covered a very wide range of electronic and electrical
goods, These included electronic components, electronic
consumer product, telecommunications equipment, computers and
automatic data processing equipment, arc welding equipment,
electric motors and other industrial electrical equipment. / 2 
-2-
Dr. Cairns said he was pleased that the question of
colour television had been referred promptly to the Tariff Board
for early enquiry and report.
This step would enable the Board and the Government
to be aware of the views of all interested parties, including
manufacturers, television broadcasters and consumers.
Dr. Cairns said he was sure that the Board's advice
would be of great assistance to the Government when the time
comes for it to weigh up the benefits and costs of assisting
the local manufacture of colour T. V. receivers.
Dr. Cairns said Australia had a well-established
electronics industry which for many years had been engaged in the
manufacture of components, consumer products ( such as monochrome
television receivers) and telecommunications and defence equipment.
The industry employs about 30,000 people and has funds employed
approximating $ 2830 million.
The advent of colour television presented both a
challenge and a great opportunity to the industry.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 6
8 December 1972
SALES TAX ON OPAL CONTRACEPTIVES
The Federal Government has lifted the sales tax on
oral contraceptives as from today.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, made the decision
after consultations with senior officers of the Federal
Treasury and the Taxation Department.
A special meeting of the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Advisory Committee called for today agreed with Mr. Whitlam's
suggestion that oral contraceptives prescribed by a doctor
would become available as pharmaceutical benefits.
Sales tax until today on all contraceptives was
levied at a rate of 27-per cent.
Mr. Whitlam, in announcing today's decision, said that
enabling legislation would be introduced when Federal Parliament
resumed next year.
The legislation would make the exemption of the sales
tax retrospective to today.
However, pending passage of the legislation, the tax
will not be collected.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



1 UST ALI,~ L PRESS STATEMENT NO. 7
8 December 1972
RACIALLY SELECTED SPORTING TEAMS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
in future racially selected. sporting teams would be excluded
from Australia. The South African Government has been informed of the
decision. Mr Whitlam said that transit through Australia for
sporting teams selected on a racial basis would also be
prevented. " The Australian Government's position on such visits
is now quite clear".
-Shipping and airline companies operating international
services to Austral. ia are being informed of the decision.
Mr Whitlam said he was confident that the government
would. get th~ e co-operation of the companies on the question.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRE3S STATEMNT NO. 8
8 December 1972
AIRLINE CURPEW
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today issued an
instruction that airline companies must observe the night
curfew on jet aircraft operations at Sydney Kingsford Smith
Airport. The instruction is aimed at minimising nuisance to
people living in the vicinity of flight paths to and from the
airport. IvMr. Whitlam issued the instruction in a minute to the
Director of Civil Aviation, 8. r Donald Anderson.
He told Sir Donald that, in accordance with stated
government policy, he should ensure that all airline companies
strictly observe the curfew which operates from 11p. m. to
6 a. m. The only exception to this strict enforcement should
be on safety grounds, he said.
Mr. Whitlam told 3ir Donald that it was most important
that the airlines be notified immediately so they can plan for
the Christmas period.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
I I. 



A ArAF
b-O E G
NQ DATE
M/ 1 8 December 1972
HUMAN RIGHTS DAY
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G.
WVhitlam, today issued the following statement on the occasion of Human
Rights Day. " Human Rights Day on 10th December 1972 marks the twenty-fourth
S anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
on 10th December, 194* 8. 1 recall with a sense of pride that it was an
eminent Australian, the late Dr Herbert Evatt, who was President of the
General Assembly at the time that the Declaration was adopted.
Since the adoption of the Universal Declaration, the United
Nations has been active in drawing up new international conventions
and declarations aimed at the protection of human rights. Altogether
they spell out in considerable detail the various rights and freedoms
0 set out in the Declaration. Of the Conventions, perhaps the most
important are the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, vwhich was adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly in 1965, and the International Covenants on Human Rights
which were adopted by the United Nations General Assembly a year later.
My Government attaches great importance to Australia becoming
a party to these international instruments. Racism and racial discrimination
are reprehensible and we shall take all necessary steps to prohibit
discrimination on grounds of race. Indeed, I have already set in train 
action to expedite Australia's ratification of the Racial' Discrimination
Convention and relevant I. L. O. Conventions.
The two International Covenants oh Human Rights cover important
economic, social and cultural rights as well as civil and political
rights. It is our intention that Australia should shortly sign the two
Covenants, as a first step towards ratification."
Mr Whitlam drew particular attention to the preamble of the
Universal Declaration which called on peoples all over the world to
renew their determination " to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights,
in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of g
men and women and to promote racial progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom". 0 



A
II I NQ DATE
M/ 2 10 December 1972
AUSTRALIA CONTRIBUTES TO POPULATION FUND ACTIVITIES
SThe Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam,
announced today that Australia would contribute in the current financial year
$ 200,000 to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and $ 100,000
Sto the International Planned Parenthood Federation.
Mr Whitlam said that the decision had been taken after consultations
with the Agencies, and following advice from departments concerned. The
decision had been taken in the light of the important role population
programmes have in the economic and social development of many developing
countries. The United Nations Fund for Population Activities and the International
Planned Parenthood Federation are channels for widespread international
S effort in this field. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 9
11 December 1972
I\ 1AJOR GRANTS FOR THE ARTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced major
grants by the Australian Government for the performing arts
for 1973. The grants, recommended by the Australian Council for
the Arts, include boosts for companies involved in major new
developments in Sydney, Perth and Adelaide.
These increases aim to enable opera, ballet and drama
companies to appear to advantage in the Sydney Opera House,
the Perth Concert Hall and the Adelaide Festival Centre.
The grant for the Australian Ballet has increased from
$ 400,000 in 1972 to $ 500,000 for 1973. The Australian Oi~ era
will receive $ 800,000, compared to $ 650,000 in 1972, the
Elizabethan Trust Orchestras $ 800,000 ($ 640,000), the Old Tote
Theatre Company $ 260,000 ($ 186,000), the South Australian
Theatre Company $ 90,000 ($ 60,000) and the National Theatre
at the Playhouse, Perth $ 80,000 ($ 62,500).
Another substantially increased grant will go to the
Tasmanian Theatre Company which will receive $ 70,000, compared
to $ 45,000 in 1972.
Details of other major grants are attached.
Mr. Whitlam said the coming year will see developments
of great importance to the arts, both at Federal and State level.
In many-State capitals during 1973 splendid new buildings will
open in which the people of Australia will be able to share the
pleasure and excitement of performances by-bur top performing
artists. The Concert Hall in Perth, the Festival Centre in
Adelaide, the Opera House in Sydney and other fine'buildings now
being planned in other capital cities will provide magnificent
settings for our orchestras and our opera, ballet and drama
companies. It is our aim to see that the companies are able to
appear in them to advantage. To this end our grants to the
national and State companies have been increased to allow them
to build up their resources and mount a fitting scale and
quality of performance. 
-2-
Australia must aim towards companies of world quality if
our top professional artists are to be encouraged to live and
work here. But our aims are broader than that. The arts have
an important role in the changing life style of Australia.
We look to a future when the leisure time of all Australians
will be enriched by the diverse pleasures of music, drama, dance
and painting, craft work, opera, film and sculpture; when
children, whatever their background, will have an equal chance
to express and develop talents and enthusiasms.
To foster this general community interest my Government
will in the coming year provide maliy more grants for special
projects and give increased assistance to bodies like the Arts
Councils which cater for the needs of country people. Vie will
also increase support to the small theatre companies in the
various States which provide an invaluable basis for our national
companies and in many cases are beginning to compete with them
in range and interest of work.
In the coming year significant changes will be
implemented in the administration of the arts at Federal level
to carry out the undertaking given in the Australian Labor
Party's policy speech. I stated there our concern to help the
arts, not only by fostering high standards of work and wide
public interest and involvement, but by seeking through them
a focus and expression of our national identity and a means
of making our values better known in contact with other countries.
To achieve these objectives the present arrangements will be
overhauled and the Australian Council for the Arts will be set
up by statute-to provide the direct and specialised administration
which the arts require.
cANBE:{-RA. A. C. T.. 
LA. joiZ G.. TiIS 17C10_ 2iTD) BY T1IAUT-. LJ COUlICIL 2iflE FOP.
MT R~ A2 : ITDIiIG 31 D2221. BE2), 17
14ATrI O! iL TAAI IIJ G PA'-OGAIiI I23
liational Institute of Dramatic Arts
A. ustralian Ballet Scliool
H1ATIOI 1A, Q1J o-Tiz 2AORO: G1T S2 O
The A~ ustralian Ballet
The Austrlalian Opera
T_ h e BZlizabethan Tru: st Orchiestras
He iEarionette Thea-' re o" Austrcalia
The Old Tote Theatre Company
The IMelbourne .'. eaIre Company
The South A. ustralian Theatre Comapany
The Queenisland Thleatbre Company
The Canberra Theatre ' 7rust
Th e Ilational ThieatLre at the Playhouse, Perth
T-he Tasmanian Theatre Company
The A ustralian Eli7zabetvhan Theature rust
TMe Arts Council of lustra-li-( ederal -' ivision)
Ilusica Viva J~ ustrAlia
2: LGIOiIAL OZGI ISATIOIIS
Hieu South '! ales
The ThIsemble Theatre
The Community Theatre
Q Tlhectre Group
N'imrod Street Theatre
Young Opera
The Dance Company, i.. T
The Theatre Guild ( St Marin's) Limited
The Victorian Opera Company
The Victorian Ballet Guild
Australian PerfLorming Group
La Ilama Uriters' Workshop and Experimental Theatre
SOUTH kUSTU. LIA
The Australian Dance Theatre
Theatre 62
" UTEiITSLAI D
The (' ueensland Ballet Company
The QueenslLan--d Opera Company
TNvelfth ilight Thecatre
-13STILN AUST3, ZLLIA
The 1Western A ustrcalian OperaL Com-pany
The Tes-t Australian Ballet Companyl
The M__ ole in the ' Jall Theare
AUST 2ALIA1! CkPITA. L
The Caonberra 7 epertory Society
December, 1972 140,000 80,000
500,000
800, 000
800,000 65,000
2~ n 0 000
260,000 090,000 no0,000
20,000 80,000 70t000
307,000 175,000 63,000 5,000 1,000
12,000 13,000 7,000
10,000 18,000 16,500 13,000 180,000 6,000
1 I, 1000
14,000 7,000
24,000 14,000 24,000 15,500 5,000
6,000 


PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 10
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, and the Attorney-General designate, Senator Murphy, today held discussions&nbsp;with officials of the Attorney-General's Department following&nbsp;a bomb blast in Brisbane resulting in the death of a 43-yearold American, Thomas Patrick Enright, last Friday.
Senator Murphy said later the relevant officials&nbsp;had been instructed to investigate any Commonwealth aspect&nbsp;of the incident. A report would be made as soon as possible.
State authorities were co-operating.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.11 December 1972



ljA&gt; AU ST A L I( A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 11
12 December 1972
DUKE OF EDINBURGH'S AUSTRALIAN TOUR
The Duke of Edinburgh will make a 15-day tour
of Australia in March next year.
The tour is being made in response to an
invitation issued earlier this year by the McMahon Government.
A statement issued jointly by Buckingham Palace
and the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, last night said:
" The Duke of Edinburgh has accepted with very
much pleasure the Australian Government's invitation to
visit Australia in March next year as President of the
Australian Conservation Foundation.
" The visit is expected to begin in Canberra on
Tuesday, 13 March and to conclude in the Northern Territory
on W7ednesday, 28 March. The States to be visited are,.
in sequence, New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania."
The Duke's visit will be made in his capacity as
President of the Australian Conservation Foundation.
Mr. Whitlam said he was pleased to learn of the
acceptance of the former government's invitation to make the
visit as President of the Foundation. In a personal message
to the Duke, Mr. Whitlam said:
" I need hardly say that you can be assured of a
warm welcome -being extended to you by my ministerial
colleagues, the members of my government and myself."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NO DATE
M/ 3 12 December 1972
RICE AID TO INDONESIA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G.
Whitlam, today announced that the Australian Ambassador to Indonesia,
Mr R. W. Furlonger, had yesterday informed President Suharto that Australia
would supply Indonesia with $ 2.5 million of rice to help alleviate the severe
Sshortage in Indonesia caused by drought.
Mr Whitlam said about 20,000 tons of rice would be purchased
on the international market and supplied to Indonesia as soon as possibleø
He added Australia was assisting Indonesia in this way because the current
adverse conditions in Australia meant that Australian producers would not
be in a position to supply rice in the quantity needed until after the
April 1973 harvest.
Mr Whitlam said this gift was in addition to the 74,000 tons of
Swheat and 5,000 tons of rice which Australia had already agreed to give to
Indonesia. Mr Whitlam also revealed that he had sent a personal message to
President Suharto through Mr Furlonger. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 12 DECEMBER 1972
PRIME MINISTER Ladies and gentlemen : the first announcement
I wish to make to you is concerning the Interim Australian Schools
Commission about which you will remember I spoke in the government's
policy speech. I will hand out the terms of reference of the Interim
Committee for the Australian Schools Commission, the terms of the
letter sent to each of the persons who have been asked t~ o serve on
the Interim Committee and the list of those persons. All I-need to
say before you ask any questions is that the Chai~ rman
Karmel, whose service in general administrative jrlitki's and
particularly educational matters in South Aust 4ia, Papua New Guinea
and the Commonwealth as a whole is well-known. 0--
On diplomatic relations with China; there has been a further
meeting between the Chinese and the Australian ambassadors in Paris,
this time at the Australian Embassy early this morning Canberra time.
Good progress is being made. I have also received a cordial message
from Prime Minister Chou En-lai.
Our Ambassador to Indonesia has returned to Indonesia. He has
been received by President Suharto. He has given the President the
news about the $ 24-million gift of rice to alleviate the severe
shortage in Indonesia caused by drought. There is a press statement
which will be given to you on that.
At yesterday's Executive Council meeting, there were some
renewals of appointments to what were the Boards? in the
repatriation. field and-the valuation field the No. 1 War Pensions
Entitlement Appeal Tribunal and the Valuation Boards.
The Honorable John Ignatious Armstrong has been appointed our
High Commissioner to Britain as from next Friday for a term ending
at the end of 1974. You will remember he was a Senator for very
many years, he was'Minister for Supply, he was Chairman of the Sydney
County Council, he was Lord Mayor of Sydney. I have let Mr Heath
know that Mr Armstrong's appointment is to symbolise the high
importance that the Australian Labor Party places on links with
Britain, and my own personal desire that those links should be close
ones. Well, those are the thinps I thoug; ht I woiil. d announce first.
IRANK CHAMBERLAIN : Prime Minister, that's ex-Senator Armstrong?
PRIME MINISTER .: Yes.
TONY HILL : Can you give us the terms of the message from Chou En-lai?
PRIME MINISTER : No. I think the terms of messages will be released
when, as we expect shortly will happen, relations are established,
but there is no agreement to release any texts at this stage.
MATTHEWS, MELBOURNE HERALD : Have you any intention of recalling the
Parliament early to give the pensioners an immediate $ 1.50 rise for
a Christmas bonus?
PRIME MINISTER : No, When the ministry is sworn in we will decide
when the Parliament will meet. It is unlikely to be before February. 
One of the early pieces of legislation will be to increase th.-
basic pensions by 31.50 per week. I know there has been some
speculation on a Christmas bonus. In fact9 no such proposal
ever made in the policy speech and during the campaign I was v: rr
asl.. cd about it, and I made no commitments on it.
KEVIN POIWER, 2UE: Does your Government propose to re-negotiate
the Fill agreement, Sir. That's the first question, the secc:. d
one do you propose to restore the News and Information Bursau
to full departmental status or will it be incorporated in some
other department such as Media or will it remain with Interior?
MIR. BARNARD: The first one, Kevin, if I may answer it, on the Fl1l
it has not been possible for me, at this stage, to be able to examine
the documents that I would want to look at in relation to the Fll1
purchase. What I did, of course, say during the course of the
ca. mpaign was that it appeared, in view of the large amount of money
that Australia has already paid out for the F111, that we will have
to accept it. But it would not be possible for me, before the full
minisi. ry has been sworn in, to devote my attention to this particular
quest ion.
PRIME MINTSTER: On the I have made no commitment. There
is no current proposal to make the Australian News And Information
Bureau a full department. The Department of which it will form a
part, or the Minister to whom it will be responsible, 4. s being
considered at this time by Mr. Barnard, Senators Murphy and'Willesee
and me in consultation with the departmental heads in preparation
for a recommendation to Caucus next week.
jitjY( PN STOYLES, FINANCIAL REVIEW: In view of what Mr. Crean has been
saying about taxation policy, have you yet made any decision for the
Treasury to publish a " comprehensive review" on taxation levels which
ou promised in your policy speech?
PRIME MINISTER: We have been asking Treasury about this. There
have been several papers prepared for the former Government on
taxcatior review. We are working with them on two matters. Firstly,
which are the ones to which Mr. McMahon was referring in answers to
questions in Parliament, and, I think, in answers to members of the
press. Secondly, if these were Cabinet papers then we clearly have
to check with our predecessors whether they mind them being released.
JOH1N LOMBARD, MELBOURNE SUN: Last July you promised rehabilitation
assistance for those who suffered in the name of conscience under the
National Service Act. What form will the rehabilitation assistance
take will it be financial compensation and is compensation being
considered for draft resisters who went underground?
PRIME MINISTER: Nothing is being considered at the monent. I can
assure you that Mr. Barnard and I have not considered this matterø
You mention some statement by me. I do not remember a statement of
this character. At the last Federal Conference of the-Australian
Labor Party in June last ye: r, there was a resolution that this
matter should be considered. I do not remember saying anything about
it. We have not given consideration to it, I did not mention it in
the policy speech. I was not asked about it and I made no statements
about it later in the campaign. This is a matter clearly for the
ministry when it is formed. 
MR. BARNARD: Mr. Prime Minister, can I supplement the question
by saying that once again I have not had the opportunity to fully
consider this matter but I have made etnquiries0 I will be having
. discussions later this; afternoon with officers of the department.
LONDON DAILY TELEGRdAPH: Have you any more surprise announcements
for people in Britain?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't believe that any Britons taking an
intelligent interest in Australian politics would have had any
surprises to this stage.
BEGG, Have you given any consideration, as yet, to the
redistribution of boundaries?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Here obviously is a matter which will be
left to the full ministry. I would expect that there will be
legislation amending the Commonwealth Electoral Act as there was
introduced as a Private Members Bill by Mr. Daly in the last
parliament, and a distribution is due but the census upon which a
distribution would be based was held 18 months ago. Western
Australia should have one more seat in this Parliament if a
distribution had been held. There would be a much more equal
representation of thc. people if a distribution had been held, as
it could and should have been, before this recent election.
DAVID SOLOMON, CANBERRA TIMES: Do you expect that there will be any
necessity for another meeting between the Australian and the Chinese
amibassadors in Paris before the matter is finalised?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
FRANK CHAMBERLAIN: Will you be taking any Christmas holidays?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope so.
FRANK CHAMBERLAIN: Will you use those holidays to go for a trip to
the Torres Strait Islands with Mr. Bjelke-Petersen?
PRIME MINISTER: I am very much looking forward to Christmas so I
can have a holiday. I noticed Mr. Bjel~ ke-Petersen's kind off'er.
I had already received some offers. I will be writing to Mr. Bjelke-
Petersen about the Torres. Strait Islands question. which was raised
by the United Nations Visiting Mission to New Guinea in the middle
of last year. I think I am right in saying that this matter had not
been raised by the former Government with the Queensland Government.
I am taking steps to raise it.
ROBERT HAUPT. FINANCIAL REVIEW: It is Dr. Cairns' publicly expressed
view that a final decision has been reached as to the future shape
of' the Trade Department. I understand from your office-that this
is not so. Can you finally tell us whether a decision has been made
over the future status and shape of the department? Can you tell us
under what title Dr. Cairns will be sworn in when he is sworn in? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: No decisions have been made at this stage.
As I said in answer to an earlier question, these are matters
being discussed by Mr. Barnard, Senators Murphy and Willesee and
me in consultation with the heads of departments for a recommendation
to Caucus. Caucus will make the decisions as to what departments
there will be, and then after Caucus has made that decision it will
be my responsibility, if I am re-elected as Leader of the Party,
to allocate the portfolios.
KEVIN POWER: Will you make a recommendation to Caucus on that
partiLcular point?
PRIME MINISTER: Among others. There will be recommendations on
the whole departmental structure.
BENNELL, 7 NETWORK: How long do you think it will be before the new
health scheme comes into operation as proposed by the Labor Governement,
and what do you think should be done with the vast reserves that the
health schemes have at the moment?
PRIME MINISTER: There are two big items of the health scheme.
One is the question of insurance; how long it takes to implement
the Government's program on this matter will depend on the co-operation
of the medical profession. There is, in addition, a very large part
of the Government's health program relating to hospitals, the
modernisation and regionalisation of hospitals through Commonwealth
grants to the States on the basis of recommendations of a Hospitals
Commission. I would hope that that Hospitals Commission would be in
operation before the end of 1973. There are other features in the
Government's health program such as dental health for school children
which can scarcely get under way in the life of this Parliament because
one just has to train more dental therapists or nurses than Australia
has the hope of getting in less than three years. You asked me about
the reserves of the hospital and medical benefits funds. I think these
reserves amount to somewhere about $ 140 million. This is a sum which
obviously would be appropriate to provide hospital and nursing home
facilities in those parts of Australia where they are very badly
needed. I would hope that arrangements can be made for the-se sums which
have been collected by contributors over the la. st twenty years to
be spend for such proper public health purposes as hospitals and
nursing homes. It will require, naturally, negotiations with the
bodies concerned because they are generally incorporated under State
laws and the registration by the Commonwealth which has enabled them
to flourish and multiply exceedingly didn't provide for the
dissolution of these bodies.
HAWKINS, BRISBANE TELEGRAPH: Is there a possibility, as you have
seen Mr. Tonkin and Mr. Dunstan in the last few days, of asking Mr.
Bjelke-Petersen to come to Canberra before Christmas to talk to you
about this problem rather than you arranging a trip up there?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Dur~ tan and Mr. Tonkin asked to see me.
If Mr. Bjelke-Petersen asks to see me I am very happy to see him
on this or any other * matter.
BAILEY, ADELAIDE ADV RTISER: Has a date been discussed for a Premiers
Conference? 
PRIME MINISTER: No. This is clearly a matter which will have to be
decided by the full ministry. There have been suggestions that, as
usual, there will be a Premiers Conference in February, but this is
not a matter upon which Mr. Barnard and I would make arrangements
alone. D'ARCY, In view of the speculation, could you state at
this stage whether Dr. Stephen FitzGerald is to be Australia's first
ambassador to China, and secondly, have you had any official
communiques about Francis James?
PRIME MINISTER: My answer on an ambassador to China must be the
same as it was a week ago. It is just not possible or proper for
any country to announce who its representative will be in another
country until that other country has been informed and has approved.
This must be the case still more, of course, with a country with
which we don't yet have full diplomatic relations, with which, at
this stage, we are only having discussions. So, I must reiterate
that it would be quite improper to confirm or deny any speculation
on who might be our~ first ambassador to China.
In view of the very many references which are being made to this
question, perhaps I should say that many of you have seen Dr. FitzGerald
in China when you accompanied me and Dr. Patterson and Mr. Burns and
Mr. Young there. 1 think most of you are here. There is Mr. Barnes,
Mr. Oakes, Mr. Walsh, Mr. Stubbs, Mr. Randall, Mr. Barnett and Mr. Koch.
Nearly all of you are in this room. You went to China with us.
You saw Dr. FitzGerald in those isolated circumstances and you would
have noticed his dexterity, his diligence, his decorum. Perhaps
I might add this Dr'. FitzGerald has turned down the opportunity of
taking a prestigious professorial post, a foundation professor, at
Griffith University so that he might be eligible for appointments
by the Commonwealth Government. The Commonwealth Government regards
it as appropriate that there should be academnics or business people
serving the nation in various positions of advice or representation
for periods of 2 or 3 years and we would regard it as appropriate
that public servants, for instance, should be seconded to academic
and commercial positions for similar periods. I don't believe that the
constant speculation about Dr. FitzGerald is fair to him. He can't
say anything on this matter and, I reiterate, I can't either.
D'ARCY, Prime Minister, Francis James, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I am sorry. I have sent no message about Mr. Francis
James since taking office.
D'ARCY, Have you heard anything of him, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I have heard nothing about him since taking office.
LAUR&amp; IE OAKES, MELB. SUN: Will you send a message, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: When full relations are established then the
Australian Government will be in the normal, proper position to
safeguard the interests of its citizens in China, including Francis
James, 
6-
WARREN DUNCAN, Prime Minister, there has been yet another
prediction~ today as to what the level of inemployment will be in the
coming year. How do you see employment over the next 12 months in
Australia? Secondly, when will the monthly figures be released,
and in view of Mr. Cameron's comments about these figures, are you
going to check to make sure they are accurate?
PRIME MINISTER: I will ask the Minister for Labour and National
Service to answer this question.
MR. BARNARD: I have asked for information concerning the latest
unemployment figures and I have no knowledge of them myself at this
time but I expect to have some information on them tomorrow. They
would normally be available for publication, that is if one follows
the procedure of the previous administration, they would be available
for publication on Monday next. Whether I at this stage ought to make
any comment, that is after I have received the information, or wait
for the new Minister for Labour and National Service to make the
comment is a matter that I will determine with the Prime Minister.
Matters concerning the levels of unemployment and what we intend to do
about unemployment, of course, I think ought to be more properly
answered by the Prime Minister at this stage.
BOB BAUDINO. NEWS LIMITED: Mr. Barnard, if I might, in his capacity
as Minister for Defence Massive savings have been made by the
abolition of national service, and now of the withdrawal of' our
forces from Vietnam. Could you tell me if those savings will be
diverted elsewhere or do they remain in the defence vote?
MR. BARNARD: I have not discussed this aspect with the Prime Minister.
It is not one of the matters that we thought desirable or necessary
to consider immfediately. Naturally I will have to determine what will
be done, but myoff-the-cuff decision. at this stage would be that
whatever saving is made in this respect would be expended by the
defence forces.
DAVID BARNETTA. A. P.:....
PRIME MINISTER: An old China handa.
DAVID BARNETT: A question to Mr. Barnard. Have you begun to consider
yet the future of the D. D. L. program announced by the last administration?
Have you begun to think yet about what sort of tank the Army should
have, and have you begun to consider also the level of 40,000 men set
by the former Defence Minister as desirable for the Army'?
MR. BARNARD: You have asked three questions. First of all, concerning
the D. D. L. program as you know, action was initiated by the previous
administration, that is, for a * design study to be authorised. I have
made no alteration to that program. It is still proceeding although
this does not, and I want to emnphasise this, it does not necessarily
mean that the present governme~ it or the new government, the next
Whitlam ministry, when it is sworn in, would continue with the program
without looking very closely at it. Now naturally I have not had the
opportunity to fully consider it. The second question, I think, that
you asked was in relation to the tanks. The tanks that we have in
Australia today, the Centurion tanks, are 22 years old. Half of them,
I understand, have been used in Vietnam. Naturally there would be a
need to look very closely and quickly at this question. Yes, I have 
-7-
discussed it but no firm decision has been made at this stage.
The final one was on..
DAVID BARNETT: The level of troops, is 40,000 a desirable number
for the Army?
MR. BARNARD: I have, as you know, following the announcement which
I made last week to discontinue the call-up and the discharge of
national servicemen,-and perhaps I can answer your question by
pointing out that what I said at the time apprently appears to have
been borne out by the facts that I have available to me at this time
that about at least 40 per cent of the national servicemen have
elected to remain and continue their service. The precise figures
or the details will not be available to me until the middle of next
week. It could be even higher. Indeed, the report I think I read
in the Melbourne " Age" this morning may be rather closer to the
actual figure, that is about 60 per cent. So far as the level of the
Army is concerned, once the decision. had been made in relation to
national service, the future level of the Army itself is a matter that
I have set down for discussion with the people concerned from the Army
Department early next week.
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen, you are asking quite a number of questions
about defence. Mr. Barnard and I spent this morning at the passing out
parade and graduation ceremony at Duntroon. You might be interested
in the remark that was made there, that it is the first time that the
whole Commonwealth4 Ministry has attended such a ceremony and it is the
first ministry which is entirely composed of returned servicemen.
TED BARKER, " WEST AUSTRALIAN": Prime Minister, could you tell us
ihat plans you have for the terrirotial sea legislation? Do you
intend to press ahead with it?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
BARKER: Anything else?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The Labor Partyls policy is, as you know, to
assert the national government's jurisdiction over the territorial
sea beyond low water mark and I expect that, in opening this Parliament,
the Governor-General will use the same words as he used in opening
the last Parliament.
MUNGO McCALLUM: Sir, do you think you can get that through in time
for the Law of the Sea Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
LAURIE OAKES, " MELBOURNE SUN": Prime Minislar, you told us a week
ago that the interim two-man government was set up to deal with
urgent matters. I am wondering, since we already had an acting
High Commissioner in London, what was urgent about appointing a
permanent High Commissioner? Secondly, while I am aware of Dr.
FitzGerald's qualifications for a diplomatic nost, I am not aware
of Mr. Armstrong ' s qualifications. Could you explain that to me,
what experience he has had? And, thirdly, do you anticipate any
criticism based or. allegations of jobs for the boys and if it should
occur, how would you answer it? 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: I have been urged by the Foreign AffE: irs Department
to make this appointment promptly because there has already been an
embarrassing hiatus in the post. You will remember that the former
High Commissioner, Sir Alexander Downer, had had his term of office
extended sevvral times and finally he would not accept another
extension., and the whole staffing of the office, such as the
appointment of a Deputy High Commissioner and-so on, awaits the filling
of the main post. The post has always been one of what is called a
political nature, and this has the advantage, it has been said over
the years, that the person holding the post has the ear of the
government of Australia. There are some matters, as you know, where
the new government of Australia has found that it had to vote in a
different way to Britain in the United Nations. There are a ntumber
of issues whiich have arisen in Britain concerning the position of
Australian citizens visiting, settling or working in Britain. Clearly
it is an embarrassment to have this post, the first diplomatic post
that Australia ever set up, vacant any longer. As I said earlier,
Mr. Armstrong is a public figure of long ' service and great distinction
in several fields and his appointment will be understood by the British
Government as one showing that the Australian Labor Party regards the
post as important and that I regard the post as important.
BROWN, COURIER MAIL: Sir, could you clear up the Torres Strait
issue, please? Do you plan to confer with Mr. Bjelke-Petersen eitherhere
or in Brisbane in the near future, and do you plan to take up
his invitation to go to the Torres Strait Islands?
Could I ask a second question on a slightly different subject?
Why is the Schools Commission interim at this stage? Interim is
until when?
PRIME MINISTER: The Torres Strait Islands first I only know of
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's invitation. from reading the newspapers.
I don't think I have received a letter from him conveying such
an invitation. I am writing a letter to him. I would not think
that a meeting between us is necessary at this stage to discuss
the question. The discussions which may take place will be made
easier if there are appropriate arrangements between officials in
advance. But I would rather wait till I have written the letter to
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen before saying anything-more on this matter. I
did say something last week about it, I am not sure that I mentioned
last week, as I did today, that the United Nations Visiting Mission
to New Guinea had raised this matter at least 18 months ago.
Furthermore, there has been the successful conclusion of an agreement
between Australia and Indonesia concerning the sea boundary between
them. One would expect that similar negotiations would now take
place with Portugal as regards Timor and then also there are to be
negotiations which will concern Papua New Guinea herself concerning
the land and sea border with Indonesia. In these circumstances it
is desirable to have a consistent border, a contemporary border
between Papua, which is still an Australian colony but which will
soon be part of an independent nation, and Australia. This is much
more amicably settled while the Australian government has jurisdiction
on each side of Torres Strait than it will be if we wait until Papua
New Guinea gets independence and the matter has to ) e determined, say,
by the International Court of Justice. 
-9-
BROWN: The plan on that is for officials to discuss it first?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, as I say, I iuant to write a letter before
I say any more about this. You also asked about the Schools
Commission. The reason for having an. interim committee is, as I said
in the policy speech and as I had said I think in Parliament but
ce rtainly I had said at public meetings well before the election
campaign opened, we wanted to follow the procedure that Sir Robert
Menzies had followed in regard to the Commonwealth's peace-time
commitment for universities. Just as Sir Keith Murray and some
other prominent educationists were asked to make a report on
universities and that report was adopted in the next Common-ealth
Budget and was then followed by legislation establishing the
Australian Universities Commission, so, as I said in the policy
speech and in these earlier public meetings, we would write to
educationists in this field to make a report in good time for our
next Budget and then we would set up a standing commission by statute.
I did say I would write before Christmas, and I might also add t1Xit
Mr. Beazley has spent a great deal of time with the people concerned
and the Department of Education. and Science and some of the A. U. C.
in the terms of reference and the personnel. We discussed these
first last Wednesday or Thursday.
DAVID SOLOMON: Have they all accepted?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
ALAN RAMSEY, " THE AUSTRALIAN": Prime Minister, it appears you are
going to have another national strike on your hands. The tanker
drivers are going nut. Can you tell me whether you have had discussions
with Mr. Cameron about this?
PRIM MINISTER: No.
RAMSEY: Any suggestion. that the government might intervene in this
strike, and what is your comment on suggestions that industrial
activity has been delayed, in support of pay claims, has been delayed
until after the elections so it would not hurt your party's prospects
at the elections?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no comment to make on the last. I have not
been in touch with Mr. Cameron on this. I have no doubt that he has
the matter well in hand.
STEWART HARRIS, ". LONDON TIMES": Sir, I know you don't normally give
away what goes on in-negotiations, but I think perhaps a lot of people
would like to know whethqr the matter' of-Francis James was raised with
the Chinese in Paris by Mr. Renouf.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
PETER BARRON. " SYDNEY SUN": Mr. Whitlai, on the question of the
health funds' reserves, Mr. Hayden was quoted in the press this
morning as saying these reserves could be used to provide free
health insurance for contributors to the funds or perhaps to pay the
benefits to the contributors. Can we take it from your answer
earlier this afternoon that you have dismissed that idea? Do you
believe, as Mr. Hayden is quoted as saying this morning, that those
reserve# belong to the contributors?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course they do. 
I r 
BARRON: And is it correct that if the funds decide not to co-operate,
the Common' 4ealth can do very little about the reserves that they have
built up?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course these funds belong to the contributors
in every moral sense. A great number of these funds have lasted
for a long time. They are benevolent associations, co-obps, in the
very best sense. These are the closed funds and I have no doubt that
those bodies will do the right thin~ g by their members. As you know,
however, the funds which have grown most rapidly in the last 20 years
since the Commonwealth decided to register the funds anc. to make them
the vehicle for any help in paying doctors' and hospital. bills, these
funds are run by very small bodies. Ths most notorious of them is run
by a council composed of doctors and laymen nominated by those doctors,
and the annual meeting is never notified and the contributors have no
right to attend it. And there are other similar demtocratic examples.
I think it is right, but Mr. Hayden really is much more au fait with
these than I have been in the last Parliament, that the reserves have
been run down a bit in the case of the medical funds, I think it was,
as a result of the Nimmo Committee's recommendations. It was said
that reserves should not be held for more than about three months.
I think the reserves were larger a year ago than they are now,
It would be possible to run down the reserves in that way. If it
were found th.-these autocracies running the l. arge open funds were
not to devote these resEerves to proper public purposes such as I have
suggested, then the government wou'ld rely on the co-operation of the
States to see that the contributors' funds were properly safeguarded
and properly directed.
Ladies and gentlement, perhaps there are a couple of things I might
have mentioned. We expect quite quickly to ratify the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Treaty on the Prohibition
of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons of Mass
Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil
Thereof. Those two nuclear treaties have been signed by Australia.
We will be ratifying them quite soon. At yesterday's Executive
Council meeting we took the proper procedures to enable us to sign,
as Britain and New Zealand signed, I think four years ago, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
the International Covenent on Civil and. Political Rights. These
have been outstanding for a long time. There will also be steps to
ratify fairly soon, before Parliament meets we hope,. three I. L. O.
conventions No, 87 Freedom of Association and Protection of the
Right to Organtise; No, 98 Right to Organise and Collective
Bargaining; No. 100 Equal Pay; and No, 111 the Elimination
of all Forms of Discrimination in Employment. We are taking
legislative means to enable us to ratify the International Convention
on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination. It would
be our hope to ratify all these human rights conventions by the
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which falls
on 10 December next, year, and upon which I made a statement two days
agoo Might I conclude by mentioning that at the press conference
I had on Sunday week I referred to the fact that it was not only the
anniversary of Eureka bu the first Sunday in Advent. I have been
helped by the officer of the Prime Minister's Department who covers 
-11-
the question of horours and decorations and also by a letter
from the priest who performed the marriage ceremony for my son that
on the first Sunday in Advent the epistle of the day, and you might
be interested in the reference, Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 13,
verses 11 and folluw, ( This is the Jerusalem Bible, translation)
read: " The time has come. Our salvation is near. Besides you
know the time has come. You must wake up now. Our
salvation is even nearer than it was when we were converted.
The night is almost over. It will be daylight soon." 



PR~ IME MINISTERj PRESS STATEME~ NT NO.
13 December 1972
Members of the incoming Labor Ministr y next week
will be able to examine detailed reviews of secret or
unpublished reports or documents prepared by their
departments in recent years.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, has asked the
head of his Department, Sir John Bunting, to have all
permanent heads prepare the reviews for the new ministry.
A full list of items proposed for release will
be prepared and circulated later.
Particular emphasis will be given to the release
of reports or documents involving statistical exercises
or social research.
Questionnaire surveys, cost benefit analyses of
public investment projects, independent consultants
reports and internal administrative manuals for the
administration of legislation conferring rights on
individuals will be among documents named specifically
for release to the new government.
CANBERRPA. A. C.-T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 13
13 December 1972
ABORIGINAL GItITS
The Prime Minister, Mr. VWhitlai, has approved two
grants for voluntary organisations involved in aboriginal
affairs. A grant of $ 16,000 will be given to the Aboriginal
Publications Foundation for 1972-73o
This will enable the foundation to continue
operations, particularly including the publication of the
magazine " Identity", in the coming year.
The Craft Council of Australia will receive a
grant of $ 5,000 to prepare a comprehensive and accurate
exhibition of traditional and developing Aboriginal art.
This will be a major part of an exhibition of
Australian folk art to be displayed in the National Korean
M1useum at the time of the A. S. P. A. C. Conference early next
year and subsequently in other South-East Asian countries.
The Craft Council and the South Australian Museum
are preparing the exhibition at the request of the Department
of Foreign Affairs.
CANBE1RA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 4 13 December 1972
CONTRIBUTIONS TO UNITED NATION'S FUNDS FOR SOUTHERN AFRICA
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, today announced
that Australia will contribute $ 10,000 to the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa, and $ 5,000 each to the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the United Nations Fund for Namibia.
Mr Whitlam said this was the first time Australia had contributed
to these Funds, which were established to assist the educational development
and other aspirations of the people of Southern Africa.
Mr Whitlam said he had long felt that Australia should assist the
people of Southern Africa by taking an active role in United Nations activities
undertaken on their behalf and by making financial contributions to the Funds
established for this purpose.
Mr Thitlam. said that Australia would be one of the first countries
to make a contribution to the United Nations Fund for Namibia, which was
established in December 1970. This Fund was established to support a
programme designed to help Namibians prepare for independence.
The United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa was established in
December 1965. Grants made by the Fund are used to provide legal assistance
to persons prosecuted under the discriminatory legislation of South Africa,
relief and education to such persons and their dependents and relief for
refugees from South Africa. The United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa was established in December 1967. 



' 7
Al.
Jj AUST ALIA.,.
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 14
13 December 1972
SCHOOLS COM. IITTEE
The Interim Committee for the Australian Schools
Commission will hold its first meeting in Canberra next
Thursday, December 21.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, decided to call the
meeting after talks with Mr. K. Beazley, today.
The interim committee will immediately begin
discussions on the preparation of recommendations for the
1973-74 Budget. The recommendations will cover Australian Goverinent
grants for 1974.
Mr. Whitlam pledged in his election policy speech
that these grants would increase in 1974.
The meeting next Thursday will be chaired by
Professor P. H. Karmel.
The nine other members of the committee will attend.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Ij AUSTRALIA PRESS STATEMENIT NO. 12
13 December 1972
HIGH COMMISSIONER
The U. K. Prime Minister, Mr. Heath, has welcomed
the appointment of Mr. John Armstrong as the new Australian
High Commissioner in London.
In a message, sent through the British High
Commission, Mr. Heath said the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam,
could be assured that Mr. Armstrong's appointment is very
welcome. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 8 14 December 1972
APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSIONER, LONDON
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlan, announced today the
appointment as Deputy High Commissioner in London of Mr D. W. McNicol, C. B. E.
Mr McNicol is currently Australian High Commissioner to Canada.
Mr McNicol was born in Adelaide in 1913 and was educated at
YKinrs College and the University of Adelaide. He served in the Royal
Australian Air Force from 19J40 to 1943 and joined the Department of Foreign
Af fairs in 1946.
Mr McNicol is a senior and experienced officer of the Department
of Foreign Affairs. After service in TGkyjo and Washington, he was, during
the period 1953 to 1954, accredited as Australian Minister in Viet-Nam,
Cambodia and Laos. Mr McNicol attended the Imperial Defence College in
London in 1957 and was then appointed Australian Commissioner in
Singapore, where he served from 1957 to 1960. After a period as
Assistant Secretary of the Pacific and Americas Branch in the Department,
he was appointed Australian High Commissioner to Pakistan towards the
end of 1962, an appointment he held for three years. From the end of 1965
until early 1968 he was Australian High Commissioner to New Zealand after
which he served as Australian Ambassador to Thailand. Mr McNicol has
served in his present position as High Commissioner to Canada since
August 1969. 
-2-
As Deputy High Commissioner Mr McNicol will succeed Mr W. B. Pritchett,
who has been Acting High Commissioner since the retirement of Sir Alexander
Downer. The Prime Minister recently announced that the new High Commissioner
will be Mr J. I. Armstrong.
Mr McNicol is expected to take up his appointment in London in
April 1973. He is married with one son. 



NQ DATE
M/ 6 14i December 1972
AM4BASSADORS' RETURN FOR CONSULTATIONS
The Foreign Minister, Mr Whitlan, announced today that he had
asked the Australian Ambassador in Washington, Sir James Plimsoll, and
he* Australian Ambassador to the United Nations, Sir Lawrence McIntyre,
L'o return to Australia for consultations.
Mr Whitlam said he wished to discuss personally with Sir James
questions concerning Australian/ American relations in the future. With
Sir Lawrrence he would be considering Australia's role in the United
Nations, especially in the Security Council after Australia takes its
seat on 1 January 1973.
The two Ambassadors are expected to arrive in Canberra later
this month. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 17
14 December 1972
ML,, IBERSHIP OF THE COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today that
Professor Russell Mathews had been appointed a Member of
the Commonwealth Grants Commission for three years.
The Prime Minister said that he had consulted with
Mr. Frank Crean about Professor Mathews' appointment.
Professor Mathews has held the Chair of Accounting and
Public Finance at the Australian National University since
1965. He is also the Director of the Centre for Research on
Federal Financial Relations in the A. N. U.
Professor Mathews' work in this area has included the
publication of books on public finance in Australia. His
publications, include " Public Investment in Australia: a Study
of Australian Public Authority Investment and Development" and
" Federal Finance" by Professor 1Mathews and Mr. W. R. C. Jay.,
The other members of the Grants Commission are Sir
Leslie Melville, Chairman, and Mr. W. R. Lane.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



r( 7 PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEIENT NO. 16
14 December 1972
ABORIGINAL EDUCATION ASSISTANCE
The Federal Government will launch a campaign to have
aboriginal children living in distinctive aboriginal communities
given their primary education in aboriginal languages.
The Government will also supplement education for
aboriginal children with the teaching of traditional aboriginal
arts, crafts and skills mostly by aborigines themselves.
The Government will assist in the training of teachers
and teacher aides some of them aborigines in help with the
introduction of language teaching in primary schools.
Planning of the projects is already taking place within
the Office of Aboriginal Affairs.
The Prime Minister, Mr. W¾ hitlam, announced the moves today
after consultations with the nominated Minister for Education,
Mr. K. E. Beazley, and Dr. II. C. Coombs.
Ir. Whitlam said the Government felt a need for greater
respect for aboriginal languages and culture. The tribal
cultures should be preserved, not crushed, he said.
Mr. ! Whitlam said in introducing the programs the
Government was implementing conventions of both the I. L. O. and
U. N. E. S. C. O. which encouraged the teaching of indigenous people
in their own languages.
In primary schools in aboriginal communities English
will be taught as a second language.
Among the traditional and cultural skills which will be
taught aboriginal children will be art, carving, music, dancing,
tracking, traditional religion and mythology.,
When the program is fully implemented it will affect most
aboriginal children in the Northern Territory and will be extended
to tribal areas of northern Queensland, the Kimberleys in
Western Australia and northern South Australia.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 7 14 December 1972
AUSTRALIAN' WHEAT EXPORTS TO RHODESIA ENDED
The export of wheat from Australia to Rhodesia will no longer
be permitted. This was announced today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, after reviewing the circumstances under which wheat exports
haid been permitted since the United Nations sanctions were imposed on
Rhodesia in 1968.
" The Government is satisfied that humanitarian considerations
no longer justify our wheat exports to Rhodesia," Mr Whitlai said.
The United Nations Security Council's resolution which imposed
sanctions on Rhodesia exempted the export of foodstuffs to that country
in special humnanitarian circumstances. Up to now wheat exports to
Rhodesia have been allowed on these grounds.
Mr Whitlam also said that the Secretary-General of the United
Nations was being informed today of the Government's decision.
" The Australian Government strongly supports the United Nations'
efforts to bring to an end the illegal minority regime in Rhodesia, and
accordingly will strictly enforce sanctions imposed on it" Mr Whitlan
added. 



NO DATE
14 December 1972
APPOINTMENT OF HIGH COMMISSIONER
TO TANZANIA
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E G. Whitlam, announced
Stoday the appointment of Mr J. A. Forsythe as Australian High Commissioner
to Tanzania. He succeeds Mr WG. A. Landale, who recently returned to
SAustralia for leave and consultations but is unable to resume duty in
Tanzania because of ill-health.
Mr Forsythe is a senior officer of the Department of Foreign
Affairs and has served previously in Tokyo, Rome, the United Nations, Bonn,
Pretoria, Capetown and Berne, where he is at present Charge d'Affaires.
He is married and has two children.
SMr Forsythe is expected to take up his appointment in Dar es
Salaam early in 1973. 



PRESS STATEE'NT NO. 18
14 December 1972
ADVERTISING OF CONTRACEPTIVES
The Prime Minister said today that the Pharmacy
Ordinance 1931-1971 is to be amended to remove the prohibition
on the advertising of contraceptives in the Australian Capital
Territory. He added that a similar amendment to the Pharmacy
Ordinance of the Northern Territory will be placed before
a future session of the Legislative Council of the Northern
Territory. CANB: J. 3 RA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATETJENT NO.
December 1972
TAAR RIVER SEWERAGE CONTROL
The new Australian Government today took its first
step against pollution by approving a grant to help clean up
the Tamar River at Launceston.
The Government decided to give $ 300,000 in the current
financial year towards the cost of the first stage of a treatment
plant for Launceston sewerage.
The Senate Select Conmmittee on Water Pollution in 1970
singled out Tamar River pollution for mention in its report.
The committee said " Raw effluent is discharged into
the Tamar River, a practice which was aptly described by the Port
Mdanager and Port Engineer, Port of Launceston Authority, Mr.
J. K. Edwards, as ' primitive, obnoxious and beneath the standards
acceptable to any present day community'."
The Premier of Tasmania, Mr. Reece, sought the grant
today during talks in Canberra with the Prime Mlinister, r lr. Whitlam,
the Deputy Prime Minister, Mdr. Barnard, and Mr. Frank Crean, M. P.
He sought the grant to enable the Launceston Corporation
to proceed with the construction of a plant which would provide
both primary and secondary treatment facilities.
This would enable the pollution load in the Tamar River
to be reduced to a level which was acceptable from a public health
and environmental point of view.
The Commonwealth grant indicates the new Government's
desire to overcome pollution problems of the type being
experienced in the Tamar River.
CANBER! IA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 21
December 1972
ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS
The Australian Government has decided to hold a judicial
inquiry as the first move towards the legal recognition of
Aboriginal rights in land.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced the appointment
of Mr. Justice Woodward as the Commissioner to conduct the
inquiry. Mr. Justice Woodward's commission is not concerned with
whether rights in land should be granted since the government
has already decided that they shall.
His ta~ rk is simply to advise how they shall be granted.
He has been asked to report on:
oarrangements necessary in the Northern Territory for vesting
title to Aboriginal reserved land, including rights in
minerals and timber, in the Aboriginal groups and communities
concerned; procedures for the examination of claims based on t raditional
rights in the areas outside reserves or alternative ways of
meeting effectively the needs of Aboriginal communities outside
the reserves for land;
oamendments to legislation necessary to give effect to his
recommendations. The Commissioner has been advised that in preparing his
recommendations he should take into account already existing
commitments affecting the areas of land involved.
The precise terms of reference will be decided by the Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs and announced in due course.
The Government intends to refer subsequent matters involving
Aboriginalurights in or claims to land to Mr. Justice Woodward as
soon as the first stage of his commission is complete. 



4Jj&gt; AUST HA LIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 19.
December 1972
TERTIARY EDUCATION
The Australian Government has begun moves for greater
decentralisation of tertiary education.
Part of this process will be rationalisation of tertiary
education in Sydney to take into account population distribution.
The Prime Minister, Mr. ' hitlamn, initiated the moves with
letters to the chairmen of the Australian Universities Commission
and of the Australian Commission on Advanced Education this week.
He has asked them to prepare a joint report on the
location, nature and development of tertiary institutions
throughout and near the Sydney and Melbourne metropolitan areas
and in the Albury-, iodonga region.
: He asked that the report be made as a matter of urgency
by the end of March next year.
In his letters to the chairmen, Mr. ' hitlam pointed out
that the Australian Government intends to raise with the States
next year the question of the Commonwealth assuming financial
responsibility for tertiary education.
He also said that the Government would not necessarily
preclude consideration being given to the establishment of one or
more location of an institution which did riot conform with
the pattern of existing colleges and universities.
This applied to the extent that the institution offered
courses which perhaps spanned and even went beyond the interests
of both present universities and colleges of advanced education.
As Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, Mr. Whitlam
has previously said that tertiary institutions should be established
at Penrith and Campbelltown, near Syduieyo"
In his election policy speech, he said that at Albury-
Wodonga the Commonwealth had the constitutional jurisdiction and
the administrative options to establish another inland city the
size of Canberra.
CANB SRRA. A. C. T. 



-,,, AUSTRA LIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 22
December 1972
ELIZABETH EVATT
The Prime Minister, Mir. Whitlam, has announced the
appointment of Miss Elizabeth Evatt as a Presidential Member
of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
Deputy President Evatt is the first woman to hold such
a position. A vacancy on the Bench occurred following the
resignation of the Hon. Deputy President, Vernon Watson, to
take up a position as a Judge on the Industrial Commission of
New South Wales.
The decision to replace Mr. Watson with Deputy
President Evatt was made after consultations between Mr. Whitlam
and the nominated Minister for Industrial Affairs, Mr. C. R.
Cameron. Deputy President Evatt has accepted the position and
will take up her appointment at Easter.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
BACKGROUND Miss Evatt graduated from the University of Sydney with
the Law Medal in March 1955. She was admitted to the New South
Wales and Federal Bars in that year and to the Inner Temple three
years later. She later obtained the Degree of Master of Arts at
Harvard. She lives in London with her husband, Mr. R. Southends,
of the London Bar and their son Robert, 9, and daughter, Anne, 3.
She is at present a staff member working in family law
reform for Lord ( Justice) Scarman's Law Commission.
Miss Evatt is the daughter of well-known Sydney Queen's
Counsel, Mr. Clive Evatt, and the niece of former Labor Leader,
Dr. H. V. Evatt. 



4
) PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMlET NO. 23
17 December 1972
PIREFERENCE TO AUSTRALIAN SUPPLIERS
The Prime inister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today a new
system of preference to Australian suppliers in purchases by
the Australian Government.
He has directed that Australian Government contracts should
be awarded to an Australian-owned company in cases where Australian
and overseas-owned firms submit tenders which meet specifications
and are equal in respect of price and availability.
This represents a change from present procedures for
selecting successful tendererso
The present practice in most cases in which equal tenders
are submitted is to accept the tenderer who has been the most
recent satisfactory supplier of identical supplies.
His decision follows discussions between Government
departments, held to ensure that future purchasing arrangements
for the Australian Government would take into account the question
of Australian ownership and control.
Mr. Thitlam1 has also ordered that a study be made of future
arrangements which might apply to the purchase of petroleum products
from Australian-owned and controlled companies.
Mr. '; Thitlam said current contracts for petroleum products
will not expire before the end of 1973.
In his election policy speech, Mr. Whitlam pledged that
the Labor Government will give a lead to maximising Australian
ownership and control of the oil industry by ensuring that where
price, availability and accessibility are as good, the Commonwealth
will make its purchases from Australian-owned and controlled
companies. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRE33 STATEMENT NO. 24
18 December 1972
REPRESENTATION AT I. L. O.
Australia would strengthen its labour representation in
Europe and its relations with the International Labour
Organisation and with other organisations concerned with manpower
and social affairs in Europe, by appointing in Europe a Special
Labour Adviser with the personal rank of Ambassador, to handle
all labour questions, the Prime M1inister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. 1hitlam, announced today.
This representative would be Dr. P. H. Cook, at present
Secretary of the Department of Labour and National Service.
He has had great experience in the work of the I. L. O. and has
participated on many occasions as Australia's representative at
I. L. O. Conferences. Dr. Cook -would be attached for administrative purposes
to the Australian Mission to the United Nations in Geneva but
would have wide-ranging responsibilities covering the whole of
Europe. As well as carrying out representation and continuing
relations with the major organs of the I. L. O. and its Office,
Dr. Cook would assist the Australian Ambassador to the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development as Australia's principal
representative for manpower and social affatrs questions with
the Organisation. The of which Australia became a
member in June 1971, has an important Manpower and Social Affairs
Directorate within its secretariat and conducts meetings of
Government representatives through its Manpower. and Social Affairs
Committee, as * well as through seminars and other specialist
meetings of experts from Vestern. European and North American
countries and Japan. For a number of years, O. E. C. D. has urged
Mdember governments to adopt ani active manpower policy, particularly
through measures to facilitate and stimulate mutually beneficial
adaptation between the labour force and the needs of a rapidly
changing economy. o.&amp;/ 2 
-2-
Dlr. Cook would generally keep in touch with manpowe r
developments in Western Europe, especially those which may
be of direct interest to the Australian situation. He would,
inter alia, maintain regular contact with such organisations,
as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
PM1r. Vhitlam emphasised the importance he attached to
Australia's active participation in I. L. 0. and to ratification
of I. L. 0. Conventions. He said that Australia had, at one*
time, led . the world with some of the most progressive labour
legislation but, during the last twenty years, had fallen
far behind many of the countries in Western Euirope. It was
now time to catch up. In many instances conditions of work,
social security, retirement benefits and many otherthings
vital both to the individual worker and to the economy as
a whole were now much more favourable to workers in European
countries than in Australia. V e must learn in depth and in
detail just what European countries had managed to achieve
while we had been standing still. The appointment in Europe
of a senior representative with a great background of
experience and expertise in labour matters would go a long
way to help remedy the lack of progress in Australia in recent
years. CCAANNBBEERRRRAA.. AA.. CC.. TT.. 



91lOA 3fRE
000 NQ DATE
M/ 9 18 December 1972
AMBASSADOR APPOINTED TO THE INTMTATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATICN
Australia would strengthen its labour representation in Europe and
its relations with the International Labour Orpnisation and with other
organisations concerned with manpower and social affairs in Europe, by
appointing in Europe a Special Labour Adviser with the personal rank of
Ambassador, to handle all labour questions, the Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced today.
This representative would be Dr P. H. Cook, at present Secretary of
the Department of Labour and National Service. He has had great experience
in the work of the I. L. O. and has participated on many occasions as Australia's
representative at I. L. O. conferences.
Dr Cook would be attached for administrative purposes to the
Australian Mission to the United Nations in Geneva but would have wide-ranging
responsibilities covering the whole of Europe. As well as carrying out
representation and continuing relations with the major organs of the I. L. O.
and its Office, Dr Cook would assist the Australian Ambassador to the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development as Australia's
principal representative for manpower and social affairs questions with the
Organisation. The OECD, of which Australia became a member in June 1971, has an
important Manpower and Social Affairs Directorate within its secretariat and
conducts meetings of Government representatives through its Manpower and
Social Affairs Committee, as well as through seminars and other specialist 
-2-
meetings of experts from Wiestern European and North American countries and
Japan. For a number of' years, OECD has urged Member governments to adopt
an active manpower policy, particularly through measures to facilitate and
stimulate mutually beneficial adaptation between the labour force and the
needs of a rapidly changing economy.
Dr Cook would generally keep in touch with manpower developments
in Western Europe, especially those which may be of direct interest to the
Australia situation. He would, inter alia, maintain regular contact with
such organisations as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
Mr Whitlan emphasised the importance he attached to Australia's
active participation in I. L. O. and to ratification of I. L. 0. Conventions.
He said that Australia had, at one time, led the world with some of the most
progressive labour legislation but, during the last twenty years, had fallen
far behind many of the countries in Western Europe. It was now time to catch
up. In many instances conditions of work, social security, retirement
benefits and many other things vital, both to the individual worker and to
the economy as a whole were now much more favourable to workers in European
countries than in Australia. We must learn in depth and in detail just what
European countries had managed to achieve while we had been standing still.
The appointment in Europe of a scnior representative with a great background
of experience and expertise in labour matters would go a long way to help
remedy the lack of progress in Australia in recent years. 



PRESS STATE2NT NO.
19 December 1972
The Prime Minister, Mr. JWhitlam, will give a
" Report to the Nation" on radio and television at 7.30 p. m.
( Eastern Summer Time) tomorrow night ( Yednesday).
A. B. C. radio and television stations will carry the
broadcast and commercial radio and television networks have been
advised of its availability.
The broadcast will be for ten minutes.
Times for its shoving in States that are not on
Eastern Summer Time are:
L. 4.30 p. m.
7.00 p. m.
L. 5.30 p. m.
In the broadcast, ilr. Jhitlam will describe the
objectives of the new Labor iMinistry.
NOTE: The text of the broadcast will be made available to the
Press tomorrow a fternoon.
CAl 32~ 22A A C T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 19 DECEMBER 1972
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: there is a matter which
will be interesting in the next few days, it concerns diplomatic
relations with East Germany the German Democratic Republic.
I have instructed the Australian Ambassador in Moscow to
have discussions with his East German colleague there, about
the early establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia
and the German Democratic Republic. These discussions are in
progress. Following the recent moves between West and East Germany
to normalise their relations, I consider it is important both
for political and commercial reasons to normalise Australia's
relations with East Germany. Apart from facilitating trade in
both directions, Australian recognition of East Germany would,
when agreement is reached, make people in Europe more aware that
there is a new government in Australia which is not concentrating
on South East Asia and the Pacific to the exclusion of our highly
important relations with Europe.
I would also make the point that in opening discussions
with the German Democratic Republic I am seeking to avoid situations
in which Australia takes general decisions in international affairs
late. I would rather see Australia in the vanguard then in the
rearguard in coming to its own foreign policy decisions.
MR. BARNARD: Mr. Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen: the
Government has decided that because of the heavy burden of
defence policy which will fall on the Defence Minister, a second
Minister under the policy of higher management direction of the
Minister for Defence should be appointed to whom the three services
may look for political guidance, and who will answer questions in
parliament relating to their parti cular sercice interests.
He will participate along with the Minister for Defence himself
in discussions in the Ministry when the interests of servicemen
are involved in matters coming before the Government. The
Minister assisting will exercise many of those functions which
under existing legislation are conferred on the Minister for the
Navy, the Army and Air.
The Government intends, at the second stage and before the
end of 1973, to merge into the Department of Defence the three
service departments and, if deemed practicable, at the same
time the Supply Department. Legislative amendments will be
introduced after the plans for organisational change have been
prepared by the Secretary of the Department of Defence in
consultation with other responsible authorities, and after the
Government has made a decision on them. There will be other
innovations; the Government will establish standing machinery
for assessing the pay and conditions of the armed forces and
it will come into effect after the Woodward Committee completes
its work. An Ombudsman for the members of the armed gervices
will be appointed after his mandate has been drafted and his
relationship with the military disciplinary and command system 
-2-
has been clearly laid down. As soon as the re-organised Department
of Defence is ready to assume the responsibility, the Civil Defence
Directora te will be transferred to it from the Department of the
Interior, and there will be created a National Disaster Organisation
in association with it to cope in co-operation with other civil
authorities in Australia with the effects of natural disasters
like droughts, floods, fires and cyclones to which Australia is
subject. The appointments reflect the Government's intention to
give an important priority to maintaining efficient fighting forces
controlled by modern administration under a senior Defence minister.
The Government intends to break down the separation of service
administration from each other and from the Department of Defence
in which respect a number of countries have moved far ahead of
Australia. PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: the last two Conferences,
the first two of the three Conferences given by the present
administration, were given in the late afternoon. We tried to have
the last one in time for the afternoon papers to have it in the
morning. You remember, that that wasn't posiible, but we have
been able to arrange this one this morning. It might suit your
convenience best for the representatives of the afternoon papers
to ask the first questions.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, in the field of foreign affairs, has
it been made clear to the United States government that your
government does not follow the same policy on Vietnam as your
predecessors did and are you at this stage, prepared to deplore
the resumption of American bombing of the Hanoi/ Haiphong area?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, naturally we regret that the negotiations
for a cease-fire, leading one would hope to a peace settlement,
have broken down. There have been no communications on this subject
between the United States and the Australian governments.
Australia is not a party principal in any way in Vietnam.
As you know, the last Australian combatant or training forces have
now left the country. obviously, we hope that the negotiations
are soon resumed.
Prime Minister, what about the bombings?
Q. Riave you any comment on the bombings to Mr. Matthew's question?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't think a comment would help. we would
like to have the negotiations resumed. That's all that I feel I
should say.
Q. Have you at last received the communication from the
Queensland Premier about the Torres Strait Island border problem?
Have you had any representations from the Islanders themselves that
you should visit there or see some of their people? What's your
latest attitude on this?
PRIME MINISTER: I : might have received a reply from Mr. Bjelke-
Petersen. I haven't seen it. You can understand that yesterday
and today I wouldn't be very much up to the minute on my
correspondence. I don't know if he's replied. I did write to
him last week on this subject. He must have the letter by now.
Q. Has he said that he's replied? 
-3-
HAWKINS: I understood that he had written back to you again,
but I'm niot 100% sure that it was in reply to your letter.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't I haven't seen a letter from him on
this subj-ect.
Q. Sir, will there be a Cabinet meeting before Christmas and
what do you see as the most pressing problems or questions to be
discussed by the first Cabinet meeting?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope there'll be a Cabinet meeting tomorrow.
Ther-e will not: . be many matters that can be dealt with at this
notice, but one that I have in mind is the application pending
on Thursday before the Public Service Arbitrator about four weeks
annual leave for the Public Service. I would like the full
ministry to consider the attitude that should be taken on that
application. Q. Mr. Whitlam, I'm told that the Chinese, in the discussions
on recognition, are demanding that your government expropriate
all the assets of the Taiwan Ggvernment and hand them over to
them and, secondly, that we remove even our trade representatives
from Taiwan. Are these things that the Government is prepared
to negotiate with because they seem to go beyond the Canadian
formula that you have laid down as the key to recognition?
PRIME MINISTER: You've been told more than I have. There will
be no official representatives in Taiwan once relations are
established with Peking. There are there never have been
official representatives of Canada in Taiwan.
Q. Aren't there trade officials?
PRIME MINISTER: I thought not.
Q. Appropo to that particular subject. Could you say what
stage has been reached in the negotiations with the People's
Republic of China through our ambassador to Paris?
PRIME MINISTER: The discussions are proceeding statisfactorily.
I expect that there will be another meeting between the ambassadors
quite shortly.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister. If Mr. Barnard can handle five previous
portfolios, admittedly with the assistance of an Assistant Minister,
how hard will Senator Cavanagh work in Works? Could not the
Ministry have, in fact, and the general administration, been cut
considerably? PRIME MINISTER: The pra ctical fact is that no Commonwealth
Ministry from now will have less than 27 ministers. I would
imagine that Senator Cavanagh, as Minister for Works, will be
much more fully engaged than his predecessor in that portfolio. 
-4-
Q. Sir, have you opened any negotiations with the French
Governme. t regarding nuclear tests in the Pacific?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Prime Minister, you indicated prior to the elections that
the one minister would control both the Departments of Labour
and Immigration. In the Ministry you announced last night this
was not so. Why have you now appointed an individual Minister
for Immigration? Does this involve a re-thinking of your
immigration policy?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been three or four ministers who
I have said, from time to time, would have two portfolios but
who will now be having only one. The reason is largely the
reason I've just given, that there have to be portfolios for
27 Ministers. I also had said that Mr. Uren would handle both
Urban and Regional Development and Environment and Conservation
but he agreed to take only one. I had also said that Mr.
Hayden would take both Social Security and Health. He has agreed
to take only one and the change in Mr. Cameron's position of
taking only one of the two that I'd previously suggested was one
which was also taken with his agreement.
Q. This doesn't represent any changes in your thinking on
immigration the change in immigration policy?
PRIME MINISTER: No. No, I'm not quite sure what you mean there.
Q. The fact that immigration will be running down?
PRIME MINISTER: No, the emphasis will be, as you can well see
from Mr. Grassby's appointment, in making people who have
migrated to Australia happy in this country, and the prime
means of bringing other migrants to this country.
Q. Do you intend to give assisted passages to coloured migrants
in the near future? If so, when and how many per year?
PRIME MINISTER: I would. The general attitude is, as has been
stated for quite some time, the emphasis on who comes here will
be not what the Government determines, but what is determined
by people who are already living in Australia. Principally,
that is the people who are close relatives and close friends of
existing residents in Australia will be the migrants who will be
coming here. No numbers have ever beeh stated, but I would
think that the number of migrants of all categories will
continue, I emphasise continue, to fall.
Q. Will you give assisted passages to the Taiwanese?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll consider that.
Q. How do you regard Australian and British relations now that
you're Prime Minister? 
PRIME MINISTER: Better.
Q. Prime Minister, following the split between Social Security
and Health, will Dr. Everingham. and Mr. Hayden both be involved in
negotiations, for example with the doctors, or will the Social
Security Minister be solely responsible for those negotiations?
PRIME MINISTER: The Social Security Minister will be mainly
responsible. There may be occasions when the Health Minister
would also be involved in bringing in the new form of health
insurance. There will be other matters in which Dr. Everingham
would be principally concerned in negotiation with the doctors
such as hospitals and clinics.
Q. Would he be involved in discussing with the doctors fees, the
question of doctor's fees?
PRIME MINISTER: This would be primarily Mr. Hayden's. I don't
say that Dr. Everingham mightn't be involved but this would
primarily be a matter for Mr. Hayden. You will appreciate
that the Department of Social Security will deal not only with
cash social services: it will also deal with health insurance
and with the introduction of national superannuation and
national compensation.
Q. Sir, do you intend to encourage your Ministers to take up
residence in Canberra and do you intend to review the policy of
the last government on Ministerial housing?
PRIME MINISTER: This will be considered by the new
administration to be sworn in at half past five this
afternoon. Where Ministers live will depend, as it always
has, on the two considerations of looking after their
electorate, which is their base after all, and best performing
their administrative duties.
Q. The Hospitals Commission you proposed. When do you envisage
setting that up and who will be administering it, Dr. Everinghamor
Mr. Hayden?
PRIME MINISTER: It would be responsible primarily to
Dr. Everingham.
Q. When do you envisage setting it up?
PRIME MINISTER: I think, in an interim form. I would hope
quite soon.
Q. I want to clarify a question I asked you last week about
a statement you made in July, of which you were apparently
unaware, about rehabilitation assistance to people who
suffered in the name of conscience under the National Service
Act. I've since looked up the reference. I don't know
whether you have.
PRIME MINISTER: No I haven't.
Q. It was a telegram you sent to the Reverend Roger Wootten
of the Melbourne Presbyterian Church. 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: My communications from clergy usually come
from othe-rquarters.
Q. Well, this telegram was quoted in the " Age" on the 11th of July
1972. The telegram you sent to him in which you promised
rehabilitation assistance for those who had suffered in the
name of conscience under the National Service Act. Again, what
form will the rehabilitation assistance take. Will it be
financial compensation and is financial compensation being
considered for draft resisters who went underground?
PRIME MINISTER: I would guess that the answer I sent to this
gentleman would be quoting the resolution at the Launceston
Conference last year. I would doubt if I went any further than
that, but I've given no further consideration to this matter.
It's obviously a matter for the new Government to consider if
it's to be considered at all.
Q. In view of Mr. Cameron's rather gloomy forecasts about
the future employment situation and the high priority which
you gave to this in your election campaign, what remedial
action can you take in addition to the action already tak en
through the States? Is there any program in your mind for setting
up plans to absorb the unemployed persons?
PRIME MINISTER: I've received a letter from Sir Robert Askin,
along with several proposals for employment which can be rapidly
increased in various fields through public expenditure in New
South Wales along the lines that have been arranged with the
four southern States already. I think this letter came yesterday
and I'll be discussing it with Mr. Crean today, but the form
of Commonwealth assistance to get people back to work will largely
be in the form that's already been taken.
Q. With regard to your own area: of responsibility, could you
explain specifically your responsibility to the Tariff Board and
how this fits in with the functions of the Department of
Secondary Industry and, the second question, do you know at
this stage when Parliament will meet?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't know when Parliament will meet.
This will be a matter which will be discussed by the new
Ministry. About the Tariff Board; you'll remember that the
proposal that we were making earlier this year was that the
Tariff Board should be extended and perhaps renamed " Protection
Commission" in order to have references, not only in respect
to secondary industry from the Department of Trade and Industry
which is now being abolished, but also from the new Department*
of Bed-ondar y Industry and from the continuing Department of
Primary Industry and from the continuing Department of Customs
and Excise, the whole idea being that the Tariff Board, or its
enlarged and maybe renamed successor, would inves tigate and,
if it sees fit, recommend the forms of encouragement for protection
by way of tariff or subsidies or grants research grants in both
primary as well as secondary industry.
Q. ' Prime Minister, have you had a chance yet to have a look
at the proposed Cabinet Committee system? How many Committees
will there be, what will be their names and to what extent will
they be able to make decisions on behalf of the Cabinet? And, also,
could you explain why you've transferred Prima ry Industry from
the Reps to the Senate? 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't considered yet the Cabinet Committee
system. I've done a little study of it for instance, on the
Canadian model. All I can say at this stage is that it's unlikely
that the Cabinet Committees will make decisions on behalf of the
Cabinet. What may happen is that the Cabinet Committees would
make a recommendation to the Cabinet and that would become the
Cabinet decision if no other Ministers objected to it and asked
for the matter to be re-opened. You also asked me about the
transfer of Primary Industry from the House of Representatives.
to the Senate. There is, of course, no requirement for any
Ministry to be in either House except, I suppose, the Prime
Minister and the Treasurer have to be in the House of Representatives.
Any other Minister can be in either House, and I would think every
Ministry, hitherto, at one stage or another has been represented
in each House.
Q. Prime Minister, some pensioners have complained a little
that they haven't received an immediate increase as you had
promised in your policy speech, and I would like to ask how it's
possible that youlre able to find a loophole in terms of getting
dra ft resisters out of gaol and not being able to give a pension
increase?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm sorry that any pensioners have made
that compl'ant because I never made any promise in the Policy
Speech of an immediate increase. I said there would be in Autumn,
and there will be in Autumn quite early after the House sits.
However, I never said there would be one before Autumn. I said
that, thereafter, there would be twice a year, Spring and Autumn
thereafter. Q. Reading the policy speech thouigh it does, in fact, say
an immediate increase?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think it does. There was no suggestion
that there would be any increase before the Parliament met.
There can't be, can there?
Q. If I may just supplement that one. You were able to find
a loophole in terms of conscription, and draft resisters were
let out of gaol.
PRIME MINISTER: There was no expenditure of money required there.
You can't expend money on social services except by authorisation
of the Parliament, and payment of social services comes out of the
National welfare Fund I think it is to which the contributions
are made under amending social services acts. I haven't got a
copy of the policy speech with me but I never came across any
misunderstanding on this matter at all. The promise was that
there would be an increase of $ 1.50 when the Parliament met next
year and thereafter every Spring and Autumn until the pension
reached 25% instead of the present 20% of the avera ge weekly
male earnings. 
-8-
Q. Mr. Whitlam, a question on your announcement at the weekend
of a scheme to favour Australian-owned companies in the allocation
of government contracts?
PRIME MINISTER: That was in the policy speech.
Q. Do you envisage the situation of tenders equal in price and
availability arising very often? If tenders equal in price and
availability do arise often, this is not a matter for the collusive
tendering provisions of the Trade Practices Act?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it would be.
Q. If they don't arise often what benefit real benefit will
the scheme have for Australian-owned companies and the second
point; have you any details of the criteria for determining
Australia ownership? If those details haven't been worked out yet,
why was the scheme announced by the interim administration and
not announced in full detail so that companies who could
be affected by it can find out all the details by the second
Whitlam Ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: The present administration carried out as many
of the proposals in the party platform and in the policy speech
as it could do in the time available to it., T his was one of the
proposals in the policy speech. It was particularly mentioned
in the policy speech in connection with Commonwealth purchases
of petrol and oil. The present situation, as I understand it,
is that if tenders are equal then they go to the company which
previously had the order, the contract. Presumably, therefore,
there have been cases hitherto where people have made the same
tender. Now, in that case, there may be in the future. If
this happens in the future, instead of going to the old supplier
it would go to the Australian supplier. As you will remember in
the press statement I made two days ago, current contracts for
petroleum products will not expire before the end of 1973. I.' ve
been investigating this as regards the Department of Supply by
way of questions in the last Parliament, but there are a
considerable number of instrumentalities where I was unable
to find the position in the last Parliament. It now appears
that all the contracts go on until the end of 1973. Now, if by
1973 some of the other oil companies achieve the favourable
position of Ampol or even H. C. Sleigh then they will continue
to get some of the Commonwealth contracts which hitherto they
seem to have been largely monopolised.
Q. The question of the criteria of Australian ownership. Has
that been resolved?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There are various criteria which have already
been laid down in Commonwealth legislation. Ampol would clearly
comply with this and maybe H. C. Sleigh but it would appear that the
other companies which have Commonwealth contracts at this stage do not.
Q. May I ask, through you, Mr. Barnard a couple of current issues on
defence? First of all, the Woodward Committee reported to you, I
think last FRiday, on the outstanding items which included possible
pay rises. It was mentioned that these pay rises could cost $ 70 million.
How soon do you expect to be able to implement these last matters and
also, on the DqF, R. B., you had meetings also last week on the D., RB
which I believe are being 
-9-
tidied up this week. Are you encountering any unforeseen
difficulties in carrying out the policy promise to implement
the D. F. R. B. Jess Committee's Report as quickly as possible?
MR. BARNARD: Well, first of all on the Woodward Committee Report.
I received it last Friday afternoon. That allowed me some time
over the weekend to look at it myself. Now, it's a very
comprehensive report. It is true that it will involve the Government in
additional expense but it is in line with our policy undertakings
to improve the conditions of serving members ' of the armed forces.
Naturally, I want sufficient time to be able to carefully consider
the proposals before I have further discussions about the Woodward
Committee's report with the Prime Minister. Now, I hope to do that
as soon as possible because we have said that we will provide
improved conditions for serving members of the forces as soon as
possible. I believe this is a very valuable and significant
report and, therefore, I hope to have the discussions as soon as
pos. õ ible and then the decision will be one for the new Government
to determine when legislation is introduced into the Federal
Parliament. But we have also said that we would want to make
reports available to the public and those interested in them as soon
as possible. I can assure you that I'll be moving, as soon as
practicable, to have the report made available to the media after
consultation with the Prime Minister. Now, the second part of
the question was on the Defence Forces Retirement Benefit Fund. Again,
it was a policy decision during the last election that we would
implement the recommendations of the Jess Committee. Now, I began
last week by having discussions with those concerned; with the
Treasury Department and from the armed services. I have indicated
to them that I would hope to have legislation ready for the first
session of the Federal Parliament. This, of course, will depend on
some administrative matters, the availability of the necessary
machinery to provide the legislation. But, I will be having further
discussions again this week on matters concerning the D. F. R. B. and
it will, as I have said, be introduced as soon as it is practicable
to do so.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, on the subject of primary industry again.
Only the second time since Mr. McMahon became the first Minister
in the early fifties has this job fallen to a non-farmer. In
view of the fact that the previous farmer representative in the
previous government was ranked about fourth or fifth in the
Cabinet with due respect to Senator Wreidt why has the
position been so downgraded?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know where primary industry has ranked
in the Ministerial list hitherto. I think the highest position
it ever reached was in the last Government and that was merely
for the reason that it was held by the Deputy Leader of the
Country Party. It was not because of the Department, it was
because of the party position of the Minister.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, I'd like to know who's going to authorise
the tapping of our telephones? Could you tell us about the
relationship of ASIO to the government, and are there any new
arrangements there? 
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. It stays with Senator Murphy does it?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Sir, on tariffs. Which department will now carry
the overall responsibility for moulding general tariff courses?
PRIME MINISTER: This is probably one of those matters which will
be discussed by one of the Cabinet committees. Tariff Board
matters will only be defused to use your term because there
will be, for the first time, an investigation of protection in
various forms for primary products, not, as hitherto, secondary
products alone. The administration is already pretty defused
because two Ministers hitherto have been able to refer matters
to the Tariff Board for enquiry and report, the Minister for
Trade and Industry formerly I think it used to be Customs and
Agriculture wasn't it? Commerce and Agriculture and then,
of course, Customs and Excise can do so.
Q. Sir, will we have an early increase in members' pay and,
if so, will this mean an increase in ministerial pay?
?' RIME MINISTER: I do like the lilt in your voice!
This has not been considered by the present ministry. As you
probably know, their emoluments have not been increased for years.
Mr. Barnard and I are drawing the emoluments, and I've seen that
Senator Murphy and Senator Willesee continue to receive them
although they would otherwise have lost the emoluments we were
all receiving in the last Parliament and no more at this stage.
PRIME MINISTER: Incidentally, on this I forget the calculations
but tech-nic-aly Mr. Barnard and I could have taken, for this
fortnight, the whole of the ministerial pool.
Q. On that subject, Sir, at the moment there are senior ministers
and junior ministers who receive differing pay scales. I think
you are going to be an egalitarian minister, you're receiving
the same salaryA
PRIME MINISTER: You are quite right.
Q. Will your salary drop or will the others increase?
PRIME MINISTER: They might.
Q. There is a point, Sir, related to that. What sort of
staffing facilities do you think the Government will provide
for the Liberal and Country Parties so that they can carry out
their mandate to oppose?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll have to they will get better staffing
facilitie~ s than the previous Opposition, and they'll probably
need it. This is a matter where, clearly, the new ministry will
have to discuss the matter and the method of communication in
the first instance is between the leaders of the various parties.
When the Liberals choose their new Leader then, presumably, he
and Mr. Anthony and I will have a discussion on this matter and
then the Ministry will have a discussion upon it. 
-11-
Mr. Anthony did approach me about this. He was very quick
off the mark but I told him that he could go ahead on the basis
that his staff should be not smaller than that which Mr. Barnard
enjoyed in the last Parliament, and he has taken up residence.
I hope the Speaker approves of it.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, in view of the meeting, I think early
next month, with Mr. Hamer and Sir Robert Askin on the development
of Albury/ Wodonga. Have any instructions been issued cancelling
or deferring the transfer of departments to Canberra and, in
particular, the building of office blocks further office blocksf
or the Public Service in Melbourne or Sydney?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
I'm not sure that there wasn't I said no oders had been given.
I'm not sure there wasn't something on the proposed Woolloomooloo
Commonwealth building. You'll remember that the Public Works
Committee reported against it. Now, I if you're interested in
this matter perhaps I'd better look it up and see precisely if
anything has happened since then, but otherwise there hasn't been.
Q. Will Dr. Patterson be answering for Primary Industry union
representatives and, if so, what will be the inter-actio n between
Northern Development and Primary Industry?
PRIME MINISTER: Of f hand, the principal relation between the
two will be in sugar and in cattle but administratively they
would be sepa rate departments. You ask me if Dr. Patterson
would be the Minister in the House of Representatives representing
the Minister for Primary Industry. I haven't discussed the
question of representation in either House with any of my colleagues
but I would expect that Dr. Patterson would be the Minister in
the House of Representatives representing the Minister for Primary
Industry.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, can you name the new Permanent Heads of the
departments you outlined last night and, if not, when can we
expect to have the names of the new Pe rmanent Heads?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter where the new ministers will
be having ' discussionwsi th the Public Service Board, and then
when they have recommendations they'll make them to the Cabinet
which will then make the appointments. I don't know how soon
this can be done but it may be possible to do it more quickly
in some departments than in others. Some of the new departments
are ones where it may not be possible to find a properly qualified
person in the Commonwealth Service.
Q. Have you given any thought to the invitations you might like
to extend during the coming period to heads of governments or heads
of State from other countries we've talked at previous press
conferences about yourself visiting China, do you intend to invite
anybody here? In terms of a European Leader, might you be
thinking of the Chancellor of West Germany who is the Head of
the fraternal party?
PRIME MINISTER: It's too soon to say. It's a happy thought.
I apprec'ia-te your reference to the Leader of our brother party 
-12-
in West Germany.
Q. On the question of Mr. Cameron's ra ther gloomy predictions
for unemployment, do you expect now that you will quickly bring
in higher unemployment benefits? If so, when and what do you see
as a reasonable figure for unemployment benefits?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter where the new Ministry will make
decisions.' Higher benefits will have to await legislation. I
think that these are benefits which have remained unaltered
longer than any except maternity allowances and child endowment.
Q. I believe Lord Carrington, Britain's De fence Minister,
is coming out in January. Can you indicate what might be
discussed with him?
PRIME MINISTER: I've said that we I think I said this a.
fort-night ago but there has been further correspondence and
I have repeated the fact that we'll be very happy to have
discussions with him on the whole range of matters which he
likes to bring up on behalf of his Government.
Q. You said a fortnight ago that a question on the Honours
list was premature. Do you now confirm that there'll be no
Commonwealth list in the coming New Year's list, and are
you seeking or have you received any proposals from your
department on an alternative Australian system of recognition?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter of some delicacy. All I want
to say i1s : no persons were sounded on their willingness to
receive Awards in a New Year's Honours list on the nomination
of the Australian Government. I say that because some people
have suggested that there's been a breach of faith or a
humiliation. No persons were sounded about any honours from
the Australian Government.
I'm assured that no soundings were made. I've read reports
that some former ministers had been recommended for honours.
I have not asked to see any civilian honours lists. I'm assured
no soundings were made. There was one former private member
I noticed, according to thepapers, had been recommended for a
Knighthood. Q. Who was that?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd only be repeating newspaper speculation.
All I can say about it is that it would have been the most
remarkable knighthood since Sir Toby Belch. A fortnight ago,
I did say that I was seeking a report on appropriate recognition
of long service or gallantry in the armed forces or in the
uniformed services. This would I've not received it, but
I didn't ask for it as a matter of urgency. I would not expect
it to come to hand for quite some weeks. There would be no
recommendations by this Government, accordingly, for people
in the armed forces or the uniformed services I mean people
like fire brigades and police forces. 
-13-
Q. Can you report on the progress of moves to close the
Rhodesian Information Centre in Sydney, and also following'
the latest and yet more stories of Francis James' imminent
release from China can you give us any information about
this? Can you tell us the latest situation?
PRIME MINISTER: I wrote, you may remember, to Sir Robert
Askin about the registratio n of a so-called Rhodesian
Information Office under a New South Wales Act. He wrote
back to me, in effect, acknowledging the letter. Now, I might
have had a letter yesterday or today but due to the pressure
of work, as you can imagine, I'm a bit behind with the letters.
I've not seen a substantive reply. On Mr. Francis James,
the answer is exactly the same as it was last time.
Q. Could you give us your tip for who might be elected Leader
of the Opposition by the Liberals?
PRIME MINISTER: I've had some big problems on my plate in
the last fortnight but none as great as this. Gentlemen,
this apparently is the last question at the concluding press
conference of this ministry. Therefore, may I take the
opportunity of saying that we will try to follow the same
procedure in the new Ministry. In the meantime, we wish
you as we wish ourselves a restful holiday.
Q. And prosperous?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope so. I hope it's a prosperous
New Year but this will require quite a deal of Government action.
In the meantime, a Happy Christmas for us all. 



a P. GS STLTEI'iNT HO. 26
December 1972
TEPORT TO Tr NATION
Good evening. Just over two weeks ago the people of
Australia gave the Australian Labor Party a clear mandate to put into
effect the policies which I had set forth on behalf of the party
during the campaign. The uncertainties and complexities of the
Australian electoral system are such that it was not possible until
this week to assemble the parliamentary party and elect the full
ministry. But I believed it was essential that the new Government
should waste no time in implementing its program, and therefore I
formed an interim ministry with my Deputy, iMr. Barnard, A great
many decisions were made, but I am anxious that it should not be
thought that any of them were hasty or ill-considered. Every
decision was a clear expression of the program on which we were
elected, an expression of our unmistakable mandate. The question
was simply whether there was any good reason for delaying action,
in obedience to the people's will. I could find no good reason.
The most important of our initiatives have been taken
in the field of our relations with our neighbours, our friends and
our allies, and in this area it was particularly urgent that any
doubt or confusion about the intentions of the new Government
should be set at rest immediately. How we have a ministry. I am
delightd with the choice my colleagues have made. I am honoured
and proud to be the Leader of this team. The leader not just of
the ministry but of the many excellent men who have not been chosen
but who will render great service to our nation as members of the
Government. In the past two weeks I have been vastly encouraged by
the help and co-operation given to us by all sections of the public
service. It speaks volumes for the strength of Australia's democratic
system that the loyalty and integrity of the public service can be
transferred without question or qualification to a newly elected
Government after 23 years of equal fidelity to another Government.
A. d in this context I take the opportunity to congratulate ir. 3nedden
t'Le new Leader of the Liberal Party and the Leader of the Opposition.
i') nc knows better than I the burdens and can one say the
rustrations of that high office. And none appreciates more than
its crucial importance to the proper working of our democracy. / 2 
-2-
Now the real work of Government begins. I believe exciting
months and years are ahead for all of us. Abroad I believe we are
already forging a new style and image for Australia nothing raucous
or rash or abrasive but Australia is speaking with a firm, clear and
independent voice and I believe we are being hoard with a new respect.
At home we have already begun the restructuring, reinvigoration and
modernisation of administration to equip Lustralia this great urban
nation to meet the problems we face in the last quarter of the
twentieth century. And let's not under-estimate the problems, the
immediate ones, the long term ones. In particular, my G overnmont
will spare no effort to restore genuine full employment in this
country. Yet we must do this while continuing a battle to contain
inflation. I'e are under no illusions about the difficulty of this
double task. One of the worst aspects of inflation is that it is socially
disruptive. It creates tremendous pressures for new wage and salary
Cemands. Inevitably whole sections of the community people such as
the retired, who are dependent on Governments for their income, and
those on fixed incomes struggle behind in the race. And it is these
social aspects of inflation the things that would weakcn unity and
mutual goodwill among our citizens that, for the Australian Labor
Party, give added urgency to the problem. For we do want the great
theme of our Government to be the restoration of national unity, the
ending of the weakening divisions whereby employees have been set
against employers, the young against the mature, the parents and
teachers of pupils at government schools against those at nongovernment
schools. It was this determination, as much as anything
else, that gives us pride in the fact that the first great decision
of our Government was to end conscription, for perhaps its very
worst feature was the way it created needless and harmful divisions
in our community. And for the same reason it has given me tremendous
satisfaction that history will show that our first major appointments
were the highly qualified men and women who have agreed to give their
time and talents to the work of the Interim Schools Committee. This
committee has already set about with great enthusiasm its appointed
task of ensuring that every Lustralian child who embarks upon secondary
education next year will leave school with an equal start in life.
I believe that the futile debate on State aid and State rights in
education, which has divided our society for a century, is now ended.
I last spoke to you. directly on the eve of the elections.
I then said that I would seek and need the help of all sections of
the Australian people in the task of leading this great nation.
Everything I have seen and learnt in the past two weoks confirms
that need. Together we can achieve great and good things for Australia.
Mlay I wish you and your families a very happy Christmas
and assure you that my Government will do its very best to ensure
that we all have a prosperous iTew Year.
CAIBER~ AE. A. C. T. 



NO DATE
20 December 1972
AUSTRALIA SIGNS INPERNATIONAL COVENANTS ON HUMAN RIGHTS
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced today
that Australia~ s Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Sir
Laurence McIntyre signed on Monday 18 December in New York, two International
Covenants on Human Rights. The Covenants are the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights.
Mr Whitlam said the signature was intended to affirm the Government's
unequivocal agreement with the aims of the Covenants. In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations these are directed towards promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedom for all,
0 without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
Mr Whitlam said signature of the Covenants does not impose any
immediately legally binding obligations on Australia. However, signature
does imply that Australia will put itself in a position to ratify them as
soon as practicable. The Government has directed that work should proceed
at once with a view to seeing what steps may be necessary to enable
Australia to ratify.
Mr VWhitlam said he hoped Australia would be in a position to ratify
the Covenants by the time we observe the 25th Anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights on 10 December 1973. 



PRESS STATELJENT NO. 28
December 1972
PUBLIC SERVICE LEAVE
The Australian Government will support a claim by
Commonwealth Public Service Unions for 4 weeks' annual leave
to be heard on 21 December.
The first meeting of Labor's Cabinet decided not to
oppose the claim for extra leave by Commonwealth Public
Servants. The extra leave provisions will apply only to
members of recognised unions and associations involved in
wvork within the Service.
Departments, however, will assume that all staff are
members unless advised otherwise by a union.
Provision will be made for conscientious objectors
to unionism to obtain the new leave entitlements upon payment
of union dues to a nominated charity.
The Public Service Board had previously opposed the
Public Servants' 4 weeks' leave application.
The new provisions will apply to all Public Servants
whose annual leave is accruing on or after 1 January 1973.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 27
December 1972
APPOII-TiENT OF PERMAN\ ENT HEADS
The Executive Council has today appointed Permanent
Heads to Deoartments as indicated below. The appointments
follow discussions in the Cabinet this morning.
Overseas Trade Er. D. II. McKay, O. B. E.
Science Sir Hugh Ennor, C. B. E.
Minerals and Energy Sir Lenox Hewitt, O. B. E.
Labour Dr. I. G. Sharp
Northern Development Mlr. R. S. Livingston
Urban Regional Development MIr. R. B. Lansdovm
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 11 21 December 1972
SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION TO UNHCR'S R-ETITLEMENT
PROGRAMME FOR S2ATELESS UGANDAN ASIANS
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced
today that Australia would be making a special contribution of
$ US75,000 ($ A63,000) to the United Nations High Commission for
Refugees ( UNHCR).
Mr Whitlam said the contribution is in response to an
international appeal by the High Commissioner for Refugees and is
intended to help meet the costs in the transportation, care and
maintenance and resettlement of the 3,600 stateless Asians now
in transit camps in Europe after being expelled from Uganda last
* month. Mr Whitlam said the contribution supplements an amount of
$ US60,000 ($ A50,000) given in November to assist the movement of
displaced persons from Uganda and brings to $ US135,000 ($ A113,000)
the total assistance from Australia to the resettlement programmes
organized by international agencies. 



JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC
REL~ ATIONS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND CHINA
The Australian Government and the Government of the People's
Republic of China, in conformity with the interests and common desire
of the two peoples, have decided upon mutual recognition and the
establishment of diplomatic relations as from 21 December 1972.
The two Governments agree to develop diplomatic relations,
friendship and co-operation between the two countries on the basis of
the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs,
equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence.
The Australian Government recognises the Government of the
People's Republic of China as the sole legal Chvernment of China,
acknowledges the position of the Chinese Government that Taiwan is a
province of the People's Republic of China, and has decided to remove
its official representation from Taiwan before 25 January 1973.
The Government of the People's Republic of China appreciates
the above stand of the Australian Government.
The two Governments have agreed to exchange Ambassadors as
soon as the administrative formalities and practical arrangements have
been completed, and to provide each other with all the necessary
assistance for the establishment and performance of the functions of
diplomatic missions in their respective capitals on the basis of
equality and mutual benefit and in accordance with international law
and practice.
For the Australian Government For the Government of the
( signed) Alan Renouf People's Republic of China
Australian Ambassador to France ( signed) Huang Chen
Ambassador of the People's
Republic of China to France.
Paris, 21 December 19' 72* 


DATE EMBARGO: Not to be used in any form before 6 p. m.&nbsp;22 December 1972
M/13
&nbsp;
ESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH CHINA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, today issued the following statement.
" Australia and the People's Republic of China have reached agreement on mutual recognition and the establishment of diplomatic relations.
I announced on 5 December that I had instructed our Ambassador in Paris to open negotiations with his Chinese colleague on this matter. These negotiations have been successful, and the two Ambassadors signed the attached joint communique at our Ambassador's residence in Paris on 21 December at 9 p. m. ( 7 a. m. on 22 December Canberra time).
It has long been the objective of the Australian Labor Party to establish diplomatic relations between Australia and the People's Republic of China. It accordingly gives me great satisfaction to announce * that this important step has now been taken.
While it has long been recognised that Australia's geographical position gives it special interests in the Asian region, up until now we have not come to terms with one of the central facts of that region, the People's Republic of China. This serious distortion in our foreign policy has now been corrected.
We have recognised the Government of the People's Republic of China as the sole legal government of China. It follows that we can give no recognition to others claiming to be the Government of China. Chinese policies on both sides of the Taiwan Straits required us, as they have&nbsp; required other governments in a similar position, to make a choice in this matter. We have made the choice which we believe will best serve the interests of Australia. It is also the choice that has been made by the United Nations.
Our diplomatic relations with Taiwan came to an end with the signing of the communique in Paris. It is consequently necessary that Australian official representation in Taipei, and Taiwan's official representation in Australia, be withdrawn. This will be done before January 1973, as noted in the communique.
We now look forward to the growth of a more substantial relationship between Australia and China. I conveyed this hope in the attached message to Premier Chou En-lai which was passed to him through the Chinese Ambassador in Paris on 6 December ( Paris time). Premier Chou responded to this message on 10 December, ( Text attached.) I am gratified that Premier Chou has reciprocated my wish for a more substantial relationship and that he has identified some fields of future cooperation."
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE AUST'RALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND CHINA
The Australian Government and the Government of the People ' s Republic of China, in conformity with the interests and common desire of the two peoples, have decided upon mutual recognition and the establishment of diplomatic relations as from 21 December 1972.
The two Governments agree to develop diplomatic relations, friendship and co-operation between the two countries on the basis of the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non- aggression, non-interference in each other ' s internal affairs,&nbsp;equality and mutual benefit , and peaceful co-existence .
The Australian Government recognises the Government of the People ' s Republic of China as the sole legal government of China, acknowledges the position of the Chinese Government that Taiwan is a province of the People' s Republic of China, and has decided to remove&nbsp;&nbsp;its &nbsp;official representation from Taiwan before 25 January 1973.
The Government of the People's Republic of China appreciates the above stand of the Australian Government .
The two Governments have agreed to exchange Ambassadors as soon as the administrative formalities and practical arrangements have been completed, and to provide each other with all the necessary assistance for the establishment and performance of the functions of&nbsp;diplomatic missions in their respective capitals on the basis of equality &nbsp;and &nbsp;mutual benefit and in accordance with international law and practice.
For the Australian Government
(signed) Alan Renouf
Australian Ambassador to France
For the Government of the People' s Republic of China
(signed) Huang Chen
Ambassador of &nbsp;the People's
Republic of China to France.
Paris, 21 December 1972.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
His Excellency Chou En-lai,
Premier of the State Council of the People 's Republic of China.
&nbsp;
When I visited China last year and had most cordial discussions with you, we agreed on the desirability of putting relations between our two countries on a proper footing. It therefore now gives me great satisfaction to be able , as Prime &nbsp;Minister &nbsp;of Australia, to propose to Your Excellency the normalisation &nbsp;of relations between Australia and the Peoples ' s Republic of China be achieved with all possible despatch .
1 have accordingly today instructed the Australian Ambassador in Paris to propose through your Ambassador the immediate opening of negotiations between our Governments for mutual recognition and the establishment of diplomatic relations. I feel certain th.at our two Governments can soon agree on the terms of an announcement to this effect.
I hope, Excellency, that this will be but the first step in the growth of more substantial relationship between our two Governments and peoples and one marked by understanding, friendship&nbsp;and cooperation.
I personally look forward to extending in Australia to guests from the People' s Republic of China the same warm welcome which I myself was accorded in China last year.

Signed: Gough Whitlam, Prime Minister, Commonwealth of Australia.
Canberra, 5 December 1972.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
His Excellency Edward Gough Whitlam
Prime Minister of the Government&nbsp;of the Commonwealth of Australia , Canberra Australia
Your Excellency
On the occasion of your assumption of the office of Prime Minister of the Government of the: Commonwealth of Australia, I wish to extend to you our warm congratulations on behalf of the&nbsp;Chinese Government and people.
I still keep a pleasant memory of the friendly conversation we had concerning the international situation, Sino-Australian relations and other questions while Your Excellency was on visit in&nbsp;China last year.&nbsp;
When our table tennis delegation visited your country last July, Your Excellency kindly accorded it warm hospitality and made very friendly remarks about the relations between China and Australia.&nbsp;
Your Excellency has in your letter again indicated the desire of normalising the relations between China and Australia as soon as possible and has taken positive steps to this end.
I express my deep appreciation of all this.
I am convinced that the normalisation of Sino-Australian relations is in conformity with the interests and common desire of our two peoples.
It will open up good prospects for friendly co-operation and personnel exchanges between our two Governments in the trade, cultural, scientific- technological and other fields and help further strengthen the friendship between the peoples of China and Australia.
I wish Australia prosperity and her people well-being.
Signed: Chou En-lai , Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.
Peking, 10 December 1972
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



NQ DATE
M/ 12 22 December 19' 2
mBAGO: Not to be used in any
form before 6 pomo on
22 December 1972o
DIPLOMTIC RELATONS WIH TE GEA DEOCRTIC REPUBLIC
0 he Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr EoGo Viitln
released today the text of a joint communique annuncing the establishment
~ o7 diplomatic relations with the German Democtatic Republicø Following is
the text of the joint communique:
" The Government of Australia and the Government
of the German Democratic Republic have today decided
to establish diplomatic relations at Ambassadorial
~ level0 " In reaching this decision both Governments
t'ere prompted by a desire to promote friendly co-
0operation to the mutual advantage of both countries0
"' The timing of the exchange of diplomatic
representatives will be the subject of further
consultation between the two Governmentsø"' 
PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
19 DECEMBER
RELATIONS WITh EAST GERMANY
Prime Minister: I have instructed the Australian Ambassador in Moscow
to have discussions with this East German colleague there about the
early establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and the
German Democratic Republic. These discussions are in progress,
Following the recent moves between West and East Germany to
normalise their relations, I consider it is important both for political
and commercial reasons for Australia to normalise its own relations with
East Germany. Apart from facilitating trade in both directions, Australian
recognition of East Germany would, when agreement is reached, make people
in Europe more aware that there is a new government in Australia which is
not concentrating on South East Asia and the Pacific to the exclusion of
our highly important relations with Europe.
I would also make the point that in opening discussions with
the GDR I am seeking to avoid situations in which Australia takes general
decisions in international affairs late. I would rather see Australia in
the vanguard than in the rearguard in coming to its own foreign policy
decisions. 



PIZESS 13Tki-': 2I1TT ,1O. 29
22 December 1972
BROALCAST 011 ?. ADIO AU&amp; T2ALIA. BY P EIii INIñ 12.
I. ITLA, CAij. BEiRA, 23 DECEMBER 1972
This is the Prime Minister of Australia, Gough Jhitlam,
speaking to you by the facilities of 2. adio Australia. 2adio Australia
has asked me to make this broadcast so that the millions of people
who know and trust this radio service might get some idea of the
intentions of the new Government which has just been elected here
in Australia. So the first thing I would like to say is about 2adio
Australia itself. My new Government wants ' adio Australia to keep
going exactly in the same way as it has cone in the past years. The
iustralian Government the government which has just been defeated
in the election as much as my own government has never used and
shall never use 2adio Australia as a propaganda machine. There has
never been any difference between our Australian political parties
about this. . adio Australia will continue to be completely
independent, completely free to report the news as it truly is,
Radio Australia is not the voice of the Australian Government.
It is the voice of Australia, and the speakers and writers whose
work you hear are expressing their own views, not the imposed views
of my Government, or any Government. They can do and say what they
like, according to their professional judgement and skills, to bring
you the best, most honest programs.
But there has been a change of Government in Lustralia
a change brought about just by a majority of the Australian people
exercising their choice through the ballot box. The previous Government
had been in power for 23 years; but when the will of the people
became clear on election night, the previous Prime Minister, Mr.
iElciahon, immediately said that the will of the people was clear and
the power of government must therefore be turned over to me and my
party. And it -was done within a few hours completely, quietly,
efficiently. And the great thing about the democratic system is
that this is how it happens. Today, my colleagues of the new
Government and I have working, with us and for us, the whole of
Australia's great and dedicated civil service the same men and
women who have been serving a different Government for 23 years
past, now giving us the same faithful, loyal service they gave
our defeated opponents. 
-3-
Yet, in this context, it would be churlish not to
acknowledge our traditional, our deep and abiding relationship with
the United States. In the great essentials, there will, under my
Government, be no decisive change in that relationship. The treaty
bctween Australia, iTew Zecland and the United Stat. as, . thie. JAZUS treaty,
will remain the crucial treaty for Australia, Indeed, we shall try
to make A ITZUS live again, more constructive,, mor-fruitful, more
meaningful, than it has ever been. It is my Government's profound
belief that V ietnam did not end America's role in our noighbourhood;
it ended the destructive part of that role, and we believe a ner,
better and magnificently constructive role lies ahead for the United
States, if only we in this region can help encourage the American
people the most generous, most idealistic people in history to
accept this new role. But it depends on us all of us in this region
as much as on them.
Let me say this I am tremendously confident about the
prospects for our region. There is every chance that over the next
years the rich countries like ustralia, Hew Zoaland, Japan and the
United States will accept greater responsibility in making a determined
and combined attack on the poverty, starvation, illiteracy, that keep
us all b. ack, and lessen all of us as human beings. There will be no
international war in our region in our time. Let us all use this
unparallelled opportunity! Let us make this our objective that
every child now born in our part of the world shall have a chance
for a life without fear, without want, without war. Is this an
impossible goal? Perhaps but why, in the name of reason, in the
name of humanity, should we set our sights at less? Lot us at least
make the attempt. Years ago, I said, in a rather bleak time for my
party, " Let us now begin". For our region I say, with hope and
confidence, " Let us now begin aneow".
CA~ IS. BZjAi A. C. T. 



PRISS STATEiMENT IHO.
22 December 1972
CRAFTS INQUIRY
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, has decided to expand
the membership of the Committee of Inquiry into the Crafts to include
practising craftsmen and representatives of crafts in education and
industry. Mr. ' Jhitlam said the Government would take steps to
expedite the work of the committee which was established more than
twelve months ago.
The committee will appoint professional assistants to
help prepare its report to the Government.
The findings of the committee will have an important
bearing on new developments in the crafts field.
The Prime Minister has invited four new members to
join the committee. The present members of the Committee are:-
Mr. K. Bonython ( Chairman)
Mr. E. YTestbrook
Mr. J. Mollison
Hr. F. McCarthy
IMr. C. Last
The new members will be:-
Mr. Tozer
Mr. R. J. Richards Art dealer and member of the
Australian Council for the Arts.
Director of the ilational Gallery
of Victoria and member of the
Industrial design Council of
Australia. Director of the Australian Hational
Gallery. Former Principal of the Australian
Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
Sculptor and member of the
Commonwealth Art Advisory Board.
Senior Lecturer, Melbourne
College of Education.
President of the Victorian Craft
Association.
Goldsmith. Curator of the historical section
and applied arts, Art Gallery of
South Australia.
Member of the South Australian
Government's steering committee
on design and craft-based industries.
/ 2 
-2-
Mr. Ian Templenan Director of the Fremantle Arts
Centre and former Federal
Secretary of the Australian
Society for Education through Art..
Mrs Marea Gazzard One of Lustralia's leading potters
who is Vice-President of the
Asian Division of the Vorld
Craft Council.
Ir, % Thitlam said the Committee of Inquiry would present
to the Government at the earliest possible date a report on the
present situation of craftsmen and crafts organisations in Australia,
on ways in which they might be assisted, and on irays of extending
interest and activity in the crafts throughout the community.
In this respect it was essential to have on the Committee
people with special knowledge of the crafts and their place in
education, their role in leisure and their uses in industry.
In giving high priority to action of the crafts, the
Government acknowledges the special pleasure which the crafts
bring to thousands of Australians. There is at present a great
revival of interest in weaving, and pottery, leather and metalwork,
carving and glasswork and other craft forms. LMany young people
who seek beyond the pressures and products of modern urban life a
more personal and satisfying life style are particularly attracted
by them. Their combination of creative ideas and technical skills
suggests further links to people whose working background gives
them a special knowledge of handling materials and applying
techniques. The trade unions in their earliest form grew out
of the guilds of craftsmen who in past centuries took a special
pride in their work and its standards.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



FOR P SS 32A 1GO: 9 a. m. 3ATiU?. DAY
23 December 1972
( Eastern Sunmer Time)
STATEI UiT 3Y PIMI E MI-ITISTER
TE HON. E. ILAM,. H. P.
2_ ZCKAUG RA. TE OF TIH AUSTRALIAII DOLLA
It has been decided to revalue the Australian dollar. The
International Monetary Fund has been consulted and has concurred with
this decision. The gold parity of the Australian dollar, expressed in terms
of U. S. dollars, will be changed from the present 3US1.2160 0A1 to
$ US1.2750 $ A1, representing an appreciation of 4.85 per cent. At
the same time, the market rate will be fixed until further notice at
the new parity. This will mean an overall appreciation of 7.05 per
cent over the present market rate of SUS1.1910 $ A1.
As well, it has been decided to strengthen the existing
measures to control the volume of capital inflow. The present embargo
on overseas borrowings which are repayable, or carry options to repay,
within two years will be continued and its coverage will be broadened.
This measure will be supplemented as from today by the introduction
of a variable deposit requirement scheme in respect of borrowings with
a maturity in excess of two years. Under this scheme, borrovers will
be required to lodge a proportion of the proceeds of overseas borrowings
in a special account writh the Reserve Bank, on which no interest will
be paid. This deposit will be held frozen until the time of repayment
of the borrowing, at which time it will be released to the borrower.
Initially the deposit requirement will be fixed at 25 per cent.
The Governor of the Reserve Bank will be issuing a
separate statement giving further details.
The purpose of these measures is to correct the fundamental
disequilibrium in Australia's balance of payments. That such a
disequilibrium exists has been clearly evident for the past twelve
months or more. It is taken for granted by Australia's own business
community, and is being increasingly recognised abroad.
In the calendar year now ending, there was an overall
surplus in Australia's balance of payments of some ; 2,000 million.
This huge surplus was attributable both to an excessive rate of
capital inflow, especially in the form of borrowings, and to a large
and unprecendented excess of exports over imports of goods and
services. The outcome of these trends, in combination, has been
to swell our holdings of official reserve assets to almost $ 5,000
million, over three times their level of only two years ago. No
responsible Government could allow such a situation to continue. / 2 
-2-
Because they do not necessitate immediate and drastic
solutions in the same way as do the opposite problem of low and
falling reserves, it is sometimes supposed that fast-growing reserves
are not a problem at all. But they are a problem. They represent
a waste of potential resources at our disposal, they are potentially
inflationary, they make more difficult the task of effective economic
management, and in themselves they raise expectations of exchange
rate changes which in turn lead to still further reserve increases.
That being said, I want to make it clear that our decision
to appreciate the exchange rate does not derive principally from the
fast growth in our overall balance of payments surplus and reserves,
which have been heavily influenced by the large inflow of capital
from abroad. Rather, it is a product of developments in our current
account. From a position where, in 1968-69, Australia was incurring
a current account deficit of over 01,000 million, we have moved
progressively into surplus.
The particular strength of the current account at the
present time does, it is true, owe something to the depressed level
of imports which has resulted from the slow-down in the economy
during 1971-72. As overall activity in the economy picks up, so
will the level of imports. But so, we believe will the level of
exports, as our major markets abroad grow apace and their demand
for our products increases. In short, while we both expect and
will welcome the growth in imports that 1973 will bring, we see no
likelihood of the overall current account position being transformed
as a result. The rapid growth of Australia's export and import-competing
industries which underlies this progressive strengthening of our
current account is, in itself, a matter for satisfaction. But the
foreign excchange earned from the proceeds of exports is of no value
to Australians, unless it can be used to enlarge the real resources
actually available for use within our economy. It has been clear
for some time that, with our previous exchange rate, this was
impossible. The appreciation of the Australian dollar will have
differing effects on different sectors of the economy. Some groups
will initially be advantaged, other disadvantaged. Maintaining an
undervalued currency can bring temporary gains to some sectors of
the economy; but in the modium and longer term these gains are
illusory because of the harm which the resulting inflationary
forces inflict on each and every member of the community.
The Government's responsibility is to the Australian
pcooile. It is their interests that we have kept centrally in mind
in taking the decisions I have announced today. Gains and losses
to individual sectors of the community gains and losses which in
any event are of a once-for-all character cannot be allowed to
over-ride this primary consideration. 
-3-
The Government recognisos that some of the rural industries,
which are already facing difficulties and problems of adjustment to
changed circumstances, may find it particularly difficult to bear the
consequences of the exchange rate appreciation. Should this prove
to be the case, the Government will be prepared to examine
sympathetically the position of those industries and take such
action as may be necessary, in their case, to ease the processes
of adjustment to new conditions.
In the Government's vier, any appropriate appreciation of
the exchange rate would not in itself be sufficient to deal fully
with the problem of excessive capital inflow, although it is an
essential prerequisite to tackling this problem successfully. That
is why we have also moved specifically to restrain the inflow of
foreign capital by the introduction of the deposit requirement
scheme. That scheme will raise the effective final cost of overseas
borrowings and will thereby deter such borrowings. At the level of
per cent at which the deposit has initially been set, the effective
interest cost of funds borrowed overseas will be increased by onethird.
For example, a borrowing at 6 per cent will now effectively
cost 8 per cent to any borrowers who still wish to proceed.
iction of this kind is long overdue. The former
Government took some steps, three months ago, to discourage some
forms of capital inflow. The action then taken had been long delayed,
it was of a very modest kind, and it dealt with only part of the
problem. The result of this delay has been a build-up of domestic
liquidity to a dangerously excessive level.
This Government will do everything within its power to
remedy this situation. Jo accept the responsibility for managing
Australia's affairs in the interest of Australians, and we are
determined to establish and maintain the conditions that make this
possible. The former Prime 1iinistor announced in September that his
Government was examining further moans of giving effect to the aim of
ensuring that overseas capital was employed in Australia in real
partnership with Australian-owned capital. This Government has a
similar objective: the difference is that we are prepared to take,
and we will take, decisive measures to give effect to that objective.
The impact of the deposit requirement scheme will be on
capital inflow, and the main initial impact of the appreciation of
the exchange rate will also be on the capital account of the balance
of payments. But as I have said, the appreciation of tho Australian
dollar is chiefly directed, in the medium and longer run, towards
adjusting the quite excessive strength of the balance of payments
on current account. / 4 
-4-
In the months im. ediately ahead, the effects in this latter
regard will be relatively snall. It has been the recent experience
of all countries adjusting their exchange rates and all of the main
trading countries of the world have done so in recent years that the
chief effects of adjustment on the current account occur only after
some considerable time. This is only to be expected.
In Australia's case the delayed reaction of exports and
imports to the exchange rate change will work to our advantage, because
quick reactions if they were to occur night slow the process of
recovery in economic activity and delay the return to full employment.
Given the time-lags, we do not see that as a danger. I-owover, in the
unlikely event that the reactions were felt more quickly than re
expect, the Government would not hositate in taking appropriate
internal measures to offset any such developments.
In the longer run, of course, the somervhat slower growth
of exports and the rather faster growth in imports which exchange
rate appreciation will bring vill be very much in Australia's total
interests. It will increase the real resources at our disposal, and
will therefore materially assist us, as a Government, in maintaining
the strong forward momentum of the economy and providing the real
resources which will be involved as we come to introduce the policies
and progranmes we have promised to the Australian people.
In recent years, the trends in our balance of payments
have meant that the resources available for use within Australia have
risen more slowly than Australian production. As the Government
progressively establishes conditions in which available resources
can expand more rapidly and the decisions I have announced today
are an essential ingredient of those conditions so it will be
possible for us to improve materially the living conditions of
the Australian people, both in their quantitative and, importantly,
their qualitative aspects. That is the task to which we have set
our hands. Our decisions rhich I have announced today will assist
in its achievement.
CI. BcTA. A. C. T.
23 December 1972 



NO DATE
M/ 14 26 December 1972
NICARAGUAN EARTHQUAKE RELIEF
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced
O today that Australia is to give assistance worth $ A25,000 towards the
relief of the victims of the Nicaraguan earthquake.
O Mr Whitlam said he was appalled to learn of the extent of the
damage and loss of life caused by the earthquake.
Australians would, he said, join with him in conveying their
heartfelt sympathy to the government and people of Nicaragua. 



DEATH OF FORMER PRESIDENT TRUMAN
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam,
has sent the following messages to President Nixon and Mrs Truman on the death
of the former President:-
Message to President Nixon
The Government and people of Australia join with those the world
over who deeply regret the passing of a very great President and a most
distinguished American.
President Truman assumed office in times of unparallelled complexity
and difficulty and was faced during his Presidency with a number of decisions
that profoundly affected the future and the well-being of mankind.
SHis inauguration of the Marshall Plan, which rebuilt Europe, stands
as one of the geatest and most generous acts of statesmanship of modern
times. Under his guidance the United States steadily assumed her post-war
Srole as leader of the Western democracies.
The sympathy and condolences of all Australians go out to the late
President's widow and family in their bereavement.
Message to Mrs Truman
Please accept the deepest sympathy of my Government and of the
people of Australia on the passing of your distinguished husband.
President Truman has rightly earned a lasting place in history for
the great role of leadership he played during a most critical period in
world affairs. We share the grief and sorrow that you and your family are
experiencing at this time. 



NM DAARMETO
M/ 17 29 December 1972
MEDICAL AID TO VIET-NAM
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlan, announced
today that the Australian medical aid programme in Viet-Nam is to change
its emphasis from " patient care" aid to the fields of public health and
medical training. Mr Whitlam said that the revised programme follows a major review
of Australian medical aid to Viet-Nam. As part of this review a team of
three doctors led by Sir William Refshauge, the Director-General of
Health, visited Viet-Nam in November 1971. The team included a senior
Adelaide surgeon and former leader of two surgical teams in Viet-Nam,
Mr Mervyn Smith, and Dr J. Boxall, of the Department of Health. The new
programme is based on the review team's recommendations.
Mr Whitlam said that as part of the change, arrangements have now
been made for the Australian Surgical Team at Bien Hoa to be withdrawn at
the end of December. Since 1964 " patient care" aid has formed a major part
of the Australian medical aid programme in Viet-Nam comprising for the
most part surgical teams attached to selected provincial hospitals. In
1968, at the peak of the programme, 4+ 6 Australian doctors, nurses and
support staff treated approximately 59,000 patients and performed over
10,000 operations in four provincial hospitals. During the patient care
programme nearly 500 doctors, nurses and support staff recruited from all
Australian states served in Viet-Nam. 
Mr Whitlam said he wished to draw attention to the valuable assistance
provided by state medical authorities, the Repatriation Department and major
city hospitals in forming surgical teams.
The phasing out of the final surgical team at Bien Hoa will coincide
with the completion of a major re-building project at the Bien Hoa hospital
carried out under the medical aid programme at a cost of $ 1,450,000. The
new medical assistance programme has already taken shape and Australia is
constructing a prophylactic and diagnostic clinic in Saigon at an estimated
cost of $ 250,000. This community health clinic will provide normal outpatient
facilities, dispensary, a small laboratory, X-ray facilities, minor
operating room and a maternity wing. The building is expected to be
completed by April.
In addition to the public health clinic project, medical training
programmes for Vietnamese civil medical teachers and public health staff are
being planned. These courses will be held in Australia and Viet-Nam. Already,
at the request of the Vietnamese authorities, a senior Australian surgeon is
undertaking a training programme for medical teaching staff at the Cho Ray
teaching hospital in Saigon. Further training assistance within Viet-Nam
is planned for doctors in the fields of X-ray diagnosis, E. N. T. surgery and
public health administration.
L 



No DATE
M/ 18 29 December 1972
AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATION AT MEMORIAL SERVICE
FOR FORMER PRESIDENT TRUMAN
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
said today that he had asked the Australian Ambassador to the United
States, Sir James Plimsoll, to return to Washington somewhat earlier than
he had originally planned so that he could represent Australia at the
Memorial Service for former President Truman.
The Memorial Service for President Truman will be held at the
Washington Cathedral on 5 January. 



NQ DATE
M/ 16 29 December 1972
MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER TO THE PRIME
MINISTER OF CANADA ON THE DEATH OF MR LESTER PEARSON
Following the death of the former Prime Minister of Canada, the
Right Honourable Lester B. Pearson the Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam,
has sent the following message to Prime Minister Trudeau:-
" I have learned with regret of the death of the Right
Honourable Lester B. Pearson. Canada has lost a most distinguished
citizen and statesman whose passing will be greatly mourned
throughout the world.
During his long public career Mr Pearson worked tirelessly
in the cause of world peace. The award to him of the Nobel
S Peace Prize was a richly deserved recognition of his unique
contribution in this field. His efforts on behalf of the
lesser developed nations were no less remarkable and afford
an eloquent testimony of his deep and abiding interest in
making the world a better place for his fellow men.
I would like to extend on behalf of the Australian
Government and people my sincere sympathy and condolences
to Mr Pearson's widow and family in their bereavement."
Mr Whitlam also sent a message of sympathy to Mrs Pearson on
behalf of the Government and people of Australia. 



AAL t!! r HAA IA,~
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 168
9 JANUARY 1973
GATT ANTI-DUMPING CODE
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, released today a report
by Sir John Crawford and by Mr G. A. Rattigan ( Chairman of the
Industries Assistance Commission) on arrangements for imposing
dumping duties in accordance with the anti-dumping code laid
down by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The report recommended that legislation to implement
Australia's accession to the anti-dumping code should ' provide
for the Minister for Customs and Excise to -take anti-dumping
action in respect of any goods which he is satisfied are being
dumped in Australia and are causing or threatening material
injury to established domestic industry or are materially
retarding the establishment of a domestic industry. If the
Minister requires independent advice it was recommended that
the legislation provide for the matter to be referred to the
Industries Assistance Commission and that provision also be
made for appeals to the Commission against the minister's
decision on a dumping complaint.
As announced by Mr Whitlam at his press conference on
11 December 1973, Cabinet has accepted the recommendations of
the report. Copies of the report are available from the Prime Minister's
Press Office or the Protection Policy Division of the Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 9 JANUARY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: As you know we had a
Cabinet meeting this morning and this afternoon, and there are quite
a number of announcements which I will make arising from that meeting.
Many of my colleagues will be making further statements on some of the
subjects which fall within their province.
First of all, the Governor-General has signed the Proclamation
calling Parliament together on Tuesday 27 February. A special Gazette
is being issued. The presiding officers, Sir William Aston and
Sir Magnus Cormack have been informed.
All but two departments have now had their permanent heads
appointed. The permanent heads who were appointed today are as follows:
Department of Aboriginal Affairs:
Department of the Capital Territory
Department of the Environment and
Conservation
Department of the Media
Department of the Northern Territor
Department of Secondary Industry:
Department of Social Security:
Department of the Special Minister
of State Mr Barry Dexter
Mr Engledow
Dr Donald Frederick McMichael
he is not a member of the
Commonwealth Service. He is
an outstanding member of the
New South Wales Public Service.
Mr Jim Oswin also not a
member heretofore of the
Commonwealth Public Service
but the Head of the Channel 7
network, and a man with
exceptional experience in
newspapers, radio, television
and advertising: We regard
ourselves as very fortunate
to have secured the services of
Dr McMichael and Mr Oswin
Mr Allen O'Brien
Mr Frank Pryor
Dr Wienholt
Mr Peter Lawler
Department of Tourism and Recreation: MMrr LoLdlBoytdD SCBott, D. S. C. 
The vacancy on the Australian Broadcasting Commission has been
filled by Mr Hal Lashwood, who has been the General President of
Actors Equity for the last 21 years. All these appointments were
made by the Executive Council at half past one today.
I might draw your attention to the fact that the appointment
of Dr Stephen FitzGerald as Ambassador to the People's Republic of
China is being announced today. A press release is being issued
by the Department of Foreign Affairs.
The advance party to establish an Embassy in Peking will be
crossing into China tomorrow, Wednesday, the 10th of January.
Now matters of legislation: I'll ask you to bear with me because
I have to look through the Cabinet papers, and there may be a few
pauses as I come to various paragraphs.
Cabinet authorised the preparation of a Death Penalty Abolition
Bill. This will be based on the bill which was introduced into the
Senate by Senator Murphy in April 1971, and which passed the Senate
in March last year but which was allowed to remain on the Notice
Paper in the House of Representatives.
Cabinet authorised the preparation of enabling legislation to
remove the excise on wine. We authorised the preparation of
legislation enabling the removal of the sales tax on contraceptives.
We authorised the preparation of legislation to amend the National
Health Act to provide that oral contraceptives which have been by
regulation made available on doctors' prescriptions will be
incorporated in the schedules of the Act as the Act requires in
respect of any provisions which are made by regulation.
We authorised the preparation of legislation along the lines
of the amendment which Mr Cameron moved in the last Parliament to
the Compensation ( Commonwealth Employees) Act in effect saying
that there will be no reduction of income for people who are
injured in the service of the Commonwealth during the period of
their incapacity.
Now all of these are legislation unless I state otherwise:
To extend the Aboriginal Secondary Grants Scheme to include
all children of Aboriginal descent attending secondary schools and
classes from the beginning of this year and to continue to assist
the small number of children of primary level who have reached the
school leaving age. And, provision is being made that education
officers of the Federal Department will visit each student receiving
benefit at least once a term.
Legislation to adopt the principles of maternity leave for
Commonwealth employees for 6 weeks before the expected date of
confinement and 6 weeks thereafter, this maternity leave to operate
from the first of January this year.
Legislation to lower the franchise for Federal elections to 18,
and to lower the age for candidature at Federal elections to 18. There
are some States in which such legislation has already been passed
but is awaiting gazettal depending on Federal action. The practice has
been in the case of States where there are common Federal and State
electoral rolls, for the two governments to share the expense.
We will share the expense of preparing rolls for 18, 19 and
men and women in anticipation of this legislation being
passed. This has particular relevance to Victoria where an 
election is pending and where enrolment is compulsory, and to
South Australia where an election is pending but where, State-wise,
enrolment is optional.
Cabinet authorised the Minister for Minerals and Energy to confer
consent under the Petroleum Submerged Lands Act with respect to
farm-in agreements between Burmah-Woodside Consortium and Mt. Isa
Mines Limited. Cabinet authorised the Attorney-General to draft
legislation combining broadly the Territorial Sea and Continental
Shelf Bill which was introduced in 1970, and the Minerals Submerged
Lands Bill which was promised at that time. I have sent telegrams.
to all the Premiers informing them of these decisions.
Cabinet authorised the Minister for Minerals and Energy to
confer with the State Mines Ministers with respect to construction
and operation of a national pipeline system.
A Committee of Cabinet is meeting tonight to draw up terms of
reference for an inquiry into the Postmaster-General's Department.
There are a very great number of matters which have-arisen in the
election campaign, in the policy speech, in recent times concerning
the whole operations of the Post Office, regional basis, concessions,
different categories of mail, capital and running expenses.
Another committee of Cabinet is to make a report by the end of
March on the proposal for an international airport at Townsville
for the purpose of encouraging tourism. Mr Stewart, the Minister,
will be the chairman of that Committee.
Cabinet approved the provision, of additional funds of up to
for War-Service Homes in the current financial year.
If this had not been done, a waiting period would have had to be
introduced for six months.
Aged, invalid and widows pensions:. you will remember that in my
policy speech I said " all pensions will immediately be raised by
$ 1.50 and thereafter every Spring and every Autumn the basic pension
rate will be raised by $ 1.50 until it reaches 25 per cent of average
weekly earnings".
The increases will be raised for aged and invalid pensions by
$ 1.50. They will be paid as soon as possible after the legislation
is passed by the two Houses, and payments will be paid at that
increased rate from the first full pension period after the day
of the elections, the 2nd day of last month.
The old categories of widows pensions and will be
abolished. All widows receiving and pensions will receive a
pension and the pension for widows will be increased by at least
$ 1.50; i. e. every widow will receive $ 21.50 soon after the
legislation passes the two Houses and the additional rates will be
paid as from the first full pay period after the date of the elections.
The position of repatriation benefits wil. C be considered
probably next Tuesday.
Unemployment and sickness benefits and special benefits will
be paid at the rate of aged, invalid and widows pensions; i. e.
$ 21.50 for a single person, and $ 37.50 for a married couple as
from the 1st March. There has hitherto been payable an additional benefit
of $ 4.50 a week for all children up to 16 years of age. 
We have authorised an amendment to the Act to make that payment
available to all full-time dependent students without limitation
of age. Now there's something on the French Nuclear tests...
The Australian Government has communicated its position to the
French Government that the conducting of the tests would be
unlawful, and has invited an assurance that no more atmospheric
tests would be held either this year or in the future. And in the
event of the Australian Government not receiving satisfactory
assurances from the French Government, the Australian Government
proposes to institute proceedings in the International Court of
juetice to restrain the conducting of future tests in the Pacific
by the French Government.
Q. Prime Minister: Can I ask you about your communications with
the French Ambassador before he left for Paris?
PRIME MINISTER: The note was delivered to the French Foreign Office
by Australia's Ambassador, Mr Alan Renouf I think on the 3rd of
January. Now I think those are all that I can say at the moment.
Q. Is there any time limit on the assurance of the French
Government? PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. It is sort of indefinitely any time this year?
PRIME MINISTER: Any undue lapse of time would be taken as a
refusal to give the assurances invited.
Q. -Well, would you consider an undue lapse of time?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd like to take advice on that. This is the
first time that any nuclear power has been invited to give such
assurances. Q. Mr Prime Minister, have you asked the President to give a
similar assurance about illegal bombing of North Vietnam?
PRIME MINISTER: I've written to the President, as you know,
days ago and our attitude was made known to the President also at the
State Department when our Charge called there and more recently
I think it was yesterday when our Ambassador called there. Also,
of course, it has been made known to the American Ambassador in
Canberra when he called last week on two occasions on the Secretary
of the Foreign Affairs Department, Sir Keith Waller, and when he
called on me yesterday.
Q. Prime Minister, supplementary to that: Have you had discussions
with the United States Government or the U. S. Embassy about the
purposes of the various American bases in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. You have not?
PRIME MINISTER: No. 
0. Can you tell us if any of their purposes are involved in the
logistics of the American presence in Vietnam?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm assured they are not.
I've been very careful to make all possible inquiries on that issue
I'm assured that they have no bearing on any operations in Indo-China.
Q. Can you tell us if you will be seeing the Americans about the
full purposes of the bases and will you be able to make these
purposes public either to members of Parliament or to the Australian
people generally?
PRIME MINISTER: I've had full briefings some weeks ago by the
Australian Foreign Affairs and Defence Departments and the matter
is being considered by Mr Barnard.
Q. Why have you remained silent over the last 10 days on the
U. S. union boycott, especially, in view of the fact that you've
already sent a note of protest to the President? Secondly, will you
now disclose the contents of the note? Thirdly, did Cabinet today
consider the boycott? If so, have you any announcement to make on
that particular point?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, let me take it in reverse order. Cabinet
did not consider this matter. It was not mentioned.
PRIME MINISTER: What was the second one?
Q. Contents of the note?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I won't disclose the contents of the note.
It would be quite exceptional to disclose the contents of notes between
governments unless they both agree.
Q. Will they be tabled in the Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: This again would be quite exceptional. I've
said nothing on this because I don't believe by grandstanding on this
issue a quicker solution could have been achieved than has been
achieved. And furthermore I wanted to keep a sense of proportion
in this matter. What is the significant thing for the Australian
Government, or the Australian Foreign Minister, to be concerned with?
A shipping strike or bombing strikes?
I concentrated on the issue in hand the important one.
Q. How would you have been grandstanding if you had made any
comment on this?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I could have got even right across the front
page of your paper, or any paper, if I had said anything on this issue.
But ladies and gentlemen, I at least have kept a sense of proportion,
even if not everybody in Australia or elsewhere has done so. There are
2 ships involved 2 ships: one a cruise liner and the other, I think,
a container ship. Two ships.
Q. Have you told your Ministers not to make statements on
foreign policy?
PRIME MINISTER: The Cabinet didn't discuss this matter either, but
I can assure you...
0. I asked you whether you have asked your Ministers? 
PRIME MINISTER: All I choose to say is that there will be no
further statements on foreign policy except by the Minister.
But I would like you to understand that some of the statements
that have been made were made pursuant to arrangements concluded
days or a couple of weeks before while the bombing was proceeding.
Q. Do you feel that the Australian-American relationship has been
damaged by the events of the last couple of weeks?
PRIME MINISTER: No, not the events of two or three weeks ago; by
the resumption of the bombing.
Q. How would you like to describe what the current state of play
in Australian-American relations are at the moment?
PRIME MINISTER: Following the cessation of the bombing and the
resumption of talks the relations have improved. The only cloud on
the horizon in relations between the United States and Australia
arose when the bombing was resumed.
Q. Was that indicated to you by the Ambassador, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Well., what indicated?
Q. The damaged' state of relations between the two countries?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't say what passes between the Ambassador
and me or between any of our representatives and representatives of the
American Government. I'm just stating as a fact if the bombing had not
been resumed relations between the present Australian Government and
the United States Government would be better than they had ever been
since the Second World War between any Australian Government and any
American Administration. The difference is that in the period before
the American and the Australian elections there was a position where
the Labor Party in Australia was enthusiastic and co-operative with
what the President and Administration was understood to be undertaking
and desiring to achieve, and our opponents, the former Government, were
sulky and sullen as they had been ever since the President took his
great initiative to bring about a detente with China. We were the
co-operative ones. We were the enthusiastic ones. We weren't hesitant,
we weren't sulky.
Q. when you said just now that the statements made by the Ministers
had been pursuant to arrangements in the last two weeks, do you mean
that you approved the statements criticizing the President made by
Dr Cairns and Mr Cameron?
PRIME MINISTER: No, not all of them.
Q. Some of them?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, what did you mean b that statement that some
of the statements had been made by prior arrangements? I think
Mr Uren spoke at the pleasant Sunday afternoon as a result of the
arrangements which were made about a fortnight before while the
bombing was on.
Q. Had he told you what he was going to say?
PRIME MINISTER: No. 
Q. Did any of the Ministers clear their statements with you
beforehand? PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Sir, which parts of the statements by Mr Cameron and Dr Cairns
don't you approve of?
PRIME M INISTER: I'll not go over this issue at all. I'm not going
to say anything on this issue which would be interpreted or alleged
as in any way impeding the progress of the talks in Paris.
Q. Can I ask then something in relation to your approach to
foreign policy concerning the United States?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. The previous Government made much of the fact that, as far as they
were concerned, the U. S.-Australia alliance was vital to the security
of Australia. Do you continue to subscribe to that?
PRIME MINISTER: I regard, I've said quite recently, on the eve of
Christmas I think it was, that I thought that the ANZUS Treaty was
our crucial international treaty and what goes on in Vietnam, what
has gone on in Vietnam, has not been under ANZUS.
Q. Now that the dispute over shipping appears to be on the way
to being solved
PRIME MINISTER: I thought it had been completely
Q. Yes, the seamen have agreed. Are you now prepared to say what you
think of the merits and demerits of the boycott?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't believe that any such action helps
in any way because it distracted attention from the big issue
the bombing that was then going on.
Q. Did you convey that feeling to the seamen?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I've not spoken to any officials of the unions
involved. I've regarded this as a matter which was appropriate for
solution in the industrial context, and that's where it has been
solved.
Q. Sir, do you think they were morally correct?
PRIME MINISTER: I make no comment on this. As I say, I'm not going
to say anything which anybody can allege or construe as impeding the
resumed negotiations. our whole objective has been to get the
negotiations resumed. our sole interest in Vietnam now is to put an
end to the war and to help in rehabilitating the country.
0. Mr Prime Minister: You wrote a personal letter to the President.
Have you received a personal response from him?
PRIME MINISTER: No. He has, however, acted in the way that I
hoped he would.
I think Frank here, has been waiting for a second one longer than you.
May I compliment you on the birth of my god-daughter. 
Q. Mr Prime Minister have you had any consultations or any
information from Washington to assist you in assessing the progress of
these negotiations?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Have you been taken into the confidence of the American Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No, we do not regard ourselves as involved in any way
in the hostilities. No, the Party's Platform provides, and the people
gave the party a mandate to do two things: to end Australian participation
in the war and to oppose the continuation of the war. Now, we have
completely stopped our participation in the war. our opponents had, in fact,
withdrawn all fighting men, and aircraft and ships and tanks. We,
as you know, have withdrawn the training teams and have cancelled
the military assistance. We are continuing the civil aid. We stand
ready to give greater civil aid when the country is in a sufficient
state of tranquility to be rehabilitated. But, I'd like to emphasize
that our Government has V a mandate to do all it can to stop the
continuation of this war and I hope this is quite clear to everyone in
Australia and abroad. It's our duty to do it. It's been the Party's program
since the first Federal Conference after my becoming Leader. We are
opposed to a continuation of the war and to Australia's participation
in it.
Q. You said, somne time ago, that you thought one of the things we
could do in Australia, in an independent sense, although we're
not actively involved, is to try and bring about a rapprochement*
between China and Japan. I was wondering, again, in an active sense
a rapprochement between America and North Vietnam what we could
do in an active sense and whether you had anything in mind in view
of this stated aim of trying to end the war?
PRIME MINISTER: I think what is required is a continuation of the
patient deliberations which are required of both Washington and Hanoi,
and I'm sure I know that is the view of the Japanese Government
also, with whom we have been in consultation.
Q. Do you believe that the retaliatory action of the American
longshoremen in boycotting Australian goods was either encouraged
or suggested by Washington?
PRIME MINISTER: I would never make such an offensive supposition.
I mean I assume the trade unions don't make the foreign policy of
the American Administration. I assume the American Administration
doesn't control the affairs of the American trade unions. In fact
the union concerned, I believe, had a boycott a total boycott
of many foreign flagships on the east coast and the gulf coast of the
United States for over twenty years and successive Administrations were
powerless to end the boycott. I don't want to belittle the
ideological purity of the union concerned. I'm told that their latest
boycott was on the importation of some Mao dolls made in
Czechoslovakia weren't they? -Ireland which half? your part or ours?
Q. In practical terms what happens what did happen in the past
ten days when Australian-American relations weren't so good?
That's one question. Secondly, if the Americans did start bombing
North Vietnam again what would the Australian Labor Government do?
Can you tell us the answer to those two questions?
PRIME MINISTER: The first one: both sides went back to the conference
table. The second one: I will not limit myself to a private letter,
but I will be making a public statement. 
Q. Did Cabinet consider revaluation compensation today?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Will it be considering it tomorrow?
PRIME MINISTER: No. It wasn't mentioned today. It's not on
the Agenda.
Q. Have you had any estimate of the magnitude of economic
stimuluis that would be provided by the welfare measures you've
announced, and do you feel further stimulus to the economy will
be required soon?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you had better speak on this to
Mr Crean and Mr Hayden who prepared the submissions. The welfare
measures will be quite a considerable stimulus to the economy
because they will put purchasing power into the hands of people
who have the smallest purchasing power in the community and who
purchase necessities.
Q. How much will the increased pensions and unemployment benefits
cost? a
PRIME MINISTER:, Mr Hayden will give you that.
Q. I notice in the list of Cabinet Committees which was handed out
before you arrived that while Mr Enderby is listed under both of
his portfolios..
PRIME MINISTER: Oh yes, thanks. I'm sorry.
Q. Dr Cairns is listed in the Economic Committee only as Minister
for Secondary Industry. Does this mean a reduction in the importance
and in the policy advising role in the Department of Overseas Trade,
and if so, for what reason?
PRIME MINISTER: I thank you for raising this. I meant to say we
appointed five committees. Their names are: Economic, Welfare,
Foreign Affairs and Defence, Urban and Regional Development and
Legislation. You ask specifically about Dr Cairns appearing as
Minister for Secondary Industry in the Economic Committee and as
Minister for Overseas Trade in the Foreign Affairs and Defence
Committee. The point is that Dr Cairns is on each of those
Committees. The Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee will not be
confined to the affairs within the jurisdiction of the-Departments of
Foreign Affairs and Defence. It will cover the whole field of investment,
overseas control, resources, trade, international banking and it is
for this reason that the Treasurer is on it. The Minister for overseas
Trade, who of course is responsible for the international ramifications
of the Departments of Secondary Industry, Primary Industry, National
Development and while, of course, both the Prime Minister and the
Deputy Prime Minister are on it and the Lead~ r of the Government in
the Senate and the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate
are both on it there is an additional significance in Senator Murphy
being on it as Attorney-General, because we lay so much emphasis
on the reinforcement the application of international law and order
through conventions, the World Court and so on. So Dr Cairns is on in
the Foreign Affairs and Defence one because Overseas Trade obviously
bears on a very-great number of these matters and he is on in
Secondary Industry because this concerns so much the internal economy.
Perhaps I should say a bit more about it time's getting on and 
I should have mentioned this earlier. The procedure will be
that when submissions for Cabinet come to me from individual
Ministers I will send them to the relevant Committee. The Committee
will hopefully make a recommendation on them, they will then be
listed on the Cabinet Agenda and the recommendation also listed
and unless anybody wants to debate it further automatically the
recommendation will become the Cabinet decision. The members of the
Committees are under an obligation to attend the meetings of the Committee
but any other Minister will be entitled to attend and hopefully
will do so when on the documents of which every minister will receive
a copy, he sees that his Department is involved.
Q. Sir, could one assume that the Department of Overseas
Trade will not make recommendations to the Economic Committee?
PRIME MINISTER: No, this is largely academic because the Minister
for Qverseas Trade will, of course, be attending meetings of the
EconLic Committee because he is also Minister for Secondary Industry.
Q. Will the Economic Committee draft the Budget Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: The Cabinet will do that, but I imagine the
Economic Committee will have quite a deal to do with it in
preparations, but, obviously, all these things and particularly
a matter of such overwhelming importance as the Budget is a matter
which I would expect the whole Cabinet will discuss. I'd be quite
surprised if the Economic Committee's recommendations on the Budget
were not further discussed by the whole Cabinet.
Mr Prime Minister, is there anything more concrete on the move
for talks with the Queensland Premier about the Torres Strait
boundaries? PRIME MINISTER: I'm still awaiting a reply. Perhaps I should say
I'm going from memory here that I wrote to Mr Ejelke-Petersen
on the Torres Strait Island question on the 15th of last month.'
The suggestion I put to him was in the same terms as the suggestion
that was made to Mr McMahon by his Ministers. So I wouldn't have
thought there was any political difficulty federally in putting
these suggestions. They were proposed to my predecessor I made
the decision to send them on.
Q. Second question, Sir. Do you agree with Mr Gordon Bryant on
the need for a referendum of some sort among the islanders and the
Commonwealth? PRIME MINISTER: I don't comment on remarks made by my colleagues,
but frankly I'm not going to get into the habit of commenting on reports
which are made of or attributed to my colleagues.
Q. R. Sorby, Financial Review... In outlining your list...
PRIME MINISTER: Your one of the few members of the staff still
on the Financial Review aren't you? Oh, are you under offer too?
I mean John Fairfax has been very good to us Jim Osmond and all
these other members of the staff of the Financial Review.
Q. The initiatives you outlined for the next few months... you didn't
put down any priorities on them? Have you any priorities for the
legislation itself? Which particular one will be first off the rank,
and secondly, on the offshore mineral question offshore soverei~ pty
to what extent does this effect the offshore petroleum legislation? 
PRIME MINISTER: It won't affect it. You'll notice the wording was
quite careful. Broadly, it would combine the Territorial Sea and
Continental Shelf Bill of 1970 and the Minerals Submerged Lands Bill
mentioned by Mr Swartz I think it was acting on behalf of the
then Foreign Minister, Mr McMahon, at the same time. Now, you ask
what priorities there are here. We have naturally been concerned
at having as much legislation drafted as we can for this coming
session or period to carry out our program, and the fact that
I have mentioned certain things today doesn't mean that these will
necessarily be the first to be implemented. Obviously those in the
Social Services field will be brought in. They'll be brought in, in
the first day or so. There ought to be no difficulty in drafting
them, but some of the others such as the offshore legislation
mightn't come in until just before Easter or ' after Easter. But we're
hopeful of getting all the Bills that I've mentioned and ma * ny
others which will keep us similarly busy I imagine at Cabinet meetings
this month and next in the first session. The Ministers have all
been asked to identify the items of the Program which will require
legislation. They have been asked to do that, I think, by the end
of next week I think it is. Also, they have been asked, by a week later,
to suggest the references that should be made in the Governor-
General's speech opening the Parliament to their pieces of legislation.
Perhaps I should announce that arrangements have now been made for
me to make a visit to New Zealand... Where is that? ( press comment)
Across the Tasman.
PRIME MINISTER: God, you'll make sayings of the year. I'll be
visiting New Zealand from 20-23 of this month. The New Zealand
Secretary for Foreign Affairs will also be visiting Australia commencing
next Thursday for discussions with Foreign Affairs officials. My visit
will coincide with the anniversary of the Canberra Pact made between
New Zealand's Prime Minister Peter Fraser and our John Curtin in 1944.
It was Norman Kirk's happy thought that we should have the meeting
on that anniversary.
Q. Has your Government had any approaches made either through the
Minister or from parents for assistance in any way in claims for
help and against Distillers company by parents of thalidomide children?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't heard of them but this would be a matter
where I think you should ask Dr Everingham. He'd be the Federal
Minister who might have some information on it.
Q. Is it a matter which you think the Government should or would
intervene?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't express an opinion off the cuff.
I mean, quite frankly, you don't expect me to express opinions
on matters which can end up in the courts.
2Perhaps I should, for the sake of the international press here,
mention that Mr Grassby has completed his consideration of the case
of the Rolling Stones and they'll all be arriving.
Q. Have you yet decided whether Mr Anthony should have his status
and his salary upgraded? It is now below Mr Lynch?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a painful matter. I don't think I could
usefully say anything to resolve the differences. 
12.
Q. Have you yet received a letter from Mr Anthony asking you to
consider it?
PRIME MINISTER: To arbitrate? No. I've had letters from them about
their staffs, and I expect to be discussing this with them. There are
some things here which are, quite frankly, no affair of the Government.
It's the Speaker who allocates accommodation, and there is legislation
which describes persons in terms which the authors never expected to
bear upon their own fortunes. I'll naturally be very happy to discuss
the legislation but I'd like to have a combined submission.
Q. I'd like to ask what can you tell us about the Commonwealth
Police investigations into these two army officers perhaps
Mr Barnard?
PRIME MINISTER: I did see a note that Mr Barnard has on the matter.
I'd ask him.
Q. Could we ask him?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, he's here is he? Yes, yes.
MR BARNARD: Well, inquiries are being made into allegations made
by a private businessman into or concerning two comparatively senior
army officers. It would not be correct for me, of course, at this
delicate stage of the investigations, to make any statement that
would prejudice either the police officers who are carrying out
the investigation or the army officers who have not been charged.
However, I expect a report will be available, it will be considered
and if charges should be made they will be. There was a sensational
statement of course. It involved surplus equipment from Vietnam.
There's certainly nothing in the allegations or nothing that has
flowed from the investigations so far, that would substantiate
such a charge.
PRIME MINISTER: All our top-ranking officers have been withdrawn
from Vietnam. I don't think it's very gracious to suggest that
gun-running takes place in the Australian Armed Forces.
I didn't know... you should have been sitting here I didn't realise
you were here.
Q. Prime Minister, you said that the Cabinet Meeting would continue
tomorrow. Can we expect another news conference at the conclusion of it?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I'll just announce the decisions. I'll hand
them out. I don't think we'll have another press conference. I think
Mr Walsh will give you the decisions. I think that's better. Quite
frankly going into tomorrow means that my appointments have to be a
bit readjusted and if you'll excuse us?
Q. Which Committee is drawing up the terms of reference into the
P. M. G. inquiry, and when would you hope the inquiry would begin
and end?
PRIME MINISTER: They're meeting
tonight. Do you want to know who the ministers are?
Q. Well, which of these committees, the five committees?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no, no. This is an ad hoc one. it's just a meeting
of half a dozen or so ministers tonight. I'll say who they are if you
want to. 
They're meeting at 8 o'clock tonight, and they're just drawing up
the terms of reference and they've been authorised to approach
suitable people to conduct the inquiry but I wouldn't guess as to
how long the inquiry would take. We would certainly expect to have
advice from the inquiry on some aspects before the Budget.
Q. When you say suitable people, might it be a judicial type of
inquiry? PRIME MINISTER: Maybe judges, maybe senior counsel, maybe junior
counsel, maybe economists. I don't think we ought to get the idea
that inquiries of this nature should be conducted only by judges.
Some of the most effective inquiries conducted in Britain have been
conducted by bodies on which there are no lawyers or a minority of
lawyers. But clearly some economists and management people would be
considered in any panel " to make this inquiry.
I notice that there is quite a number of representatives from
overseas newspapers. I have, on an earlier occasion, thought it might
be helpful if I were to give priority to representatives of the
afternoon papers. Now, maybe next week or the week after you might
think it suitable the President of the gallery might suggest to
me when to give priority to any members from overseas papers who
want to ask questions. Let them all have one question before any
of the indigenous press ask questions. I mention this partly because
I've been inundated with requests for interviews by overseas newspapers
and I think this is the greatest discovery of Australia since Cook,
and I've been unable to oblige all the kind gentlemen concerned as yet. 



JJ, AUSTAL IA&amp; L
PROME MONISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 31
January 1973
VISIT TO INDONESIA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. E. G. Whitlam, announced today that he would make an official
visit to Indonesia from 20 to 23 February inclusive.
Mr. Whitlam said that he would fly to Port Moresby on
18 February and from there to Jakarta, with a brief stop en route
at Bali. He would be accompanied by Mrs. Whitlam.
Mr. Whitlam said that he looked forward to the visit
to Indonesia with keen interest.
" It is appropriate that my first visit overseas,, after
my meetings with the leaders of New Zealand and Papua New Guinea,
should be to Indonesia,"! he said.
" Because of its proximity to Australia and Papua New
Guinea, and because of its size and influence in the region,
Indonesia is of major and permanent importance to Australia.
" I have already stated my Government's intention to
develop and strengthen our relations with Indonesia. And I know
from my personal c6ntacts with the Indonesian leaders that this
wish is reciprocated. " The futures of our countries are indissolubly linked
together and our relationship will be a crucial factor in
determining the future of our region for the rest of this century".
Mr. Whitlam added: " I am only sorry that the amount
of work facing me at home prevents me at present from extending
this visit to our other neighbours in the region who also have a
very important place in Australia's international relations".
CANBERRA 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 32
January 1973
ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT
The Australian Government decided today to allocate
a further $ 10.85 million for Aboriginal Advancement projects in
1972/ 73. Federal Cabinet decided that most of the extra
allocation would be divided to expansion of advancement programs
through the States, by way of supplementary Grants under Section
96 of the Constitution. The decision followed a submission to
Cabinet by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Mr. Bryant.
Grants totalling $ 14.5 million in 1972/ 73 were
authorised by the States Grants ( Aboriginal Advancement) Act
1972 but a substantially greater sum could have been used
particularly on housing and on special works projects.
Apart from grants for the expansion program through
the States, funds are needed to meet other urgent proposals
involving direct funding by the Commonwealth. Included among
these is the cost of implementing, during the rest of 1972/ 73,
an A. L. P. policy undertaking to meet all legal costs of Aborigines
appearing before the courts.
It is estimated that $ 850,000 will be needed to meet
these costs during the rest of the current financial year.
A sum of $ 1.5 million which was pledged to Western
Australia for Aboriginal housing on December 11 will be part of
the extra $ 10.85 million allocation.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS A special committee of Federal Ministers will investigate
the possibility of establishing an international airport at
Townsville. This was announced today by the Minister for Tourism and
Recreation ( Mr. Frank Stewart).
Such an airport would be expected to boost the tourist
potential of the entire region, Stewart said.
It would also continue to be used by the RAAF as a joint
military-civil vpnturP.
" The committee will carefully study the location and also
the physical requirements for an airport, the anticipated needs
of international airlines and the environmental, urban and regional
development aspects," he said.
" We will also look at the operational and economic factors
which would speed up the tourist development of Northern Australia
in general and the Great Barrier Reef area in particular."
Mr. Stewart said the Prime Minister ( Mr. Gough hitlam) in
his policy spcech had bcon s-pecific about thce Govcrniuiicnt's
intentions to declare the Great Barricr Rcef a National Park.
This would follou the expectcC early passage of the
Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill.
Such a move :.' ould neccs: itate the e; tablishment of an
international airoort at Townsvillc.
Chairman of the sp,, ecial Cbinet Coiiitte is
Mr. Frank Stevwart.
Other meribcrs are Dr. Rex Patterson, Iinister for
Northern Development, Senator Reginald Dishop, linister for
Repatriation and inister assisting the -inister for Defence,
1r. Tom Uren, . inister for Urban anC Regional Development,
H. r. Charlooes Jones,. inister for Transport and i: inister for Civil
Aviation and Dr. Moss Cass, Minister for the Mnvironrment and
Conservation. The committee held its first meeting last night, shortly
after the full Cabinet ncmeeting.
Mr. Stewart said the pro) osed new Tov. nsville airport would
cut travelling time for overeoas touristo and %: ould also eliminate
many of the inconveniences aLsociated with changing aircraft. / 2 



EMBARGO: 6.00 P. m.
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 33
12 January 1973
INQUIRY INTO PROPOSED INCREASE IN STEEL PRICES
In its election policy speech, the Government promised to
establish prices justification machinery. The initial and timeconsuming
work necessary to give practical effect to this promise
is being undertaken as a matter of the utmost priority, by my
colleagues the Treasurer and the Attorney-General. The Government
aims to introduce enabling legislation into the Parliament very
early in the coming session.
Pending the establishment of that machinery, it is obviously
impracticable for the Government to conduct any widespread
examination of price increases which may be proposed. There are,
however, some products which are clearly of such basic impor'. LtLce
that increases in their prices ramify widely and can have majoi:
consequences for the whole economy. Steel is a case in poia;..
The Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd., on behalf of it. 501if
and its subsidiary company Australian Iron and Steel Pty. LtK,'. 0
has requested that their case for proposed increases in the drice
of steel should be examined. It has been decided to accede tCo
that request. The Government is pleased that the nation's largest
corporation has not only thus expressed its willingness to
co-operate fully in the achievement of our objectives and policies
in this area, but has taken the initiative to do so. We welcome
this co-operative approach to a problem which affects us all.
Had the prices justification machinery already been in
operatibin,, this request by The Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd.
and Australian Iron and Steel Pty. Ltd. would, of course, have
been dealt with by referral to that body. Since it will be
some time before permanent machinery can be established, we
propose to take action of an interim kind, by means of a special
Inquiry, to examine the proposed increases in the price of steel..
Neither the method of operation of this Inquiry, nor its
conclusions, are to be rcgarded as prejudicing those of the
permanent body in its investigations of price increases, whether
of steel or of any other cormmodity. 
Mr. Justice Moore, Acting President of the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, has consented to conduc.
an Inquiry into the Companies' proposals. Mr. Justice Moore is
Senior Deputy President of the Comnission to which he was
appointed. in 1959.
The terms of reference of the Inquiry are set out in my
letter to Mr. Justice Moore. The text of my letter is attached.
In deciding to establish this Inquiry, the Government takes
the view that large corporations have responsibilities not only
to their shareholders and to their employees, but to the nation
as a whole. The terms of reference also recognise the economic
reality that continually rising costs present large problems for
industry if it is to remain economically viable and continue to
grow and develop as in the national interest it should.
Nevertheless, the Inquiry is nriot limited to those aspects, and
Mr. Justice Moore has been given wide discretion to conduct it
in such a manner and on such basis as he thinks fit.
Mr. Justice Moore has been asked to report as soon as
practicable, hopefully by about the end of January.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
COPY ONLY Prime Minister,
CANBERRA, A. C. o',
12 January 1971
My dear Judge, I refer to our conversation in which you indicao. cu
that you were willing to conduct an Inquiry on behalf of -th
Australian Government in relation to proposed steel price
increases by The Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. and Australian Iron
and Steel Pty. Ltd. Pending inquiry upon the estabiisliachmen of
permanent prices justification machinery, I appoint you * o : Luiniinto,
and to report to me, as soon as practicable, wheti:;:
steel price increases proposed by The Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd.
and Australian Iron and Steel Pty. Ltd. are justified in whole
or in part. In conducting the Inquiry you are to have regarc.
cost increases incurred by the steel industry soc-.:
of the companies that would not, without the
increases, be recouped by the companies in pricej;
the level of profits earned in the steel industry
of the companies in relation to the funds employc&gt;-l
those sections; and
any other matters chat you consider relevanc.
You are to conduct the Inquiry in such manier
determine. In conducting the Inquiry and furnishing yiu; r,:
you are to take such action, and to make such recommc!; n(..
with respect to the non-publication of particular part;. o:
report, as you deem appropri. ate to prevent damage to tn
legitimate business anterescs of the companies, or of: an, Co.:
company or person, which might ensue from publication of
information received in the course of the Inquiry.
Yours sincerely,
Whitlam -cd.
The Honourable Mr. Justice Moore,
18 Robinson Street,
EAST LINDFIELD, N. S. W. 2070 



0 j AIJS I ,1A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 34
January 1973
DEATH OF THE HON. W. J. RIORDAN
We have all been greatly saddened to learn of the death
of Bill Riordan, one of the few surviving members of the Chifley
Government. He was a staunch friend and a profoundly loyal Labor man.
He maintained a remarkable hold on the loyalty of his
electorate of Kennedy ( North Queensland) which was undeviatingly
a Labor stronghold until his retirement.
Arrangements are being made for a State funeral.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 0.
F 1 R 9M IFE M 0 N 0 -13 7 E VR 



P__ RZ,, SS. 1. O
January 1973
VI-JIT OF _ CI F iIISz; OF Pl'.-Uh irii c Ii
' he Ch-ief l'inister Paoua New Guinea, 1: r. iiichael
2jorare, will arrive in Canberra tomorrow evenin[ g Ior talks
witha thIe Autaian G-overnment.
Thie 1prime Ilinister, 1-1r. *. Titlrn 2n te 1iiinister Eor
Extern~ al Territories, 1. r. h4orrison will greet hr. Somare wh-Ken
he arrives at the R.... base, Fairbairn, at 5.20 p. m.
The Governmaent is providling a V. I. P. aircraft to fly
Er. Sornare from Bzisbane to Calberra.
L'r. Sornare wTill '-old talks with the Prime I" inister on
' Jedne sday. lie will also hold alk s with othIer senior ministers on
' Jednesday and Thurseay.
Cl'TRL L. C. T.
go 



NQ DATE
M/ 21 15 January 1973
GOVERNMENT WELCOMES RELEASE OF FRANCIS JAMES
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr
Whitlam, said today that he warmly welcomed the news that Mr Francis
SJames would be allowed to leave China on 16 January.
The Chinese Government had advised the Australian Embassy
Sin Peking that Mr James would be deported, having been found guilty of
espionage. Mr Whitlam added that the Chinese had said that the
arrangement was being made as a friendly gesture now that diplomatic
relations had been established between China and Australia.
SMr Whitlam said that arrangements had been made for Australian
officials in Peking and Hong Kong to offer assistance to Mr James and
that he had personally informed Mrs James of the news this morning.
The Prime Minister recalled that there had been a number of direct
and indirect approaches made by and on behalf of the Australian Government,
through several channels, and he welcomed the outcome. Mr WVhitlam said he
was certain that Australians, particularly those who had taken a close
personal interest in Mr James' welfare, would be very pleased that the
uncertainty surrounding his well-being had now been resolved and that he
had been allowed to leave China. 



J
P~ ES3 STATMIENT ITO. 36
16 January 1973
IAPOINTL121T OJF SPECIAL TPADE 2E-i7ETATIVE, MR.
G. TARTICK SMITH
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Wvhitlam, today announced the appointment of a Special Trade
Representative to represent Australian interests in the forthcoming
multi-late ral rae negotiations under the General Agreement on
Tariff and Trade ( GATT).
" These negotiations" said Mr. , Thitlam " are regarded by
the Government as having a significant bearing not only on Australia's
trading patterns but on the expansion and liberalisation of world
trade in agricultural and industrial products.
" A prime objective of the negotiations is a programme
aimed at improving the living standards of the people of the world,
and about 100 countries are expected to participate,
" Preliminary meetings will be held over the next few months
and the multi-lateral negotiations are expected to continue at least
through 1974". The Government had appointed as Special Trade Representative
Mr. G. ' Tarwick Smith formerly Secretary of the Department of the
Interior who has had extensive experience in international trade
negotiations. In his previous capacities as Deputy Secretary of
the Department of Trade and Industry and Special Commercial
Adviser in London, Mr. Varwich Smith had been directly associated
at senior level with the operations of the GLTT and the complexities
of multi-lateral trade negotiations, He would be located in Canberra
whilst the preparatory work for the negotiations was being carried
out, and would be based in Geneva for the actual negotiations,
" There is" said IMr. Whitlam " a clear need for an experienced
negotiator to put the Australian viewpoint at the highest level, In
previous multi-lateral negotiations a number of countries found an
appointment at this level materially assisted their negotiating
position, I would expect the Australian decision to be welcomed
by other participating countries as an indication of the importance
we attach to the negotiations".
C ITB 1,. g. T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 16 JANUARY, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: there were several
appointments which the Cabinet made this morning. Three of them
required Executive Council action which took place at half past one
today. Mr George Warwick Smith who was previously Secretary of the
old Department of the Interior has been appointed as a Special Trade
Representative to represent Austra ' lian interests in the forthcoming
multi-lateral trade negotiations under GATT. Dr Cairns is issuing
a separate statement about Mr George Warwick Smith's position.
He will have the personal status of Ambassador.
Mr Kenneth Jones has been appointed Secretary of the Department
of Education. He has been First Assistant Secretary of the Department
of Education and Science since it was established in 1964.
Mr Maurice Timbs has been appointed Secretary of the new
Department of Services and Property. I-don't think that you
gentlemen should refer to it so often as the Department of Property.
Many people have said that it was amazing the first new department
created by a Socialist Government in Australia was the Department of
Property. It's the Department of Services and Property. Mr Timbs
is at present Executive Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission.
He has held a number of Public Service positions since 1936. He is
also Director of the Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust and the
Australian Opera Company and holds several other voluntary outside
offices. An Interim Hospitals and Health Services Commission is being
appointed. The Chairman will be Dr Sidney Sachs, who is at present
the Director of Health Services Research and Planning in the N. S. W.
Department of Health and the N. S. W. Hospitals Commission.
There were several administrative proposals and decisions for
legislation. Firstly, in the educational field pre-school
teachers. It was decided to take emergency action to encourage
well-qualified students to enter pre-school teacher education from
the beginning of the present academic year. Special pre-school
teacher education scholarships for both men and women will be
available to all students in recognised pre-school or child care
teacher training courses. Both new entrants to courses in 1973
and existing students who have made satisfactory progress will be
eligible for the awards. The awards will carry the maximum benefits
applicable to Commonwealth Advanced Education scholarships but there
will be no means test. Under these arrangements the new awards
will be comparable to the awards the Commonwealth grants to teachers
training for the Commonwealth-Teaching Service and will also be more
closely related to the benefits available to students training for
employment in State Government primary and secondary schools.
The benefits for 1973 will be payment of compulsory tuition and
service fees plus a living allowance of $ 800 for students living at 
home and $ 1,300 for students obliged to live away from home.
Next, isolated children. The Cabinet decided that from the
beginning of the 1973 school year new measures be introduced to
assist in the education of children who, because of the geographic
isolation of their homes, do not have reasonable daily access to a
Government school providing courses at the appropriate level.
We shall provide for such children, at both primary and secondary
level, boarding allowances of $ 350 per year free of means test and
up to an additional $ 350 subject to a means test on family income.
Assistance up to similar levels will also be available for approved
educational expenditure to eligible students who are studying at
home by correspondence. For cases of particular hardship, where
children are living away from home and are receiving boarding
allowances application may be made for assistance with uniforms
and text book~ s. The maximum amount available for any student will be
the maximvm amount at Present available fcr students with Aboriginal
secondary scholarships, i. e. $ 1,004.
The Government proposes to review these measures in light of
a survey which the Department of Education will commence this year
in consultation with the States. The aim of the Department's study
will be to assess more thoroughly the effectiveness of -the measures
which I have mentioned in assisting parents of isolated children to
overcome the educational disadvantages experienced by their children.
The Government sees one of the basic issues in dealing with the
educational disadvantages of these children as being the provision of
better school facilities and better hostel facilities. The Schools
Commission, when established, will be asked to investigate where
these needs lie.
Thirdly, dental therapists. My election policy speech included
a commitment to introduce a five-year program to provide free dental
services to all Australian school children. This commitment was based
on the use of dental therapists. Cabinet decided today to authorise
Dr Everingham, the Minister for Health, to make arrangements with
New Zealand with a view to training perhaps 100 Australian men and
women as dental therapists this year. There are just not the
facilities available in Australia. We hope there are in New Zealand
where such use of dental therapists has been carried on for more
than 50 years.
Then there-were several matters in the welfare field.
Repatriation. We approved amendments to the Act to achieve the following
reforms: There will be increases of $ 3.10 a week in the special
rate pension; $ 2.00 in the general rate; $ 2.25 in the intermediate
rate and $ 1.50 in the War Widow's pension. Equivalent increases will
be made for seamen who served in the war. The increases will apply
from the first full pension period after the election day, the 2nd of
December. The increase in the special rate pension will mean
that it will equal the Commonwealth minimum wage which is the undertaking
the party made. The increase in * the general rate is a start
towards fulfilling our election commitment to raise this rate to
per cent of the minimum wage.
We approved an increase of $ 1.50 for Service pensions, i. e.
burnt-out pensions; again from the first full period after the 2nd of
December. 
We also agreed to the continued recognition of a child
of a Service pensioner, for service pension purposes, irrespective
of the child's age for as long as the child continues to undertake
full-time education.
We authorised amendment of the Act to provide the Repatriation
Funeral Benefit to be increased, from $ 50 to S100.
We approved the introduction of legislation enabling war pensions
to be continued until completion of full-time education to dependent
children who are'not receiving maintenance or living allowances or
salary from Commonwealth sources that equals or exceeds the allowances
payable under a Commonwealth Scholarship.
We approved preparation of amendments to enable the legal personal
representatives of a deceased ex-serviceman whose claim has been
processed to Repatriation Commission level but no further, to proceed
with an appeal to an Entitlement Appeal Tribunal or an Assessment
Appeal Tribunal to enable payment of arrears of service pensions to
the estate of an applicant for service pension who dies before the
granting of the pension, and to recognise de facto wives and certain
children who are at present not recognised under Repatriation
legislation but, of course, are recognised under Social Services
legislation. We decided to appoint immediately an Interim Departmental
Committee to investigate and report upon Commonwealth office space
in major cities. It will consist of representatives of the Urban
and Regional Development Department which will chair it, and the
Prime minister's Department, Treasury, Services and Property, Works,
Public Service Board, Transport, and Environment and Conservation.
The Committee will bring up-to-date a report which was made to the
previous Government in 1968, and one of its fields of investigation
will be the question of the new Commonwealth building proposed
hitherto for Spring Street, Melbourne. This project will be
reconsidered. Now those decisions were made this morning. I may take a little
longer to give you the ones this afternoon. They are in the housing
field. We decided to confer with the States to see what additional
funds they can spend in providing Housing Commission houses up to
the end of next June. The money will be made available on condition
that the houses are let, not sold, and that they are made available
to needy families. The general situation has been that in 1969
to 1971 there were 18,000 Housing Commission houses built each year.
Last financial year it dropped to 15,000; this year it is already
at the rate of only 12,000. In particular, the situation is that in
New South Wales there is 42 per cent of the outstanding applications in
the whole of Australia but the State only receives 35 per cent of the
funds. In South Australia 20 per cent of the outstanding applications,
the State only receives 12 per cent of the funds.
We have decided to amend the War Service Homes Act, not only
as we announced at the beginning of last month to cover members of
the forces, including National servicemen who complete their full
period, we will now alter the Act to make War Service Homes advances
available for members of the nursing services, members of the women's
services whether single or married without dependents and members
of the welfare organisations attached to the Defence services. We 
will increase the War Service Homes Act maximum advance to $ 12,000
and we will remove the limitation that you can get a minimum deposit
of 5 per cent only if the homes are worth $ 4,000 or less. The
situation is, of course, that at the present time the maximum War
Service Homes advance represents only 57 per cent of the average cost
of house and land in Australia.
There is a couple of other announcements I can make.
Following letters which I sent early last month to the Premiers
of New South Wales and Victoria, arrangements have been made for a
meeting to take place between Commonwealth and State Ministers at
Albury on Thursday of next week. The purpose of the meeting is to
discuss a program of joint co-operative development of the Albury-
Wodonga area. Mr Uren and I will attend on behalf of the
Commonwealth. The meeting will take place on the New South Wales
side of'the border in the Albury Civic Hall. Wodonga also offered
its services so we are having lunch there. We are asking the
Shire President and the Mayor of Albury.
To celebrate the 5th anniversary of Nauru's independence,
Senator Willesee and his wife will represent me and my wife.
They will arrive in Nauru on 30th January and remain for three days.
The Government attaches considerable importance to developing further
constructive, friendly and helpful relationships with the countries
of the South Pacific, and Senator Willesee's visit to this anniversary
of independence is intended to demonstrate this interest early in the
life of the new Government. This will obviously be one of the
subjects that Mr Kirk and I will be discussing next week in
New Zealand, whose successive Governments have shown very valuable
initiatives in political, economic and social co-operation between
all the States and territories of the South Pacific.
Now are there any questions?
Q. Mr Prime Minister: In a very short period of time you and
several of your Ministers have managed to ruffle more than a few
feathers in official Washington. What is the message
PRIME MINISTER: You look very cool
Q. I don't come from official Washington, Sir. But what is the
message that you are trying to transmit to Washington concerning the
future of Australia-U. S. relationships and is the strain over Vietnam
very deep, and is it irreparable?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, the Australian Government was elected with a
mandate to oppose the continuation of the war in Vietnam and to oppose
Australia's participation in it. This is the only point of
disagreement between the United States Administration and the
Australian Government. In all other fields there are many
opportunities great opportunities for co-operation between
the United States and Australia. Our part of the world particularly
will benefit from such fruitful, constructive peaceful co-operation.
Q. Is there if I could just follow up my colleague in
Washington, a man of the State Depar tment, in answer to a request
sent this along today. He said that there is a sense in Washington 
that Whitlam is not a Nixon type: there are far-reaching changes
in Australian policy caused by Whitlam's election which officials
here acknowledge will require some long and cosy chats between the
two sides in the future. While Whitlam was here before coming to
power he was not received at the White House though he asked for
an appointment. So, my question after all that is, do you and the
President see eye to eye on major issues? Are you of similar
personalities or are your personalities so different that you will
not be able to get along in the future?
PRIM4E MINISTER: I don't believe there is any reason why any
Australian Prime Minister can't get along with any United States
President. I see no reason why the present Prime Minister can't
get on with the present President. I have been foremost among
Australian political leaders in publicly praising President Nixon's
initiatives to bring about a detente with the People's Republic
of China and with the Soviet Union, and I hope that he is able to
fulfil before his second inauguration his promise to end the war
between America and North Vietnam.
Q. Mr Prime Minister: Now, as far as Vietnam is concerned,
maybe you have already answered a lot of the questions I am
interested in the solution in Vietnam now that peace may be
attained again. What is the position of your Government? Do you
think it is in the interests of Australia to have Vietnam reunited
under North Vietnamese auspices or, in other words, under a
communist government, and what do you think might be the
consequences for, as you would call it, this area?
PRIME MINISTER: It's not for outsiders to determine what sort of
government the people of Vietnam should have. The division between
North and South Vietnam is an artificial one. The present parallel
was provisionally determined 18 years ago after the end of the
Korean War and the defeat of the French. It was only meant to
be a temporary border. We should not expect that the'division
should continue as long as the division of Germany or Korea.
There was an earlier division in 1945 at a parallel 1 degree south
of the present one. But we believe that outsiders should allow
the people of Vietnam who have a long history of patriotism
against outside intervention, whether for good or bad purposes,
we believe they should be allowed to determine their political
futur~ e, and outsiders shouldn't say whether the regime in Hanoi
or the regime in Saigon should rule the whole country.
The interest of the Australian Government is that, as soon as
possible, there should be an end to hostilities in that countryan
end to the supplies from so many outside countries to the
warring factions in that country and that Australia should stand
ready with other countries to help rehabilitate that countrythe
whole of that country.
Q. Do you think the conflict will be ended in Vietnam if the
Americans stop the war?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe..-. I hope that not only will there be
an end of military activities and supplies by the United States
but an end of military supplies by the People's Republic of China
and the Soviet Union. I believe that the cessation of such supplies
will make the country more rapidly tranquil, give some hope for its
rehabilitation. 
Q. Mr Prime Minister, following that light is very
bright... PRIME MINISTER: Well, I have it in my eyes all the time.
Q. I know... Dr Cairns in the last week has been making
statements suggesting that Australia is going to recognise
North Vietnam.
PRIME MINISTER: No, he hasn't.
Q. But, he has. I'm sorry. You mean to say all the press
reports quoting Dr Cairns have been wrong?
PRIME MINISTER: He has not said that. He has said that the
recognition of North Vietnam is inevitable. He has expressly
said that he wouldn't say wouldn't guess when that would be.
Q. If the recognition of North Vietnam is, to quote him, a
matter of fact...
PRIME MINISTER: Inevitable well, isn't it?
0. How does this then reconcile with your own statement on the
future of a single Vietnam rather than a divided one which was,
from my interpretation, what you were just expounding?
PRIME MINISTERt Now, it's again... I am not asserting that there
should be a single Vietnam. I am asserting that the type of government
that the people of Vietnam should have is a matter which they
should decide. I'll reassert that the country has been artificially
divided in 1945 by British and Chaing-Kai-Shek occupation respectively
and then later after 1954, north of that, under the present regime.
But I'm not asserting that there should be one country. I would
think that reasonable, but it's not for me to say that there should
be. Looking at history, I would think this is likely.
Q. But Dr Cairns statement does indicate two countries rather
than one. How does this reconcile in view of the Australian
attitude towards what ought to be happening in Vietnam?
PRIME MINISTER: Now the Australian attitude is that what ought to be
happening in Vietnam should be determined by the people of Vietnam
without outside intervention or encouragement. My guess would be
that sooner or later there would be one government for the whole
country. I can't speculate how soon that will take place. I
would hope that it won't take as long as it has taken in the case of
Germany and Korea.
0. Could we suggest then that perhaps Dr Cairns has been a little
bit premature in his statements of recognition of North Vietnam being
inevitable?
PRIME MINISTER: If we are-to help in the rehabilitation of this
country there will have to be representation in North Vietnam
as well as in South Vietnam. I've not used the term recognition.
The division of this country was imposed from outside. It is an
artificial one. But as long as it persists, then outsiders to play
an effective part in rehabilitation, will have to be represented
in both halves. 
Q. And what then can we interpret as Australia's role in the
rehabilitation of North Vietnam?
PRIME MINISTER: To co-operate with any other country which is
prepared to help in rehabilitation.
Q. And if no other country is prepared?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, of course there are other countries prepared
to rehabilitate. Japan has said so, the United States has said so.
0. What is Australia's role in the rehabilitation of North Vietnam?
PRIME MINISTER: Through international arrangements. As you know,
Japan already has people there to see how she can help to rehabilitate
North Vietnam.
Q. Could I ask you about Lake Pedder. Mr Reece seems to indicate
that the book is closed on Lake Pedder. Dr Cass seems to think
that there should be a Federal Government inquiry. What is the
Federal Government's position on Lake Pedder?.
PRIME MINISTER: Wait till the Government considers it. It didn't
consider it today.
Q. Supplementary to the question on North Vietnam. Do you
consider Dr Cairns' statements regarding North Vietnam in any way
contravened your statement at your last press conference that you,
in future, would be the only person in the Government to make
statements on foreign policy?
PRIME MINISTER: No, you read what he said. He said in effect,
that recognition I think the word was he used. I would have thought
the more appropriate one was representation in North Vietnam
is inevitable. Well, of course it is. If we have faith, as I
certainly do that hostilities will come to an end, then there will
have to be representation in North Vietnam as well as South Vietnam
to help in the rehabilitation of the country. It's on that basis
that Australian representation continues at such expense and in such
number in Saigon. And it's for that reason that the civilian aid for
South Vietnam continues unabated as far as the Government is concerned.
Q. I'm sorry, Sir. I was in fact seeking a clarification of your
statement at your last press conference that in future you would
be the only member of the Government to make statements on foreign
policy. PRIME MINISTER: That's true.
Q. Do you not feel that Dr Cairns statement on North Vietnam...
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. What do you define as future statements on foreign policy
then if that isn't one foreign policy?
PRIME MINISTER: PIRI MtEhMIiNnITkE R: y ou gentlemen ought to be reasonable. 
You're saying, I take it, that if there's a debate on foreign
policy or on any subject in the Parliament the only person
the only Minister who can speak on it will be the Minister
within whose ministerial responsibility that subject falls.
Might I make that very reasonable parallel.
Q PRIME MINISTER: Just because you live in Australia doesn't
mean you don't represent a great international paper.
Q. Thank you very much, Sir. The New South Wales Law Reform
Commission has pointed out that quite a lot of the residual powers
in the British Parliament with respect to Australia affect the
States. PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Would Senator Murphy in London be representing or have a
mandate of any kind for the State Solicitors-General or Attorneys-
General as well as for the Commonwealth on this question on
residual powers as they affect the States? And, Sir, secondly,
on the judicial committee of the Privy Council: do the States have
the power to prevent or impede, do you think, your intention to
make the judicial committee of the Privy Council synonomous
roughly with the High Court of Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Murphy is representing the Government of*
Australia. He's not representing, he's not been asked to represent,
he's not sought to represent the State Governments of Australia.
You have mentioned two matters where he is to have talks with
British Ministers. One is to end the archaic position where the
British Parliament can still make laws covering this national
Parliament of Australia but also, of course, the State Parliaments
in Australia. There is one quite notorious case in the latter:-
coastal ships trading between one port in a State and another port
in that State are covered by British laws, and it may come as a
surprise to you but it did arise in a court not so long ago where one
of these 60-milers, the Colliers which trade between Newcastle and
Port Jackson foundered on the way and several people lost their
lives, and it was conceded that the New South Wales Workers'
Compensation Act didn't cover them. The legislation which covered
them was the Imperial Merchant Shipping Act of 1894 and that meant that
the only compensation the families could get would be to divide the
number of victims into a sum calculated on the tonnage of the ship,
and it's still not possible for any State Government in Australia
to pass a law concerning matters of maritime commerce between two
ports in the one State. The Commonwealth can do it between ports in
different States but within the one State the British Parliament
alone can do it. Now, again, you ask about appeals to the Privy
Council. Most members of the British Commonwealth have abolished
appeals to the Privy Council.
It's a basis of democracy that judges should be appointed
by the Government. That they should sit and citizens in a country
should be able to appeal to courts in that country. Now the
objectionable feature of the Privy Council is that the members
of the judicial committee are appointed by the British Government.
It sits in Britain and its judgments take the form of advice to
The Queen of the United Kingdom. She happens also to be Queen of 
Australia, but she doesn't get their decision in the form of advice
to her as Queen of Australia, but in the form of advice to
The Queen of the United Kingdom. Now, the Party's policy has been
and was in my policy speech that we should aim to have the
Privy Council, when it hears appeals from Australian courts,
constituted by Australian judges sitting in Australia, and that's
one of the things that Senator Murphy will be discussing. It is
not possible for the State Parliaments to abolish appeals to the
Privy Council. That would need the approval of the Queen on the
advice of the British Government. I notice there's some speculation
that this has something to do about the monarchy. Now the only
issue here is the despatch and acceptance of credentials of
ambassadors. The attitude that the Government takes is this:
Australia is a monarchy The monarch is usually resident overseas.
In those circumstances the Governor-General should be a viceroy.
He should be able to discharge the whole of the functions of the
monarch when the monarch is not within the jurisdiction, and we
believe it is anomalous that if an ambassador of a foreign country
is credentialled to the Australian Government, his credentials
have to be approved by The Queen in England. And we regard it as
objectionable if an Australian ambassador is being credentialled to
another country The Queen issues his Commission, even when she is
not resident in Australia, although of course, I sign it at her
command. Q. Do the States have any power though to prevent you from ha ving
the judicial committee of the Privy Council made synonomous with
the High Court?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think they have any power to do it. They
may make representations to the British Government. I hope that in
these circumstances the British Government would agree with the
Australian Government. Ladies and gentlemen, the constitutional
situation is that the Australian States are still British colonies.
That's why the Governors apparently still fly the Union Jack.
Q. Mr Whitlam, can I come back to Alan Barnes question?
We have had a number of reports from Washington which indicate that
President Nixon has been somewhat confused, that three senior
Ministers of your Government can speak as they have about the
bombing of North Vietnam, yet not be speaking for the Government.
Can I ask you if you have had any communication with either the
White House or the State Department to make it clear that, as YOU
told us last week, you don't endorse everything they've said. And
on Dr Cairns' pronouncements since then you've told us that you
think the choice of the word " recognition" to North Vietnam was rather
unfortunate: have you communicated with Washington at all about
this to make it clear that your Government is talking simply about
representation in terms of rehabilitation?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been no communications at all on this
subject between Washington and Canberra. I don't believe that you
should believe every report you see. There were some people that
were urging me to make some statement about a report of evidence
given before the appropriate U. S. Senate committee which was
inquiring into the nomination of a new Deputy Secretary of Defence.
It was represented here that the nominee had refused to be drawn
on the question whether America might use nuclear weapons against
Hanoi. The actual reports show that that was a very garbled report
indeed. No inquiry was made from here. I was quite satisfied the 
itiatter would be cleared up and I believe Washington would have
=; cted with the same understanding and decorum. I have deliberately
refrained myself from using the term " recognition" as regards
North Vietnam and South Vietnam because it is a matter of dispute
as to the juridical status of the regimes in Hanoi and Saigon.
7 don't want to express an opinion on them, but I am prepared to
u. se the word " representation" because this is something that does
happen. For instance, Indonesia and India have representation in
Hanoi. Britain has a Consul in Hanoi.
Q. Are you satisfied that the White House and the State Department
understand the position of your Government as opposed to the position
which has been taken by people like Mr Cameron, Dr Cairns and
Mr Uren?
PRIME MINISTER: Well there's been nothing more that any of those
colleagues have said since the last press conference.
Q. Well, there has been Dr Cairns...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but I've already dealt with that.
Frankly, gentlemen, you're scrambling if you want to see what
Dr Cairns said in a radio interview as a pronouncement on foreign
policy. He said that recognition of North Vietnam was inevitable
sooner or later, and of course it is.
Q. Let me say, Sir, that the most important matter in Europe is
what happens about the Australian relations with France and
Western Europe, and relations with America, do they matter that
much anyhow?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, Australia wants to be on good terms with all
countries and not least the United States and France.
Q. Any news about the nuclear tests?
PRIME MINISTER: No, the only significant difference of opinion
between Australia and France is the possible continuation of French
nuclear testing in our hemisphere.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, I have prepared four questions how
many am I permitted to ask?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, let's see how the first two go.
Q. The first question concerns Australia's relations to the
German Democratic Republic and is divided into two parts:
What was the response of the Government in East Berlin to the
recognition; what sort of representation is contemplated ini
East Berlin respectively in Canberra, and when was the first
Australian diplomatic mission to leave for East Berlin?
PRIME MINISTER: Our Ambassador to East Germany the German
Democratic Republic will be resident in Another country. This
form of representation will be acceptable to the German Democratic
Republic. I cannot say when there will be G. D. R. representation
in Australia. I can find.., if you want to ask me I can give
you a more precise answer afterwards. I don't think it will be 
11.
long delayed. There have been, as you know, some officials in
Sydney for some time.
Q. Well, I now come to part of question number 1. Does the
Australian Government contemplate to ask East Germany for war
compensations as other western countries which have recognised the
Democratic German Republic recently have?
PRIME MINISTER: It's never been considered. I don't think we've
sought reparation from West Germany either, but thanks for the
suggestion, I'll consider it.
Q. The second question concerns the relations between Australia
and the Federal Republic of Germany. Divided again into two parts
PRIME MINISTER: No, wait a minute, one part..
Q. One part. Well that would be the more difficult part. Have
you, Mr Prime Minister, considered to seek the support of
Chancellor Willie Brandt for your fight against the French nuclear
tests? PRIME MINISTER: No.
PRIME MINISTER: I think there's another overseas Jack, you
represent an overseas...
Q. Yes, two quick and unrelated questions,
PRIME MINISTER: In answer to the first part of the third question
Might I say that the present matter in which Australia is concerned
in relation to the French nuclear tests turns on the fact that these
tests can harm countries in the track of the winds, and accordingly
Australia believes that she has a legitimate cause of complaint
before the International Court of Justice. Mr recollection is that...
No, well, that's enough for this one.
Q. Two quick and unrelated questions I promise. Did you feel
yourself slighted in Washington or did you think that Nixon was
not quite up with the trend of Australiant politics, and the unrelated
question the other one.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, the answer to the first is no
Q. You weren't slighted?
PRIME MINISTER: No, never.
Q. Did you think he was up with the trend of Australian politics?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't express an opinion on that. He is now. I
don't know whether he was before. Look, there's been no slighting at
all. This was a fabrication of Roy MacCartney last January and people
who work for the Sydney Morning Hera'ld know the circumstances in
which he felt spurred to fabricate that story.
Q. You've made-your position perfectly clear in South Africa on
sport. Have you got any decided views on trade with South Africa?
PRIME MINISTER: PNRoI. M EMTIhNIeT EgR: e neral principle is that trade with all 
12.
countries including divided countries is prima facie desirable.
The only limitation we put to that is where there are international
decisions made as there have been as regards Zimbabwe, which we
loyally observe.
Q. I have one quick and unrelated question. When may we expect
the Government to honour its pre-election commitment to the
publication of detailed economic forecasts by the Federal Treasury
a comtmitment which you reaffirmed shortly before the elections
will you be pursuing this matter as a question of urgency with the
Treasurer, Mr Crean?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter is being pursued. It is likely that
the quarterly bulletin that the Treasury issues will come out more
regularly. There may be more frequent Treasury forecasts published.
Q. Will it come out in more detail the quarterly bulletin?
PRIME MINISTER: I think this is being considered, this is a
possibility. Q. On Francis James. In view of reports of elaborate security
surrounding his departure from China and entry to Hong Kong, is it
reasonable to assume that the Australian Government has asked him
to go quietly at this stage since we have the Embassy only about
three days established?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The Australian representatives have made it
plain to Mr James that if he wants privacy, they will help him enjoy
privacy. If he wants to speak to the press, he is completely free
to speak to the press. The Australian Government has expressed no
opinion on whether he should make statements or not. Gentlemen:
this is one subject on which I've made no statements at all despite
a great deal of blaggarding and pressure since my visit to China,
and it might be appropriate for me to say that I have appreciated
the co-operation and the honour of those journalists who accompanied
me to China. They knew that I had a message. They accepted that
it would be in the interests of Mr James and his family that there
should be no publicity attached to this matter. All of us, all
these journalists, I'm glad to say, as well as my own colleagues and
I, had taken up the position of Mr James in that fortnight when we
were in China in the middle of 1971. When I was coming on the train
from Wongjo to the border the Chinese official who had accompanied
us throughout told me that he had three messages I could give to
Mr James' family. First, that he was in China. Two, that he had
violated China's laws. Three, that his case was under consideration.
I got to Tokyo that night and wrote and sent those messages by
letter to Mrs James. When I got back to Australia-just over a week
later I telephoned her about them. I told her that I thought it
would be in the interests of Mr James himself and of her family
that this should not be publicised. I told her I would be making
no statement concerning him without clearing it with her, and I've
remained silent to this day about it because I believed
and the events of last March bore it out that the more publicity
there was, the more drama there was about this, the more likely it was
that there would be a hitch in his leaving China.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, a question on the Constitution. You appear
to be working with a patched-up State Federal relationship which
constitutionally obviously isn't working at the moment. It seems 
to be pulling apart perhaps rather than pulling together.
Prime Minister, when do you intend really getting to the core
of the matter, and Sir, do you perhaps see that the importance
oi the States is perhaps waning?
PRIME MINISTER: If one compares the present situation with 1900
and the 1890' s when State politicians drew up the Australian
Constitution, then one obviously would have to concede that the
position of the States vis-a-vis the Commonwealth is much less
significant, but it is inevitable in view of the financial realities
in Australia and in view of international arrangements which are
now so much a feature of everything that companies and individuals
and governments do, that the Commonwealthr should be predominant.
It was ' only on the eve of the last war that the Commonwealth's budget
exceeded the budget of New South Wales in size. Now the
Commonwealth's budget is very much as large as all State budgets
combined and most of the State revenues come from the Commonwealth.
Now the big thing that has to be done is to equate the functions
and the finances and there ha-s already been correspondence with all
the Premiers since the elections to bring about a better balance.
In effect, the Commonwealth wants to ensure that it plays a full
part in planning and spending the revenues which it has to find
particularly in those functions which it's now beyond the
possibility of any State Government whatever its political complexion
to provide in contemporary terms. In particular I suppose one has
to say education, health, transport and the whole conditions in which
people buy and use land are now beyond the capacity of the States
to provide good government.
Q. Would you say we're working under an outdated federalism?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, of course we are. There's another feature in
this. The States have created a great number of semi-government and
local government authorities and particularly in the capital field
these authorities have as big a burden every year as the States.
And the worst governed areas of Australia, Sydney and Melbourne,
suffer because in the constitutional arrangements in Australia
these State creations, the semi-government and local government
authorities have no voice and no vote. So if we are updating
Australian federalism one has to include the people who are elected
as aldermen and councillors throughout Australia.
Q. Mr Whitlam, I just want to refer to New Guinea as Mr Somare
is coming here tonight.
PRIME MINISTER: That's why I have to knock off early, because I
have to go and meet him.
Q. While Mr Morrison was in New Guinea he said that New Guinea
would be independent in 1974. Is it the Australian Government's
policy that New Guinea should be independent in 1974?
PRIME MINISTER: Well this is a matter to be worked out in
consultation between Papua New Guinea and Australia. There are
international obligations reasserted only last November by the
General Assembly of the United Nations that we should be planning
for this purpose. I mean both Governments have a say in this.
Australia can't be compelled to remain an imperial power if she
doesn't want to. But I think this is a matter which we can discuss
at the press conference which Iguess will take place after
Mr Morrison and Mr Somare and I have had talks tomorrow. 



MI.~ 1111._ 1 ' I1E131: 17 january 1973
' IG" COIT D" ZIGU COiJ?, 3TITIOiI
Si;: competitors Iiave been selected to suh-it designs
for a ner lIiga Court building in Canberra. ThIe competitors will
be required to submit entries developed to finvl design standard
by 1 June 1973. selection of the iwinner's design will be made soon
after. he competitors are:
Cameron, Chisholm and iHicol, of Perth
R~ odney Connors, of Sydney
idwards, liadigan, Torzillo and Brigr, of Sydney
Guy ldoron, of Adelaide
1. icIntyre, NcIntyr, of HMelbourne
Perrott, Lyon, Timlock; and ; Lesa, of Ielbourne
Their selection follows the coiipeition of adjudication
of entries in the first stage of the iL~ ig Court Design Competition.
The A~ ssessors for the competition aro:
Sir Garfield Barxwic.,
Sir John Overall,
Professor P. T. 1armel,
iIr. E. H. Farmer, and
r. Daryl Jackson.
CLU13E.-. Ci I T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
WITH MR. MICHAEL SOMARE
CHIEF MINISTER OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
WEDNESDAY, 17 JANUARY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: the Chief Minister and
the Minister for External Territories and I have had discussions this
morning and this afternoon on matters concerning our two countries.
You have a copy of the communique which we prepared. Are there
any questions yo'd. like to ask us?
Have you all finished reading the communique?
A. Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: I should have said also that the Treasurer
is issuing a statement about the Commonwealth guarantee of Papua
New Guinea loans until independence comes about. Have you got
copies of that too?
A. Yes.
Q. You say on page 3 of the communique that the Australian
Government is willing in principle to negotiate the relocation of
the border between Australia and Papua New Guinea and would not allow
any narrow considerations to obstruct such a settlement. Can you tell
us exactly what form this negotiation would take. In particular,
would you feel it necessary to pass the Territorial Sea and
Continental Shelf Bill'first through Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: No. This can be a separate issue.
Q. Would you regard it as an area in which the Queensland
Government might be able to take a challenge to the High Court?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to express a legal opinion on this.
Very careful consideration has been given to the wording of the
communique on this point and I'd rather leave it as it is.
Q. When you say that there are constitutional considerations
which have to be taken into account and which might delay the matter,
can you tell us how long a delay you ' re thinking of and precisely
what constitutional considerations?
PRIME MINISTER: Political development often takes longer in the
Legislative Assembly of Queensland than in the House of Assembly
of Papua New Guinea, and we have in mind that a Queensland Act
which would be the simplest way of resolving it might take longer
than it will take the House of Assembly to vote a timetable for
independence. 
Q. in the communique your Government still seems to be
aiming for 1974?
PRIME MINISTER: We're working towards that, yes.
Q. And the Chief Minister still seems to be keeping an open
date on that. Do you see any difference still between you working
for independence dates?
PRIME MINISTER: No. At this stage, Australia has to speak f or
Papua New Guinea in international councils such-as the United
Nations and, accordingly, it is easier for Australian elected persons
to realise international feelings on this matter than it is for all
elected persons in Papua New Guinea to realise such matters. The
communique points out the resolution of the United Nations
General Assembly on this matter. You will notice that on 14
December, the General Assembly called on Australia to prepare
in consultation with the Government of Papua New Guinea a
further timetable for independence. There's no particular
significance in the fact that this resolution was passed with
Australia's support after the elections. The late Government had
in fact supported the same resolution in the Fourth Committee in
November. So there is no difference between the parties in the
Australian Parliament on this proposal.
Q. I meant differences between you anft the Chief Minister.
We've still got an open date. He's not committed to 1974?
PRIME MINISTER: No. We are working towards it.
Q. But the Chief Minister doesn't accept the date as 1974?
PRIME MINISTER: He doesn't operate in the context of the
House of Assembly.
Q. May I ask a question of M-r. Somare?
PRIME MINISTER. Yes, gentlemen, as a matter of fact I was
hoping that most of the questions would be directed to the
Chief Minister.
0. Chief Minister, Mr. Somare: Are you disappointed to find
that your Government and the Australian Government is not in unison
on the question of independence for New Guinea?
CHIEF MINISTER: I'm not disappointed at all. All I've said is
that we have to see how we operate in Papua New Guinea context.
We have got certain problems. We've got problems of people having
to understand what we tell them and as elected representatives of
the people. We have to get their feelings where the feelings
are and, of course, this is an example of what happened. My
group, in particular, went out saying that we had to have selfgovernment
in 1972 and independence soon after that, and we feel
in Papua New Guinea that this has come so quick, no one expected that
T wol sitting where I am today and I said to them that these
changes will come. Whether we like it or not, change must come.
Now the same thing applies with the independence. Just that there
are some sections of the community in Papua New Guinea who are not
used to it, maybe the word independence is so confused in their
minds and people don't know what independence is. There have been
threats of independence comes, exodus of white people, they take all
their money away j Australia withdraws its grant its monetary 
assistance and so on, And this is the fear. Once this is
explained to people, it's a matter of only accepting it once
people know really what independence is all about.
Q. Sir, in your talks with the Prime Minister today have
you sought assurances as to the continuation of support and-the
degree of continuation of support for Papua New Guinea after
independence? What sort of reassurances have you received?
CHIEF MINISTER: With my talks with the Prime Minister today,
we have had this assurance I've had this assurance that the
Australian Government will continue to give us financial assistance
even close to independence and after independence if the Papua
New Guinea Government wants Australia's assistance.
Q. Has this been quantified? Have you indicated how much
support you will need or require?
CHIEF MINISTER: No, we haven't said anything about what
actual figure that we want, but assistance in manpower, financial
assistance and so on.
Q. Sir, what's your personal preference on when the
Territory should be given * independence. We were talking earlier
about the feeling of the people and explaining it to them. Now
what's your personal preference on when?
PRIME MINISTER: Remember he was up with us in Wewak
three years ago?
CHIEF MINISTER: Sometimes it's very difficult and when you met me
some years ago you felt that things couldn't have changed much faster
than you expected and today you've seen the change. So change is
like that.
0. What's your personal preference, Sir?
CHIEF MINISTER: Well, I have said it. After self-government,
will come independence, but it is a matter for us to be able to work
out and if the House of Assembly endorses a timetable which, when
we ask for House of Assembly's endorsement, and if House of Assembly
agrees that could be maybe towards the end of 1974 could be middle
of 1975, so it's very difficult to work out the exact date.
Q. Chief Minister, one of the problems of independence will
be the question of unity. We read reports last week of the
incidents you faced in Bougainville and the successionist
demonstrators in Bougainville. Did you raise t. hese at all in your
talks today with the Prime Minister?
CHIEF MINISTER: This is quite true that you would have the question
of unity in the country but I think the people of Papua n~ ew Guinea
would know by standing together they can achieve more. 2t is
quite true in my last week's tour of Bougainville you have this
feeling. maybe it came in the wrong time when two of my senior
public servants were involved in the incident and were killed.
And I went to Bougainvilile at the wrong time when people were ai11
emotional about the whole matter, but I find that in Bougainville
itself and in other places if there is a need for quicker
development, they'd rather go much faster because when you take
Bougainville it's much more people are mu'ch more sophisticated 
people have had dealings a long time there are a lot more
educated people on the island, So you have to work with this
feeling and for my position in the country it is very difficult
to be able to say we had to wait you have to get people in
Gazelle Peninsula and Bougainville, possible in New Island
and other places to wait so if you want to get unity in the
country all you have to do is let's show something let's show that
we can do something on our own. They feel that they are part of
the whole show. But if you wait too long, you'll probably find that
you've got this kind of feeling.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, may I return, while we're still on this
question of independence, to you, Sir: In the reference in the
communique on top of page 2 to the timing for independence you say
that the Government would work towards 1974. This would be subject
to consultation with the Government of New Guinea and the
endorsement of the House of Assembly. Is this a firm undertaking
the Australian Government will not unilaterally declare the
independence of Papua New Guinea?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I think in practical terms Papua New
Guinea will move just as surely and rapidly to independence as
we all now observe that she has moved to self-government. In
effect, there is self-government already in Papua New Guinea. The
Australian Government exercises no authority makes no decisions
internally in Papua New Guinea without consulting the Chief Minister
and his Government. Perhaps I should explain the reference to
endorsement by the House of Assembly as representing the wishes of
the people refers to the sections of the Charter of the United
Nations dealing with the trusteeship system. It indicates that the
Australian Government will seek the endorsement by the Trusteeship
Council of the United Nations of the view that on the question of
independence as hitherto on the question of self-government the
House of Assembly is regarded as representing the wishes of . the
people. In other words it is to counteract the idea which is
spread in some quarters that there should be a plebiscite or a
referendum. The late Australian Government, the present
Australian Government, the Trusteeship Council, successive Houses
of Assembly is Papua New Guinea have all taken the attitude that
the House of Assembly expresses the wishes of the people in the
terms of the charter.
Q. Does that mean you need a majority vote in the House of
Assembly before New Guinea can be declardd independent?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. You don't have to have it. In
practical terms you will have it. You don't have to have it, but in
practical terms you will.
0. May I ask the Chief Minister a couple of points about the
Torres Strait border? Mr. Somare, where precisely would you like
the border to be? How far south would you like it to come? Are
you planning at any time to confer with the Queensland Government
yourself and explain to them what you'd like, and I notice on page 3
that you say you are confident it would be possible to reach a
solution. If you don't reach a solution will you take it to the
International Court for a solution? 
CHIEF MINISTER: Well I think I'll have to answer you back to front.
Talking about going to International Court we are not yet a sovereign
country and this is something that we cannot test on the International
Court. Your first point which you raised was that we have no
I have no intention at the moment to talk with the Premier of
Queensland. This idea of disputing the boundary -we are thinking of
taking it down JO degrees south coming together -I think it's the
Commonwealth's prerogativeto be able to talk with each State and we
as a non-sovereign country I don't see my position as jumping the
Commonwealth to go and talk to the Queensland Premier. So my position
at the moment is all I have to do is communicate to the Commonwealth.
Q. But you'd like to be at the 10 degree parallel?
CHIEF MINISTER: South.
Q. Sir, on that same question on page 4 the phrase you used
as the Australian Government: Would it facilitate contact between
the Papua New Guinea Government and the islanders and does that mean
that you plan to visit the islands, would you like to visit the
islands?
CHIEF MINISTER: No, I have no plans at this stage to visit the
islands. I'm hoping that the officials from the Australian Government
and officials from our Government will have to sit down and talk about
it and then find out from the people concerned on the island what
their feelings are before we start talking about whether we should go
and visit the island or whether the Australian Government should go and
visit the island.
Q. Chief Minister, on the question of Bougainville again, did
you get any impression from your visit there that they really did want
to secedeand if they did would you have any power to stop them?
CHIEF MINISTER: Well there is a feeling all throughout the island
in my week's travel throughout the island of Bougainville there is a
feeling of secession. This was expressed that we want to be ab&amp; e
to break away but there is also a feeling of we want to have autonomy
for our own island. There were suggestions made on our relationship
between the central Government and this is something which the
Constitutional Planning Committee of the House of Assembly has to sit
down and work out, what sort of powers they should have as the
central Government and what sort of powers should we go for
regional type government or we have to move ahead so that people
feel that they haven't been left out.
Q. Mr. Chief Minister, following on Bougainville, obviously
Bougainville Copper has a fairly large place in the economic
planning of Papua New Guinea. I was wondering if you could tell
us whether you have any indication whether Bougainville Copper
as a company is attempting to prevent secession or is, in fact,
working towards secession on Bougainville.
CHIEF MINISTER: Well I'd be it would look silly on my part
to say that they are working to prevent they are deliberately
encouraging it because I don't know what the feeling of Bougainville
Copper is. 
Q. Chief Minister, if I may, on page 4 of the communique it says
that Australia also agreed to an urgent examination of the Chief
M~ inister's request for a continuing aid commitment. As I understood
you were coming here today to look for confirmation of an earlier
promise. That seems to fall short of what you're looking for?
CHIEF MINISTER: Well, I've been given verbal assurance by the
Treasurer, the Honourable Mr. Crean, that this will be done
this is the verbal assurance I have got and this is something
that we still have got discussions to come sometime this year that
we will also be taking this one up again. But I've been given a verbal
assurance that this aid will continue.
Q. Mr. Somare, you indicated talking about Bougainville a
moment ago that you are thinking in terms of giving Bougainville
a reasonable degree of regional autonomy. I think your Government
has already more or less, agreed to do the same for the Gazelle
Peninsula. Do you think it is possible to give certain areas a
lot of regional autonomy without giving it to all areas and thus
to weaken the authority of the central government throughout the
country? CHIEF MINISTER: Well, this is something... It could be very
difficult at this stage, but this is something which the
Constitutional Planning Committee will have to look at very
closely. Whether the system and type of government which we are
following at the moment is workable in our society and this is wherethis
was the purpose of setting up a Constitutional Planning Committee
to be able to find out what type of government-what kind of rules we
would like to set up whether the system which we have got suits the
people and their needs. So it could be very difficult for us
to say we should give all the regional governments to everyone.
There are problems, certainly there are problems in certain areas of
Papua New Guinea, but this is something which the Constitutional
Planning Committee has to come up with the answer. What would be
our direction what pattern of government we should follow. So
it is very difficult for me to say what we're going to follow till
such time as the people of Papua New Guinea tell their
Constitutional Planning Committee what they want.
Q. Are you prepared to express your own personal preference
for a regional type of government or not, Sir?
CHIEF MINISTER: Sometimes it's very difficult to express one's
personal opinion but I have always felt that you have a government
which we have got at the moment -we have used the system for the
last generation that this is the pattern we have been following
but if the majority of the people of Papua New Guinea decide they
want to have something else, well, it's a majority decision.
Q. Given the complexity of this problem of self-government and
the problems of consulting the different groups in the country and
reaching some sort of concensus, have you got enough time between
now and the end of next year to come to a proper decision on the
constitutional arrangements for the country or is the end of 1974
pushing it a bit too close? 
CHIEF M4INISTER: I think we've got time, but we sometimes in Papua
New Guinea like to take our time and time in the Australian sense
doesn't appeal to us much, but I feel, you know, that wqe've got a lot
of time to be able to work out something and eventually we'll have
self-government in the time that we said.
Q. If you feel you can't get the House of Assembly behind you for
independence say, by the end of 1974, do you see the Australian
Government standing up to international opinion on your behalf and
supporting you with a later date for independence?
CHIEF MINISTER: Well I would say that darlier when it started round
about 1968 people were against self-government and they said no
self-government for Papua New Guinea for another 50 or 100 years, but
things went very fast and I don't expect this to happen. Once people
know what they are doing-once they know what independence is All
about I think people will realise, and we would come much closer
than we expected.
Q. Mr. Somare, on the border question again, do you, Sir, see any
valid point in the suggestion that; s been made in a few quarters
here that there should be a pleviscite of the people who live on the
islands concerned with any border realignments involved in the
suggestion you've made? And secondly, do you see anything less than
the possibility that, when the border is realigned, it will involve the
complete transfer of sovereignty over the land areas that are
concerned to Papua New Guinea on your side of that border?
CHIEF MINISTER% Well your first question about plebiscite: this
is something which I don't know what the Queensland Premier would dowhether
hie wants a plebiscite for the Torres Strait Islanders but
I'd say that, as far as we are concerned, we feel that there are areas
in which these people are ethnically related to some of the western
district people and we could find out, as I said, there'll be official
groups from the Australian Government and from my Government that will
be seeking their views to find out sometimes a plebiscite can end
up with yes and no answers and you really don't know what the people's
thinking is. Coming back to your second point which you raised about
problems. As I said earlier that I thi ' nk we, the Papua New Guinea
Government and the Australian Government willcome to some common
agreement on the line that we want to be able to operate from
the seabed and so on, and I think this is something,* as I said
earlier, this is the Commonwealth's per ogative and as a nonsovereign
country I don't think we are in a position to be able to
take it up to court to dispute that and this matter would lie in
the hands of the Commonwealth Government, and we will be talking with
the Commonwealth Government and Queensland Government to sort out this
thing to find a compromise position.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, may I ask you a question. Sir, on page 4 of the
communique you talk about a provisional agreement regarding the
sovereignty over the Territory regarding the border question. The
provisionayI agreement related you said to seabed division fishing
and navigational rights. Is it an undertaking by the Australian
Government to hand these rights over to Papua New Guinea once you have
the power presumably under the Territorial Seas Bill?
PRIME MINISTER: The power-would not only be under the Act you
mentioned, Mr. Barnes. it would also be under the external affairs 
power once Paptua New Guinea is a sovereign state. These matters are
determined by agreement say, between Australia and Indonesia
already they have been. They are in the process of being determined
between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea at this moment.
Q. In both cases though, would the endorsement of the States
involved PRIME MINISTER: There is no purported State interest in those cases.
There can be no obstruction by the State in those two cases. When
Papua New Guinea is an inddpendent sovereign nation as of course
Indonesia is, then it would be presumably completely possible for
Australia and Papua New Guinea to come to a sensible, as contemporary
an agreement on these matters as it has been for Indonesia and Australia
to come to such an agreement. I point out again as th1e communique
mentions that this is a matter of which the United Nations has taken
notice, the visiting mission to Papua New Guinea in January, February,
early part of March in 1971 referred to it. The position is that the
purported border between Queensland and Papua passes less than a mile
from the Papuan coast for a distance of more than 60 miles. There
are within that what's ordinarily called by any standard " territorial
waters" three islands with a population of 370 people. The visiting
mission pointed out that this question could harm good relations in
the future between Australia and Papua New Guinea. The mission said
the question is one which in the opinion of the mission merits being
kept under constant review. Now it is of course an intolerable position
to say that people in any country can't go from one part of the
country to another part of the country without going through the
territory of another country. Somebody mentioned the International
Court of Justice. I would not believe that the International Court
of Justice would validate such a situation. I wouldn't believe
that the United Nations General Assembly would validate it. It ought
to be possible to solve this matter while Australia has jurisdiction
on both sides of the Torres Strait. The Queensland Government however
will not come to the party. As the communique points out an
interdepartmental committee of Australian Government officials
recommended that there should be discussions between Australian
Government and Queensland Government officials last July. The
former Attorney-General, Senator Greenwood, made this
recommendation to the former Prime Minister in October. The former
Minister for External Territories, Mr Peacock, reiterated the
recommendation to the former Prime Minister in November. I was
attracted to the recommendation of Mr Morrison's predecessor, the
preceding Attorney, and I put the proposition to the Queensland
Premier, and he sees no merit in it.
Q. Mr Morrison, in view of what Mr Whitlam has just said and in
view of what Mr Somare has said that he is not prepared and doesn't
wish to speak to the Queensland Government, are you now prepared
to seek a meeting with Mr Bjelke-Petersen to put the views of
Mr Somare and the views Of the Government?
MR MORRISON: Relations with the State of Queensland don't fall within
my portfolio.
0. Not even on this subject?
MR MORRISON: I'll be involved in the coflSltations from the
Australian side but it wouldn't be a diretresponsibility of mine. 
PRIME MINISTER; Gentlemen, on this matter, reference is very
frequently made to the Australian citizenship of the Torres Strait
Islanders. You will notice that Papuans of course are also
Australian citizens and will remain such until Papua New Guinea
becomes a sovereign state. The Chief Minister has pointed out
that his Government will be intent on safeguarding the interests of those
Australian citizens who reside on the islands in the Strait.
Q. Have you discussed the question of trans-migration of
these Australian citizens Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: We believe that there should be complete freedom
of movement by Australian citizens anywhere within Australian
jurisdiction. Q. Will you allow that for the Papuans into Australia, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER; There are Papuan Ministers who have asked
if they may visit the islands and we've said of course. Gentlemen,
some of you were three years ago up in Wewak with the Chief Minister
and me and I think some of you didn't at that time have sufficient
faith that we'd be holding the positions we now have.
CHIEF MINISTER: I don't think they did. 



.240 STI'LE-iiTT 110. 37
17 January 1973
TT7 FUPIAL i02 TI--101T. 2IO2iJ
Flags Iill be flown at half mast on Cormonrec. lth
buildings in the Australian Capital Territory and Queensland
from 0.00 to 1.00 p. m. tomorrowr as a marl-. of respect for
the late Hon. W. J. Riordan.
A State Funeral for 1Ir. Riordan will be held in
Brisbane at 11.00 a. m. ' iomorrov, ILursday, 1U January.
C I. BCE VC 



PRINIMISTEE PRESS STATEMENT NO. 172
18 January 1973
VISIT OVERSEAS BY ELIZABETH REID
Elizabeth Reid, Adviser to the Prime rMinistdr,
left today f or a study tour that will take her to ten major
European and North American cities. While away she will
also represent Australia at a United Nations forum on the
Role of women in Population and Development.
The purpose of her visit will be to establish
contact with women and groups in other countries who are
working in the same field and to inform ' h-erself of developments
elsewhere relating to the status of women. Areas she will be
studying include future patterns of employment for women,
parliamentary and government organisations responsible for
matters relating to women and the evolution of government
policy to cope with the effects of changes in society on
women in employment and in the home.
These problems are at present being discussed
in northern America and within the European Economic Community
where extensive research is being undertaken. Miss Reid's
tour will include visits to the O. E. C. D. in Paris, the I. L. O.
headquarters in Geneva and the E. E. C. headquarters in Brussels.
She will also meet women's groups and trade union and government
representatives. The Australian Government is in a good position
to learn from the experiences of other countries in their
efforts to formulate policies and initiate changes to improve
the status of women.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 22 18 January 1973
AUSTRALIAN AID TO INDONESIA
Australia has made available a third instalment,
$ l750,000, in its programme of D. K. ( Devisa Kredit) aid to
Indonesia. This was announced today by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam.
Mr Whitlan said that the money would be used to provide
Indonesian importers with foreign exchange to buy essential goods.
Goods bought under the programme must be at least
two-thirds Australian in content and have, in the past, included
tin-plate, steel, aluminium and zinc products, machinery, chemicals
0 and pharmaceuticals. The balance-of-payments support given to Indonesia by
the D. K. aid programme since its inception in 1967 had contributed
markedly to the stabilisation of the Indonesian economy.
In addition, the importation of essential raw materials
under the programme was promoting the expansion of Indonesia' s
domestic production. Mr Whitlam said that Australia's D. K. instalments to Indonesia
this financial year would total $ 5.5 million.
Australia's total aid programme to Indonesia in 1972/ 73
will be $ 23 million. 



pla1-V j 1 -10H
' k9 Juay1 973
l IJ 12_ j 2fl 1DJC
2: : CCJLency -the Governor-GeneraJl as -, I). rovec h
award o" a cueo*. n-s Cora-inc~ tion for racConduct to Conastable
TPail rlas Canderaan of the Hrthern Territory Police Force.
Constable adea -waS Woul-ded w-hen a'trxp tinc' to
dlisar. m hijacker at lic mi~ virxo on 15 j vebr 1972.
wa t. eaein he~~ ocrewr an azegr, a boardte
izo-acedhs ' ndnDao r: onal sa -ety
by vout'~. 2 a iton,
0i wI : eS0' S ~
KrA'&gt;.-c in~ ue ise
received b2u Loi~ t we-Tunets frorl the..-hij acker's r i -A" e1
ci. IiaiI2 A C 



PRIME MINISTER P2*.-23 SITTA T"" S 110 33 9
19 January 1973
VISIT TO AUTRL Y T~ ifRJ1 I1, LEE'I1, L :: wGMrE2SES C1OTT
PRINCE A. T'I ITO 1-U. D CrP. 0-niP-IiCES j* ICLLZ-O 0? JI 11T
The ierime Ijilister conlirmed today tha Tei Imperial
Iighnesses Crown Prince 1, hiiiito amnd Crown Princess klich7ilco of
Japan hlave -acceTpteOd -an invitation to visit kustralia. during
1973 as guests of thL-e Aiustralian Government.
! iAr. UThitlam said that h'-e war,) s lookin-. forward to
thieir visit which 1, e feels will be an enjoyrable ex--perience for
Thieir Imnrial -Highnesses are ex--pected to begin
their visit in Canberra in th'ie second eekoiyadt pn
from ton to twelve days~ visiting several of the Austra-lian Z'tates
as well as the 1-ational Capital.
1: r. * T" hitlan said that the: Si tate authorities in those
States included in th'-e iti 4nerary will be invited to propose a
program of engagementus for submission to Their Imperial
i-iignesses. UThei-an approved program fLor th,?, eir Aiustralin
visit has been decided, the details will be announced.
ClArfi32, IR C a T. 



JOINT COMMUNIQUE
The Prime Minister of Australia, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
visited New Zealand from 20 to 23 January at the invitation
of the Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Hon. Norman Kirk.
The two Prime Ministers had lengthy and intimate
discussions on a wide range of issues.
AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND COOPERATION
The Prime Ministers noted that their first meeting
since they came into office took place on the 29th
anniversary of the signing of the Australian-New Zealand
Agreement of 1944 the ANZAC Pact. Although they
recognised that parts of that Agreement had been overtaken
by events and were less relevant to contemporary
needs, the Prime Ministers felt that close consultation
and collaboration between Australia and New Zealand
were needed in 1973 as they had been in 1944.
The Prime Ministers recognised that a habit of
consultation and exchanges had developed between the
two countries based on the 1944 Agreement. They took
the opportunity to reaffirm the principles of that
Agreement. They indicated their intention to work for
the closest possible consultation and collaboration on
all matters political, economic, defence, social and
cultural which affected their joint interests,
particularly in the South Pacific region.
To this end the Prime Ministers agreed to make
every effort to revitalise and further to strengthen
the habit of consultation by means of more frequent
exchanges between Ministers and regular meetings of
officials on both sides of the Tasman. The Prime
Ministers agreed that they themselves should meet
informally at least once a year for an overall review
of relations between Australia and New Zealand.
Economic Particular attention was paid by the Prime Ministers
to the broad principles which should underlie the growing
economic relations between Australia and New Zealand.
Agreement was reached on the need to broaden the range
of consultations on economic matters between both
countries and it was decided that officials of both
countries would jointly undertake a comprehensive
reappraisal of the scope for increased economic cooperation
as soon as possible.
The Prime Ministers noted that the New Zealand/
Australia Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA) of 1965 had been
an important instrument in contribuiting to a growth in
trade. However, the objectives of the'Agreement / should 
should not be seen as directed solely to trade expansion
but through trade expansion to furthering the economic
and social development of the two countries and the
use of their resources. The implementation of policies
of the two Labour Governments would provide the opportunity
for both countries to take a new look at how progre'ss in
bilateral trade under NAFTA might become more rapid and
effective. The development of NAFTA will be thoroughly
reviewed at a Ministerial meeting to be held shortly in
Wellington. The preferential tariff arrangements between the
two countries were considered in the light of the
imminent termination of their trade agreements with
Britain. Agreement was reached that negotiations will
proceed about the retention of preferences on a mutually
beneficial basis.
The Prime Ministers discussed the impact of the
enlarged European Communities on the trading interests
of the two countries. It was -agreed that this development
underlined the need for Aust-.-alia. and No1w Zealand to work
together in the economic sphere. Th1is nee:, d particularly
apparent in the case of primary products where the two
countries would encourage their marketing organisations
to cooperate to the fullest oxtenit possible.
The Prime Ministers~ noted the good work being done
by the Australia/ New Zealand Joinz Dairy Cormittee.
They agreed on the importance of close cooperation in
this sector to imeet changes in the world trading patterns
arising in particular from the enlargement1-of the European
Communities. The two Prime Ministers agreed that the successful
completion of the coming GATT round of multilateral
trade negotiations, particularly in the field of
agricultural trade, was of the greatest importance and
that the two countries would work together to this end.
DefenceCooperation The two Prime Ministers noted that there had been
close cooperation in defence between Australia and
New Zealand ever since World War II, and that it had
developed in recent years. They agreed on the importance
of continuing, and where practicable furthering, this
cooperation, and of assisting each other whenever
possible in such fields as personnel, facilities and
courses of training, operational and technical matters,
and the supply of defence equipment. They noted that
studies were being made of the strategic basis of
defence cooperation, and that the Australia-New Zealand
Consultative Conmmittee on Defence Cooperation would
report to the two Governments on this question among
other s. / Travel 
Travel The Prime Ministers agreed that citizens of each
country and citizens of other Commonwealth countries who
have resident status in either Australia or New Zealand
should henceforth be able to travel between Australia
and New Zealand, for permanent or temporary stay, without
passports or visas. Talks between immigration officials
of the two countries regarding practical arrangements
for the implementation of the new policy would take
place as soon as possible.
INTERNATIONAL QUESTIONS
The two Prime Ministers also discussed a number of
international. questions of concern to both Now Zealand
and Australia, on which their two Governments intend to
work together as closely as possible.
South Pacific Affairs
The two Prime Ministers recalled the developments
of the last 25 years in the South Pacific, many of
which owed a good deal to the impetus of the ANZAC Pact
of 1944. They expressed satisfaction that the South
Pacific Conference now meets annually to approve the
work progranate of the South Pacific Commission and that
in recent years both Australia and New Zealand have
been represented at sessions of the Conference by
Ministers. The Conission had been strengthened by
Western Samoa, Nauru and Fiji becoming full members.
They attached particular value to the South Pacific
Forum, which offered the Heads of* Government of the
independent and self-governing states of the Pacific
an opportunity to explore common problems, to consider
priorities, and to plan cooperative programmes on a
practical basis. Already it had demonstrated its
usefulness to the governments concerned.
Both Prime Ministers were planning to attend an
early meeting of the Forum. They were very much
looking forward to this opportunity of meeting their
colleagues, the leaders of the Island states.
Advantage was seen in developing contacts between
Parliamentarians in the area, and enabling them to take
a wider role in the consultative and planning processes.
One possibility which was canvassed was to include
Members of Parliament in delegations attending the
South Pacific Conference, as was the Australian practice.
The Prime Ministers pledged that their Governments
would continue to work to the best of their ability
for the progress and advancement of the people of the
/ Paci f ic 
Pacific, guided always by the wishes and aspirations of
the people of the area and their leaders.
The Prime Minister of Australia gave an account
of recent constitutional and economic developments in
Papua New Guinea and forecast an early advance to full
self-government, to be followed by independence. The
Prime Minioter of New Zealand acknowl edged the importance
of these developments for New Zealand, and, as earnest
of the goodwill of the'people of New Zealand, indicated
that his Government wa8 disposed to establish a diplomatic
mission in Port Moresby at an appropriate time.-
The Prime Minister of New Zealand said that he was
glad to report that Niue would soon be fully selfgoverning.
A delegation from the Niue I-ouse of Assembly
was expected inWellington in a few weeks for constitutional
talks. Race Relations
The Prime Ministers reaffirmied their belief in the
equality of every citizen in a multi-racial society and
the right of all to the enjoyment of equal opportunities.
Policies of racial discrimination such as apartheid
are directly contrary to the provisions of the United
Nations Charter. They are abho-rent and cannot be
accepted by the international coanunity. The P'rime
Ministers agreed that their two countries would strive
to implement measures, national and international, which
would help to bring to aneri all such discriminatory
policies. Asian and Pacific Region
The two Prime Ministers made it clear that New
Zealand and Australia stood ready to work with other
countries in the Asian and Pacific region to achieve
for their peoples the benefits of peace, progress and
cooperation. They recalled that since their Governments came to
power Australia and New Zealand had both recognised and
established diplomatic relations with the People's
Republic of China, and they indicated that both were
anxious to develop friendly cooperation with that country.
The Prime Ministers also recalled that, while New Zealand
and Australia had withdrawn their remaining forces from
South Vietnam, both Governments had made it clear that
they are prepared to take their parts in an international
rehabilitation programme throughout Indo-China. They
welcomed the progress that had recently been made in the
Paris peace talks and expressed the hope that agreement
would be reached soon on a settlement fair to all.
/ The 
The two Prime Ministers agreed'that the essential
objective was to end the war and the terrible suffering%
it had caused.
Recognising that changes in the relationships
between the great powers aind the ending of the war in
Indo-China were bound to affect other countries in
South East Asia, the two Prime Ministers acknowledged
the importance of maintaining stability and confidence
in the area while the countries there were adjusting to
the new situation. The P~ rime Ministers noted that
Australia and New. Zealand forces were in Singapore and
Malaysia by agreement with the Governments of those
countries. They discusSed the future disposition of
their forces: they, would each consult with their
partners in the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
They also expressed willingness to discuss with countries
in the area what forms of assistance from No1w Zealand and
Australia would be most appropriate and helpful.
The two Prime Ministers expressed understanding and.
support for the desire of the membcers of ASEAN to limit
outside interference in the affairs of South East Asia,
and sympathy for their efforts to make the area a zone
of peace, freedom and neutrality.
The two Prime Ministers agreed that effective
cooperation in the fields of economic and social
development, trade, cultural exchanges and political
consultations was at leaot as important as joint efforts
in the defence field in promoting the peaceful progress
of the region. The Prime Ministers expressed their
intention to work with their Asian and Pacific neighbours
in making adjustmants to existing arrangements and seeking
new forms of cooperation that took full account of the
present realities of the situation in Asia and the
Pacific. They offered to join in appropriate efforts
to bring the countries of the Asian and Pacific region
together in a new collective endeavour to promote the
wellbeing of their peoples.
The United States
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed the intention of
both their Governments to maintain friendly relations
with the United States in a spirit of mutual respect
and trust. They noted that the ANZUS Treaty symbolised
a community of interest and outlook among the three
partners that extended to many fields other than defence.
By strengthening the security of Australia and New
Zealand, the Treaty helps to create a climate that
enables the two countries to work with their neighbours
and to contribute to the peaceful progress of the Asian
and Pacific region in general. There had been occasions
on which the policies of the three Governments had
/ diverged 
6.
diverged, and, as they were all sovereign independent
states, there might well be other occasions in the
future. But such instances need not and should not
disturb the friendly ties among the three countries, or
their far-ranging cooperation in practical matters.
Nuclear Weapons Testingl
The Prime Ministers accorded high priority to the
problem posed by continued nuclear weapons testing.
They emphasised that their opposition extended to all
forms of nuclear weapons testing by whatever nation and
reaffirmed the objectives of a suspension of all such
testing and the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban
treaty. They appealed in particular to France to appreciate
the special degree of concern which the toesting of
nuclear weapons in the South Pacific causes throuqhtout
the region. They recalled that an overwheilming majority
in the United Nations had already acknowledged the
legitimate nature of this widespread concern. The
Prime Ministers declared their Governments' intention,
failing such an aszurance, to work together to oppose
the tests by all appropriate means and to consult closely
w ith other countries in the region.
Wellington, New Zealand.
22 January 1973 



AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE
WELLINGTON
Outward Telegram to
RZUPX COUMW ( WsA/ AP0qM 2.2jV g .422aMe
UNCLASSIFIED 110 FOLLOWING IS UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRIME MINISTERIAL
PRESS CONFERENCE HELD IN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, WELLINGTON, AFTERNOON
OF 22 JANUARY 1972.
BEGINS MR WHITLAM LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE PRIME MINISTER HAS BEEN GOOD ENOUGH
TO SUGGEST THAT I SHOULD ANNOUNCE THIS MATTER WHICH HIS CABINET
WAS GOOD ENOUGH TO DECIDE WHEN I VISITED THEM THIS MORNING*
I SUPPOSE THAT YOU HAD HEARD THAT MY GOVERNMENT HAD SOUGHT NEW
ZEALAND'S ASSISTANCE IN ESTABLISHING A SCHOOL DENTAL SERVICE
IN AUSTRALIA. THERE IS A START OF SUCH A SERVICE IN THE SMALLEST
AUSTRALIAN STATE AND THE THIRD SMALLEST BUT NOT IN ANY OF THE
OTHERS. YOU KNOW THE COMPLEXITIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL
SYSTEM. THIS WOULD ORDINARILY BE A STATE RESPONSIBILITY, BUT
SINCE THERE IS NO GOVERNMENT WHICH HAS ACCEPTED THE RESPONSIBILITY
UP TILL NOW, IT'S FALLEN TO THE NEW COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT TO DO
IT AND WE NATURALLY THOUGHT OF NEW ZEALAND'S EXPERIENCE EXTENDING I
BELIEVE OVER 50 YEARS. SO WE SAID IN THE WORDS OF PAUL, WILL YOU
COME OVER AND HELP US AND MR TIZARD PUT TO CABINET TODAY A PROPOSAL
WHICH WILL, WE BELIEVE, ENABLE US TO TAKE UP 50 PLACES IN MARCH,
ISN'T IT, AND ANOTHER 50 PLACES IN SEPTEMBER, AND THEN WE WOULD
HOPE IN DUE COURSE THAT YOUR MATRON INSPECTORS WILL COME TO
AUSTRALIA AND HELP TO ESTABLISH SIMILAR TRAINING FACILITIES THERE
TO SUPERINTEND THE OPERArION OF THE SERVICE IN TilE SCHOOLS.
WELL, I'D LIKE TO ACKNOWLE) GE PUBLICLY, AS I HAVE WARMLY IN
PRIVATE, THAT THIS HAS BEEN A MOST GENEROUS ACTION BY THE NEW
ZEALAND GOVERNMENT. IT'S A FIELf) WHERE NEW ZEALAND HAS HAD A
SOCIAL WELFARE SCHEME OF GREAT BENEFIT FOR MANY YEARS. AUSTRALIA
HAS NOT. SO YOU WERE WILLING To HELP US START. THE URGENCY OF
IT FLOWS OF COURSE FROM THE FACT THAT THE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO WILL BE
ENCOURAGED TO TAKE THIG CAREER ARE JUST GETTING THEIR EXAM
RESULTS FROM THE END OF THEIR SECONDARY EDUCATION AND WILL BE
DETERMINING WHAT THEY SHALL DO NEXT. SO MANY OF THEM WILL NOW BE
ABLE TO SERVE IN THIS NEW FIIœ LI).
Q. PRIME MINISTER, IN RESPECT OF THE 50 PLACES THAT ARE GOING
TO COME TO AUSTRALIA ( INAUDIBLE)
MR WHITLAM NO, THEY WILL BE AUSTRALIANS COMING TO NEW ZEALAND
TO OCCUPY THE SPARE PLACES WHICH NEW ZEALAND HAS CREATED FOR THEM.
WILL THIS BE AT NEW ZEALAND'S EXPENSE?
MR WHITLAM NO, NO, WE'LL BE QUITE WILLING TO PAY FOR THE WHOLE
LOT 
MR KIRK WE HAVE AGREED) IN PRINCIPLE TO THE TRAINING OF THE
AUSTRALIANS HERE* THERE WILL BE SOME NEGOTIATIONS AT THE
OFFICIAL LEVEL TO SET THE TERMS OF WHICH IT HAS ACHIEVED* WE
ARE TOLD BY OUR ADVISERS THAT ONE OF THE REASONS WHY WE ARE ABLE
TO MAKE PLACES AVAILABLE IS THAT THE WIDENED USE OF FLUORIDES
HAS IMPROVED DENTAL HEALTH TO THE POINT THAT THERE IS SOME
AVAILABLE ACCOMMODATION NOW INSID) E THE SERVICE SO THAT IT IS
ABLE TO BE UTILISED IN THIS WAY.
MR KIRK, COULD YOU TELL US THE NAME OF THE-SERVICE, WHAT
SCHOOLS WILL THEY BE USING, WHAT COURSES WILL THEY BE UNDERTAKINC4?
MR KIRK WELL,.-THEY'LL COME HERE TO, WELLINGTON. THE SCHOOL
DENTAL SERVICE ( UNDERLINE THREE) IS IT'S POPULAR DESIGNATION
THROUGHOUT NEW ZEALAND, AND IT HAS BEEN A SCHOOL THAT HAS BEEN
INVOLVED IN THE TRAINING OF YOUNG WOMEN, THOUGH THERE IS NO
SPECIFIC REASON WHY IT SHOULD BE EXCLUSIVELY HELD TO THEM* IT
MAY WELL BE THAT AUSTRALIA OR OURSELVES MAY WANT TO TRAIN YOUNG
MEN WHO CHOOSE TO TAKE UP THIS VOCATION. THERE IS NO STRICT
LIMITATION ON WOMEN ONLY. AND IT PROVID) ES DENTAL CARE FOR
PRE-SCHOOL AND PRIMARY SCHOOL CHILDREN THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY.
Qo THERE IS NO REASON FOR AUSTRALIA TO RECRUIT EXISTING TRAINED
DENTAL SERVICES TO COME TO AUSTRALIA.
MR KIRK NO, THEY WILL RECRUIT FROM THEIR OWN YOUNG PEOPLE AND
IT IS PROPOSED THAT THE TRAINEES COME HERE, AND WE WELCOME IT
FOR ANOTHER REASON BECAUSE IT GIVES US THE OPPORTUNITY TO EMPLOY
SKILLED AND TRAINED NEW ZEALANDERS IN NEW ZEALAND RATHER THAN
LOSE THEM ABROAD WHERE TRAINING HAS TAKEN THEM SOMEWHERE ELSE.
Q, WHAT IS THE DURATION OF THE COURSE?
MR KIRK I CAN'T TELL YOU THE FULL LENGTH OF THE COURSE, BUT THE
SECON4D INTAKE WILL COME IN WHEN IT HAS BEEN RUNNING TWO YEARS.
MR WHITLAM I THINK IT'S THAT. THE AUSTRALIANS HERE WILL KNOW,
AND WHAT THE NEW ZFEALANDER MIGHTN'T APPRECIATE, THE NEW AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS WANTING TO CREATE A SUFFICIENT FRAMEWORK IN THE
LIFETIME OF THIS PARLIAMENT IN THIS COMING THREE YEARS
TO ENSURE THAT IN THE FOLLOWING PARLIAMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION AND FOR-SOCIAL WORKERS AS WELL AS FOR
DENTAL THERAPISTS OR DENTAL NURSES AND YOUTH LEADERS: AND IN
AUSTRALIA THERE ARE JUST NOT AT PRESENT THE FACILITIES TO TRAIN
THE YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN WHO WANT TO TAKE THESE CAREERS. THIS
WAS ONE WHERE YOU COULD HELP US.
Q-WHEN CAN WE EXPECT T1HAT THE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE TRAINED
HERE WILL BE ACTUALLY OPERATING IN AUSTRALIA?
MR WHITLAM I DON'T KNOW. THI. WILL BETTER COME FROM MR TIZARO,
THE NEW ZEALAND MINISTER FOR HEALTH, OR DR EVERINGIHAM, THE
AUSTRALIAN ONE, WHO IS SENDING -US EXCELLENT INFORMATION OVER
THIS WEEK. IT COULD BE POSSIBLE FOR THE FIRST OF THEM TO BE
TRAINING IN MARCH.
Q-I'D LIKE TO ASK MR KIRK WHETHER THIS INVOLES ANY
ALTERATION OF THE NEW ZEALAND COURSE, TO ACCOMMODATE THESE.
MR KIRK NO, THE MAINTENANCE OF THE BASIS OF TRAIN* ING, WILL BE
CONTINUED AND IT WILL BE TO THE SAME STANDARD AND THE SAME WORK*
Q. AND THE NUMBERS ACTUALLY UNDERGOING TRAINING WILL-NOT BE
EXPANDED BY THIS PROCESS? 
MR KIRK NO. WE HAVE SOME AVAILABLE CAPACITY AND' IT MEANS THAT WE
CAN TAKE 50 IN THIS INTAKE AND 50 AGAIN IN SEPTEMBER. IF THERE
IS AN EXPANSION OF THE FACILITIES NECESSARY TO PROVIDE FOR A
GREATER NUMBER IF THIS WAS NEEDED, THAT ALSO CAN BE ARRANGED,
AND AT THE POINT WHERE WE ARRIVE WHERE THE FACILITIES ARE GREATER
THAN IS NEEDED THERE IS STILL BE POTENTIAL WITHIN THOSE FACILITIES
FOR SOME SIMJLAR TRAINING AS PART OF DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE WITH
OTHER COUNTRIES. IT'S NOT A MATTER OF ESTABLISHING FACILITIES
WHICH COULD BECOME REDUNDANT. WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A LONGER
TERM USAGE.
Q* IS THIS SCHEME LIKELY TO BE THE FORERUNNER OF OTHER SCHEMES
WHICH COULD POSSIBLY BE ON A RECIPROCAL BASIS?
MR KIRK -IT COULD WELL BE WHERE THERE IS ADVANTAGE IN WORKING
TOGETHER -WE'RE CERTAINLY GOING TO DO IT.
PRIME MINISTER, CAN I ASK YOU ABOUT THE COM1MUNIQUE IN RESPECT
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS TESTING. YOU'VE AGREED TO WORK TOGETHER
AND USE ALL APPROPRIATE MEANS. WOULD YOU BE PREPARED TO SAY
WHAT MEANS YOU WOULD CONSIDER APPROPRIATE?
MR WHITLAM NO, WE CERTAINLY DID DISCUSS MEANS, BUT QUITE
FRANKLY WE DON'T WANT TO GO INTO DETAILS OF THESE THINGS AT
THE MOMENT. I DON'T KNOW IF IN NEW ZEALAtnD THE ANSWER I's
ACCEPTABLE THAT USED TO BE ACCEPTAB3LE IN AUSTRALIA RECENTLY,
BUT THIS IS A HYPOTHETICAL QUESTION. WE ARE IN AUSTRALIA NOT
GOING TO ASSUME THAT THE FRENCH WILL GO AHEf7AD WITH ANY FURTHER
NUCLEAR TESTING REGARDLESS OF THE RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY. IN NOVEMBER AND OF THE PROCEEDINGS WHICH AUSTRALIA IS
GOING TO INTIATE IN THE WORLD COURT. YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT
AUSTRALIA HAS TAKEN THIS STEP OF DELIVERING4 A NOTE TO FRANCE
RAISING A LEGAL DISPUTE. WE ARE NOT AT THIS STAGE GOING TO
ASSUME THAT THE FRENCH WILL PRESS ON.
Q. DID YOU DISCUSS THE QUESTION OF AUSTRALIA'S CHALLENGE?
HAS NEW ZEALAND AGREED TO SUPPORT IT?
MR WHITLAM HERE AGAIN I THINK WE HAVE TO BE A LITTLE RETICENT
WITH YOU IF YOU DON'T MIND, BECAUSE THERE ARE ELEMENTS OF THE
COURT PROCEEDINGS WHICH WOULD BE PLACED) IN DOUBT IF WE WERE
TO BROADCAST THE NATURE OF THE PROCEEDINGS OR THE BASIS OF THEM.
Q. COULD I ASK MR KIRK WHETHER NEW ZEALAND IS GOING TO GO ALONG
WITH AUSTRALIA FULLY ON THIS SUB11ISSION TO THE WORLD COURT?
MR KIRK WE DON'T FIND OURSELVES IN ANY POSITION SO FAR AS THE
APPROACH TO THE INTERN-ATION4AL COURT IS CONCERNED), AND INDEED
WE HAVE CONDUCTED SOME PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION OF WHAT IS
INVOLVED). FURTHERMORE WE HAVE GATHERED AN AMOUNT OF SCIENTIFIC
INFORMATION4 THAT WOULD BE INVALUABLE ON ANY SUC1H COURT ACTION,
AND I MIGHT ADD TO THAT SPECIFICALLY THAT, BYTr VIRTUE OF BEING
CLOSER TO THE TEST AREA THAN AUSTRALIA, HAVE THAT MUCH ADDED
STANDING TO THIS COMPLAINT, SO FAR AS FALLOUT FROM THE TESTS
IS CONCERNED. FOR OUR PART OF IT, WE HAVE CONSIDERED THE
APPROACH THAT AUSTRALIA HAS MADE TO THE INTERNATIONAL COURT.
WE'RE INTERESTED IN IT. WE HAVE UNDERTAKEN SOME LEGAL STUDIES
AND CERTAINLY WE'RE EXAMINING THE POSSIBILITY OF SUPPORTING
AUSTRALIA IN THAT RESPECT. THOUGH THAT IS NOT ALL WE'RE
EXAMINING. WE HAVE SIMILARLY CONSIDERED CONSULTATIONS WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES AND WE WILL CONTINUE OF COURSE WITH THAT. BUT WE ARE
NOT IN A POSITION OF ACCEPTING THAT FRANCE IS ENTRENCHED INTO
THE POINT THAT IT WILL NOT CEASE THE TESTING, BUT WE'RE BEING
PROVEN IN THAT SO FAR AS WE'RE ABLE, IF SUCH AN ENTRENCHMENT
WOULD DEVELOP, THAT WE WOULD STILL BE IN A POSITION TO GO ON
WITHOUT ANY GREAT LOSS OF* TIME. 
SO THERE IS A POSSIBILITY THAT NEW ZEALAND WILL NOT GO ON
WITH AUSTRALIA TO THE WORLD COURT?
MR KIRK NO, WE'RE NOT EXAMINING IT FROM THAT POINT OF VIEW,
I THINK THAT THERE ARE NO GROUNDS FOR JUSTIFYING THAT QUESTION.
CAN I PUT IT ANOTHER WAY? YOU SAID A LITTLE WHILE AGO,
EFFECTIVE MEANS OF CHALLENGING THE TESTS STEMS THROUGH AN
INTERNATIONAL COURT FOR THE CHALLENGE TO BE EFFECTIVE.
MR KIRK NO, I SAID EFFECTIVE MEANS, ' AND I DIDN'T MEAN THAT
THIS WOULD BE SOME METHOD OF USING THE COURT, BUT AN EFFECT IVE
AVENUE THAT IS OPEN TO BRING ABOUT NOT ONLY FRENCH TESTING.,
BUT WE'RE CONCERNED TO BRING ABOUT THE* CESSATION OF ALL TESTING,
AND-SO ANY EFFECTIVE AVENUE WOULD CERTAINLY BE EXAMINED) BY US
AND WE'RE EXAMINING THE INTERNATIONAL COURT, THE PART THAT WE
CAN PLAY IN IT AND THE POSSIBILITY OF HOW WE COULD BE LINKED
WITH IT. AND WE SHOULD BE QUITE HAPPY TO CO-OPERATE IN EVERY WAY
WE CAN WITH ANY ACTION THAT ADVANCES THE OBJECT OF BRIN( GING
ABOUT THE CESSATION OF WEAPON4S TESTING.
MR KIRK, IT HAS BEEN SUGGESTED, I THINK BY YOURSELF DURING
THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN, I'M SUBJECT TO CORRECTION ON THAT POINT,
THAT NEW ZEALAND COUL() SEND A SHIP WITH CABINET MINISTERS ABOARD
TO THE AREA OF MURORUA ATOLL. WAS THIS ONE OF THE EFFECTIVE
MEANS THAT YOU DISCUSSED WITH MR WHITLAM AND DID YOU ASK WHETHER
THERE WAS ANY POSSIBILITY OF AUSTRALIA PROVIDING REFUELLING
FACILITIES FOR SUCH A VENTURE?
MR KIRK NO. WE DISCUSSED THIS QUESTION AND IT IS STILL VERY
MUCH IN OUR MIND, BUT AS A LAST RESORT, AND I AM NOT PREPARED
AT THIS STAGE THAT WE SHOULD BE SO UNSUCCESSFUL AS TO GET TO
THE LAST RESORT BEFORE WE GET ANY MOVEMENT.
IS THAT WHEN YOU THOUGH THE IDEA UP?
MR KIRK OHl NO. WE ARE NOT ( INAUDIBLE) THE NEW ZEALAND
VIEW RELENTING IN ANY WAY. WE WANT THOSE TESTS TO CEASE. I
HOPE THAT FRANCE WILL REALISE WHAT DAMAGE IT IS DOING TO THE
REPUTATION OF FRANCE TO CONTINUE THE TESTS AND WILL CEASE THAT
PARTICULAR PROJECT, BUT I THINK IT'S PUTTING THE CAR BEFORE
THE HORSE TO START FIGHTING FROM THE LAST DITCH. WE WANT TO
START A BIT EARLIER THAN THAT.
HAS THERE BEEN ANY ACTION OR COMMUNICATION WHICH SUGGESTS
TO YOU POSITIVELY THAT FRANCE MAY IN FACT ACT UPON ITS PROPOSALS
TO GO AHEAD AND HOLD THE TESTS?
MR KIRK NO, AND I'M BOUND TO' SAY WE HAVE HAD NO RECENT OR
EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATIONS THAT IT WILL CONTINUE. SO AT THIS
STAGE IT IS AN OPEN QUESTION.
Q-IN THE EVENT OF IT BEING NECESSARY TO GO TO THE INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTIC AND THE APPEAL BE DONE TO GET AN INJUNCTION
TO RESTRAIN IT WHAT IS THE LAST RESORT AS AUSTRALIA **( ZINAUDIBLE)
MR WHITLAM WE SOUGHT OUT SEVERAL CONTINGENCIES, YES, BUT I
DON'T WANT TO STATE WHAT THEY ARE. 
MR KIRK I MIGHT ADD TO THAT IF I COUL). WE'RE ATTRACTED TO THE
PROPOSITION OF GOING TO THE INTERNATIONAL C: OURT BECAUSE TO SMALL
COUNTRIES THE RULE OF LAW IS TREMENDOUSLY IMPORTANT AND IT OFFERS
ONE AVENUE OF ENDEAVOUR WHICH ALSO HIGHLIqHTS THE ATTACHMENT TO
THE RULE OF LAW IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. AND SMALL NATIONS
THE WORLD OVER ARE TREMENDOUSLY DEPENDENT ON THE RULE OF LAW.
THIS HAS CONSIDERABLE ATTRACTION AS FAR AS WE ARE CONCERNED*
WAS THERE ANY DISCUSSION OF YOUR IDEA LAST YEAR,
MR KIRK, OF YOUR HOLDIN~ G A CONFERENCE-OF ALL AFFECTED
COUNTRIES NOTABLY AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, THE ISLAND
TERRITORIES AND SOUTH AMERICAN COUNTRIES?
MR KIRK YES, AS AN APPROACH, AND IT HAS NOT BEEN RULED OUT.
WAS THAT CANVASSED THOUGH IN YOUR TALKS WITH MR WIIITLAM?
MR KIRK OH YES.
WHAT'S YOUR POSITION ON THAT MR WHITLAM? DO YOU SUPPORT
THE CONCEPT OF HAVING A SOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE ON THE TESTS?
MR WHITLAM I THINK THIS IS QUITE AN APPROPRIATE METHOD. AS
I SAY, WE DON'T WANT TO CONCED THAT FRANCE WILL NOT FALL INTO
LINE WITH THE OPINIONS EXPRESSED BY EVERY COUNTRY WITHIN
THOUSANDS OF MILES OF THE TESTS, OR THAT THE STEPS WHICH WE
HAVE IN MIND IN THE WORLD CO URT WOULDN'T SUCCEED IN PREVENTING;
FRANCE FROM GOING AHEAD WITH THEM IF SHE WANTED TO. WE DON'T
WANT TO ASSUME THAT FRANCE WILL CONTINUE TO DEFY WORLD OPINION
OR, IF IT CAME TO THAT, TO DISREGARD THE WORLD COURT.
Q9-WHAT MAKES YOU THIINK( THAT FRANCE MIGHT CHANGE ITS MIND NOW
AFTER IT HASN'T AFTER ALL THE PRESSURES OF THE PAST?
MR WHITLAMD WELL, FRANCE DID CHANGE HER MIND ONCE BEFORE ON
NUCLEAR TESTS. SHE DID CONDUCT THEM MORE THAN TEN YEARS AGO
IN THE SAHARA, AND THE AFRICAN NATIONS WHICH HAD BEEN HER
COLONIES SECURED SO MUCH SUPPORT IN THE UNITED NATIONS THAT
FRANCE DISCONTINUED IN THE SAHARA AND OF COURSE BROUGHT THEM TO
OUR HEMISPHERE. BUT THEY WERE DISCONTINUED THROUGH POLITICAL
ACTION IN THE SAHARA.
IN PRACTICAL TERMS DO YOU THINK YOU HAVE ANY HOPE OF
PERSUADING THEM NOT TO CONTINUE?
MR WHITLAM YES. THAT THERE WERE NOT TESTS IN 1971 I THINK
IT WAS... THERE IS QUITE A CHANCE AFTER ALL NOT EVERY
FRENCHMAN SUPPORTS THIS COURSE.
THE COMMUNIQUE REFERS TO '' FAILING, SUCH AN ASSURANCE'
BUT IT DOESN'T SEEM TO BE QUITE SPECIFIC ABOUT SIMPLY AN ASSURANCE
TO GIVE UP THE TESTS CINAUDIBLE).. PA; E 6, '' THE PRIME MINISTERS
HAVE DECLARED THE GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION, FAILINQ SUCH AN
ASSURANCE'". IT DOESN'T SEEM TO BE QUITE CLEAR FROM THE WORDING
WHAT THE ASSURANCE SPECIFICALLY WAS THAT YOU SOUGHT. 
MR WHITLAM THAT THEY WOULD NOT GO AHEAD.
THAT IS IN FACT THE ASSURANCE THAT YOU SEEK?
MR KIRK I THINK IF YOU GO TO THE FIRST PARAGRAPH OF THAT SECTION
TO GET THE MEANING OF THAT " THEY EMPHASISED THAT THEIR
OPPOSITION EXTENDED TO ALL FORMS OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS TESTING BY
WHATEVER NATION AND REAFFIRMED THE OBJECTIVES OF A SUSPENSION
OF ALL SUCH TESTING AND THE CONCLUSION OF A COMPREHENSIVE TEST
BAN TREATY''. I THOUGHT ALSO IT MIGHT HAVE RELATED TO THE WORDS '' APPEALED
IN PARTICULAR TO FRANCE TO APPRECIATE THE SPECIAL DECREE"'.
WELL, IF THE ASSURANCE IS SIMPLY THE APPRECIATION OF FRANCE,
CONCEIVABLY WE COULD SAY, '' YES WE APPRECIATE THAT...''
MR WHITLAM WE WILL STILL GO AHEAD ( GARBILED CONVERSATION
INAUD IBLE)
Qe THE ASSURANCE IS SIMPLY TO STOP TESTS?
MR WHITLAM YES.
YOU REFER TO HAVING CONTINGENCY PLANS. BY
DO YOU MEAN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND OR AUSTRALIA?
MR WHITLAM AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.
YOU'VE DISCUSSED CONTINGENCY PLANS AND AG4REED?
MR WHITLAM YES.
Q. YOU SAY YOU'VE GATHERED SOME SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION. CAN
YOU SAY WHEN YOU GATHERED THAT?
MR KIRK IT'S BEEN GATHERED OVER A PERIOD OF YEARS BECAUSE
THOUGH THE SOUTH PACIFIC THE D6S. I. R. HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN
MONITORING; THE GATHERING OF INFORMATION.
CAN YOU SAY WHAT THE CONCLUSIONS OF YOUR SCIENTIFIC
INVESTIGATIONS ARE?
MR KIRK I'M NOT IN A POSITION TO BE ABLE TO QUOTE YOU THE
DETAILS OF THAT BUT I AM TOLD THAT THE INFORMATION IS HELD IN
THE VOLUME OF ( INAUDIBLE) IN* RESPECT TO ( INAUDIBLE).
MR WHITLAM, I WONDER IF YOU COULD GIVE US SOME COMMENT ON
YOUR ATTITUDE TO THE FUTURE OF NEW REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS.
YOU REFERRED TO ASEAN. YOU DON'T MENTION THE FUTURE OF ASPAC
AND I WONDER IF YOU HAVE ANY COMMENT ON THE TWO GOVERNMENTS'
ATTITUDE TO ASSOCIATION WITH EITHER OF THOSE BODIES.
MR WHITLAM IT'S TRUE WE DO SAY QUITE AN AMOUNT HERE ABOUT OTHER
REGIONAL BODIES. WE DISCUSSED ALL OF THESE BODIES, BUT LET ME
GO OFF ON A COMMENT OF MY OWN. THE GREAT FAULT OF ASPAC NOW IS
THAT IT INCLUDES REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CHIANG KAI-SHEK REGIME
ON THE BASIS OF ITS CLAIM TO BE THE SOLE LEG.' AL GOVERNMENT OF
CHINA. CLEARLY SOME MEMBERS OF ASPAC WOULD N iOT ACCEPT THAT
CLAIM. JAPAN DOESN'T, NEITHER1 NEW ZEALAND NOR AUSTRALIA. IN
NO CIRCUMSTANCES ONE WOULD EXPECT THAT SOME CHANGES OF
MEMBERSHIP SHOULD TAKE PLACE OR SOME ADDITIONS TO MEMBERSHIP.
THE ADVANTAGE OF ASPAC TO GIVE THE POSITIVE ASPECT IS THAT
IT IS THE ONLY ORGANISATION WHICH HAS ( INAUDIBLE) BUT ASIAN
OR WEST PACIFIC MATTERS, AND IT'S THE ONLY ONE WHICH INCLUDES,
JAPAN AND NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA. 
Q. WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE CHINA AS AN ADDITION?
MR WHITLAM WELL TECHNICALLY, IN THE SENSE THAT CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S
GOVERNMENT CLAIMS TO BE THE GOVERNMENT OF CHINA, SOME PEOPLE
WOULD SAY THAT CHINA IS A MEMBER* I WOULD THINK THAT CHINA
SHOULD BE IN THE TERMS IN WHICH JAPAN AND NEW4 ZEALAND AND
AUSTRALIA RECOGNISE THE SITUATION NAMELY, THAT THE GOVERNMENT
IN PEKING IS THE SOLE LEGAL GOVERNMENT OF CHINA. BUT AFTER ALL
THERE ARE OTHER COUNTRIES TOO WHICH SHOULD BE INCLUDED. THE
IDEAL WOULD BE TO NOT ONLY INCLUDE JAPAN, AUSTRALIA AND NEW
ZEALAND IN ASEAN BUT THE WHOLE OF THAT EAST COAST OF ASIA..
I DON'T THINK ONE OUGHT TO ASSUME THAT THIS COULD BE A MILITARY
PACT. THE DAYS OF MILITARY PACTS ( INTERRUPTION) MUTUAL ASSISTANCETHE
WORDING THERE COVERS THIS SITUATION YOU RAISE ABOUT ASPAC IN
PART ICULAR.
MR WHITLAM CAN I ASK YOU A QUESTION ABOUT THE CHAPTER IN
THE COMMUNI1QUE ON TRAVEL. DOES THAT MEAN THAT THE RESTRICTIONS
ON THE ENTRY OF NEW ZEALANDERS OF ASIAN AND PACIFIC ISLAND
ORIGIN WILL NOW BE LIFTED?
MR WHITLAM YES.
Q. IS THERE ANYTHING TO STOP SAY AN INFLUX OF PACIFIC ISLANDERS
INTO AUSTRALIA FROM NEW ZEALAND?
MR KIRK IT WILL DEPEND OF COURSE FIRST ON THEIR BEING NEW
ZEALANDERS* I THINK THAT THE DISTINCTION THAT OUGHT TO BE SEEN
IN THIS, AND ONE THAT REALLY TROUBLES US A GREAT DEAL IN THIS
COUNTRY, WAS ( INAUDIBLE), AND THE VOLUNTARY ACTION OF AUSTRALIA
ELIMINATING THID DISTINCTION IS THAT OUR CONCERN REVOLVED ABOUT
THE DISCRIMINATION OF ONE NEW ZEALANDER TO ANOTHER. IT'S
NOT A QUESTION OF HIS ORIGIN, THE FACT WAS HE WAS A NEW ZEALANDER,
AND A CHINESE WHO WAS NEW ZEALAND-BORN, A PACIFIC ISLANDER WHO WAS
NEW ZEALAND-BORN AND A NEW ZEALANDER IN EVERY ASPECT WOULD BE
TREATED DIFFERENTLY FROM EUROPEANS. NOW THAT DISTINCTION HAS
REMAINED SO THAT IF THEY ARE NEW ZEALAND CITIZENS THE RULE
APPLIES, BUT NOT IF THEY'RE NOT.
DOES IT MEAN THAT THEY HAVE TO BE NECESSARILY NEW ZEALAND
BORN NOR?
MR MIRK NO, THEY HAVE TO BE NEW ZEALAND CITIZENS. BUT, FOR
EXAMPLE ASIANS WHO ARE DUTCHMEN ABOUT TO BE NATURALISED IF ANY
OF THE DUTCH MIGR~ ANTS SEEK TO BECOME NEW ZEALANDERS. BUT THEY
HAVE To TAKE UP NEW ZEALAND CITIZENSHIP To QUALIFY, OR OBVIOUSLY
THEY ARE NOT A NEW ZEALANDER.
CAN I ASK MR WHITL-AM NOW IF THERE IS ANYTHINfj TO STOP THE
NUMBER OF PACIFIC ISLANDERS BECOMING NEW ZEALAND CITIZENS
AND GOING TO AUSTRALIA.
MR WHITLAM IF THEY ARE NEW ZEALAND CITIZi:_ NS, OF IF THEY'RE
CITIZENS OF COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES WHO HAVE RESIDENT STATUS IN
NEW ZEALAND, THEN THEY CAN COME TO AUSTRALIA WITHOUT PASSPORTS
OR VISAS. 
MR KIRK THEY DON'T THINK THERE IS ANY GREAT FEAR ON THAT SCORE.
THE POINT I THINK YOU OUGHT TO UNDERSTAND IS THAT THE ISLAND
POPULATION IN NEW ZEALAND, THAT IS PEOPLE WHO COME FROM THE
ISLAND COUNTRIES TO OUR COUNTRY, ARE NOW NUMBERING SOMEWHERE
ABOUT 36,000 AT PRESENT. MOST HAVE SET THEIR ROOTS DOWN AND
MADE THEIR HOMES HERE AND ARE UNLIKELY TO SHIFT, BECAUSE IT IS
NOT ONLY A QUESTION OF THEIR NEW ZEALAND CITIZENSHIP BUT THE
MATTERS OF POLENYSIAN AFFINITY HAVING TO DEFINE CULTURALLY.
I THINK FOR A START THERE ARE 37,000 PEOPLE IN THIS CATEGORY,
AND THE IDEA THAT THIS BECOMES SOME SORT OF ROUND-ABOUT
WAY OF MIGRATING TO AUSTRALIA ISN'T REALLY FAIR TREATMENT OF WHAT
YOU PROPOSE. THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA HAS SAID TO ALL NEW
ZEALAND'S CITIZENS THAT THEY STAND EQUAL, AND WE ARE VERY HAPPY
ABOUT THAT.
I'D LIKE TO REFER BRIEFLY TO THIS QUESTION, IF I MAY SIR,
OF REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS. MR WHITLAM, AT THE LUNCHEON TODAY
YOU GAVE AN ASSURANCE THAT AUSTRALIA WOULD STRIVE TO THE UTMOST
TO SEE THAT ALL CONSTRUCTIVE AND VALID ASSOCIATIONS THAT ARE
INHERITED BE PRESERVED AND REINFORCE). WOULD YOU REGARD
SEATO AS A CONSTRUCTIVE AND VALID ASSOCIATION?
MR WHITLAM WELL LET'S SEE HOW IT DEVEILOPS. I HAVE USED THE
WORD '' MORIBUND" ABOUT IT IN THE PAST, AND SINCE THEN PEKISTAN
HAS DRAWN OUT OF IT, OR GIVEN NOTICE THAT IT'S GOING TO.
MR KIRK, ON PAGE 3, SECOND LAST PARA( RAPH, IS A REFERENCE
TO " GREATER INVOLVEMENT BY PARLIAHENTARIANS IN THE SOUTH
PACIFIC AREA". THERE IS NO SPECIFIC MENTION OF THE PROPOSED
PACIFIC COUNCIL WHICH IS PART AND PARCEL OF YOUR ELECTION
MANIFESTO AND WHICH IS DESIGNED ALSO TO SET UP SOMETHING WHICH
WOUNDS A BIT LIKE THE PARLIAMENT OF EUROPE., PARLIAMENTARIANS
CONSULTING, MEETING REGULARLY.
MR KIRK THE PARLIAMENT OF EUROPE HAS NO FORCE IN THE SENSE
THAT THE NORDIC COUNCIL HAS, AND WHAT WE PROPOSE IS RELATED
TO THE NORDIC COUNCIL.
CAN YOU DISCUSS THE PROPOSED PACIFIC COUNCIL, OR DID YOU
REACH ANY AGREEMENT ON IT WITH MR WHITLAM?
MR KIRK WELL WHAT WE'VE DONE IS TO ACCEPT THAT IN THE
PACIFIC MATTERS ARE NOT SETTLED' BY OUR DECISIONS ALONE, BUT
SETTLED BY OTHERS, AND THE CONFERENCE HAD BEEN DEVELOPING AS
A FORUM OF POLITICAL DISCUSSION, AND WHAT WE WILL DO IS OBVIOUSLY
DISCUSS THE PROSPECTS OF THE PACIFIC COUNCIL INSIDE THE CONTEXT...
IF THE PACIFIC CONFERENCE IS CAPABLE OF DEVELOPING ADEQUATELY
THEN THAT'S THE COURSE WE'Ll. FOLLOW. BUT IT'S NOT JUST FOR US
ALONE TO MAKE THAT DECISION. THE ISLANO COUNTRIES ALSO HAVE
VIEWS ON THIS, AND ITrS A MATTER OF PUTTING IN IDEAS AND WORKING
TOGETHER FOR DEVELOPMENT. IT'S ESSENTIAL IN MY VIEW: THAT
THERE IS A POLITICAL FORUM WHERE POLITICAL TOPICS MAY BE FREELY
DISCUSSED, IT IS VITAL THAT PARLIAMENT SHOULD BE REPRESENTED
INTHAT FORUM, BECAUSE IN DEMOCRACY, AS WE'VE SEEN IN TWO
IMPORTANT COUNTRIES RECENTLY, GOVERNMENTS HAVE CHANGED, AND I
THINK IF PARLIAMENTS ARE REPRESENTED THEN THERE IS A CONTINUITY
OF THE KNOWLEDGE AND A CONTINUITY OF EXPERIENCE INSIDE THE
POLITICAL FORUM WHERE THESE DISCUSSIONS TAKE PLACE, SO THAT
THE DOMESTIC POLITICAL CHANGES IN A COUNTRY DON'T NECESSARILY
MEAN RADICAL CHANGES. IN THIS SORT OF FORUM, YOU CAN PRESERVE
SOME SORT OF CONTINUITY OF APPROACH. WHEN I FIRST SUGGESTED
THE CONCEPT OF A PACIFIC COUNCIL THERE WAS NO POLITICAL FORUM
FOR DISCUSSION AND INDEED EVEN BEFORE IN WHICH THE HEADS
OF STATE DISUCUSSED MATTERS OF CONCERN TO THE REGION AND THE
INDIVIDUAL STATES DID NOT EXIST, AND THE PROPOSITION WAS
PATTERNED ON THE NORDIC COUNCIL WHERE THEY WERE ABLE TO
RATIONALISE DEVELOPMENT, THOUGH FOR EXAMPLE THE UNIVERSITY
BENEFITTED CONSOLIDATED CENTRALISED LIBRARIES AND THINGS OF THIS
KIND.
I I 
( CHANqE TO OTHER SIDE o: -rAPE)
WHAT-WE ARE CONCERNED IS DRAWING TOGETHER A BIT
CLOSER SO THAT WE CAN COORDINATE DEVELOPMENT AND SPEED) IT UP.,
COLD I ASK YOU WHAT YOU SEE AS AN INTERNATIONAL
REHABILITATION PROGRAMME IN INDO-CHINA?
MR KIRK WELL, WE ARE LIKE AUSTRALIA, EXCEPT THAT WHILE WE
TERMINATED MILITARY INVOLVEMENT IN THAT COUNTRY WE DIDN'T
WITHDRAW FROM THE INDO-CHINJA REG~ ION, AND CONSEQUENTLY, ON THE
DAY THAT WE ANNOUNCED THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE LAST OF OUR
MILITARY FORCES THERE, WE ALSO ANNOUNCED THAT WE WOULD DOUBLE
OVER THE NEXT FIVE YEARS OUR CONTRIBUTION FOR CIVILIAN
REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION., AND FURTHERMORE, BECAUSE WE
WANT TO SEE THE UNITED NATIONS HAVE AN EFFECTIVE AND CONSTRUCTIVE
ROLE AND TO TRYAND DO WHAT WE CAIN TO HELP IN I1-S EFFECTIVE
REHABILITATION AND STANDING OF WORLD-WIDE, HAVE UNDERTAKEN TO
PUT A SUBSTANTIAL PART OF THE ASSISTANCE WE'VE GRANTED TO THE
UNITED NATIONS SO THAT IT WILL GO BACK THR~ OUGH THAT BODY INTO
INDO-CHINA. SO WE HAVE ACCEPTED IN FACT'THAT WE SHALL PAY EXTRA
AND AMOUNT FOR CIVILIAN RECONSTRUCTION IN THE INDO-CHINA AREA.
DOES THIS INCLUDE NORTH VIET-NAM?
MR KIRK INDO-CHINA INCLUDES, LAOS, CAMBODIA, SOUTH VIET-NAM
AND NORTH VIET-NAM.
DO YOU EXPECT SIR, THAT, LIKE AUSTRALIA YOU MAY HAVE
ULTIM1ATELY REPRESENTATION OF SOM~ E FORM IN HANOI?
MR KIRK NO, WE HAVEN'T CONSID) ERED) FRANKLY, FOR A COUNTRY
AS SMALL AS NEW ZEALAND WITH THE RESOURCES WE H4AVE WE'VE HAD TO
FOLLOW FAIRLY STRICT PRIORITIES WHERE WE CAN OPEN NEW POSTS
AND WE HAVEN'T ACCORDED A HIGH PRIORITY TO THIS, BECAUSE AT
THE MOMENT WE ARE INVOLVED IN CONSIDERING THE OPENING OF A POST
IN ( INAUDIBLE). THERE ARE LIMITATIONS ON RESOURCES WHICH HAVE
POSED TIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
ENDS. PLEASE NOTIFY MIR WOOLCOTTOR MR HOYLE OF RECEIPT OF THIS
TRANSCR IPT*
WE REGRET THE LACK OF CLARITY. OFFICIAL TEXT I. S EXPECTED
TO BE AVAILABLE FROM MR KIRK'S OFFICE APPROXIMATELY 1000 HOURS
LOCAL TIME 23 JANUARY. WE WILL CABLE THAT AS SOON AS
AVAILABLE U1NLESS YOU ADVI. SE OTHERWI-SE.
CCFM 110)
ENDS 230035LT
SHA 



pvT rzrnj NT 110.* 41
22 Janua-ry 10,73
YtLBU: RY ' TODOIIG1A VISIT
Tic 1rime ii-inister, ' JThitlam, anid the Federal Ninisteor
for Urban anrd R~ egional lievelopmcnt, 1. ir. Uren, will meet w-ith the
Premiers of i1S'. and Victoria-in conference at Albury n_. ext
Tliursday. Tie meeting will4 ho t he first step towrards fulfilling
Labor's election pledge to develop 1Llbury-' Jiodoniga as a reL! ional
crouTth centre. In his policy speec-hhMirl saia that Llbury-
' JTodonga had -all the ingredic-its for a successful ef-fort to
establish an~ othe1r inlar. d ci-% ty tesize olf Canberra. Lie pledged
that ho vad the new Ninister7 f" or Urban Aff airs would ha,-ve an
early meeting, witih the Premiers of i.. J* and Victoria to
initiate aprogroxmm-e for the developracnt of tile Llbury-WJodon[ ga
proj ect. The Deputy Premier of i1. S. W. and M1inister for Local
Gover-nnent, Sir Chiarles Cutler, the Hinister for
Deetrl-tion, M~ r. Fullr2 -thle Victorian ! Minister for Lo', al
Government, 14r. Hunt and the Mlinister for State Development,
Er. Byrne, will also be present. They will be accompanied by
senior State off-icials as advisers.
Thle meeting will also be attended by the Oecretary
of the niew-Comoneal1th Do-oartrIaent of Urban and : 2ecional
Development, 1M'r. Zv. Z. 1innsdown, theo Commis: rioner ol" tihe
Lational Urban and 2" egional Development Autho-rity, Sir John
Overall, and! thle Commissioner o-f the National Capital
Development Commiission, 1. r. ' JT. C. Andrews.
Tlhe m~ eeting will begin at 10.30 a. m. in. thie Dancuet
. oom of tile Llbury City ! all. An official lunchieon w-ill be
given by the Prime M-Ainister for State Einisto'rs and local
Government offL'icia-ls at-U thIe Provincial M-otel, ' Jodonga at 1.00 pm.
For all ( enquiries contact the Prime M--inister's Press
Office onl 73 1770, or M. r. 1harry Stein ( 11r. Uren's Yress Secretary)
on 73 2333 or at the Hotel Cannberra tonight.-



P22S3~ T~ iiiIT110. e 41
22 January 1c. 73
1LLBUT. Y J.' OD0iIG1A VISIT
The Prim. e I'inister, Hir. J. hitlan, a-nd thea Federal H-inisteor
for Urban and Regional Development, H1r. Uren, will meet with thle
Pprmiers of iIS~. and Victoria-in co-nfe" rence at 1,1bury ne. ixt
Thiursday. Thae meeting w-ill be the first step towrards fulfilling
Labor's election pledge to develop 1, lbury-\! odonga as a regional
growrth centkre. In his policy speech.-, 1: r. , Thitlam saicd tha,-t 1Llury-
-odong3a 1had all the ingredie-nts for a successful ef.' ort to
esta-blish aanother inadcity th1-e size of % Ca-nberra. ' To~ pledged
tkat 1he and the new 1-iniister: for Urban ki fai rs would have an
early meeting, with' the Premiers of iIZ~. and Victoria to
initUi ate pro cramle f or theo devel1oprmien of tile Llbury-Jodonga
project. The Deputy Premier of 11. S.-iJ. and I-Ainister for Local
Government, Sir Charles Cutler, thle IT. S. J. Hinister for
Decontrali;' DationI Hr0 Fuller, the Victorian Minister for Local
Government, 14r. Hunt a-nd the M4inister for Statue Development,
1' r. Dyrne, w'ill also be present. They will be accormpanied by
senior State of. 2icials as advisers.
The meeting, will alo e tended by the Cecretary
of the niew, Commonealth Doe), arti'll,-nt of Urban and -' eg,, ionrl
Develo-1ment, Lnsiiown, the Comrmis! rionor o.-f the
National Urb,-n and 2egional Development Authlority, Sir John
Overall, and thio Commis'sioner of the6 National Capital
Development Commu~ ission, 1Hr. 71T. C. Androws.
Tlhe meeting, will begin at 10.030 a. m. in thie Dancuet
2. oori of thle LAlbury City ' Hall. An official lunchieon w-ill be
given by the Prime 1M-inister for State ! Hiniszt-ors and local
Government officia~ ls at thle Provincial Hoel Tdog at
For all ' enquiries contoct the Prime Einister's Press
Office onl 73 1770, or r. Harry Stein (, Lir. Uren's Trress Secretary)
on 73 2333 or at the Hotel Canberra tonigh-'., 



l'' W
M 7 O0U NQ DATE
23 January 1973
AUSTRALIAN RATIFICATION OF NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFEATION
AND SEABED ARMS CONTROL TREATIES
0The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced
today that arrangements had been made for Australia to ratify two
Treaties relating to the control of nuclear weapons the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Seabed Arms Control Treaty.
Mr Whitlam said that instruments of ratification were being
deposited today by Australian representatives in the three depository
capitals, London, Washington and Moscow.
" This action fulfills a pledge I gave on behalf of the
Government in my first week in office," Mr Whitlam said.
" It reflects the Government's strong and unequivocal support
for efforts to check the spread of nuclear weapons, and for the
principles of arms control contained in the two Treaties."
Mr Whitlam said that to fulfill the principal requirement of
ratification of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Australia was
already negotiating with the International Atomic Energy Agency for
a Safeguards Agreement, which would provide practical arrangements to
prevent the non-peaceful use of nuclear material. 



P2. ESS STATEIiIT NO. 42
23 January 1973
TRIBUTE TO FORiME P2ESIDEiT LYTDON B. JOHNSON
Lyndon Johnson will be remembered as one of the great
reforming Presidents of the United States. Nothing should be
allowed to diminish the memory of this achievement.
He came to office in the most difficult and tragic
circumstances and assumed his great responsibilities with
valour and distinction. HIe went on to secure, in the Presidential
election in 1964, the greatest popular mandate in the history
of the Republic. Under his Administration, the 90th Congress
was among the most active in his country's history, with a
record of achievement and innovation in social and welfare
legislation unmatched in our generation.
President Johnson involved his country more deeply in
the Vietnam var than any other President. He was, in a real
sense, a victim of this disastrous conflict. Yet no one would
have welcomed more warmly the present steps towards a peaceful
settlenmt. Australians have vivid and cordial memories of his
visits to Australia in 1942, in October 1966, and in December
1967. He was the only American President to have visited this
country while in office. His presence at the memorial service
for the late Harold Holt was a signal demonstration of his
affection for the Australian people and his own high estimation
of the value of the Australian-American alliance.
On behalf of the Lustralian Government, I extend to his
family and to the American people our profound sympathy in the
loss they have sustained.
CA1IBE1RA. A. C. T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 23 JANUARY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: I haven't had time to see
today's Australian papers yet, so I am not sure what cover there was
given to the decision by the New Zealand Government at its Cabinet
meeting yesterday which I attended to help the Australian Government
get a start with a Dental Therapist Scheme in the schools a School
Dental Service as they call it in New Zealand. The sum total of it
is that they will agree to take 50 Australian students in March this
year and another intake of 50 in September. This follows the
announcement I made a week ago after our own Cabinet meeting that
we would be taking specific steps to accelerate the intake of preschool
teachers in this academic year. So, therefore, while we have
been frustrated in undertaking any steps this academic year to increase
the output of social workers or of youth leaders, we have succeeded
in taking the necessary steps in respect to school dental nurses and
pre-school teachers.
Today our Cabinet ratified the arrangements which I have been able
to make over the last week with the New Zealand Government and the New
South Wales Government to have a committee of inquiry to prepare a
National Compensation Scheme in Australia to provide compensation for
personal injuries including injuries sustained on the road, at work,
in the home, in the school or elsewhere. I want to thank very much
indeed the co-operation I have received from the Prime Minister of New
Zealand, the Attorney-General of New Zealand and the Chief Justice of
New Zealand and the Premier, Attorney-General and Chief Justice of New
South Wales. Because of that co-operation, we have been able to secure
the services, as members of this committee, of Mr. Justice Woodhouse,
from New Zealand and Mr. Justice Meares from New South Wales.
The third member of the committee will be Professor Patrick Atiyah,
Dean of the Faculty of Law at the Australian National University here
in Canberra. Mr. Justice Woodhouse was the Chairman of a Royal Commission which
in December 1967 brought down a report on compensation for personal
injury in New Zealand. It was a pioneering and epoch-making report.
It has been read with very great interest in all common-law countries,
and we are very fortunate to have Mr. Justice Woodhouse serving on our
committee. Mr. Justice Meares is the Chairman of the Law Reform
Commission of New South Wales. He is a member of the expert group on
road safety which was appointed by our predecessors. You will remember
the report it brought down last September on the road accident situation
in Australia, a national review.
Professor Atiyah is serving under Mr. Justice Meares on the New
South Wales Government's Consultative Committee on Motor Vehicle
Accident Compensation. He has given evidence to the House of
Representatives Select Committee on road safety.
These gentlemen are acknowledged throughout the English-speaking
world in every common-law country as being experts, innovators in this
field. There have been, as you will appreciate, negotiations by letter
and telephone on this subject with both the Prime Minister of New
Zealand and the Premier of New South Wales and, in particular, the
wording which I can read to you if you like of the proposed terms of
reference have been drafted by the New South Wales Attorney-
General as weli as myself. 
-2-
In fact the idea of having Mr. Justice Meares and Professor Atiyah
on the Commonwealth's committee of inquiry came from a letter which
the Premier of New South Wales sent to me at the beginning of the
month inquiring about the proposals that we were making for a national
compensation scheme.
Mr. Justice Woodhouse will come to Australia in about a fortnight's
time and he will confer in Sydney with Mr. Justice Meares and, I trust,
I haven't on this point had the opportunity today since the Cabinet rose
to speak with Professor Atiyah but I would expect that he would also be
able to be there with the two judges as they look at the terms of
reference. They will be invited to make any other suggestions to make
this report as complete and helpful as possible and it is quite likely
that at that time they will be able to make some preliminary
arrangements for the conducting of the inquiry, and where they should take
evidence and from whom. The other members of the New South Wales
committee will be invited to give evidence to this committee and, no
doubt, the advice and documents which they have already been able to
give will be very much in Mr. Justice Meares' mind as he takes part
in this inquiry with Mr. Justice Woodhouse and Professor Atiyah.
Now I can read the terms of reference if you like or you can get
them afterwards.
Well Mr. Walsh can give you the text of them afterwards.
Gentlemen; I very much appreciate, as I said at the beginning, the
co-operation of the New Zealand and the New South Wales Gover nments
and judiciary.
There were a couple of other decisions which Cabinet made.
one is to fix a price for the sale of the Nomad-aircraft. We
take quite a pride in the quality and the success which this Australian
aircraft has achieved. We will welcome purchases at $ 285,000 each.
Mr. Barnard can give you further details of these arrangements.
You will remember that in my policy speech I placed particular
emphasis on our desire to build up some basic industries in Australia
for which there is certain to be a great demand in Australia, light
and fighter aircraft was one subject, pipelines, rolling stock,
shipping were the others I mentioned.
Also we decided to defer the hearing of the application for a
second commercial broadcasting station licence in Canberra.
Senator McClelland, the Minister for the Media, reported to us that
there are quite serious deficiencies in the present act. There maybe
conditions laid down for the grant of a licence. It is extremely
doubtful if those conditions can be sustained if challenged, and we
believe that before any new licences are granted that the statutory
position should be clarified and re-enforced.
There is one other matter I should mention to you.
I am pleased to announce that arrangements have been made for
Australia to ratify today two treaties relating to the control of
nuclear weapons, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Seabed
Arms Control Treaty.
The first one, the N. P. T. you will remember was supported by the
Australian Labor Party over the last four years. 
-3-
We have said that not only should the treaty be signed which Australia
did after some hesitation but should be ratified. Well we are now
doing that. The instruments of ratification are being deposited today
by Australia's representatives in London, Washington and Moscow
the three depository capitals. This action fulfills a longstandin6
policy of the Australian Labor Party and the pledge, you will recall,
that ' I made in my policy speech before last year's elections. It
reflects my Government's strong and unequivocal support for efforts
to check the spread of nuclear weapons and for the principles of arms
control contained in both treaties. A press release on this matter is
being issued to you by the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Any questions?
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, may I ask you two related questions concerning
the French nuclear tests in the Pacific. Firstly, Sir, were you
disappointed that the Prime Minister of New Zealand didn't join you
in your proposed approach to the International Court of Justice. And
the second point is: you said during the election campaign that if
this approach failed the next step would probably be cessation of
relations with France. Does that still stand?
PRIME MINISTER: On the first one, the Prime Minister of New Zealand
has not declined I think that was your word to join in the Australian
approach to the International Court of Justice. The Prime Minister of
New Zealand has already said that he will make available to Australia
the considerable scientific data that New Zealand has collected on this
matter. It's quite probable that New Zealand can make out a stronger
case for nuisance in the legal sense nuisance arising from the
French tests than Australia can do. The Attorney-General of New Zealand,
Dr. Martyn Findlay, is awaiting the return of Senator Lionel Murphy,
our Attorney-General from London and Washington to concert further
approaches in this matter. Senator Murphy, as you know, has been
discussing this matter with likely witnesses and likely counsel in
London. Dr. Findlay will be taking an early opportunity to discuss
these matters with Senator Murphy and other matters which as you know
Senator Murphy has been raising in London. I never used the word in
the policy speech about cessation of diplomatic relations. I think I
used the word suspension. This is one of the contingencies. I want
to emphasise that we do not assume that France will in fact go ahead
with these tests. And furthermore if a favourable decision is given
by the World Court still less would we assume that France would not
obey the Court's decision.
Q. Prime Minister, on that question can we take firstly that the
ratification of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty is linked with
the possible approach to the World Court in the sense that it will
strengthen Australia's hand?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. It's part of a pattern that we will adopt to
strengthen all means of arms limitation not least nuclear arms
limitation. Q. Well, sir, New Zealand I understand one of the contingencies
mentioned was the possibility of sending w.. arships into the testing
zone if the tests go on. Has Australia ruled out any possibility
of joining such a move?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a contingency. Australia has not ruled
out co-operation in such a contingency. New Zealand, however, takes
the same attitude as Australia. She does not assume that France will
not heed the resolution of the General Assembly last November and
particularly any decision by the World Court. 
Neither country assumes that France will carry out further nuclear
weapons tests in our hemisphere.
Q. Sir, on a different subject, there are suggestions that the
submissions to the late Mr. Justice Moore in the Steel Price Inquiry
will not be made public. Does this procedure meet with your eicpressed
hope, for open government and for a public prices justification and
in answering this question, I wonder whether you might go on and tell
us whether you received any applications for similar inquiries from'
other industries and would you expect to, and would you like to?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't heard any more about the B. H. P. matter which
Mr. Justice Moore is reporting upon since last Friday. I don't know if
there has been anything further on this matter. I haven't got the
letter to Mr. Justice Moore with me. My memory is that we said that he
could conduct the inquiry in any way he saw fit, and my memory is that
he made a public statement saying that he would be sitting on one day
in public when any interested persons could make oral submissions to
him.
And I think this also involved oral submissions on written submissions
which had been made to him. So whether these documents are made public
before Mr. Justice Moore makes his report depends on Mr. Justice Moore.
Furthermore, whether he refers to them in his report, of course,
depends on him. Or if he incorporates them, or quotes them in his
report. But the report will be public. There has been a letter from
another company. I discussed what the reply should be with Mr. Crean
and I haven't seen the reply I imagine it's been sent but perhaps
I shouldn't say any more until I know whether it was sent or what
suggestions or responses were made in it.
Q. You might answer which company, if you can, sent the letter to
you and if you've replied to it, and I'd like to know whether the
Government is going to put its own submission to Mr. Justice Moore
on these?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, we hadn't prepared a submission last Friday.
I don't know what the position is since then as I told you. I think
the company's name was mentioned, wasn't it? Will you wait has
it been mentioned?. . the name hasn't been mentioned, so I won't give
you the name.
Q. On the same subject, it's been suggested that the B. H. P. inquiry
is going to be somewhat self-defeating simply because if you want Mr.
Justice Moore to report as quickly as you've suggested you won't really
have time to do much more than look over the B. H. P. books and the third
term of reference of any other material he considers relevant is really
quite meaningless in this context. Could you comment on that, and is
it possible that although obviously you want to get this inquiry
completed quickly, you might have a second run at it over a longer and
more comprehensive look at B. H. P. and the steel industry in general
before the next application for a price increase?
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen, I frankly didn't expect that you'd be
asking questions still on this matter because it was announced I think
on Friday week and we did have a press conference last Tuesday and I
haven't got the letter in front of me. I do remember some criticisms
such as you've stated. I don't believe that anything but good can come
out of Mr. Justice Moore's inquiry. His report clearly it can't be
as effective as a report by a standing statutory commission, but it is
the first time that any company has agreed to have such an inquiry
that the Government has been able to provide such an inquiry. 
It will be open to the tribunal to look at the steel industry in the
light of everything that has transpired in the last month and between
then and the functioning of the tribunal itself. I don't think I used
the word tribunal I should have used the word tribunal. It will be
open to the tribunal to take all these things into account, including
the matters that Mr. Justice Moore is inquiring into and reporting on.
But, unequestionably, Mr. Justice Moore's report will be very helpful
to the Government in framing the legislation.
Q. Sir, did Cabinet consider the question of export incentives to
manufacturers, which are worth about $ 90 million a year and do you
feel that these should be retained?
PRIME MINISTER: Cabinet has not considered this matter. I'll express
a collective view if and when the matter is considered.
Q. Sir, did Mr. Kirk approach you in New Zealand and ask you to modify
your stand on the transit through Australia of the South African Rugby
team to New Zealand?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. It wasn't mentioned at all?
PRIME MINISTER: There was no mention about any modification of the
Australian Government's policy in this matter none at all.
Q. Are you agreeable to modify your stand, before that you wouldn't
allow them transit through Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Not at all.
Q. You won't modify it?
PRIME MINISTER: No. We will not condone the South African Government's
policies of apartheid in any form.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, looking beyond the inquiry into the national
compensation case would it be envisagel that this would replace Third
Party Insurance or be in parallel withiThird Party Insu] rance?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter for the committee to inquire into
and report on. As you', 1ll see from the suggested terms of reference,
it is being asked to look into the question whether rights under the
scheme should be in substitution for all or any rights now existing.
The Commonwealth Parliament if I may venture an opinion myself
would not be able to pass laws which would preclude negligence actions
in the Courts of the States. The Co* m monwealth Parliament can, however,
under the social services paragraph of Section 51 inserted at the
referendum in 1946 and, I hope, under the insurance paragraph which
has been in the Constitution from the outset be able to provide
attractive alternatives to such expensive, incomplete, time-consuming
procedures as actions in court for injuries arising from accidents
on the roads ( Third Party) or at work ( Workers' Compensation).
Therefore, if I may hazard an opinion, it is likely that the
Commonwealth's National Comppnsation Scheme will make other forms of
compensation redundant. 
-6-
Q. Sir, is the Commonwealth intervening or contemplating intervening
in the oil tanker dispute in New South Wales in view of the fact that
a national stoppage is being threatened?
PRIME MINISTER: The oil tanker dispute of course is one which only
concerns governments insofar as they've been tardy, in fact irresponsible
in bringing in legislation Commonwealth and State to cover this
situation. The dispute arises through a demarkation or
representational issue this quite absurd position that we have in
Australia where unions can be separate legal entities in the Federal
arbitration system and in four of the State arbitration-. systems
New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia.
I've been appalled to see yet another instance such as this arising
from this situation. The Labor Party's commitment as you'll know from
the platform, as amended at Launceston in June 1971, is to pass laws
for the integration of organisations registered under the Federal Act
and their branches registered under State legislation, and the
registration of a Federal registered union or its branch under any
relevant State legislation. You might remember that Mr. Cameron and I
have raised this matter throughout the lifetime of the last Parliament
in questions and, in Mr. Cameron's case, in speeches. I'd like to
quote from the judgment of the Commonwealth Industrial Court on
February 1969 in the leading case of Moore and Doyle: " A system of
trade union organisation is urgently needed which would enable the
one body to represent its relevant members inh both the Federal and
State arbitration systems and it should be possible for Federal and
State authorities to examine the question whether organisations and
trade unions can be provided with such a system. We'have decided to
refer our judgment in this matter and these remarks to the Attorney-
General for the Commonwealth in the hope that it may be possible after
consultation between Commonwealth and State Attorneys-General, the
trade unions both Federal and State and other interested Government
authorities to arrange for the examination of the important
organisational matters to which we have referred". That was a unanimous
judgment by Chief Judge Spicer, Mr. Justice Smithers and, I think,
Mr. Justice Kerr, now Chief Justice of New South Wales, and I regret
to say that Federal and State Governments have not given the necessary
legislation to their Parliaments, and in particular, as I understand
from inquiries I've made this afternoon through Mr. Cameron, New
South Wales and Queensland are objecting to giving State legislative
status to unions registered under the Commonwealth system. ' I have it
in miild to communicate with the two Premiers About this matter which
has been outstanding for four years, come one month and two days from
now. South Australia has passed some legislation which helps quite
considerably. The Commonwealth can not pass legislation which covers
the whole position by itself. We'll do what we can. But frankly,
if occurances like this are to be avoided in the future, then the New
South Wales and Queensland Parliaments have to pass laws as well as the
Australian Parliament and we will see if we can do something about it.
There is a meeting of the Labor Ministers Australian and State
a month from today when another attempt will be made to deal with this
subject then. But it's my hope that I'll be able to write to the
Premiers well before that, pointing out that the public is suffering
once again from the failure in our Federal system of the State
Parliaments to co-operate with the Commonwealth. 
-7-
Q. Sir, when you mentioned the decision on the fixing of the price for
the Nomad aircraft, you mentioned it in-the context of an earlier
statement of your own the fostering of production of areas in which
I think you said there would be clearly local demand and you
mentioned rolling stock, pipelines, shipping and fighter and light
aircraft. Will policies relating to. producti ' on in these areas be
subj'ect to strict analysis in terms of the economic efficiency of
Australian production?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope so.
Q. And particularly in the shipping industry. will you recommit
the former Government's decision its second, decision to go against
the Tariff Board Report on the Australian shipbuilding industry?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to comment.. on'th e-second one the
shipbuilding. I'd like to talk to Mr.* Jones About this. I think he
is considering this matter. But I am unable to commit him and it's
not been discussed in the Cabinet. Can I give you the instance of
rolling stock?
There can be no question that the metropolitan railways in Australia
are becoming less attractive because of ' the'age of the rolling stock.
I forget the percentages, but it is something like 50 per cent of the
rolling stock in Sydney and Melbourne is over 40 years old. In one
State ( I think it's Victoria) nearly half the rolling stock dates from
the First War and then we suddenly find a panic about wanting to order
new rolling stock. There is a continuing need for decent rolling stock,
signalling equipment and so on in the metr . opolitan railways and it will
be our objective to consult with the States in having a proper program
to see that there are carriages built-suitable for all these metropolitan
systems on an efficient, competitive basis for a continuing program.
It's quite absurd for a State Government all of a sudden to call tenders,
maybe only in its own State and without any consultation with the other
States or any consideration of tenderers in other States. We all know
that there is a crying need to have replenishment of all this rolling
stock and we ought to have a program in which all the authorities
running the railways collaborate. I myself believe that that would be
probably the Commonwealth.
Q. Well, Sir, if I may ask a supplementary question to that on that
specific issue of the rolling stock could you be a little bit more
precise about what you mean by a program. Is this some Common-. zealth
aid to companies or are you envisaging... what ' do you have in mind?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, no. The Bureau of Transport Economics has
made a report you remember on some of the metropolitan railways systems.
I think they're the systems of Sydney,. Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth.
The Victorian Government didn't give enoug~ h information about
Melbourne's metropolitan system. One of lhe features should be rolling
stock and I would believe that the Bureau of Transport Economics, which
has reported on the age of the rolling stock, should make recommendations
on a program for adequate vehicles to meet the demand, particularly
the demand, if rail transport becomes more attractive and competitive.
For instance, it is quite likely that we would be able to have a tenyear
program to see that all rolling stock in the metropolitan areas
was at least built since the last war. But there are several companies
which would be attracted to tool up for sudh a program in several of
the States and this could I can't myself see why the rolling
stock can't be effectively planned on the basis of all the State
capitals. 
-8-
Q. Sir, in view of the failure of one of the engines on the two-engine
BAC-111 to New Zealand on Friday, have you considered getting an
aircraft with more engines a larger aircraft for Prime Ministerial
use and overseas trips?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well these things don't worry me of course.
I've flown as you know for so many years I'm quite inured to these
things.. The most distressing incident I can remember was coming from
Sydney in a Friendship when both motors stopped. And there was
another, I believe that some of you will recall, going across Bass
Strait when all the motors in a Viscount stopped a minister believed
to be at the controls. But nobody could remain unmoved at the
reaction of the young men and women who were jravelling with me.
They have their lives before them. I have an obligation to them and
to those who depend upon them and those whom they may hereafter beget.
There were some persons of more mature years advisers from the
Public Service I thought that the Treasury would cop . anything, but
I was distressed how they went to pieces under this stress. I did my
best to comfort them. Ladies and gentlemen; this is too distressing
for me to discuss further. It's enough for me to say that I conducted
myself with the usual savoir faire and aplomb. The only thing that
distresses me is that so many of you gentlemen that were proposing
to come with us to Djakarta in this type of aircraft have cancelled
your reservations. I will consider the matter. But I can say that
there was a Defence representative with us and the emergency
concentrated his mind wonderfully on this incident.
Dr. Johnson would be proud of him. / 9 
9-
Q. Prime Minister, I'd like to go back to the oil dispute.
You've mentioned long-term solutions to this type of problem
but will you be taking any action in the short-term to get these
men back to work?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not contemplating any sudden ad hoc approach
on this matter. It is a basic fault in our legislation, one which
the Commonwealth Industrial Court highlighted and stressed in very
strong terms which I quoted to you nearly four years ago. Well, the
new Australian Government will be doing something about it and asking
the State Governments which are in default to do something about it
too. It is a very clear example where the public have been let down
by inaction for four years.
Q. Prime Minister, on your Cabinet announcement regarding the
commercial broadcasting licence in Canberra, am I correct from the
way you expressed it, it seemed to me that you were saying that
you couldn't proceed with it because Senator McClelland had indicated
to Cabinet that any decision would be subject to legal appeal and
that you were concerned that this legal appeal would perhaps be
successful. Is that a correct interpretation?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I didn't forecast it would be subject to legal
appeal but what I amn saying is that the Australian Broadcasting
Control Board has been reluctant, and many people would think ineffective,
in insisting upon conditions which it has laid down for
radio and T. V. licences because it believes, and I forget the name
of the trade body concerned but it's the organisation of commercial
radio stations, has given'legal opinions to the Board saying, ah, you
can't do that to us'. The Act is weak. Well, we want to oblige
them. We want to strengthen the Act.
Q. Sir, Mr Gordon Bryant, during his tour of northern Australia
just recently said that the Federal Government should take direct
responsibility for the Palm Island Aboriginal settlement.
PRIME MINISTER: He's quite right.
Q. The basic response of the Queensland Government to this is
PRIME MINISTER: Oh. It's all right. I haven't read the papers but
I know what it'll be.
Q. What they've said is basically that they'd be prepared to accept
this if the Commonwealth Government would take responsibility for
all Aboriginal settlements. Have you considered this or are you
likely to do this?
PRIME MINISTER: No, but I think it'd be a great improvement.
Q. You are likely to do this?
PRIM4E M4INISTER: Well, I haven't discussed it with Mr Bryant,
but we are prepared to take all action which is necessary or
desirable to discharge the obligations which the Australian people
imposed overwhelmingly upon the national Parliament in the
referendum in mid-1967. The national Parliament has the
obligation it certainly has the opportunity we believe it has
the obligation, to see that the Aboriginal residents of Australia
have every opportunity that the Australian people as a whole can 
10
make for them in their country.
Q. And this would include a direct Commonwealth financial
responsibility? PRIME MINISTER: Well, the Commonwealth can conduct any
reservations insofar as reservations are still an appropriate
form of advancement for Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
I don't want there to be any suggestion that this is a matter
of State sovereignty. That is garbage. The Australian Parliament
was given this responsibility. We intend to discharge it.
By the way, I'm told that this is being broadcast and I should
therefore make it quite plain that my references to my staff and to
my advisers on the Tasman crossing were completely facetious. They
didn't refer to any living persons.
Q. Sir, I hope this is non-political to the extent that
PRIME MINISTER: Oh I'm sure coming from you... Is Channel 9
taking this?
Q. To the extent that both sides of the Parliament are involved,
have you any views on the principle of employing close relatives on
personal staff, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: You mean Ministers' personal staffs?
Q. Not necessarily ministers, also the other side of the
Parliament as well.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I mean people who are ministers in a
government of any political complexion. I accept that your remarks
are completely bipartison and dispassionate.
Whom a Minister appoints, or any parliamentary office bearer
appoints to his staff is entirely a matter for him.
Q. I accept that Sir, but have you any views on the principle
of it?
PRIM4E MINISTER: No. I just state the only principle there can be.
In this case Ministers are given the right to appoint people of
their own choice and to sack people if they like and whom they
appoint and whom they sack is a matter for them.
Q. Prime Minister, last month you wrote to the Premier of..
PRIME MINISTER: I'm sorry, there's someone
Q. Oh. It's all-right he's my boss.
Q. May I continue, Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well I mean I don't want to come into any
of these industrial disputes
Q. Last month you wrote to the Premier of Tasmania, Mr Reece,
recommending an urgent joint Commonwealth/ State inquiry into the
preservation of Lake Pedder. Mr Reece has declined to join in that.
Do you personally believe it is still important that such an inquiry
be held? 
11
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to express any personal views
in these matters at all. I'll express a collective view. It
doesn't come within my own ministerial responsibility and if whenthis
matter is considered by the Cabinet I will express the Cabinet
view. Q. Sir, Mr Cameron, the Minister for Labour, has forecast that
unemployment will rise to a record 150,000 this month. Does the
Government consider that further economic stimulus is warranted?
PRIME MI1NISTER: I believe that if you want to have a more
significant answer on this matter you ought to discuss it with
Mr Cameron or Mr Crean in whose responsibilities this subject mainly
falls. The great difficulty which has emerged, perhaps I myself
can say is, that there can be a situation where economic conditions
in general are favourable but there is still a large number
unemployed by Australian or Western European standards, and there
is a particular difficulty of course in people of maturer years
getting another job if they lose one. And they can still remain
unresolved where general conditions are quite prosperous or buoyant.
Now it is this sort of matter where Mr Cameron and Mr Crean are
particularly giving their attention. They want to see that there
are retraining schemes made available in Australia such as there
are in many Western European countries Scandinavia in particularand
I think now in the United States. There are new structural
features about the unemployment situation.
Q. Sir, one questicn on staff again. Have you yet decided how
big the staff of the opposition should be. Have you approved any
staff arrangements there and if so can you tell us how you see the
proportions, the cut up say between the Liberal and Country Parties
and the D. L. P.?
PRIME MINISTER: I've only given a general attention to this since
our last Press Conference. I'm looking at the increased number and
status of the staff accorded to the 27 ministers in this Government
compared with the 27 ministers in the late Government and, I would
offer my present information is to offer to the non-government
parties in each House/ gimilar proportionate increase in numbers and
status of their staff. I can't at this stage make any suggestion
as to how this would be split up, but my general idea is that there
should be a similar increase in numbers in let me use the word
non-government parties. I don't want to be drawn into this argument
as to which party or parties constitute the Opposition.
Q. Sir, on that subject, you said that who a Minister appoints
to his staff is a matter for him alone but we, the taxpayers pay
the salaries, could I ask you the reasons for the appointment of
Professor Harry Messel as a part-time adviser to Senator Murphy at
I understand a salary of $ 11,000 a year with overseas trips as
optional extras?
PRIME MINISTER: Professor Messel is not a member of Senator
Miurphy's staff in the sense as are people about whom the previous
questions w. ere asklled. Professor Messel is in the same position as
any otner advisers. He is of course very well known in his
consideration and exposition of scientific matters and he has
been engaged by Senator Murphy to advise him on scientific matters
particularly of course the pending litigation about the French
nuclear tests. He is helping in finding witnesses in this case.
My memory is'that his fee is not what you say, but I don,' t know 
12
what it is. But anyway I shouldn't rely just on my memory of
what his fee is in this matter.
Q. To clarify that, Sir, are you saying that the appointment
is only while the fuss over the French tests lasts?
PRIM1E MINISTER: I think it's only for this year
Q. Because I would have thought it would be more appropriate
to advise Mr Morrison, the Minister for Science.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but the litigation is in the hands of the
Attorney-General.
Q. Sir, it's only a temporary appointment?
PRIME MINISTER: Well he's engaged for this year. There are a
great number of advisers that the Government engages in all fields.
This is one scientific adviser on litigation.
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen I think you have had a statement from
me on the death of President Lyndon Johnson. I don't know if you want
me to repeat it here.
Gentlemen, Lyndon Johnson will be remembered as one of the
great reforming presidents of the United States. Nothing should
be allowed to diminish the memory of his achievement. He came to
office in the most difficult and tragic circumstances and he assumed
his great responsibilities with valour and distinction. He went on
to secure in the Presidential election in 1964 the greatest plurality
in the history of the Republic. Under his administration the
Congress was among the most active in his country's history with a
record of achievement and innovation in social and welfare
legislation unmatched in our generation. In all such domestic
matters he was the greatest president since Franklin D; Roosevelt.
President Johnson involved his country more deeply in the Vietnam
War than his predecessors. He was in a real sense a victim of this
disastrous conflict yet no one would have welcomed more warmly the
present steps towards a peaceful settlement. Australians have vivid
and cordial memories of his visits to Australia in 1942, in
October 1966 :. tnd in December 1967. He was the only American President
to have visitel. this country while in office and he visited it twice
in office. His presence at the memorial service for the late Prime
Minister Harold Holt was a signal demonstration of his affection
for the Australian people and his own high estimation of the value
of the Australian-American alliance. On behalf of the Australian
Government I extend to his family and to the American people our
profound sympathy in the loss they have sustained.
Q. On that very question, is there any proposal by yourself, your
Ministers or members of the non-government parties to attend the
funeral?
PRIME MINISTER: At the moment I am inquiring to see what other
countries are doing. 



AL
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 176
23 January 1973.
APPOINTMENTS
The Executive Council has approved the following appointments:
Appointed to the Remuneration Tribunal:
Mr Justice Campbell
Mr Andrew Grimwade
Mr R. M. Porter ( General Manager, N. S. W. Government Insurance
Office)
Appointed to Home Loans Investment Corporation ( part-time):
Dr Patricia Apps, Phd. ( Cambridge), M. E. D. ( Yale), B. Arch.
Lecturer in Architecture Sydney University. Age: 32
Re-appointed to the Australian Film Development Corporation
Mr T. S. Duckmanton
Mr D. E. Brown
Mr Barry Jones
Appointed to the Australian Broadcasting Control Board
Mr W. L. C. Davies, manager of Southern T. V. Corp of Adelaide ( NWS9)
Mr H. Souter ( part-time member)
Appointed to the Industries Assistance Commission
Prof. Alan Grahame Lloyd ( as Commissioner)
Ms Hylda Rolfe ( as Commissioner)
Appointed as Director of the Australian Institute of Marine Science
Prof. Malvern Gilmartin
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 26 24 January 1973
CEASFIE IN VIET-NAM
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
made the following statement thi s afternoon welcoming President Nixon's
announcement of a ceasefire agreement in Viet-Nam.
" I am confident all Australians will rejoice at
President Nixon's historic announcement. The Australian
Government greets his statement with full approval andl
the deepest satisfaction.
I personally extend the warmest wishes to President
Nixon on an achievement which establishes him firmly in the
foremost ranks of modern statesmanship.
The conclusion of a ceasefire agreement is a
hopeful first step tovrards the goal of an eventual
reconciliation. between the contending forces in Viet-Nam.
Many months of patient and difficult negotiation will be
required before progress towards this goal can be achieved.
The divisions caused by years of hatred, bitterness and
mutual suspicion will add to the difficulties of an
already complex task.
As the fighting recedes, opportunities will
emerge for relief and reconstruction work in the devastated 
areas of Viet-Nam North and South and in Indo-China as a
whole. It is in this field that the Australian Government
sees itself as making a particular contribution.
It is still too soon for detailed aid programmes
and machinery to have been worked out but as I agreed with
Mr Kirk in Wellington at the weekend, Australia, along with
New Zealand, is prepared to take part in an international
rehabilitation programme throughout Indo-China. We stand
ready to subscribe on a generous basis to international
efforts to restore and develop all the ravaged countries
of Indo-China. Indeed, it is to be hoped that, as the
energies of the people, particularly in South and North
Viet-Nam, become more and more engaged in the tasks of
peaceful reconstruction, so there will be a movement
from antagonism to reconciliation and cooperation throughout
the whole area." j 



FRESS STAT-I-NT O. 43
24 January 1973
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME M. INISTER OF AUSTIALIA, i
iTIITLAI, IND TIE CHIEF MIIISTEiR OF PLPUA I. Z. GUIIT2EA,
ILMR. SOMl2E
PAPUA IT] 7 GUIiEA FISHIG . IGHTS GULF OF CAIIPEHITARIA
The Australian Prino Minister, iMr. TJhitlam, and the
Chief Iinister of Papua New Guinea, ir. Somare, today issued
the following statement concerning their discussions in
Canberra on 17 January 1973.
The Chief Minister had raised with Iinisters of the
previous Australian Government the question of the rights of
the Papua Iew Guinea Government to legislate on its omw behalf
on fisheries matters, -le had also discussed arrangements for
the management of the f isheries resources in the waters between
Australia and PaDua HTew Guinea. On that occasion Ministers had
agreed that both countries must benefit from joint management
arrangements and mutual co-operation in the exploitation and
conservation of the fisheries resources of the seas which lay
between them. At that time Miinisters also agreed to the following
arrangements: delegation of licensing powers to the P. I. G. Government
subject to agreement on interim arrangements to apply
after the delegation of licensing powers and until the
transfer of complete powers;
S work to be commenced on the preparation of separate
fisheries legislation for Papua Hew Guinea. Review
of the amendments currently proposed to the Commonwealth
Fisheries Act with a view to exclusion of Papua New
Guinea from the provisions of the Act;
conclusion of interim arrangements to be set down in an
exchange of letters between the two governments,
The Papua Neu Guinea Government had then as ked that the
interim arrangements include the following provisions:
Papua Hew Guinea to license an appropriate number of
prawn catcher and carrier vessels to fish in all
proclaimed waters outside the Declared Fisheries Sone;
and agreement by all Papua TeTr Guinea vessels licensed under
above to comply with Australian conservation and
management measures as applied to other Australian
vessels licensed under the Commonwealth Fisheries Act. 
-2-
SFollowing those discussions the Chief M1inister had now
raised with the Prime Miinister the question of rights of access
for Papua iTew Guinea fishing vessels into the Gulf of Carpentaria,
and claimed that under present administrative arrangements Papua
Hev Guinea vessels were being denied access to international
waters because the restrictive provisions of the Commonwealth
Fisheries Act continued to be applied against the interests of
Papua IHTo Guinea.
The Prime Minister has agreed that there appeared to be
an anomally in the situation, and that Australia had a trusteeship
responsibility to promote the economic viability of Papua ilew
Guinea by providing reasonable assistance to Papua HIew Guinea
industries, and saw grounds for a change of Australian policy
to allow additional access to the Gulf of Carpentaria for an
agreed number of Papua eow Guinea fishing vessels. The Chief
Minister suggested that Papua Iew Guinea be granted the right
to license twelve Papua Hew Guinea vessels to operate in the
Gulf of Carpentaria from the commenconent of the 1973 prawning
season. The Prime'Minister agreed that that would be an
appropriate number, and arrangements are being made to put
this decision into effect.
The Prime Minister and the Chief Minister agreed that
Papua Nev Guinea fishing vessels operating in the Gulf of
Carpentaria would remain in international waters outside the
Australian Declared Fishing Zone ( 12 miles offshore) and would
observe conservation and management measures as applied to
other vessels licensed under the Australian Fisheries Act.
. CAIi7Za~. 1. C. T. 



PK-2CS 0" 0TklATl ~ IT 110
24 January 1973
FtYN7DMAL 02 F02i"-'-PR: 2SMEITT OF 1123 US
L
The Leader of the G. overnrmont in -Uile Sc-nAe, and the
Lttorney-General, SIenator L. Z. I.. rphy, will represent
the Prirmei Iliinister, hr. -Thitlam, at'U a fumeral service for
thel late Lyndon Johnson in ' Jash--in,,, ton tomorrow ( Thursday,
January). Senator li1urphy is due in the United States today
after a visit to the United Kingdom.
C111 -22A. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 44
24 January 1973
VISIT BY H. R. H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
The Prince of the Netherlands, who will be the guest of the
Government for his visit to Australia, will be given a ceremonial
welcome on-arrival at R. A. A. F. Base Fairbairn, at iioon on Thursday,
1 February. His Royal Highness and party will travel in a Netherlands
Government aircraft and make a short transit stop at Darwin and
an overnight stop at Townsville en route to Canberra.
They will remain in Australia until the morning of 8 February,
visiting Canberra, Hay, Melbourne, Sydney and Tamworth.
In Canberra, the Prince of the Netherlands will have talks
with the Prime Minister and the Treasurer and with the Secretary,
Department of Overseas Trade. He will also lay a wreath at the
Australian War Memorial and meet the local Dutch community at a
gathering at the Jamieson Centre.
In his role as President of the World Wildlife Fund the Prince
will visit and have talks at the C. S. I. R. O. Division of Wildlife
Research. The Royal party will leave Canberra on Saturday morning 3
February for Hay and stay overnight.
The Prince will arrive in Melbourne at 12 noon on Sunday, 4
February where his engagements include a visit to the Arthur Rylah
Institute for Environmental Research and the Sir Colin Mackenzie
Sanctuary at Healesville. He will also meet the Dutch community,
watch the Australian Show Jumping Championships as guest of the
Australian Equestrian Federation and attend a reception given by the
Government of Victoria.
The Prince will leave Melbourne for Sydney at 10.00 a. m. on
Tuesday, 6 February where his engagements include a luncheon with
businessmen, a meeting with members of the Dutch community, a
reception given by the Government of New South Wales and an
inspection of the joint Dutch-Australian Sand Dredging operationat
Botany Bay. His Royal Highness will visit a cattle stud at
Tamworth on. Wednesday, 7 February. 



r" 3
THE PiRIiME MIISTE'S P1S COIFERE~ iCE AT ALBURYS.
T ODOITGA T-HIUSDAY, JAiJUAY 25, 1973
PRIi IM. IiISTE2: Thanks ladies and gentlemen.
Q. Your figure of 300,000; was this in agreement with the Premiers;
would they have said that it may have been less?
PRIiE MINISTER: I think there was the difference between 250,000 and
300,000 which is minute in this context. The fact is that we all have
confidence that a very large inland city can now be created through
our co-operative efforts.
Q. Could you put a price on this development?
PRIME IIICTER IHo. I think one can take a general assessment that
development of a new city like this will cost less per head than a
development of Sydney or Melbourne to accommodate a similar number
of people. It costs Governments C10,000 to nut a new resident in
Cydney or Melbourne. It costs Governments ' 7,000 to put them in a
nev polace like this.
Prime Minister, in the Communique you say after the Governments
have examined the report of preliminary study. Have you set a date
for the start of that report and when you want its findings?
PRIIM MINIISTE2: The study may easily be done within a couple of
months we are informed.
Prime Minister, do you or are you able to estimate the cost of
the early studies of this particular project?
P21IM1 MINIST2J-: It is quite a small amount really a couple of
thousand dollars.
Till it be done by Government departments or will you get
outside opinions?
SIR ROB3RT ASKIN: It is being done by H. U. JR. D. A. but with the
co-operation of the Ctate Planning Authorities of Hev South Jales
and Victoria.
Q. Has the Commonwealth given any commitment that it will send
public servants Commonwealth public servants to live in the
Albury-Jodonga area?
PRI12 MINIT ZT: ITo. ' very Federal Department has been asked to report
on what number of public servants, in what sectors of the Federal public
service can be efficiently established in Albury-Jodonga.
Q. Is there any stage where that could possibly run to several
thousand public servants coming to live here?
PI MINTISTE: I think we can expect that there Aill be several
thousand public servants living in the designated area. / 2 
-2-
' Zir, has any cost been put on the acquiring of the land in the
area?
PPII1 MIHISTER: Io.
Sir, how quickly would you like the feasibility study to be
completed'-and the steps taken towards achieving this goal which
you decided on today?
PRIIi. M MIIST. R: Tell I think I have already said that it will probably
be done . rithinr two months. You will notice that the Ministers concerned
Ir. Uren, Mr. Fuller and ir. Murray-Dyrne can meet before there is any
legislation. They can do that straight away and, furthermore, the three
officials wiho will constitute the interim committee, they can meet
straight away. It is not necessary to pass legislation through the
three parliaments before the linisterial Council meets and operates
and before the Interim Officials Committee meets and operates.
0. Could you say, Sir, when you believe there will be 300,000 people
living in this area. IHow many years?
P-Ii. IIlTISTE: In my lifetime.
In about 25 years?
PRIi. E I: IIII: T2: You flatter me.
Q. Were there any discussions on other development regions in either
evw South . Tales or Victoria, like Eathurst or Orange?
P2IIM MIIIST2 In passing, yes. Sir Robert Askin and I are issuing
a statement about a feasibility study on the Bathurst and Orange region
in which the Commonwealth and lHew South Wales are sharing the cost.
2. Did Victoria go for any other development regions?
PRII' 1Ei lISI S: Ho, There was no specific commitment to any other
development regions. The great significance of this region in whose
heart we are meeting today is that it seemed a clear centre where there
was every prospect for success. Therefore, we could get the boosting
of morale to show that Governments, in fact, can create a great new
inland city at this time. It was also an area where you had two State
governments able to co-operate and the Commonwealth for various
historical and geographic reasons can also mak e a very significant
contribution, so this was an excellent place to start it. If this is
a success, as we all believe it will be, then there are good hopes of
success for other regions including inland Australia.
Your commitment to Orange-Dathurst, is this only in the
feasibility studies or is it in the development.
PrIIz MINISTER~: iTo, in feasibility studies. Te are anxious to know
the facts, and if the facts show that it is a good prospect then ' we
will be in it as a Commonwealth. 
I
Did Doew South Tales .:; ive you any feasibijlty jfactu's toC: ay onl
Bathust-Orange?
PRM2 ITOiI. S~
W Uill you be stop-. i---g t6he building of Commonwealth build: ings in
Sydney and Idclbourne before you ret ' he results of this feasibility
study? IIE M'IISTE112: ' Jell ire have already announiced that tLhe Strin, 2St-reet
project in 1.1lbourrne is being e-eaie and, as you knmow, the Public
J! orks Committee of tlhe Fee-oral Parliament rejected a proposal fLor a
7. Toolloornooloo projoct for Commonwealth public servants. This is
really another aspect but wi-here Common,, wealth buildings are to be siteed
is one o2 the terms of reference olfa Federal Cabinet committee at
this-moment. And we will, of course, bear in mind not only regional
centres such as Albjry_. Todongav but-also now cities new regional
centres in the existing,, metropolitan areas of Sydney and 1Kelbourne.
Ji nd Canberra?
P~~ ILZ. HIIT't Jl1 tt has al1 ready been done in Canberra.
U~ ill it ston, growth in Canberra?
P2i1J2i2 ITO . Canberra wrould now rgrow i. 2 theo Commonwealth never
undlertookr a further commitmont, 1 but there w-illl be furth-_-er commitments
which' the Commowealth clearly wrill unidertak-: e in Ca-nberra. Ca nberra
is nlow well ane. sureoly launched. It could carry on undler its ol-m
steami if tha was necessary.
C. Prime I1iinister* a personal cuestion. You have been virtually living
with lry-WodonEga, in that even you have called Thitlamabad, for five
' rears I think. How 0. o you feel now after this what you call historic
takstoay* sthis 1how you really alway3.1s imiagined it. Have you got
what you rea~ lly wrant-ed ?
P2I112 I'I SST1E ' U1y word. This has been a very C-reat experience for all
of us. Sure I have mentioned this complex -for quite some years and so
ha-s Eir. Uren the two " tate governments haeas'a-ti nmn
and there have been reprorts in wrhich-it hias been essly cited. How
w ~ t haS e is tha we have all got together and wre hiave found
h~ ow nvich easier it is to do it jointly. ! How 1 don'tat to eject the
narme Aitlanabad but t is was tae one qiuestion in which wre didn't
come to an agreement. I had sugrgested Isulinville and the-in it was
sugge-sted 1Hamerton. Both t-he eponymous heros declined -the honour.
Someone suggested Uronopolis or some less seemly variation still,
but if you insist I will accept WJhitlama'oad.
Q. ir ;' obort, you expressed what might'-be teormed as some reservations
this morning in your opening; speech. kre you satisfLied w-ith the decisions
that ha-ve been made today? 
SIR OB2TX ASKIU: I don't remember expressing reservations. I
ref'rred to the need for a careful examination of some of-the
pro itions that were expected to be put up. As to whether I'm
saised or not, I said before the conference that I felt it was an
experient in co-operation between the three parties, and I said at the
conclusion--of the conference in paying tribute to the Prime KMinister in
convening" the -conference and the way he conducted it that I felt the
experimcnt ' nd co-operation had boon eminently successful. I don't
think we could have covered anymore , round and arrived at so many
decisions of principle and auite a few on major detail in such a
comparatively short time having in mind the enormity of the project
. aVt e hnve set about launcinL todayi
Pi2Ii iIiIZT: Sir Robert mentioned that he had made some gracious
remarks about mo, and I appreciate what he said and I'm glad to
acknowledge it here publicly, but I think that perhaps we should say
that we all, at the end of the conference, paid tri'oute to the advisers
that the three Governments have had here and those that they have had
in their capitals, because it would have been impossible to have
covered so many matters and to have decided so many matters but for the
very fine public servants and advisers that the three Governments have
available to them. The 70 per cent of the Australian people who live
in areas over whichi the three Governments here represented preside are
well served by their public servants.
ill the Federal Government accept 7. th1eow outh ' Jales invitation
to consider reducing steel prices in some form?
PRI% IiIIHIST2I2: As you know, the Federal Government hasn't made any
representations to 1r. Justico Mloore in his inquiry. Sir Robert Askin
mentioned this matter to look at. It is certainly a relevant matter.
Zome of you in the Federal Press Gallery may remember that I did raise
this question in about August 1971 the fact that steel prices were
fixed at capital city rates and any provincial centres including say,
so large a one as Townsville iwhich is right on the coast, had to pa.-
so much more, although the delivery cost from s. y Port Ke'nbla or
Howcastle to Townsville is no treater than it is to some other places
where the stooeel costs less. And the a. nswer I got from thie I'inistor for
Trade and Indeustry at that time was that it was a matter for the
commeorcial determination of the company concerned. I don't accept that
proposition myself but it is too soon for me to say anything about it.
Clearly one of the things we have to look at is the ava ilability of
basic products in new centres, and governments can do a certain amount
3ut it is certainly incumbent on large corporations to play their part
as eoll. It is not fair that people should have to spend so miiuch
more for the particular commodity you mention or for other basic
comfmodities outside the State caitals.
S Sir Robert Askin has indeed indicated that Bathurst and Orange
would like to see some accelerated development. A question to Kr.
: armor of r. Byrne:
Jihat areas would they like to see noxt developed in Victoria? 
" Tell we have already esignatbed, five areas for ccelerat'ed
( level omc-Int--wzhich ' Jodonga wa-s one and, thei reason for designating
' Jodngnae aso ti , vea s because of i's potential " or growth
jointly with k~ bury ofLOthe" sort wkiich we haL-ve now determined on' today.
0o the, remaininng four, therefore, whiich are Dallarat, Denciigo, the
Lat robe Valley and Portlandl are tUhe -rea-s we have already deosignated
lor accelerat-.-ed developmcn-t adin some respects they are already
achieving it.
1.. UPZ21r: I have hadO-discussionls with -Ir. Ilurray-Dyrne and there is
another one undeiray so -s to balance tlie budget betwreen Victoria and
Ilew South ' Tales. I don't watto ncxme it because there mieht be
speculation in t'-he area.
I0 Leaving-the Loan Council -, nd th2-e PA" remiers Conference aside, w-. ould
you deoscribe today's r.' eeting-as a successful exorcise in federalism?
P; I' 42: y word, I would.
A~ w~ ir: I s up-ort that too.
P1II1IiI1ISTE2: . Gentlemen, both thec Premiers have planes w-aitincg for
them of course, my plane doesn't arrive bac'h-untU'il tomorrow morning
so are thecre any more questions?
have one further question about the Orallge-Bathurst area. ! Hanly
people still feel that you did come here today hoping to got something
for your project in rno-thstand thaat perhaps you may tend to
take theo attitude tihat you wren't prepared to fully support Albury-
' J-odonGa iunless you got more sunport for Or. ange-BL-thurst?
Sj12 R0. BD'. Zc A k3XI: That wrouldl be one hundred per cent wrong, 



TluQ IIErDIAT'RE LEASIE:
ALBURY-WVODOGA
INTR ODUCTORY STATE1MTE N 3Y iTE PRIME INIIISTER,
1R. E. G. ' IIIITLAI, ALBURY CIVIC CENTRE,
JAUPJARY 1973
This is an historic meeting. It is the first time on
which the Governments of the two oldest and most important
States have come together with the Commonwealth to plan the
development of a new cityo I trust it will signal the beginning,
not only of similar regional development projects, but of a
new spirit of common enterprise within our Federation. The
Murray River, once the symbol of colonial separation and
interstate rivalries, may yet come to stand for a new era
of interstate co-operation.
All three Governments represented here are committed
to decentralisation. Nevr South Wales and Victoria have worked
towards this goal over many years. But my Government believes
that only with the active participation of the Commonwealth,
in a scheme involving all three Governments as well as the
local authorities, can real decentralisation be achieved.
This enterprise is therefore a challenge to our energy,
our ability to work together, and our determination to ensure
the success of a pilot project which may one day convert our
former dreams and theories into living and concrete reality.
On the outcome of this task, the whole future of decentralisation
in this country may stand or fall.
My Government is committed to the concept of building
new cities. In my policy speech last November, I announced that
at first we would concentrate our initiatives and endeavours in
the Albury-Wodonga area. In making this choice, we were conscious
that as a national Government our involvement would benefit two
States, and ease the pressure on our two largest cities Sydney
and Melbourne. As I have mentioned, we regard th-is project as only
the first of several new cities with the development of which
we will be involved. Te are determined, therefore, to use our
full resources to ensure its success. We believe that the
chances of success are high. Its location on the transport
corridor between Melbourne and Sydney will be attractive to
industry. It has an adequate supply of water. It is
convenient to major recreational areas, and its natural
environment provides a beautiful setting.
Let me outline briefly what the Commonwealth hopes to
see happen at Albury-Wodonga. We look first of all, for a
significant acceleration of population growth. Much of this
increased population would, we hope, be made up of people
who would otherwise have gone to Sydney or Melbourne. We
want to see Albury-Wodonga achieve the status of a major
city. We set no limit; to its growth, but believe that if
the new city is to achieve its major purpose it should have
at least 300,000 people. And this growth will be planned / 2 
-2-
to ensure a auality of life at the highest level; Pollution
will be controlled: The environment protected.
The economic benefits of this development must pass
to the people of Australia. Large sums of public money must
be spent. ' e believe that this can give a good return but
we must ensure that the return is to the community at large
and is not tapped off to provide an unearned ain to land
speculators. ie want land to be cheap and its use to be
controlled in such a way that the new city is both beautiful
and efficient. ' JI also want home ownership in the new city
to be less of a burden to families than it has become in the
major Australian cities. To th: is end the Common. wealth believes
that the leasehold system must. prevail.
From the beginning of this major project, we want local
people to be involved in its planning and operation. ' Je hope
that the machinery w hich is devined to develop and operate this
new city will, in at least some respects, become a model for
future local and regional Governmento
The Australian Government has available in the
.' ational Capital Development Commission and the ilTational Urban
and legional Development authority the fund of technical
expertise which has conceived, planned and built in Canberra,
the only substantial new Australian city of our time. For
historical and constitutional reasons we have had a particular
connection with the Murray Ilivcro The Commonwealth will be
associated with supplying the quantity of water required by
the now city through the Snowy Mountains Authority and the
œ ivcr Murray Commission.
Let me outline now the steps my Government has already
taken to ensure the success of this ventureo
The Postmaster-General's Department has been instructed
to prepare a report on the cost of recognising Albury-Wodonga
as an extension of the iMetropolitan area of both Sydney and
Melbourne, for the purpose of heeping telephone and telex charges
at a suitable level for industry.
The Australian Universities Commission and the
Australian Council of Advanced Education have, as I have already
indicated in my letters to Sir Robert Askin and Mr. Ilamer on
the 15th of December, been instructed to confer and report on
the provision of tertiary education facilities in this area.
In accordance with the recommendations of Sir Henry
Bland on the Victorian Land Transport System, the Bureau of
Transport E: conomics has been instructed to investigate the
impact of inter-system rating practices on rail traffic from
the Riverina. All Departments in the Federal Government have been
asked to investigate the possibility of locating divisions of
the Public Service in Albury-Wodonga / 3 
-3-
The new Department of Tourism and Recreation has
been instructed to investigate tourist development in Albury-
Wodonga and to recommend a program for increasing it.
Finally, as you are aware, my Government is committed
to amending the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act to give local
authorities access to the Commission. We propose to encourage
all relevant local authorities in the Albury-Wodonga area to
consult and co-operate in preparing such a submission on -a
regional basis. The new Department of Urban Affairs and
Regional Development will make its expert advisers available
to any co-operative effort among the local authorities.
I do not wish to anticipate the detailed decisions
that will flow from this meeting, but I trust we will reach
common agreement on our objectives, and set in motion a
feasibility study of the project. I hope we will reach
agreement upon the general structure and essential powers
of the tripartite development authority, on the structure
of consultation an%' supervision at Ministerial level, and
the procedure for involvement of local authorities.
I am grateful to the Governments of New South Wales
and Victoria for their generous co-operation in-this scheme
and for the valuable work they have already done to ensure
its success. Let us bend all our efforts to work in harmony
together and achieve our aims. None of us here is indifferent
to the present sprawling growth of our major cities, with all
the waste, the pollution, the inefficiency they bring, and the
baneful effect of their unchecked growth on the living standards
of our people. Here is a chance, in the most literal sense, to
build for tomorrow and improve the lives not only of the people
of this region, but of other cities, today and in times to come. 



c ! a ai T I Igl,
iTITHG OF TIE iFiIS22 iZ T. G T: TAi hD P= P-Th?. AdEaS
11C1TFUV SOUTH TJAL2S AID VICTOT. IJ. LT L~ LJYT-JTCITGk, 25JA1JI2Y,
Tjhe Y-rime M. inister and( tn'e oOlH" imr er Sout -Tes andi
Victoria, cgreed, at-U thJ-eir meeting, t'Uoday in Albury tChcA th'erc should be
acceleratu eJd evelonment a rijrcityT in tEAbuy'Jdog are a.
Thec th7ree Cove rnmentr's ag,, reel t-o joir t'oget" mr in imr) ementing t'e
V-u L
en-tj s!' rp r -, ects 7T0e,:' 6 wb y bU-!) o gov r n s anc.
regional Ctevel o'mTetpoe'J_-b otioeneisac
Drormisoc by th-' e rime Iinisterl Quring, -his election camoaigcn.
' rhorocr waTcs a mutual 1feeling, Y sha) red by all concernedl that
t. Ais arreemc1nt anci t , e co-op: ra-Lion it nrencereod was a symbolic first
Ste-, towaT-rds 11 new and miore human -) a-ttcr of urban living in Autrlia
7. rocise s-tep s f2or th cdvelopm,. entv the kiburyTooa area,
woulC. L be tah -en after the overnr. entus hfadI exuozined thie re0oz-r of a
preliminary study to be commissioned b,_ y theIi th.' ree Goverinmeintus from
tne I! lation,, l Urban---anc-; : Dgon Zevcl opmentb AutHority. This study
vouldI be comlmntr to tV woV: a., lread3y do-ne by the0 States in
-" sinr, t" he resources of theAlury-WIo6. onrI region.
Duringr the meetin;-iel at-the Ilbury City al th Prime
Mi-dnister and, Preier1s agred on--certa-.) in rinciples groverning; the' 1
clevelonment of. tjh new r-' rowt,. cenatre as the cAtachment.
Todnraio~ J rrieMoin iste -r CanE~ ñ remiers stressedC" V. nat leAibury-
JoC-o,--, prjet) was -e rely the 11irst ste'-) in a com-ure..: ensive program
aime-d at improving, urban life in Autai. Tdis ) rocram would
include oth.' er g rowtu~ h centres anid Sole ctive decent: rValis) tion which'L thec
01tates h1ad alreade. ytae important dcisions to encourag. r
Thec Ilational Urban andT eional Develo-, Y. inn Auth7-ority wa. s
currentAly engageod in examinig othe centres ir the'a variov" s Sl-ttes
to test their suit abilitvy f or? accelerated1-,. v0_ loy) Mcnt such21 as w-as
now. to t'ahe p. la-ce in, Albury-_ Tod
Fromi the'-outset o' theninnin-f tbei urba-n development
ofth , lbLury__*-o.-onga rc. giont particulacr atteCntbion would be -iven-. to
involvnf representl1, aives the'-local1 comu~ unity. The,) governmen. ts
c'-Z&amp; 00c . tt wh7ile th Dysiccl idevelopment of the 1new1 city sh1ould_ be
tercs-ponsiili', ty of a s-becic. l stcatutory auth' 1ority, it wa~ s most
iimuortant thatL~ i1erst Vxswi~ e r 0ovi] n o. ed in ecision
Ch ri T Miise t-. e !-orders are httruhu
the deovelopment, envi; ronr~ i( nt should-7 be protected_ o" L' ion controllec-
They0-, said th:. Cat thIe natural surroundings of2 A. l _. ury-\ Tod! on[,, resnte
a particularlIy fine o--p-oruni.-ty to d eve"! o-) a city TIrIc-? would_ bringr
social fulf2ime0-ntl to tepresen-t citu izens and hs wh-o will come to
live in1 it. This o-), or?' unit'Vy mu1t no be lost.
Provision oftL ncessar-y services to the1 : 1eW c ity sh--ould
be carried-out at the-hihetoossible on~ r to protoct, the intecrests~
of other users the MuIrray 4% i: ve 
PGIIP23 ) F W~ A.. A
The thiree Eavernmonts will join togother to 6evelop a new JErowtH
complex in the general area of Llburyw. Tdonga and, to provid3e
incentives, amenities anE services, to faster and serve it.
2. LIMinisteria~ l Council uill he anvointeE to p~ rovide tHe rmacinery
for co-ordination between the thre Covornmients at the political
level. The Council will comprise one 1. in: istor from eacli
Government an&amp; they will'be the Lustralinn Eniester for Urban
and Aegional Devlopon, E~ r. Woen, the hlew 2oubth as iniister
for DecetrAlication ana Dovelo~ r. ent, Er. ul1 ory and the Victorian
iAnistor for State Devoloaent, Ar. Wra Byrne. Tnore will be
an interim officials corittae estabRAsh aiimelintely between
the three Governments to w~ ork to the Kinisterial Council.
3. k developmeont cor-voration will be net up~ as a statutoryr authority
by the three govon7Ionts to pie n cEavelo7) tao areas Eesigflat&amp; 0
for new urban r1rowth.
4. One important objective oil! te to ensure tat tie capability anE
experience of existinva leecal Saornm: ent is usec!,-to; t61-e -fullest
extent possible in bringing about the accelerstoV a'routh objective.
it is to be expecteE, honever, that tWe yroutL of. the aci
complex will require the evel opmont corp~ orvstion to play a role
in th'e devcloynatnt of certain ? rojacts within the existing
cities Te nra o be designal&amp; c for nwurb~ an ;' rourta willj be specific( I
by the three Covernments when the feasibility studies hove been
completed. There will be a study area it stuu ore
k: ilome ters from the Union 3ridro. UitIin tin std araprc
stabilisation cEis-'-on will avDly to tho areas to be designated
follewing the feasibility study for ur'ban nd ass sciated aevelop-
6. T2he results of the feasibility stncy will be considered by the
Kinisterial Council.
7. Th n.'~ Lrecs fial desi~ nsWe will be acc-uirod as they are noeefor
urban ancE associated Eevelomo~ nt.
G. The three g'overnments are aroEe that lad speculation shoulE not
be allowed. to Drejudice tie sucess3 of t~ e arolect an? it is not
in-tendoe. to buy lann at pricas unic reflect the increment in
value arisinEw f: rom the:. inteacS aevelop:-ent of the now ~ ou
comp~ lex.
9. The price of WEn to be accuirod for th~ e pur~ oses of the project
within the ctesir'nateE areas will be based on tie marhet level of
? riees :? revailing at the Eate of 3 October 19372, 1-but a.-i!, ay
necessary ac.. ustment for Cencral land price chanecs ( due to
factors other than the nnnouncenont of the jovolonment of the
complex) Eurina the porioc. up to the ate of actual ourclase.
0 
-2-
The appropriate Land Price stabilisation legislation vill be
introduced by the governments at an early date.
The general intent of the three governments is that in the
special circumstances of Albury-odonga, the corporation would
comprise three full-time commissioners, with executive authority,
and two part-time commissioners, drawn from the local community.
11. The chairman will be nominated by the Australian Government and
the two deputy chairmen by the New South Wales and Victorian
G overnments respectively.
12. It is agreed that the details of the corporation structure should
be determined by the Council of iiinisters and that provision
should be made for consultative machinery with State and local
agencies and other bodies. This could take the form of a
Consultative Council.
13. The task of the developnent corporation will be to'create an
Australian city with a high quality of environment, imaginatively
planned and developed, with respect for human requirements and
for public involvement.
The development corporation will acquire, either directly or
through the agency of a State authority, land in the areas
designated for urban and associated development, will plan the
urban environment and the pattern of land use, will make
provision for necessary land development works, and the provision
of fully serviced sites for government and private building
development. The corporation will be expected to involve the established
Federal, State and Local Government authorities in the development
of the complex as far as possible.
It will be empowered to undertake any works which it considers
necessary to ensure that the development of the new urban complex
is successfully achieved.
14. In respect of the overall complex the development corporation
will need to be ompowered to exercise statutory planning and
other powers to the extent necessary to achieve these objectives.
It is proposed that the development corporation, unless there are
exceptional circumstances, will follow a policy of providing
fully serviced sites for development on a long term leasehold
tenure, normally 99 years.
16. The development corporation's programme will be financed by way
of Federal grants for special purposes and long term government
and government guaranteed loans which carry af appropriate
interest charge. In the establishment period, the corporation's
administrative functions will be financed by the three governments
on a basis to be agreed upon between them. It will be eligible
to receive various forms of financial subsidy where this is
appropriate.
17. The development corporation will be empowered to negotiate for
or to provide and manage municipal type facilities and services
should this be necessary in the designated areas in the development
period. Ihere this has been done by the corporation, the
provision of these services rill be financed by way of
L 
-3-
appropriate charges, under suitable arrangements made between
the Australian ~ nd State Governments. lThon developed, the
administration of the designated areas will be handed over
to mrmnicipal self-government.
18. In the development of the now growrth complex, priority will be
given to control of pollution, including effluent disposal,
anr to protection of the environment not only of the centre
itsolf but also of areas rwhich will be affected by the
establishment of this now complex. 



PS3STkr2_ i 110. 46'
January 1973
STAT2IA 0.-TI2G : 21 i: IuI3j
The Government ha-s decided not to proceed with,' a-ny of the
remaining cha-rges nrisin-~ out of the removal ofC the Aborigin-l Embrassy
from the front of Parlia-Mont HKouse la~ st July.
In ddiono action will be take._ in to collect fines
imposed -for of-fences dluring the demonstraions whichl were notv pa-id
by December 2 li-stu yev-. r.
The Govcrnment has also decided to pay compesation to any
policeman who was injured while th1-e 3rniassy was beingr, remOod_. r
ipolice were carrying 7 out theAir duty in accordr nce wTlth1 the policy
of. ' the thien Govornneont.
In the demonstrations ofi July 20 an-Ld Julyr 23 last yeair,
26 ~ woepie aresed n carges under ' he Police Cff~ nces
Cr0dinoaice of the A-ustralian Capta ' erritory and thI-e Crimes Act
( 11.27.) s aplicable in the, 1A. C. T.
Sevenlteen ofL-thlose larrested were dealt with before
Decem~ ber 2 -, nd th1-ree of those convicted ha, 1-ve ap-pocals pending before
the Su-oreme Court of the k-ustrnlian Capital Territory. In thie
Ouprem~ e Court on these appeal ca,-ses and in the remaining matters
in t~ ic Court of Pett'Ly 23essions, the prosecution il1l offer no
evidlence -to substantia-te the-. chzarges.
C . BF13 A k. C. T. 



STRICTLY EMBARGOED UNhTIL 5 P-M EASTERN SLMIER MM,
FRILDAY 26 JANUJARY 1973 NATIONAL ANTIM
AUSTRALIAN DAY BROADCAST BY TH{ E PRIME MINISTER
During the election camapaign, I undertook that the
Labor Government would seek a new I-ational Anthem for our
country. I promised that the peopl~ e of Australia would be
invited to help choose the Anthem. On this Australia Day,
it is appropriate that I tell You of the Government's plans
for fulfilling this promise to the people.
First let me explain whly my colleagues and I believe
that a new National Anthem is needed. We feel it is essential
that Australians have an Anthem that fittingly embodies our
national aspirations and reflects our status as an independent
na1, tion. We need an Anthem that uniquely identifies our country
abroad, and recalls vividly to ourselves the distinctive
qualities of Australian life and the character and traditions
of our nation. These aims are particularly important to the
Labor Government which I lead. It has been one of tile central
ambitions of my administration to foster a fresh and distinctive
reputation for Australia overseas, and to encourage in our
domestic affairs a greater spirit of shared purpose and national
unity. My Government does not believe that our present National
Anthem is adequate for these purposes.
It is not thle Government's int ention to impose its own
choice of an Anthem on the Australian people. This is clearly
something which the people must choose for themselves. A new
Anthem will belong to the nation. I have therefore asked the
Australian Council for the Arts to confer with Government
departments and other organisations and to assume responsibility
for bringing together a number of suitable compositions from
which a choice can be made by the people.
We propose, during a period of three months, to invite
any members of the public who are interested to submit the words
and music for an Anthem. We hope that prominent writers and
composers will wish to collaborate in this task, and a small
number of established writers and composers will be specially
invited to do so. At thle end of the three months a judging
panel will select several works from those submitted. These
will be played on radio and television and in other ways
throughout Australia. The public will then be asked, withl the
help of the national media, to vote for the composition they
would wish to see adopted as the new National Anthem. 
-2-
There are, as you know, several popular songs which
already have some claim to being accepted as our Anthem. Many
of them have a long and colourful history. An opportunity will
3be given at the time of the national vote for these to be
considered, and voted upon, along with the entries selected
or invited by the judges. An award of $ 500 will be made for
each of the works invited and for each of the compositions
selected by the judging panel. The public's final choice
will receive an award of S5,000.
On the advice of the Australian Council for the Arts,
similar arrangements will be made to select a short fanfare and
a more formal composition, without words, which may be useful
on o*' her public or official occasions. These works, however,
will be used more rarely, and will not have the status of a
NIational Anthem0 In addition, as a member nation of the
Commonwealth, we will continue to use " God Save The Queen"
on occasions when 11cr Majesty is present, or when it is
especially important to acknowledge our links with -the Crown.
The details of this scheme will shortly be announced
by the Australian Council for the Arts, whose advice on this
question has been of great value to the Government. I hope
the scheme will result in some distinguished collaboration
between our composers and poets, and some imaginative entries
from members of the public. I know that all Australians will
welcome an opportunity to express their personal view in a
matter which concerns us all. I am aware that many people
and organisations have been active in this matter, in some
instances for many years, and I believe this plan will enable
the results of their work to be taken into account. A new
Anthem will be a symbolic expression of our national pride
and dignity. It is long overdue, and I have no doubt thl-at
it is fervently desired by the great majority of Australians.
After 72 years of Federation, it is astonishing that we are
among the very few nations in the world without an Anthem
of our ownm. It, is timie we reminded ourselves and the rest
of the world of what Australia stands for.
CA1NI3ERRA. A. C. T. 



i ji~ T. *[, J" ITT
26 January 1973
GOVE~ I\ ININT ARRK', TLITmTS FOR THE ARTS
In my policy speech I mentioned my Government's
commitmecnt to the arts and our intention to legislate to
cctablish the Australian Council for the Arts as an
indenpendent and strengthened ag~ ency to carry out our policies
in this field. The policies which my Government will puLrsue will
have a two-fold objective the pursuit of excellence and
the spread of interest and participation. w-ill suplport the
national institutions and progra-t. ms whichl produce, Csutain and
display1 -the top level of professi-onal ach1ie-; vement in the arts
the major theatre companies and orchestras, the National Gallery
and collection, and smai,_ ller grup nd particular projects of
hir_-ghciual ity. J~ ut our support for establisheld oreanisations and
art forms will be bnlanced by a -strong--prog raime of encouiragement
for exferimentIL and development, and for numerous smaller groups
and individuals w--hos aciiies bring enjoyment to many people.
3o now propose to take ouir first step to improve the
,-ai Gc and effectiveness of ouir sLu.-ort for the arts at
Coan-. onvealth levcl1. W. e believe thtpublic sup'port is-best
provided through a body eztablished independently of government.
Vitalityr in the arts is frequently accompa-nied by innovation, by
controversy and by challenge to established, conventions of taste,
beliefzs and behaviour. Akrtists n'e(-d protection from--unnecesIsary
restraints, an," , overnmciats shiould bc able to resOist pressures
from those who are distj'urbed controverc-; y and chiallenge.
There are at prcae-n~ t a number of advisory bodies
assistingZ the Federal Governmu~ ent withi the administration of the
,! rts. T refer -to the Advis,-ory Committee of the Comx-ionwealth
Literary Fund, thie Commonwealth A'rt Advisory -Board, thie
Cornmittee for Cormonw:, elth Assistance to Ausitralian Com-Posers,
thec Ausi. raliar Col,! ic. P fr' 2. th; e Art,-anc the TnurnCemi] fr
Li i1atioral Fil] m and(: Telecviscion School. Thiese bodies rerfori-ed
1 ef]. yin the poact , and their beabvre p-rovidecd dedicated.
and enthlusiastic servJ Cc, inl Nalln n t over ]. rn y'r7cW
are grateful to them for their coritr-ibiticn. tpo thle cievcloprilent of
thle arts in Australina and uc, hope that -i~ t wvill be possible t~ o
continue to take nCdvarrta'oe fromr time to time of thc-, ir P-xper-ene
in i f 1. d . Ilovever, vie, be. lieve tha,-t the ra pie] e: pansion in
th xatso ov( r th e last few years: and. the1 likecly ilicatior Of
thieir fture got calls, now,. 1. or comprehensive and
c o -o inY a ted plan. Ga
I'e ar hrforc propocsing-to cr!. ate a no'.:
~ ustra] anColnci 1 for,. Arts 4 viu i int~; o h
existirig advi., or2-y boclies wi.! he resuim: ed. Thle nev Cun~ icil wi
1e e stIlseib-: an Act cf ar . vr'\: 1ci-c ' ieole v~ lIbe
introduced d-un i,. ii the next esion* Thie bas-is of th. 1e new Council.
will be seven boardls dealiyq: ' vithi diffLvrent areams of' thearts.
The fo"._ lowingc1 boards will be appo) Jin te ci--d
Theat. q're,, Visual and. P-lastic A rts, !,% u11 iterau-Lre,
CIraft i] l To] cvi,. o i or. 1o2g r rs0i 
These board,_-] be th inT sour( ce of, rcolicv
ini-itiatives in their fjE-. Ic. They will1 have authcrLty to deal
vit-h their own budget allocaition and in Consultation w~ ith the
Auirali. ani Council. 2 for Thle Arts, to a] ppoint ': eil staff
Coanndi . te C to ixnnl-) er. xcrtt thieir -nc1 icieS. Theyvwill. be the
niain oo-oitc olfrrmunicaticrn % with artist: and people involved
intheir field. Th-e chairn.-an of each of these boardls will1 be
a me2: ber of the Autaio. Council-for thie A"' rts.
The new Council v. hiiv e ifretfunctions zand
corem-i-osition from the ciaigbody. It will. be res'ponsjible to
teGovern-M! iAen-t for the Cvlwetof lbroad ' ooor te ' Ii-arts
Crnmov~ e1tb lvea It w. ill advi" ac the Goveunmc o e
intatvs on ovn-r'al: L hudgotary requirjei:: eunts, wnd on miatters
r( l. ferr-eQ to it by me or by other in: Lter olr bodies It wil'], act
as. a ior'un for j; oint dj ) IAIoeuaUo_ n1' rnd cC-ordinaIted planningE. between
thev JroCu). I C) ord _ arid I-nil : L oVl; pora of commrrfon interest
and iat n ne li: ga~ rgarme iat of : r. tcr-nat-ional. cultuLral
ex-changdc,;. It ill1 provide research, adi. itaieand
C" 2 nS u _ Jan ecy s er v -i c t o thIb , Ioa-Irda, 3, a n C w; i ill beC cn a'-, lcd t. o
be bzilt on a body of c'oct stff. to) aSd&gt; io-t in the administration
cif support for the arts. It will1.1 establish and maintain rel ations
ith State-and, local roenet tit and other boic rovidinsup-
ort in tis-fie] d..
The Council. vwill have four categ[, ories of members.
It wiinclui~ de people of broa~ gr enerail erprin e ith an interes t
in the a-rts, the chairmain of e vcrn boarcls, the seocretarie.-of those
( over nn Cerartment's E_ c ciL eCd il;: its vork and ' a num1-. ber
o f a r t i Sa a pple v; c i inr. thec ar-, t s. 2ie tecrral ef
anioitmet Iallo: fe r ilor r. oplacemen t of members so
th-at ; e may L'aw: over a oo_ 1' tir-' e the benefit of ad-, cvice
noStimulus fromn a viide ranoe ofI intcrectetd. dedicated -People.
The C'etaile1 opecrations of the ne Council. and its
boards wil-l take. s-ome. i tire. to viork out. I am., a n. xious how7ever-,
that our _ zupport for the art:.; shoild not be delayed, and that
1, aiigfor the next year a hoi1 d. not be pre udiced.. I am
theref ore 1rpinsto a ppocintA thlle new Council at oneLt s
itL to assulme rcsponsibility in thie Short tecrm for thlle continuation
of existilng prgaaisand p.-olicic-s, andi t'o -prepare for mc as Soon
apoEssijb].. e a -lan for the newogn sin . c i 1eal st
-c) roccecd ith legislative and other a rrengeiq~ mentelv-
Until the Council h-asl the oymortunity to set up its
own organisation. it wnil] 1be s-erved by the sta-ff of the presenV
Counci~ l for the Arts -vhich -: ill_ collaborw', te wvith de-partrnentul1
and other offi cers, w. ho in. the past hav with thle vario-us
Commnonialth ag~ enci cc in the arts. Drg tis peried
Dr. Jean Battero. by will act as thie Council's Iaxec-Ltive Officer.
Zruring this int-eim perLo d the -re -:: ent1 CouneiL for the Arts vill
continue to be resp_, jonsible2-for. the Theatre Arts_ and other
Common~ c~ alt or _ iations vill1 carry out** ti-icir prev-ent functions
in Consultation wit'h t", he nex! l aQpr pinted Council-*. 1
I am glad -to annoonce thnat the fiown'people have
a g reed to be foundation emrsof thl. e new Couincil_: / 3 
-3-
CATEGORY I
( General Piejmbers,)
Dr. II. C. Coombz-( Chairman of the Council)
rofessor R1. I. Dcvinin(.;-, Ritchie Research
Professor of Fconomics in the
Univerfoi-2tY-of Ilielbourne
Mr. P. J. Brusey, Q0.0.
i. rs. Betty, Bura -tall
r ii. r. ( Xim) Bonytli1-on
J. L. Y-enadue, Cone ' al M'anager of Mirror-Australian-
Tele-t-raph P1ubli cations
Mr . BuiState Secretary of thie 1.7usicians Union
CA"' TEGORY I
( Cairman of the boards)
Mr. Dick FRoughoey ( Chairman of the Aboriginal. Arts Board)
Mlrs. IM-aria Gazzard ( Chairman of the Crafts Board)
Professor G. Blainey, Professor of Economic History in
the University of 1' elbourne and
rrescnt Ch. airrm,, n of the
Commorti ca: l th Literary Fund
Advisory Boart. d ( Chairman. of th) e
L itc. rat ur e B1) o ard
Mr. Donald iBan, composer ( Chairinan of the M: usic Board)
Mr. H. J. Daily, Di-rector of the A,' rt Gallery of S. A.
( Chiairman of i[ Jhe Visual and
Plastic Arts Board)
M. r. Peter Hall current architect of the Sydney Opera
Mouse; ( Chairman of the Theatre
Board(
Mr. Thililip Adams, journalist and advertising
executive ( Chairman of the Film
and Television Doard.)
CATEGORY III
( Artists and performers)
M. r. David. Vfilliamson, play'wright
Mvrs. Judith ' Vright-LMcKinney, poet
Clifton Pugh, artGist
M. Tim. Johnson, artiat
LEiss Caroline Jones21, television -journalist
Mr Don Burrows, jaz-, muasician
CATEGORY IV
( Repreoentatives of Comrionwoalth BepoxrLTments and thie,
A* DB. C.
Sir John Tunting, Secretary-oth Deartment of the
Prime M. inister and Cabinet
Sir Keith 1' aller, Secretary of the Dep,-rtment of
ForciL-; Affairs
Mr. J. H. Qawiin, Secretary of-' 7 th1-e Die-prtmerlt of the Media
Mdr. T. S. iclaimanton, General Tanag-er of the Australian
B) roadca-tinc Commission 
C". 1suu re that artists and pooplo in'crosted in the
progress of the arts will wish the now Council well and I trust
that they wiill be willing as need arises to cooperate in its
important work.
CA N B E R RA. C. T. 4 9 



NQ DATE
M/ 27 26 January 1973
PRIME MINISTER'S MEDSSAGE TO MRS GANDHI
ON INDL' ' S NATIONAL DI-Y
The following is the text of a special mFessage from
the Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, to the Prime Minister
of India, Mrs Indira Gandhi, on the occasion of India's
commemoration of Republic Day, 26 January:
" On behalf of the Australian Government and people,
I would like to convey my warmest greetings to you and the
people of India on the occasion of India's commemoration of
Republic Day. We in Australia are aware of your continuing efforts
0 to improve the welfare and prosperity of your people, and of
the many problems which you face in this great task.
Australia has been involved in assisting India in
its long-range agricultural development programmes, amongst
other things through the provision of stud cattle and the
establishment of a sheep breeding project at Hissar.
At the request of your Government, we have now
decided to expand this programme by establishing a dairy
cattle breeding farm adjacent to the sheep project at
F-issar, a subsidiary farm in Assam and a semen p.' oduction
c ntre. The expansion of these activities is an earnest
of our desire to contribute to your endeavours. / 2 
On this national day, which we share, I should like
to emphasise the importance that I place on Australia's close
relationship with India, and my determination to expand and
consolidate the ties between our two peoples.
I believe that our Governments have many ideals and
interests in common, dedicated as they are to peace and 0
progress in the region of South and South-East Asia.
Finally, on thV Republic Day, may I wish you and the
Indian people continued progress and prosperity in the coming
year." 0 



NQ DATE
M/ 29 26 January 1973
PRBiE MINISTER WEODMES AGRE34ENT WITH INDONESIA
ON PAPUA NEW GUINEA BOUNDARIES
The Prime Inister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, welcomed in Perth today the fact that an agreement has
been drawn up and initialled in Canberra providing for the establishment
of permanent and enduring boundaries between Indonesia and Papua New
Guinea. This followed negotiations in Canberra between an Indonesian
and Australian delegation from 22 January to 26 January.
The negotiations, which dealt with the land boundary between
Papua New Guinea and Indonesia and the territorial sea and seabed
boundary with Indonesia immediately south of Papua New Guinea, were a
continuation of discussions held in Jakarta in October 1972.
The Indonesian Ambassador to Australia, Mr Suyitno Sukirno,
was leader of the Indonesian delegation and Professor Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja, deputy leader. The Solicitor-General, Mr R. J. ELlicott,
was leader of the Australian delegation, which included officials
of the Papua New Guinea Government.
Mr Whitlam said that he was delighted that all matters under
review had been amicably resolved. The Government of Papua New Guinea
had concurred in the initialling of the Agreement which would now
be submitted to the House of Assembly for approval. 
Both delegations had welcomed the Agreement as a tribute to
the spirit of reason and good neighbourliness which had marked the
negotiations. The Agreement, when ratified, would conclude the delimitation
of land, territorial sea and seabed boundaries between Indonesia on the
one hand, and Australia and Papua New Guinea on the other.
Mr Whitlam added: " It is also a most important Agreement in
the context of future relations between Indonesia and an independent
Papua New Guinea." 



AUSTRALIAN~ INSTITUTE OF POLITICAL SCIENCE
SUITER SCHOOL CAN~ BERRA
27 January 1973
Opening Address by the Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
M. P.
It is a happy coincidence that this Summer School on Australia's
international relations should open on such a momentous day in the
history of our region and of the world the day tof the ceasefire in
Vie t-Nam. A generation of war and havoc and suffering lies behind us.
The problems ahead, in Viet-Nam, in Indo-China and in the region are
immense. They will tax statemanship to the limit, yet it is impossible
at such a time, on such a day, not to feel a sense of profound relief
and profound hope and a sense of excitement at the new opportunity which
this week's historic events have opened up for us all. It is in the
context of change, of hope, of new opportunities that I put my remarks
in opening the Summer School.
On 2 December the nation changed its government, but did not
and could not by that act change the essential foundations of its foreign
/ 2 
-2-
policy. Australia's national interests did not change. Australia's
international obligations did not change. Australia's alliances and
friendships did not change. Nonetheless, the change is real and deep
because what has altered is the perception and interpretation of thosa
interests, obligations and friendships by the elected government. The
essential change is that the views and policies of the Australian
Government working within the same framework of facts as its
predecessors are now those of the Australian Labor Party. The
Australian Government acts on a mandate given to it by the Australian
people. On 2 December that mandate was given clearly to the Australian
Labor Party. I make these remnarks at the outset not to strike a partisan
note, but to place on record a simple, obvious but powerful fact which
should never be forgotten at home or abroad, neither by our opponents
here nor our friends abroad.
The mandate of the Labor Government was abundantly clear on
specific matters of our foreign relations. In the Policy Speech we did
not for instance say just in general terms that we would work for
normalisation of relations with the People's Republic of China. We said
specifically " The Labor Government will transfer Australia's China Embassy
from Taipei to Peking." We have done so. We did not just say that we
would deplore resumption of French nuclear tests in the Pacific. We said
" We will take the question of French nuclear tests to the International
Court of Justice." We preparing to do so. We did not just say that we
deplored racial-selection of sporting teams. We said " We will give no
visas to or through Australia to racially selected sporting teams."
We shall not. 
Beyond, however, these and other quite specific pledges, there
were other great matters which were stated more generally and yet which
must be given commanding force and weight if we are to take our mandate
seriously. For example, the reference in my Policy Speech to Viet-N~ tm
was relatively brief and general. This was not just because in November
the ceasefire then seemed much closer than it turned out. It was
because there was not a matter in the whole range of policy domestic
or foreign on which the intentions and determination of the Australian
Labor Party and an Australian labor Government ran so deep, clear and
straight. But on three great matters the three relevant matters for an
Australian political party or an Australian government there had never
been any doubt about the attitude of my Party. Those principles were:
opposition to Australia's military involvement; opposition to the
bombing of North Viet-Nam; and, thirdly, a determination to use
Australia's influence to end the war.
From 28 April 1965 the day Sir Robert Menzies announced the
sending of the first battalion these three attitudes had never been in
doubt nor in question at any level of the Australian Labor Party. Nobody
could be under any illusion that once we had formed a government we would
delay for a day or an hour in acting upon these policies and these
principles upon this mandate.
Yet our mandate and duty to maintain the American alliance was
equally clear. This we will do. The ending of American intervention in
Indo-China will remove the really serious difference between the two
administrations. There will be another result of profound importance.
The end of intervention with all the bitterness and dissension it
brought will free the spirit and energies of the American people and
help mightily to restore the United States to her proper and constructive 
-4-
role as the world's most generous and idealistic nation. But let me also
say this:-At no time in the eighteen years since the United States began
her military commitment in Indo-China, or in the ten years since Australia
first sent advisers there, or in the eight years since Australia
committed troops on the ground in strength, or in the seven years since
the bombing of North Viet-Nam began, has it ever been suggested by any
President, by any Prime Minister, by any responsible Congressman that
Australia's attitude to the war in Viet-Nam or any phase in the war in
Viet-Namn was a condition of the continuation of ANZUS. There is no
such suggestion now. ANZUS is a legal embodiment of the common interests
of the people of Australia, New Zealand and the United States. Those
interests remain constant beyond changes of administration in Washington,
Wellington or Canberra.
It is true that the changed Australian attitude to Viet-Namn
did lead to an alteration in the degree of consultation on American policy
in Viet-Nam between Washington and Canberra. That alteration had nothing
to do with the change of government. It occurred under the previous
government as the Australian commitment waE. wound down. As the
significance of the Australian commitment lessened, the less Australia
was told and the previous government did not and could not complain.
But this was an alt,-, ration related solely to Viet-Nam. It had nothing
to do with ANZUS.
However, for all its enduring importance, adherence to ANZUS
does not in itself constitute a foreign policy. It is a treaty at the
centre of our relations with only two nations, albeit one our closest
partner and the other the world's greatest power. Yet insofar as
ANZUS represents a security guarantee in the ultimate peril, reliance
upon it as the sole objective of our foreign policy would in fact place
our foreign policy in suspension until the peril emerged. 
The real test of a successful foreign policy is the extent to
which a balance is struck and kept between a naition's commitment and a
nation's power. The United States herself now accepts that its cold
war commitment to global containment of Communism represented a gross
over-extension of her real power. This was one of the inexorable lessons
of Viet-Nam. To see the change which has occurred because of Viet-Nam
it is enough to compare the circumspection of President Nixon's second
Inaugural with the sweeping rhetoric of John Kennedyts Inaugural with
its vision of an unlimited universal acceptance of burdens by the
United States. In my Policy Speech I said:
" A nation's foreign policy depends on striking a wise, proper
and prudent balance between commitment and power. Labor will have four
commitments commensurate to our power and resources;
" First our own national security;
" Secondly a secure, united and friendly
Papua New Guinea;
" Thirdly achieve closer relations with our
nearest and largest neighbour,
Indonesia;
" Fourthly promote the peace and prosperity
of our neighbourhood."
The fourth of those is, of course, an extremely general
proposition. Yet Australia's actual situation in our region makes it a
meaningful objective for an Australian Foreign Policy. It is a
commitment realistically commensurate with our power, our resources and
our interests. 
-6-
Australia's actual situation is this: We are far and away the
richest nation in the neighbourhood. We have a gross national product
equal to that of all the countries between the Bay of Bengal and the South
China Sea. Those countries have twenty times our population. We ar3 an
island continent with one of the most formidable natural defences in the
world. We have no serious conflict of interests with any of our
neighbours and there are no foreseeable conflicts likely to arise well
beyond this decade.
We have an assured economic partnership a relationship of
interdependence, not dependence with Japan, the strongest power in the
wider region. Both Australia and Japan are moving swiftly into an
area of better understanding with the largest power, China.
If I appear to be placing such great emphasis on the rosier
aspects of our present situation, it is because I wish to contrast the
new realities with the old fears, shibboleths and suspicions. One
might say, with Canning, in a very different context ana very different
sense, " I call the new world into existence in order to redress the
balance of the old." I hasten to say that absolutely no significance
whatever is to be attached to my preferring Canning above Metternich.
Tc give an independent view from the other side of the world
I quote from the " Guardian" of 15 January:-
" Australia is the richest most powerful and most advanced
country in a part of the world that is otherwise empty of influential
states. It is proper and healthy that Australian policy should reflect
this political and economic fact.
" But until the new government came along a succession of
governments in Canberra had tended to accept for Australia a more
dependent status than the country actually enjoys. Since the Second
World War Australians and Americans have understood each other and have 
-7-
depended upon each other to a degree that was unknown before Pearl Harbour.
But friendship between Australia and America does not require Australia
to be subservient." I am determined that under this Government the Australian. people
will be encouraged to shed the old stultifying fears and animosities which
have encumbered the national spirit for generations and dominated, often
for domestic partisan purposes, the foreign policy of this nation.
The other great theme our Government will wish to stress both
with the great powers and our neighbours is that with the end of foreign
intervention in Viet-Nam the region has a second chance. The West threw
away an opportunity for a settlement in 1954 after Korea, after Geneva.
I believe the United States, the Soviet Union, Japan and China are
determined not to let the second opportunity slip because assuredly it
will not be offered a third time. In particular the Australian
Government will discourage at all levels the kind of thinking which
would place North Viet-Nam in the role of the new antagonist as a
replacement for China and which wiould place Thailand in the role assigned
to South Viet-Namn in the early ' 60' s. Accordingly, we shall support
the ASEAN proposal for a zone of peace and neutrality in South East
Asia and encourage the other countries involved in the region to endorse
the proposition. I have spoken on several occasions in recent months of the
great importance wie attach to the development of our relations with
Indonesia and stressed it in the Policy Speech. The importance of
Indonesia to Australia is indisputable. We need, however, to see the
development of ) ur relations with Indonesia within the wider South
Ehst Asian regional context. I do not want to give the impression that
by giving priority to our relations with Indonesia we would do so at
-/ 8 
the expense of our relations with other ASEAN countries. Indonesia is,
of course, closer geographically and much larger than the other members.
But our standing in other regional countries is not irrelevant to the
importance which Indonesia will attach to Australia. In the same way
as our destiny is inseparable from Indonesia, so Indonesia cannot
separate her own destiny from those of her immediate neighbours to
the north in ASEAN. So the continued development of our relations with
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines is important not only
in the wider regional context, but in the context of our own relations
with Indonesia. We see our relations with Indonesia as complementary
to and not in any way competitive with her or our relationships with
other ASEAN countries. This is what I mean in saying that in giving
priority to the development of our relations with Indonesia we are
not doing this at the expense of our relations with the other ASEAN
countries. I might sum up our general approach to the affairs of our
region by stating the situation I expect to exist by 1975. With New
Zealand, relations wrill have grown even closer through a series of
co-operative endeavours to promote the welfare and harmony of the
South Pacific. We shall have as our close neighbour an independent Papua
New Guinea which will have for the rest of this century the first call
on our substantially increased foreign aid programme. We shall be
working closely in co-operation with the Government of Papu~ a New Guinea
through a specific and guaranteed economic programme.
We do not see any immediate threat of external aggression
to the countries of South East Asia. We do not want to look on South
East Asia as a front line in terms of the old cliche of forward defence. 
-9-
We do not see South East Asia as a frontier where we might fight nameless
Asian enemies as far to the north of' our owm shores as possible in
other people's backyards.
To meet the new realities and our perception of them we shall
be seeking new forms of regional co-operation. In its present form,
ASPAC no longer reflects those realities. In particular, the continued
presence of Taiwan makes ASPAC anacronistic. Three of ASPAC's members
Australia, New Zealand and Japan recognise Peking as the sole legal
government of China. We will not be withdrawing immediately from ASPAC
although we consider that unless there is a change in its present
membership, it cannot function effectively or continue for very long.
In Wellington the New Zealand Prime Minister and I expressed
our intention to work with our Asian and Pacific neighbours in making
adjustments to existing arrangements and seeking new forms of co-operation.
We shall be consulting with our neighbours including Indonesia, Japan
and others before any final decisions are reached on how we should
proceed. There is no question of seeking to change or enlarge ASEAN.
We should like to see all our ASEAN neighbours in a larger regional
association for Asia and the Pacific, but ASEAN itself is a sub-regional
grouping which is doing valuable work and any enlargement of the
organisation is a matter for its members.
Regional co-operation will be one of the keystones of
Australia's foreign policy for the 701s. We shall be charting a new
course with less emphasis on military pacts. It will be based on an
independent outlook in foreign affairs and will be directed towards a
new regional community geared to the realities of the
The guidelines of the regional community that I foresee will
be an organisation genuinely representative of the region, without / io 
ideological overtones, conceived as an initiative to help free the region
of great power rivalries that have bedevilled its progress for decades
and designed to insulate the region against ideological interference
from the great powers.
I do not intend that Australia should try to impose a detailed
formulation for setting up such a community and we shall not seek to
intrude beyond our realistic capacity to participate and assist in the
realisation of this concept. We shall be patient and punctilious in our
consultation and prepared at every turn to take account of and participate
in the genuine aspirations of the region. But we shall be active in
seeking this end. I have already initiated efforts in the relevant
Departments of my Government and I shall continue to advance this concept
as an earnest of Australia's genuine interest in the developmnent of a truly
representative regional community.
I conclude by expressing our profound satisfaction that this
auspicious day should mark a new beginning or at the very least a chance
for a new beginning in our region. I take it as a happy omen indeed that
this should have occurred so early in the life of the new Australian
Government. Events of this week add a new importance and a new dimension
to this Summer School. Australians like yourselves who wish to help us
frame new policies and take the debate on foreign affairs to a new level
can now do so free of the overwhelming preoccupation of Viet-Nam.
I have long stressed that a Labor Government would seek and welcome
the help of Australians in framing our policies at all levels. Your views
and ideas are doubly welcome at this time. 



NQ DATE
M4/ 30 28 January 1973
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, IR E. G. V1HITLkM, ON THE SIGNING
OF THE VIET-NAM4 CEASEFIRE AGREEMENT
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
0 Mr WThitlam, said today that the Australian Government welcomed
the cowaing into force of the ceasefire agreement this morning,
Australian time.
He said that the Government sincerely hoped that the
agreement would provide the basis for a lasting peace in that
country and that peace would quickly come to the other countries
of Indo-China, Laos and Cambodia.
Mr Whitlam repeated that Australia stood ready to play
its part in an international effort for relief arnd reconstruction
in both North and South Viet-Nam and, if possible, in Indo-China
as a whole. He said that the signing of this agreement was a
beginning but that its success in bringing about progress toward
a lasting settlement would depend on the readiness of the parties
to make further concessions in the interest of achieving a lasting
political solution, and the extent to which the agreement proved
an adequate framework for -the settlement of disputes over its
implementation and for the negotiations that were to follow. / 2 
Roth sides haa made concessions in order to arrive
at the present ceasefire agreement, Mr Whitlam said. The
conclusion of the agreement was a major achievement in itself.
Acts of violence and intimidation were likely to continue, at
least in the early stages, and there could even be outbreaks
of fighting in particular regions. But the dimensions of the
suffering and destruction should be substantially reduced.
Beyond that, there was the possibility that the two
sides would eventually be able to hammer out, in direct
negot'-iations and by a further process of mutual concession,
political arrangements under which all the people in South
Viet-Nam would be able to make a genuine choice as to the
Government they wanted, and under which the NLF and its
supporters would have an opportunity of legitimate representation
in the future Government. There would be a need on both sides
for restraint, patience, and com~ passion. But the opportunity
was there. Mr Whitlam said his Government shared the concern that
had been expressed in various international quarters that the
ceasefire agreement appeared to contain no detailed provisions
for ending the fighting in Laos and Cambodia.
" iBut the expected withdrawal of foreign troops from
both -these countries should make it easier for their peoples 6o
settle their differences free from outside interference," he said.
" We hope and expect that the contending forces in those
countries, both victims of the Indo-China war, will ' take the
opportunities which the agreement seems -to hold out," he added. 
-3-
" Australia is not a signatory to the ceaselire
agreement nor to any related Protocol.
" Nevertheless," Mr Whitlam said, " the Australian
Government takes note of the agreement and undertakes to
respect its provisions.
" The Australian military advisers and instructors
have been withdrawn from Viet-Nam. Arrangements for this
withdrawal were concluded on a bilateral basis with the Government
in Saigon and the final withdrawal took place on 23 December.
" Under the terms of the ceasefire agreement, an
international conference is to be called within thirty days.
Australia will not be represented at that conference. Australia
will, however, attend a separate international conference, if one
is convened, to consider ways and means of providing aid to
Indo-China. " It is in this field that the Australian Government
sees itself as making a particular contribution in the future.
" The A-stralian Government welcomes and supports the
settlement which has been reached. We hope that, in the first
instance, it will lead to the scaling down of the fighting.
e also hope that, in the longer term, it will lead
to the reconciliation of the contending political forces
within Viet-Nam and give the inhabitants of that war-torn
country an opportunity to determine their own future by truly
democratic means in conditions of peace."
( NOTE: The ceasefire is to come into force at 24.00 hours
G. M. T. on 27 January 1973.) 



PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRAC,
TUESDAY 30 JANUARY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks ladies and gentlemen: First the Cabinet
decisions. We have sent for legislative drafting, four
schemes of tax avoidance which the Treasurer, Mr. Crean,
announced that we would be wanting to prevent from now on.
The purchase of company shells for tax avoidance purposes,
income tax concessions for capital subscriptions to mining
companies, income tax deductions for life insurance
premiums and payments to superannuation funds and avoidance
of tax through Norfolk Island. Mr. Crean will give you
the full details on any of those four if you have not got
them. Broadcasting of Parliamentary proceedings. The
present Act doesn't extend to the territories, i. e. in
case of defamation or possible defamation so we have resolved
to amend the Act to cover that situation.
Export of merino rams and semen. We are taking
steps to hold a referendum of the persons affected by any
lifting of the ban.
Amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration
Act. There again, quite extensive amendments to the
present Act were approved for drafting of amending
legislation. Mr. Cameron would have a press conference
on these tomorrow if you wish. 
A proposal for dental therapists and social
workers. Mr. Beazley can give you the explanation but in
brief they are these:
That the State Grants Advanced Education Act be
amended as soon as practicable to provide supplementary
grants for approximately $ 715,000 this year for training
up to 55 additional dental therapists and $ 40,000 this
year to establish a post-graduate course for social workers
commencing next year.
That there be an immediate announcement that the
Government will provide additional capital and recurrent
funds to enable colleges of advanced education to double
the number of places available for new dental therapy students
this year. C. A. E. scholarship,,, will be available subject
to the usual conditions for the enlarged student entry,
and the Government will provide additional funds this year
to enable the Tasmanian College of Advanced Education to
establish a post-graduate course for social workers
commencing in 1974. That fills out the proposals that have
already been announced for getting more trained men and
women to undertake pre-school education and social work
and dental therapy.
Then there was some decisions of Cabinet committees
which were ratified.
The Townsville International Airport terms of
reference. The Inquiry into the Australian Post Office.
The three Commissioners they will sit as Royal Commissioners
will be Sir James Vernon, Mr. Bernard
James Callinan, the senior partner of Gutteridge Haskins
and Davey, the engineers, and Mr. J. J. Kennedy, a Chartered
Accountant of Brisbane. .3/ e 
A fresh reference to the Public Works Committee
of the Palmerston Highway in the Northern Territory and
the general lines of the new conditions on which the
Commonwealth will make money available to the States for
housing purposes next financial year and the following
years. A decision on Lake Pedder perhaps I should read
the full text. The Minister for the Environment and
Conservation is to be asked to advise the Cabinet on the
establishment of appropriate machinery to determine the
Australian Government's role with respect to the
environment in relation to past or future development
projects both in the States and in the territories. The
projects the committee had in mind are those which have
deleteriously affected or can so affect the environment.
The projects specifically mentioned in this context were
in addition to Lake Pedder, Cluther in New South Wales,
Black Mbuntain in the Australian Capital Territory and the
Alligator River in the Northern Territory.
P. M. Are there any questions?
Q. Prime Minister, two weeks ago you said that
Vietnam was the only area of dispute between Australia
and the United States. In view of the information which
I presume you and Mr. Barnard now have, can you say whether
you are in full agreement with the type and role of U. S.
installations in Australia?
P. M. There's no more information I have to give you
on that matter.
Q. Can you say whether you have made any further
studies?
P. M. No. 4/. 
Q. Sir, on the same subject, can you tell us if
you have any information on the types of signals going
between Australia and Washington, in particular the role
of the Defence Department. Is there anything there in which
you feel you are perhaps under-informed or which you would
consider it would be important for you to know. I'm thinking
particularly of defence information which, there have been
a lot of rumours over the last few weeks, is being put by
members of the Department and by members of organisations
in the department without direct reference to the
Government to either you or Mr. Barnard?
P. M. I don't understand the purport of your question.
You mention rumours. I don't know what rumours you're
referring to.
Q. They are rumours that there are signals being
sent between Canberra and Washington which have not been
referred to either you or Mr. Barnard?
P. M. I think there'd be hundreds of such signals being
sent every day to various posts. It's quite obvious that
ministers can't see the text of every signal that is
received or transmitted. I have no knowledge of any signals
which have been sent which wouldn't be completely in
accordance with Government policy.
Q. Are you totally satisfied with the information
you've been getting from the Defence Department and from
the various security organisations about communications
between Canberra and Washington?
P. M. Whenever I've asked for any information in the
security field, I've been satisfied with the answer I was
given. Mr. Barnard has never expressed any doubts as to
the information he was given by his Department. My own
Department of Foreign Affairs I'm certain that it is
e 
carrying out the Government's policy promptly and effectively.
Q. Prime Minister, the Premiers of Victoria and South
Australia have called for a Premiers' Conference in February.
Have you considered this and, if so, what is your answer?
P. M. I don't think they have formally asked for a
Premiers' Conference.
Q. You've received no formal request?
P. M. There has been a letter from each of them but
it's not a formal request. I would point out that the
Government acted very promptly much more promptly than
had been the case as far as I can remember in assisting
the States all the States with grants for employmentgiving
works. The assistance which has been given at
Premiers' Conferences which have been often held in
February was in fact granted as the result of direct
negotiations between the Treasurer and sometimes myself
and the State Premiers or Treasurers in every case before
the end of the year.
Q. Sir, how do you feel about a Premiers' Conference
in February?
P. M. I don't see the need for one.
Q. Are you in favour in principle of maki-ng public
the membership of inter-departmental committees?
P. M. Yes.
Q. Will you make public the membership of the
inter-departmental committee which is proposed by Dr. Cairns
and Mr. Crean into the question of export incentives.
P. M. Yes.
Q. If and when set up. 
P. M. Yes.
Q. Will you make public the report of that committee?
P. M. It has been set up and I'll give you the
information. Q. The report of that committee will be made public?
P. M. I didn't say that. The membership I can give
you now*
Q. The third question was: will the report of that
committee be made public?
P. M. I don't remember ever having given an undertaking
of that character.
Q. I hadn't suggested that you had.
P. M. Well, probably not.
P. M. There is an inter-departmental committee to
consider the general question of export credit composed of
the Departments of Overseas Trade, Secondary Industry,
Treasury, Reserve Bank and Export Payments Insurance
Corporation. There is an inter-departmental committee to
deal with adjustment assistance for secondary industry
composed of Treasury, Overseas Trade and Secondary Industry.
There is a third inter-departmental committee dealing with
the question of export incentives composed of Treasury and
Secondary Industry.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, while you didn't commit yourself
to making inter-departmental committee reports public,
you, on a number of occasions asked in Parliament would
they be made public, and it was just in going through
today I noticed for example, in respect to the superannuation o o 
report superannuation I seem to remember you asked the
inter-departmental committee report to be made public and
so there was an inferential support of this idea; and
while also looking at that I noticed the available report
itself was never made public despite the fact that you
asked for it. Could you tell us when all these documents
which you requested be made public will be made public?
P. M. The general position is that they are tied in
with the question of making public documents before an
earlier government, and the practice has been hitherto
that the documents which have been before a preceding
government are not made public without the consent of the
head of the party or parties which composed that previous
government. I wouldn't depart from that practice without
very serious consideration but I have not, at this stage,
asked the heads of the Liberal Party and the Country Party
whether they would mind any such documents being published.
The whole thrust of my questions and statements on these
subjects in earlier Parliaments was that the late
Government used to hide behind the fact that an interdepartmental
committee had been set up to look into certain
subjects and one could never find out One couldn't
for the last two years, find out what Departments were on
these inter-departmental committees and when they had
reported. Mr. Gorton used to make available the names
of the inter-departmental committees and the Departments
which sat on them and somewhere about the beginning of 1971
he changed his policy and in that respect Mr. McMahon did
not change a Gorton policy. So you've asked me who sits
on these inter-departmental committees I've given you.
If you later ask me if the inter-departmental committees
have reported I expect I would tell you if they had.
Q. Do you have a closed mind to the proposition of
giving us inter-departmental committee reports? .8/ o 
P. M. No, I haven't got a closed mind about it, but
in these matters it is the Ministers who have to take the
responsibility and I believe we will tell you the procedure
by which we are arriving at our decisions. We'll not
fob you off by refusing to tell you who are on these
inter-departmental committees or when they have reported.
Q. Will you be asking the heads of the Liberal and
Country Parties whether they mind these documents being
made public?
P. M. I may, I mean one subject which is under
consideration of course is the Moreshead Committee Report.
Q. Sir, on the same subject, you say you think
you should inquire of the preceding government whether a
report should be made public?
P. M. No, whether Cabinet documents should be made
public, and these have all, we find, all these Committee
Reports have been attached to Cabinet documents.
Q. Well, Sir, during the election campaign you made
quite a lot out of the Bureau of Transport Economics
Report, You don't see any inconsistency in what you're
telling us now with what you did during the campaign?
P. M. No, well there are two matters there one I think
was the sleepers, you know, the railway sleepers, the concrete
or the hardwood you know what the Government's policy is
there. It is calling for tenders for the most economic
form of sleeper. The other one was about the B. T. E's
reports on urban transport and I think I've written to
all the Premiers on those reports on the investigations
which the B. T. E. made into urban transport, and I'm not
sure if I've written to the Tasmanian Premier because
Tasmania was not covered in the original report. Melbourne 9/. 
was not adequately covered because the Victorian
Government hadn't given sufficient information. Some of
the other States you remember hadn't given any information
on underground railways, so I've obeen in correspondence,
I think, with all the Premiers on that B. T. E. report on
urban transport.
Q. The Australian Proprietary Sugarmillers' Association
said today that they had no objection to a public inquiry
into the home price of sugar when next they apply for a
variation in the price presumably upwards. Would you
have any objection in principle to these State industry
and Commonwealth talks on the home price of sugar being
held in public in future?
P. M. I'd want to discuss this with my Minister. I've
not considered it.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, a week ago, Senator Wriedt after
conferring with you announced that he had approved the
export of 30 Merino rams to China. Could you tell us
the procedures by which this decision was arrived at. It
seemed to many who wrote about it that the decision was
inconsistent with Labor policy. Could you explain that
and could you explain if an exception was made in that
case purely to be nice to the Chinese?
P. M. This was the only application that had been received
by the present Government. It had no bearing on it that
the destination was China. It's the only application for
an export licence which the Government had received. We
found that the deal has not been concluded and, accordingly,
it is possible for us to have a referendum on the subject
as the Party Platform prescribes.
Q. On that particular subject, Sir 
P. M. I think there are some other people that
haven't asked a question.
Q. I was going to ask you about the same question.
P. M. Would you announce your name because people will
understand why you take an interest in rural matters?
Q. Richard Farmer: Do I take it from that answer
that the rams will now not go to China?
P. M. That will depend on the result of the referendum.
Q. But Sir, what was announced last week is not now
applicable. Is that right?
P. M. No. Because the deal had not in fact been
concluded it has not been concluded.
Q. As a supplementary, who will take part in the
referendum?
P. M. That's been worked out.
this for next Tuesday's Cabinet. We'll have a paper on
Q. You can't give us any idea of whether it will
be just graziers or
P. M.
affected. No, I can't. The Party Policy says the persons
Q. On the supplementary to the supplementary would
we be correct in drawing
P. M. Max, you haven't asked a question.
Q. It's not another supplementary, Sir. It's on
another subject. Lord Carrington's visit at the end of
the week which you and Mr. Barnard and other Ministers will
see him / 11. 
P. M. Yes.
J-066I take it that you will reaffirm to him as
tie p~ robably already knows that we will withdraw our
infantry battalion group from Singaporeso
P. M. We will not replace them at the end of their term
of duty.
Q. However I understand that several hundred, perhaps
up to 500 or 600 Australian soldiers will remain in
logistic support at the signal in Singapore. Has this been
made clear too?
P. M. Well I haven't spoken to Lord Carrington about
this but of course it'll be made clear. I would imagine
he's quite he knows what we've said on this..
WJ. Why I asked was I think it was generally inferred
that the whole 1300 or nearly the whole 1300 would be
coming home. It now appears that perhaps only about half
P. M. That would be an inaccurate inference.
Q. Now finally could you indicate the other matters
other than ANZAC and Defence matters that you may be
discussing with Lord Carrington?
P. M. I'm happy to discuss with Lord Carrington any
matter which he thinks the British Government would like
to discuss with me. There's no agenda. Lord Carrington
knows Australia well and Mr. Barnard and I, I think, can
claim to know him well because we knew him when he was
British High Commissioner here in the late fifties and we
always see him when we are in London.
Q. But apart from what he might want to put to you,
have you got anything specific to put to him apart from
the Defence side? 12/. 
12.
P. M. I think -there'll be quite a wide ranging discussion.
I'll have some hours with him and some of my other
collieagues will be also in the talks for part of the time
so I think there'll be quite a wide range of matters of
mnutual interest. There is no agenda. Lord Carrington
is a very easy person with whom to have a discussion.
ve Sir, on the subject of Lord Carrington, will you
be open to argument to change your mind on any subject
which you raise?
P. M. Of course, I always am.
Q. But with Lord Carrington?
P. M. Of course. And he's one of the most persuasive
of men.
Q. That's what I meant.
P. M. Lord Carrington is not just another Lord. He
is a very important member of the British Government and
of the Conservative Party.
Q. You've said Sir, he knows Australia well. fie
knows Australian politics well, too, Sir?
P. M. Yes.
W. He will therefore have some firm intentions.
Will you be prepared to hear his arguments in view of that?
P. M. Of course. Noblesse oblige.
That's for Agence France Press.
Q. Sir, on Merino rams. Can I ask why the decision...
P. M. You gentlemen are taking a great interest in them..
13/. 
13.
Q. Can I ask you why the matter wasn't referred
initially to Cabinet instead of allowing Senator Wriedt
to make a decision which was apparently in conflict with
ALP policy?
P. M. It was a matter which we hadn't got round to
discussing. No one really was expecting an application
on this subject. The next auctions were thought to be I
think next June.
Q. Mr. Whitlam, I thought the next auctions were
on February 6 in Dubbo.
P. M. Well, there are going to some in March, I now
learn.
Q. Just to return to this point, I know that
Merinos aren't very important
P. M. I wouldn't have thought so.
Q. We're in the novel situation trying to work out
procedures with the new Labor Government. It always struck
us that it was part of the Labor Party philosophy that the
opinions the conference decision were binding. The
conference decision is quite unequivocal in this area
P. M. That's right.
Q. And both yourself and Mr. Wriedt in consultation
have decided to override the conference decision. Is
that correct?
P. M. No.
Q. Well it would seem to be, Sir, that the statement
put out last week by Senator Wriedt under his name flew
in the face of the conference advice. 14/. 
14.
P. M. We now find that it is possible that since the
deal has not been made that we can go ahead with a
referendum.
Q. Was there any suggestion that the deal would have
been made within a day or two before the Cabinet meeting?
P. M. It could have been made, it was thought, last
week. But in fact it's now found that it was not. The
deal has not been concluded.
Q. If I could sheepishly ask another question
about sheep Sir, did Senator Wriedt confer with you on
this subject can you confirm that? Were there any
complaints after the decision was announced complaints
from unions or anyone else that this flew in the face
of Labor Policy, and can you explain to us why you were
apparently prepared to breach Labor policy until you found
that the deal hadn't gone through?
P. M. There have been no complaints as far as I know
from unions or anybody else on this subject. This is
scarcely a matter of as great interest as it was four
years or even one year ago.
Q. Sir, on the question of a wider topic the
uniform building code: There seems as though there'll be
some State opposition to the introduction of a uniform
building code. Have you any thoughts at this stage on how
the Federal Government will persuade the State Governments
to agree to the adoption of that policy that you pledged
before the election?
P. M. You are being very obscure. What State opposition
do you expect? 
Q. Melbourne and Queensland, Sir.
P. M. Mr. Dickey has changed his mind in the past
in fact in the last couple of weeks. In Queensland the
question scarcely arises because there is a single building
code throughout the Brisbane City Council area. If there
was a single building code throughout the Melbourne and
the Sydney Metropolitan areas the average house in those
areas would cost $ 800 less.
Q. But in the Queensland country areas, Sir, there
are I think 134 different building codes required by the
1ocal government authorities.
P. M. The mischief doesn't occur in Queensland. Where
the expense arises is where builders, architects, surveyors,
tradesmen in general have to operate in an area where
there are several conflicting codes. In Queensland, local
government areas in general are larger than in the other
States; and accordingly one does not have the waste of
money in Queensland that one has in all the other States.
The ordinary builder, surveyor, tradesman operating in any
Queensland provincial city operates in the terms of a single
building code. This is one reason why houses in general
in Queensland cost less than in any of the other States.
Q. In view of Mr. Dickey's statement, Sir, I
wondered if you could give us an indication of how far
you're prepared to support the Housing Minister in his
endeavours to carry out policy pledges in the housing area
with the States?
P. M. I'm prepared to support Mr. Johnson, the Minister
for Housing, completely in this area. I welcome the
opportunity to point out that it's been known for years
the Jennings family have proclaimed it for many years past
that the average home costs now $ 800 more than it needs .16/. 
16.
to cost because there are so many conflicting building
codes in the largest Australian cities; and these
building codes depend not only on local government requirements,
they also depend and in Queensland they can partly depend
on this on the varying requirements of the lending
authorities. The Commonwealth, under the Constitution,
can have a very great influence on standardising the
codes accepted by the lending institutions. The Constitution
gives the Commonwealth Parliament power to legislate with
respect to banking and insurance. The Commonwealth also
of course makes most of the Government funds available for
housing by way of Housing Commission and War Service Homes
finance. Incidentally, the War Service Homes Act will be
renamed Defence Services Homes Act because it will now of
course be available to people in the Armed Services in
general not just to those that have had active service
overseas.
Q. Sir, in the light of the continuing relatively
high unemployment figures, is the Government restricting
the growth the increased growth in the Public Service
to the 3 per cent limit laid down by the previous Government?
P. M. That still stands. At this stage it's not been
considered by the new Government.
Q. Can I ask a further one Sir: In view of the
number of new Departments that have been established, will
this not place a strain upon the existing if this limitation
is continued?
P. M. No. There can be savings in some areas such as
Immigration and Labour and National Service.
P. M. Gentlemen, I think this is understood. Anyone
who hasn't yet asked a question gets one before those that
have already had one get a second 17/. 
17.
Q. Can you tell me, Sir, in the light of the meeting
soon in the field of Trade with New Zealand and also the
meetings that have gone on this week in New Zealand
between Australia and New Zealand and Canadian Dairy Boards,
will we be likely to see co-operation between Australian
and New Zealand on world markets including the Australian
home market?
P. M. This will all be discussed by the New Zealand
Minister for Trade and Dr. Cairns, Mr. Freyer, and the
Minister for Overseas Trade, Dr. Cairns, when they meet o
It's quite soon isn't it?
P. M. I can't see you in this distress Mr. Hawke,
will you ask your third question?
Q. There was a question that wasn't answered the
last time. At the time Senator Wriedt and yourself made
the decision about the export of Merinos, I take it that
it wasn't known whether the Chinese deal would come into
operation. Is it to be taken then that the decision to
fly in the face of Labor Conference policy
P. M. I won't have you saying that. There's no flying
in the face of Labor policy by me or anybody else.
Q. Well, is the fact that there was no flying in
the face of Labor Party policies simply dependent on the
fact that the deal didn't go through before the referendum?
P. M. The decision today has been made in the light
of the fact that we find that we can take a referendum
or that we believe that we'll be able to hold a referendum.
Q. Over the weekend the Leader of the Opposition
advertised two positions on his staff which seemed to be
considerably higher salary than that being paid 18/. 
18,
P. M. Yes, they did.
Q. Has that been approved by the Government these
salaries, and has it been approved by the Government, the
Leader of the Opposition and other members including the
Leader of the Country Party and the Deputy Leader of the
Country Party have their staff arrangements been approved?
P. M. Mr. Snedden was told that he could have two
Private Secretaries as his predecessor had. He was not
told what the salary would be. The salary appropriate
for the positions will depend on the calibre of the
persons attracted to them. On that, the Public Service
Board's advice will be sought as it has been on all
Ministerial staff appointments as regards salary.
Q. Could I add something supplementary to that. If
he was to advertise for a man at a salary of $ 20,000 a
year and if you could get a man appropriate for that
salary, does that mean that it would be approved?
P. M. I would want to take the Public Service Board's
advice. I don't fix salaries.
Q. Sir, could you outline the proposed changes in
the Arbitration system which Mr. Cameron is to develop
tomorrow and specifically do they affect the penal
clauses?
P. M. I said earlier that if you want an explanation
of these Mr. Cameron is willing to have a press conference
tomorrow. Let him deal with it as a whole.
Q. Sir, you said last weekend regional co-operation
would be a cornerstone in Australia's foreign policy.
Does that mean a significant increase in foreign aid to
South-East Asia?
P. M. Yes. 19/. 
190
2. Could you tell me whether Senator Wriedt got the
approval or contacted any of his ministerial colleagues
before he made his announcement last week?
P. M. He spoke to me.
Q. Did he have your approval?
P. M. Yes.
Q. Sir, in view of the fact that there's been
precious little evidence so far that any of the benefits
of up-valuation will be passed on to the consumers in the
form of lower prices, has the Government got any active
policy in mind to ensure that the importers and manufacturers
who take advantage of the up-valuation on the import side
will pass the advantages on to the consumer?
P. M. The Prices Justification Tribunal will cover that
situation. Q. Sir, going back to your earlier remarks about
secrecy, will it be possible for members of the public to
look at papers presented to Ministers which involved the
exercise of ministerial discretion and, in particular,
would it be possible to look at those where the Treasurer
decides whether there should be an inquiry into a takeover
by a foreign company and specifically could I look at
the ones involving the takeover of the Australian Equitable
Insurance Company Limited by Samuel?
P. M. I wouldn't think so. I guess that you're
referring to the fact that our High Commissioner in
Britain had an interest in the Company being taken over.
Is that it? e. 
Q. That was one thing that intrigued me, but..
P. M. Yes, but I hope you don't think I'm too
suspicious if I think that was the motivation of your
question. Q No, not at all, Sir.
P. M. There is a High Commissioner United Kingdom
Act which lays down very strict provisions as to a ny
shareholdings or directorates enjoyed by the High
Commissioner. They are the most stringent conditions
in any Federal or State Constitution or Statute as far
as I know. Mr. Armstrong complied with them completely.
Gentlemen, I would have thought that I might have been
asked something about Sir William Dargie. I think
we've exhausted our time and if you don't mind I want
to get in something on this: Sir William Dargie wrote
to me on 27 December. He got an acknowledgement on
January from Dr. Wilenski. I wrote to him soon
after the date doesn't appear on my copy. I wrote
to him on 23 of January about the new Council for the
Arts, and he acknowledged that letter on 25 January.
In view of this chronology, I can't understand some of
the press reports which are attributed to him. 



TTLT HIS O.
January 1973
F-LIM Mld COLLEC0TION OF LIC2MOGD2TPH7S
The Prime inister today announced that the hustralian
Government had acquired for the future Australian National Gallery
one of the richest private collections of lithographs ever assembled.
The collection is that of 1ir. Felix Man, one of the
pioneers of modern photo-journalism, who first became interestod in
lithography in the early 1930' s and began putting together and
documenting his now famous collection.
Tho purchase price of the collection was 165,000 pounds
sterling (' 330,000). Items in the collection date from the beginings of
lithography and many are either unique or extremely rare. It is
believed that for quality and doA. th the collection has few rivals.
Its acquisition will place the Australian Nactional Gallery among the
leading centres of the world for the study of the history and
deovelopment of this art form.
Felix Man, well-known as a pioneer of photo-journalism,
and from 1930 to 1945 chief photorapher of Picture Post, began to
assemble in the 1930' s what is now probably the best known and most
extensive private collection of lithographs in the world. Mr. Man is
now 81. He is an acknowledged authority on the medium and has k1nown
personally many of the great artists of our time who have used
lithographic techniques. It has been long his wish to see the
collection housed intact in a major museunm.
, t::-ensive inquiries were made by tile Commonwealth Art
Advisory Doard before the decision to nurchase irwas taken. The
Director of the Hational Gallery, 1r. Ja mes iollison, and a member
of the Board, Mr. Fred illiams, visited Euro-e last November to
examine the collection in detail and personally asseoss its importance.
The collection constitutes a unique survey of the work of
the many artists who have made significant use of lithography. It
contains rarities which even great museums, such as the Dritish
Museums and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Now 7ork, do not own.
7hile other museums undoubtedly have fine collections of lithographs,
it is believed that few would rival or surpass the Man collection
in depth. ith the documentation accompanyin the collection, the
Australian 4ational Gallery is oll-placed to become one of the
leading world centres for the study of lithography.
C~ L 71 73hL" AU. i;. C. 17. 



PRIME iMIIITSER PIXS SiTATE'lIIT 1N0. 49
31 January 1973
AUSTRALIAH ECOGIIITIOI OF CHIITA
At the Australian Institute of Political Science summer
school in Canberra last weekend, two former iinisters for Foreign
Affairs, iMr. Bowen and IMr. Bury, referred to allegations made in
recent newspaper articles that Australia had accepted 23 conditions
imposed by the People's Zepublic of China as the price of securing
recognition by Australia. These articles suggested that Australia
had to " toe the Peking Line" and agree to conditions for
recognition more stringent than those accepted by states such
as Chad and the iialdives.
In view of the currency given to these suggestions by
ministers in the previous G overnment, I think it is important
that I set the record straight. The reports mentioned by Mr.
Bowen and Mr. Bury are totally fanciful. The facts are as I
announced on 22 December, that a satisfactory agreement on the
establishment of diplomatic relations was reached with China.
I also published the joint communique and the exchange of letters
between myself and Premier Chou En-lai.
It is nonsense to suggest that we have been discriminated
against by the Chinese and forced to accept a variety of preconditions.
The negotiations in Paris covered only questions
relating to the recognition of China and the status of Taiwan.
There was no secret agreement or understanding on other matters.
The wrording of the published joint communique in which
we acknowledge the position of the Chinese Government that Taiwan
is a province of China is very similar in its wording to the
Canadian and British formulas. The Maldives formula, which has
been described as softer than ours was, in fact, harder, as the
Maldives " recognised" Taiwan as an " inalienable part of the
territory of the People's Republic".
CLIA IY: JL. A. C. T. 



3'-
TEXT OF STATEMIENT BY THE PRIMTE 1MINISTER, M E. G. WIHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE HAV1KESBIJRY BY-ELECTION, 9 REGET
THEATRE, RICH-MOND, VWEDNESDAY 31 JANUARY 1973
The Statc of New South ales has just experienced a crippling
and unnecessary industrial dispute involving the Transport Workers
Union. The conflict involved was basically an intra-union matter
which should not have expanded into strike action affecting the
entire commiunity. The fact that an intra-union matter could grow--
to such proportions arises from a basic defect in our legislation,
a defect which has been knovm for three years and upon which the
previous Federal Government and the State Government, particularly
that of New South Wales, should have overcome some time ago.
The recent dispute involved an application by the New South
Wales union to be represented separately in the arbitration
proceedings and to negotiate directly with the employers. This
dispute could only arise because the State and Federal unions had a
quite separate cxistence in the eyes of the law.
On 25 February 1969 the full bench of the Commonwealth
Industrial Court handed down its judgement in Moore v. Doyle,
par of which read: " A system of trade union organisation is
urgently needed which would enable the one body to represent it's
relevant members in both the Federal and State arbitration systems
and it should be possible for Federal and State authorities to
examine the quostion whether organisations and trade unions can be
provided with such a system We have decided to refer our
judgement in this matter and these remarks to the Attorney-General
for the Commonwealth in the hope that it may be possible, after
consultation between Commonwealth and State Attorneys-General, the
trade unions, both Federal and State, and other interested Government
authorities to arrange for the examination of the important
organisational matters to which we have referred". I should point
out that a member of the court in this diecision was Mr. Justice Kerr,
now the Chief Justice of Newi South Wales*
Four years ago the Court referred this vital matter to the
Federal and State Attorneys-General. During this period a series
of committee meetings and sub-committee meetings has been held.
At a meeting on 16 and 17 March 1972 the working party completed its
work and definite proposals by the Commonwealth were forwarded to
the States on 13 June 1972. Only four States are involved,
South Australia, Western Australia, Queensland and New South W. ales.
Replies were received from South Australia on 23 August, from
Western Australia on 31 August and from Queensland on 8 September.
New South Wales is the only State which has not yet replied to the
Commonwealth proposals.
The recent strike should never have occurred. It would not
have arisen if the previous Federal Government and the State
Government involved had not been so dilatory in remedying this basic
and obvious defect in our laws. The fact that the matter is not
resolved at this time is solely the responsibility of the New South
Wales State Government.
I have now written to all the State Premiers involved seeking
urgent consideration of this basic legal anomaly to ensure that
disputes of this kind will never again erupt -to cause such
inconvenience to the commnunity. 



P-i'S' 3_ STrATEEEI1TT
3 February 1973
TELEG=''.* TO I~ nc11MyIOP mio-1,11D IC~ ZO r: Ji
" The Prime l'inister today sent the following telegrams
to Archbishop I'nox of 1.1elbourne:
" I send you my warmest congratulations and good
wishes and loolk forward with pleasure to the
elevation of the first ca. rdinal Archbishop of
-k-elbourne Gough;-.-JhiitJlar".
To A-rchbishop Freeman of Sydney:
" I send you may warmest conra-tulatbions and good
wishes and note With pleasure tha. t the archdiocese
of Sydney will now have two Australian born
card~ inals Gough UThitlaml".
A C. T. 



T1HE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIANEI\ TT HOUSE, CANBERITA
, TUESDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Wfell ladies and gentlemen, I have tried to get some
of these conferences in time for the afternoon papers. This is one
of the few occasions when I have been able to do so, but I will have
to rush off because of the Federal Executive resuming at 2 o'clock
and then I am sorry to have kept you waiting I came as quickly as
I could get something to eat after the Cabinet meeting.
First then, the Cabinet decisions:
Senator Wriedt will be making a statement at 5 o'clock or if he
makes it before that it will be embargoed until 5 o'clock concerning
adjustment assistance for rural industries. The embargo is required
because the Premiers have to receive the contents of the Cabinet
decision before they hear it otherwise. It has been announced to the
members of the Agricultural Council who have been meeting with Senator
Wriedt and, of course, Mr. Enderby, the Minister for the Northern
Territory, this morning and yesterday. Senator Wriedt partly
because of the preparations for the Agricultural Council meeting
was unable to prepare by Friday ( which is the closing date for
Cabinet agenda items) proposals for conducting the referehidum on
merino exports. He hopes to have that next Tuesday. He has discussed
it with the State ministers on the Agricultural Council.
There were two Tariff Board reports concerning by-law admissions
by Senator Murphy as Minis-ter for Customs and Excise. There was a
inter-departmental committee set up by the previous Government it
hasn4t met it has been reconstituted and its membership broadened.
It is to have membership from the Prime Minister's Department, Treasury,
Customs and Excise, Overseas Trade and Secondary Industry. It will
cover the whole question of the effect of imports under by-law
exemptions and the effect they have on costs and on protection.
There were seven submissions by Senator Murphy, as Attorney-General
on extradition treaties with Germany, Australia, Italy, Israel, Sweden
and the United States, and amendments to our extradition legislation.
Further details on these matters by-laws and extradition can be
got from Senator Murphy.
There was a submission by Mr. Barnard concerning the use of V. I. P.
aircraft. The present rules were tabled by Senator Drake Brockman
in September 1970. New rules will be tabled when the Parliament sits.
In essence they amplify the old rules in two respects. Firstly, it
will be plain that a V. I. P. aircraft can only be used when there are
not appropriate other commercial forms of transport available. I should
add, that there has been no suggestion that any of the V. I. P.
applications by ministers could have been fulfilled by commercial
aircraft. The other amplification of the rules is, in effect, that if 
-2-
members Of a V. I. P'S family other than his wife are sought to be
included the case must be referred to the Prime Minister for
consideration. In the same context, perhaps I should mention that when
the week after next I go on my visit to Indonesia I will be
accompanied by my daughter who, hitherto, has lived with us and is
dependent on us and who was invited by the President to accompany us.
Also, as unofficial members of the party, there will be the President
of the Commonwealth Conciliatiion and Arbitration Commission, Sir
Richard Kirby, and his wife, and Mr. Bruce Grant.
Sir Richard Kirby is coming in the party because he represented
Australia on the Good Officers' Committee in the 1940' s and is
remembered with affection in Indonesia and is visited by any
distinguished Indonesians who come to Australia. And Mr. Bruce Grant,
as you know, has long been interested, academically, in Indonesia and
has written several books on it the first when President Sukarno was
still in office.
It is very likely that you have heard of the matters about
possible Australian representation in Hanoi.' I might therefore state
that the Government's consideration for legal and practical questions
associated with possible Australian representation in Hanoi is nearly
complete. I expect to be instructing officials to seek to start
discussions with the North Vietnamese shortly. We have already informed
a number of neighbouring and associated countries of our intentions.
Once it is clear that the ceasefire has been established and that
there may be a contribution in aid by Australia, we can give further
consideration in the light of requirements the qid requirements of
the countries concerned, the likely contribution from other donors and
North Vietnamese willingness to accept aid.
Gentlemen, those are the only announcements I have to make.
2Sir, why did you move the motion at yesterday's Executive to
congratulate the Cabinet on the prompt and effective steps to control
the price and volume of mineral exports? Was it designed to strengthen
your hand against any Minister, in particular Dr. Patterson, in any
action you might take?
PRIME MINISTER: Proceedings at the Federal Executive of the party are
in the province of the Federal Secretary, Mr. Young, to announce. Hie's
already made statements on this and answered questions about it. The
resolution to which you refer arose out of an agenda item on the
Federal E7xecutive's papers. You mention about Dr. Patterson: at the
Cabinet this morning it was agreed that Mr. Connor and Dr. Patterson
would confer before any further statements were made on the export of
minerals. QSir, the A. L. P. Platform attacks the former Government's refusal
to inform the Parliament and the public of the general purposes and
possible consequences of the joint defence installations and facilities
at Pine Gap and Nurrungar. Will you arrange for the press to have an
unrestricted tour of Pine Gap and Nurrungar so that we may inform at
least the public of the general purposes and possible consequences of
those bases? 
-3-
PRIL1E MINISTER: I thank you for quoting what the Party says on this.
You'll notice that we have criticised the former Government's failure
to inform the Parliament and the public. We will be informing the
Parliament and, through it, the public, including the Press.
Q. Mr. 1Whitlam, also quoting the Party Platform which says:
" Australian forces should not be committed overseas except subject to
clear and public international agreement." Will there be such an
agreement covering the logistic force in Singapore?
PRIMCE MINISTER: There is. Gentlemien, there is I'm sure you know an
agreement published in the Australian Treaty series two years ago the
Five Power defence arrangements a summary of them was included in
my Policy Speech, and perhaps I should read that to you.
" Pending neutralisation we will honor the full terms of the
Five Power Arrangements under which Australia agrees to provide
Malaysia and Singapore with personnel, facilities and courses for
training their forces and assistance in operational and technical
matters and the supply of equipment. We will be willing to make similar
arrangements with Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, New Zealand and Fiji.
The Five Power Arrangements do not require an Australian garrison in
Singapore; the battalion and battery there will not be replaced when
they complete their tour of duty."
I've noticed many references to the Party's policy in this matter.
Therefore, may I quote the relevant passages from the 1971 revision
of the Platform. Many people quote the Platform or resolutions as
they left earl. ier conferences in 1969. I will quote the two passages
which bear upon this subject in the 1971 Platform. First under the
heading of Defence: " A strong defence capability can be further
enhanced by participation in mutual defence arrangements with other
nations in South-East Asia and the Pacific and Indian Ocean areas
consistent with the requirements of the United Nations Charter and the
objectives of existing treaties". And secondly under Foreign Affairs:
" Australian forces should not be committed overseas except subject to
clear and public international agreements."
There is a clear and public international agreement. Under it we
are fulfilling and continuing to fulfil the obligations which the
Party Platform envisages which the Policy Speech reiterated. I'm
surprised that there's been a great number of figures given as to the
number of soldiers that will remain. I was askzed last time whether
there'd be 500 or 600. I said " Yes". That's the total number, and
that's all forces.
Q. Does this include the Air Force?
PRIME MINIJSTEIR: No. Singapore includes the Air Force yes.
Q. Your interpretation of garrison, Sir. A lot of people have
interpreted... J? 1LIN~ E MINISTER: There will be no combat troops -there. 
-4-
Q. But a garrison under the strict definition doesn't necessarily
mean combat troops... 500 or 600 people could be termed a garrison.
In your interpretation it's not a garrison?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, yes. These are logistic and other training
matters in the terms of the agreement. I pointed out the agreement
did not refer require the presence of a battalion or a battery. That
is the combatant ones. And they'll be coming out at the end of their
tour of duty and, as I was told in an answer to a question last year:
" 4th Battalion R. A. R. and 106th Field Battery. Both will complete their
tour of duty in Singapore as part of ANZUK force in January 1974."
You might find other relevant matters in this in that answer on the
17th October last.
Q. Was this matter discussed at Cabinet this morning.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Do you expect it to be discussed tomorrow at the Caucus Meeting?
Do you expect it to be endorsed at the Caucus Meeting?
PRIME . MINISTER: The Caucus ieeting tomorrow is being called under the
Standing Orders as stated in the telegram I despatched summoning the
meeting to discuss projected legislation and, accordingly, Ministers
will be putting to the Caucus the subject matter of legislation which
the Cabinet has asked to be drafted.
Q. Sir, After the battalion comes back in early 1974, will another
battalion go out on location for a month or two or something like that?
PRII ME MINISTER: No.
PRIME MINISTER: There may be training exercises, yes, and that may be
a two-way thing.
Q. But it has not definitely been decided yet?
PRIfME MINISTER: No. Nobody wants to be precise on these things. The
Malaysians, the Singaporeans, the British have rmade no proposals this
way. But, as you know, as we've stated for years we are very happy to
have joint exercises and training and communications and procurement
programs with not only Malaysia and Singapore but with all our neighbours
as I stated in the Policy Speech on the last occasion.
Q. Prime Minister, could you give us a breakdown of the 500 or 600
troops that are going to remain there in Singapore?
PRIME MINISTER: No. No, I can't give that.
Q. Can you tell us, Sir, whether the Five Power Agreement has been
jeopardised in any way by Australian policy?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. It hasn't?
PRIME MINISTER: No. 
Q. The Lord Carrington talks made no difference?
PRIME MINISTER: I had quite a. time with Lord Carrington last Thursday
and last Friday and there was no suggestion of any jeopardy to the
arrangements for all five nations and, of course, I discussed them with
Mr. Kirk two weeks ago, and they suit all five members.
Q. Mr. Whitlan, you said that it was agreed that Mr. Connor and Dr.
Patterson would confer before making statements on the export of minerals.
Was that an agreement reached by the two men, or was it an agreement
made by the Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there was a discussion and they agreed. I've got
no more to say on that.
Q. Does it apply to all exports of minerals or only those that come
from the northern..
PRIME MINISTER: I said the export of minerals.
Q. Why is it necessary for two Ministers to come to that agreement?
Why not just..
PRIME MINISTER: Well I've got no more to say on this.
Q. Sir, would you care to comment on the Queensland Government's decision
to oppose your decision to have the export control of all minerals?
PRIME~ MINISTER: They're entitled to take any action which commends itself
to them. We will of course resist any such claims. I've no doubt we'd
win in the courts.
Q. Sir, just before the election Mr. Brnard suggested that Australia
should seek access to ocean surveillance information gathered by U. S.
satellites and U. S. aircraft in return for America's use of Australian
bases. Has the Government taken this up with the U. S. authorities and,
if so, with what results?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government has. I've not discussed this with
Mr. Barnard.
Q. Sir, since the last press conference, you apparently have received
formal requests for a Premiers Conference. Could you tell us whether
you've given any further consideration to this and whether there will
be a Premiers Conference in February or March?
PRIM4E MINISTER: There will not be a Premiers Conference in February
or March. My general attitude to these matters is that if any variation
is required in the financial arrangements for any particular year
any variation of the formula or of the arrangements made at the regular
Premiers Conference, then it should be backed by a proper submission
that there should bc some headings and some documentation to justify
them. Up to now Premiers Conferences have had an agenda in this area
there's been a one-line entry Commonwealth/ State Financial Relations.
The new Federal Government will require something more explicit than
that. Our general attitude is that there should be proper investigation 
-6-
of all Government expenditure which the Commonwealth undertakes or
which it is asked to underwrite. We want to seek advice, and in many
cases we will be making that advice public. Now there have been some
statements that there was a firm undertaking to have a Premiers
Conference this month. There was no such firm undertaking. I was
interested to notice that when Mr. Snedden, who was the Treasurer at
the time, made a comment on this subject a couple of days ago he didn't
assert there was a firm undertaking. lie knew there was not a firm
undertaking. I1 reiterate what I said a week ago: There were proposals
put by all the Premiers in some cases orally in other cases in
writing largely in the context of employment creating work, but
sometimes also in connection with programs which were announced for this
financial year in the Party's Policy Speech. In each of those cases
the Premiers' propositions were examined by the Federal officials.
In each of these cases I have written in reply. Now if there's any
variation, I take the basic proposition that if people can't put a case
in writing, they haven't got a strong case.
Q. Sir, have you received the report of Mr. JusticeMoore on the
inquiry into 13. H. P.? I. Then do you expect you might receive it, and
when you do receive it, when do you think it might be made public?
Finally, are you in a position-yet to tell us the name of the company
which followed B. II. P.' s example with a request for an investigation?
PRIM4E MINISTER: I haven't yet received Mr. Justice Moore's report. I
don't know when I will receive it. I would expect that I would release
it very soon after receiving it. I would obviously want to show it to
the Treasurer and to the Attorney-General because the three of us 0 -ev
up the terms of reference for Mr. Justice Moore. I haven't followed
up whether I can release the name of -the company which did apply, but
without their permission I don't think I could release it.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, according to Lord Carrington the A~ ustralian
Government has not had time to consider the question of nuclear shio-s
entering Australian ports. ' Then is this likely to be considered, and
what is your attitude?
PRIM IINIST3R: The Government only considers matters which come before
it by way of Cabinet submission and the procedure is for these to be
given to me on the Friday at the latest and then I can list them for
-the next Cabinet on the Tuesday. There's no submission on this subject.
11r. Barnard and I were pretty fully briefed about this matter before
Lord Carrington arrived because we knew that he would be w., anting to
discuss this matter. We are looking at it in the general context of
the safety for Australian ports and the people living near them or using
them as far as nuclear-driven ships naval and mercantile sare
concerned. It's not just ships such as submarines. It's also ships
like the ' Savannah'. I think the " lest Germans also have a nuclearpowered
ship. There is an international agreement concerning nuclearpowered
ships mercantile ships merchant ships. The whole question
is being examined. Ile will of course have in mind the safety of people
living near our ports or coming into them.
* If asked by -the Federal Executive, will you accept the position as
Federal President? 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I'll wait till I'm asked. I never knew of the
proposition until I read it in today's papers. I'm immensely
flattered at the suggestion, but I would think it could be more
appropriately held by persons other than members of the Parliament and
that it should rotate every couple of years. Look, I haven't been
asked. Q. With the decision of -the New Zealand Rugby Union to go ahead with
the Springbok tour, is our position absolutely unchanged and do you
. see that this might place in jeopardy the Commonwealth Games; and
w ill Australia do anything to help or hinder the actual staging of those
Games? PRIME MINISTE1: There has been no reconsideration sought of the
Government's decision to deny entry or transit to racially selected
sporting teams. I fear that if the New Zealand football authorities
persist and succeed in having a visit by a Spring bok team this will
very seriously truncate the Commonwealth Games which are to be held in
Christchurch later this year. The Australian Government hasn't taken
any steps it's not likely to take any steps to prevent Australians
playing what they like and where they like. I am, however already
asked our missions in all Commonwealth countries to ascertain the
effects of a Spring bok tour of New Zealand on the Commonwealth Games
in New Zealand. It's quite clear that half the Commonwealth countries
would not be able to participate in those Games because half of them
depend on Government assistance to participate. That Government
assistance would be withheld if New Zealand condones the New Zealand
Government doesn't but if New Zealanders appear to condone the
racial discrimination policies which the South African Government
imposes on South African sporting teams representing South Africa, then
there can be no question that the Commonwealth Games will be in peril
and all of us interested in sport or interested in the Commonwealth
will be disadvantaged by the stubbornness of that single section of the
New Zealand population. 



7
No DATE
M/ 31 9 February 1973
APPOINTMENT OF HIGH COMMISSIONER TO FIJI,
TONGA AND WESTERN SAMOA
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today the appointment of Mr H. W. Bullock as Australian High
Commissioner to Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa. Mr Bullock
will succeed Mr R. F. Osborn who will return to take up a senior
position in the Department in Canberra.
Mr Bullock was born in 1916 and joined the Department
of Foreign Affairs in 1945. Since 1970 Mr Bullock has been
Australian Ambassador to Argentina and has also been dually
Saccredited to Peru and Uruguay. He has served previously in
Washington, on the Australian Delegation to UNKURK in Korea,
Manila, Tel Aviv ( where he was Charge d'Affaires), Karachi,
The Hague and Buenos Aires ( where on his first posting to
Argentina he was Charge d'Affaires). From 1966 to 1970
Mr Bullock was High Commissioner to Tanzania. Mr Bullock
is married. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 51
12 February 1973
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ABORIGINAL EDUCATION IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced last
night that in future the Education Minister, Mr. Beazley,
would have the responsibility for all special education
including adult education in the Northern Territory.
The decision, Mr. Whitlam said, was the result of an
agreement following discussions between Mr. Beazley and
the minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Mr. Bryant, who
formerly controlled the area.
It would become effective from tomorrow, 13 February.
Mr. Whitlam said the Minister for Education was already
responsible for the community education system in the
Northern Territory.
There would be continuing consultations between the
Ministers and Departments of Education and Aboriginal Affairs,
Mr. Whitlam said, to ensure that the overall policies of the
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs were reflected in the
education programs.
Particular consideration would be given to the special
and sometimes different needs of aborigines, including such
matters as staff/ pupil ratios, teaching in Aboriginal languages
and instruction in Aboriginal culture.
Mr. Whitlam said he was confident that the new
arrangements would provide the most effective means of ensuring
that the Aboriginal people of the Northern Territory had the
best possible educational opportunities.
He said that consultation between the two Departments
had led to a start in the plans for implementing the policy
of teaching Aborigines in their own languages.
Mr. Whitlam went on to say that grouping the formerly
separate educational systems under the Department of Education
would allow an integration of resources and a more effective
approach to the provision of educational facilities in the
Northern Territory. 



SPEECH 3Y THE PRIME MINISTER, TI-HON. E. G. :. TITLAM, O. C.,
TO A DINER GIVEN BY TEV L LAiD DEVELOPME'lNT COiHFEUNC
OF VICTORIA, MELBOU2i-E, 13 FEBRUARY 1973
The decisive issue at the last election was the future
of our cities. It was the response of those who must live in
those cities particularly the growing areas of Melbourne and
Sydney which decided the outcome. The national swing to my
party was about In outer Sydney and Melbourne it was never
less than 5% and as high as 11%. Cities and city life became
one of the great issues in a national election campaign because
the Australian Labor Party believed that the national Government
must increasingly share with State and local Government
responsibility for rebuilding our existing cities and building
new ones. That was the central theme of my campaign.
You will forgive me if I quote myself, but I do so only
to re-affirm my central conviction of the mlevance of the cities
to practically every other national issue which Australia must
face. I said in the Policy Speech:
" Increasingly, a citizen's real standard of living,
the health of himself and his family, his children's
opportunities for education and self-improvement,
his access to employment opportunities, his ability
to enjoy the Nation's resources for recreation and
culture, his ability to participate in the discussions
and activities of the community are determined not by
the hours he works, but by where he lives. This is
why Labor believes that the National Government must
involve itself directly in cities. Practically every
major national problem relates to cities."
Believing this, we have moved promptly to implement our
undertakings. A Department of Urban and Regional Development has
already been created. It will be a major policy department of the
Government. It is to have a creative, initiating and coordinating
role in policy as well as an administrative responsibility for the
application of that policy.
The department will have a responsibility for creating
a National Urban strategy a statement of a national attitude
to urban and regional growth, a statement of priorities in the
urban field and a guideline statement for Government and private
action. This strategy will be concerned with the future of all
urban areas, old as well as new.
I am reminded of the definition of an urban planner as
a person who rearranges the deck chairs on ' The Titanic'. Despite
the tone of fatalism that is often reflected in debate on urban
affairs, I am convinced that we can that we must succeed.
! e are all in the same boat whatever its name. 
-2-
ee should not be discouraged by the failures of the past.
" here is a new factor which should not be underestimated: the full
resources and expertise of the Australian Government are now committed
to the task. While the Labor administration is mindful of the important
contribution the various State Governments can mlake towards determining
national iolicies on the cities and regions, we reject the implicit
. ownradin of the role of the iational Government. The shibboleth
of States rights must no lone or be used as an excuse to deny the rights
of the majori of itrlians. Certainly, we know that only with
ta:; c co-ou'eration will we be able to solve the problems of the cities.
WTe recognise, however, that the iational Government must
involve itself in the problems of all urban areas, the old as Iwell as
the ne, the existing cities as much as the new ones which we believe
must be built before the end of this century.
If I night again refer to the Policy Speech my colleague,
hr. Deazley, refers to it as the Hew Testament to distinguish it from
the Old Testament embodied in the Party platform I said:
" A Labor Government will have two over-riding objectives
to give Australian mfailios access to land and housing
at fair prices and to Preserve and enhance the quality
of the national estate of which land is the very foundation."
There should be no doubt about our c. termination to halt the
rise in land prices. There is scarcely an undertahirng we gave to which
we are so firmly committed. Te are convinced that if any serious
effort is to be made to et land prices down, then Governments must
participate in the buying, development and leasing or selling of
residential land. It is a practice long accepted in most comnparable
countries. Yet because it has not been the Australian eractice I
presume because it was regarded as socialism the price of land in
every State capital has more than trebled in the last decade. Tha
Comonwealth Banking Corporation has conducted periodic surveys of
land prices. Thcy show that in ieolbourne between 1968 and 1971 the
average price for a block of land which the Banh classified as modest,
increased by In Canberra, alone the local authority which happens to be
the 1ational Government owined, develoed and leased the residential
land. In Canberra clone were prices held stable. Two years ago the
rules were changed and the result was Canberra exerienced last year
the most expensive land boom in Australia. So, at no gain to the
community, hundreds of Australians obli ed to live in Canberra for
their living, are being needlessly &gt; urdened by high land prices.
Conversely, hundreds of thousands of Australians can be saved millions
if only the Commoronwealth will make grants to the States to enable
then to acquire, sub-divide, develop and sell or lease at cost
substantial tracts of housing land. , Te prooose to do it. 
-3-
exeineaob ' r nicat es tlie value leaseold
tenv.'' e systIem. This Has n ow boon a. cce-pted boy b oth1 theI o 1ecu S o uth alS
adVictorian Gcvernments. " Th areem ent sir: need at klbury on
Ja: 2ar' r mse12X e Siir :.. oort ksldn c, -I) es
is t t1e-' oe evelo int corp: orat'ion., unless
0 1e, 0ae Cx. 1ce-tio: 1al circumstances, will -follow C, policy
o2 DrOvicin,, -2u ly serviced sites for develolment on a
lon--terri le as eh-. oIdC tenure, normally, 99 er"
heeis tes-) ecial : roblem ofL la-nd sl'eculatJ--ion-. in alreas
dosi-atd or conecnt ated development. In tHese ccases thIc duty o: L
UG-Overnm-Kent s to 2ct' is c ear and ine s c) cb 1be.
I w. elcomec th'-e a ction o2 h South Australian Goverj] meont, whica.
in h1. arcil 197" 2 in-roduced lo-islation to stabilise land_ 6 -oricos in -U-ao
area-th-e Tpro-osoJ neO, Tr town of'Kray n I welcoime.-the announc eiment
on 17 Januar-, y thsyear by theI'aJ ost Asrla: Governmenrt to cont-Irol
land, prices-in an aranorthI' ofL 2erthl. iLy Government is particularly
heartenbC. by theo action: o-f te ! Tiu South Talos Governmoei,. in pro-, osinr-,
theI~ st-aUI, i7i -sati on o$ l2c1 pr ic cs in the'.. Go s ford JTonr IeCnai-o13s1orth,
1o actiAon by the Ir South71 Uales Gover.-fmntw followsta
Cecision-th-,? e utrinowSouth61 *. Talos adVictLorian oen ns
at thi criotin-.,, in-7 JA-L ry-.' To'o on-2' Jnur o sta-bilise ln
in that,, area at values a~ li.' on~ 3 October 197,2. '. he_
recmonsitkAd a lbtury-JToeon: ncue the1-foll owing unaribi-Lious
: 2ot be allowed6 tU'o ~ r&gt; 6 the-. Succoss th-e pro-oct a-nd
it is notl intenoJdd to b1uy land a prices whlich-rellect th6e1
incremr-t in. val ue arsij romteineed evoret
o--th new : otncorleu.-
The -) ric e o2 la7-nd to0 be0 a'cGired ' for the: I ) Ur~ oscs o1ft _. e
p~ roec withU-'-in the,.' ra -J. iinltld be0 ba3se_ Onl1t he
maktlevel of' o. rices -p-evailin-S cat te date of 3 Octo'ber
19 7, buiihay icossary ad: juUti17iIn t o0 r1 Cen era lan7d
p0ricechne ( ut fatr other-than thn ao er t
of the devolo-. ymentv' of-2' he' cori.) loe:-) dui: 7i. Criod U-0
to the sate ofC a-ctQual-1-a u -c. rchs e.
111e ! rinciple of 11hatn-land ) rice corols is Cr,
ac Co0, Y 0C. notu only, by the nlew 7, abor-Government-.' 1 but ' y the Libea I
I sho uld( adI-f: a urt., er vri~ h ~ toa Jbnao
2eDiovnea l~ met uthri ~ Tis reetvcoin( uciA7r,' a nu.: n br o:"
stUrfieJs in a num. I'er OIL aeswicmy eSuitaj" DIC 201--Lu-U._ e d0v0clo-) iment._
Th ac ffesbiiystd s nnowytob as a. Governmeont
iion to su-) port some -DL-rtVicu-, 7r cent-Ire for ute rOn. Cwleodr'e
_-1s-_ c1 atufdy isbi; care is aO.-D-oory ba,-sis for
CP e -01. t n n land. n cI -ch an'rea., rh o n umi; rj 0 1 0St'ud_ i e S
i: 2~ 1aedsholdbe sufcin oof o0 that 
In , ivir_ eewanns-A ~ 2O dloln't want, it
to be thou-! it tat I ': eliovo h ltand s-poculation is teonly problem
lor our Policy Of limiltin heesalix of Aus trcliani rosieontacl
. Ll" pziccs. It hIas booen theo no; lect andi apath-y of O" overnmcnts,
not th1 a,( c tio-' rivat citizen-s, w-H ich-1ha-ve mde_ theo -rice of an
an husn hesoil a-WZ. cconoriiic roroblem it is today. At t&gt;. el core
of tLh e ~ rbc as been th dwrain of local adscmi-overr: 1nt
by both ' a17 . dr] State-oL-G overn--__ mcnts. V 3ecause of the-i lack1 ol a-douau
a" ccess tU'o -1 fi Linciañ, resoorces, = nd Sei-Govornrment
autnriti z: c c c-Ci te Unn-zalo to ; orovide the'i scrvices fLor w -ica-, nIy
are ronn~. I0 ILIeSe communjjjity-s crvi Ccs a rc too f2requently roc: uLJroed
Of Ldevolopcrs, Or e vec n r s c no'tu rovided La all. In thei fce ofL
te lmite sply of serviced landfoce
) ricCe 0 km-arcs i-. y Governrmont is ersett so4o. r: iodta
Couicillorz n ldre will haersosblte ncti~ up thenationalcak1e
Of ', orro'Tin[; a7s rnieprnr n~ n drlsiti
kus-L-rcalia a.. Is 900"' local ' Govo rnrmiont ' 0oCis he bocics
selC~ om c-' eaeon a. re'in asis arid t-oo oft wve to co1-ircte'-
for : eosources with. in their* 1 OUZn rerjon. wjoe l -Isn r'~ i~ i2[ local
Governo orncu e tto on: th Loan:: Council, we -oropose to amencl
t&gt;. e Cor~ n. el&gt; G~ t eiszion ActU' So that h Comi. iion wi~ lI
be involved in nrmtn~ ec 1b) eiWOyO 0: n rc:' ion1s LIS .2ith r o betweoen
tUe State t wil beo recoucs ted t1o :. ccor~ f. 1orien the%. rn.: ouzat o2 Comz-ion-ce'. lth"
ascisteance needed-t'o rei-iov-re the inocualit-ies of soe: Vicinr-. ceovolopin3
' 2. r G~ b-r ierne -, iss o 2o-~ ha1m~ eo re jirect role
i -in es! urinL 1 avaibiity of l-2 Inz, my Pfolicy Speech-i propose
the creat-Cion ofL a Comm1ronwalhStt Lan Dvelo-pme. 1ntU Co] Missiol in7
each1 Stae, o caccu-iro subostantuial tra-cts o' landZ in new , arned-st o
lea-se or Sell ati cost fully service h--ousinrj-blocks. In this roc
we SOO. k the-fu-ll co-oiocration o' tt Governmentar_-s and I Have alr edy
written-to the'-, Premiers on this r.~ tter.
I want o ei'-_ 7setht hre is
in,. crea-se !) ye pthoe~: bitiiotn a Governmeint sho uld mean
Eiminishe opot ' t -, or -rivate dovelo: ers. On thI onrrybeolieve
cur rain L terestU s lin . and1 a-nd ha we sha1rea
com-mon in-teresct in-oitn' &gt; eealt n fcienr o u ii
iheG overme: 1t r: Objective is tht ve,:, r utainfml
ehuble abl t. 1oo ob:) t ainl and-% Ousin at re a Sonale pr ice0s. 2i
is sre~ i~ you:. r interest. Otir ob. etv is tatLoaan e: i
GovernIMent sh-oule. have adeuate a. ccess to the. -ITio:.-ffis:: anc e s. i'i
i -Tour inte-e, sOt Cur-0,7 obictive is thtLocal-Gov rnme nt
shudable t-o -oor'orr.-its ro-ec~-c ) ins and6 y) rovide mod-ern
a eiAcL. services-or resic-ents candc oai~ jr-, Tisi srl
in. y or -net. Oo o-: etiv is tUo. reduc nU-1 ti-icity ofL
s ~ zsad oesw: cns edlessly 7dC. o cost of la,-nd an,-(
h-osn: iJ _ 3 2i 10i1, er inerst Or bective is tohveuane
and c1imn te *. e. r0ho1e o _ 10Fas10 erip i s a sourlce o2. ea
o: rid. e rahr thnuno1ndcing-adc utn rutain is inioi 
If I may, I will roaovCt sonothing i said in this sca. me place
to your conforence in june S1O
" Tie Srcnt con-tribution 7rhich Sevoloers can ad Should nce
to the crction and recreation of our cities is to ascsnble
and co-ordinato ch varied resources and slills of te
surveyor, nrchitoct, quantity surveyor, builder, trcaosnaa,
c. cs 2 nor, lanscapcr, in-terior aecorator c~ nn to soe tin. t
finance is cvailcble fron a. bank, insurance cor. mpny, building.
society or oolicior. You of these speciclists can cpply
their shilo ns ll in isolation no tcy can apply them
tho acis of a ccveloper. Very fou homnebuildrs can,
siaLJc--n: Lec nosemblo sucz skills ns Voll s a cevelopr
can assenblo them."
I believe we can havC citics A2 which we can be 2.: roul and
biulilaing theni I belicve Avoeioaers can -Ky a role of which t-er can
be proud throurh a callin of2 which they can be proud. 



S AJUSTRALIA Press: Statement No. 53
February 1973
AUSTRALIAN FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL
Professor Jerzy Toeplitz has been appointed foundation
director of the Australian Film and Television School, on the
recommendation of the school's interim council.
We have been fortunate to obtain the services of
Professor Toeplitz, an eminent and distinguished figure with
a world wide reputation.
Professor Toeplitz is a Master in Law and holds a
PhD from the University of Warsaw. He became involved with
film production in Italy and England from 1934-39. From
1945 to 1949 Professor Toeplitz was the Director of the
Polish Film Corporation. He was the first Professor of
Film History at the Polish National Film and Theatre School,
Lodz, from 1949 to 1968 and rector of the school for two teryas,
1949-51 and 1957-68. The Polish Film School was recognised as
the most important in the world under his leadership, producing
such directors as Andrej Wajda, Roman Polanski, and Jerzy
Skolimowski. In 1967-68 Professor Toeplitz was visiting
Professor of Film at the School of Theatre Arts at U. C. L. A.
From 1948 until 1972 he was President of the
International Federation of Film Archives and for many years was
Vice-President of the U. N. E. S. C. O. International Council for
Film and Television. From 1949 he also acted as Director of the
Film Section in the Institute of Art at the Polish Academy in
Warsaw and in 1968 he took up. full time'duties there.
Professor Toeplitz was a co-founder of the Film
School at Zurich ( 1956-66). He has served on numerous
international film juries and has been a delegate to many
international film congresses. He is co-editor of the History
of the Polish Cinema and has written a massive five volume
History of the Cinema. His work on the New American Cinema is
shortly being published in English by George Allen and Unwin.
In 1970 Professor Toeplitz visited Australia to advise
on establishment of the Australian Film and Television School.
In 1972 he returned to Australia as visiting Professor at La
Trobe University in the School of Education's Communication and
Media Centre.
February 1973 



-4j_, AUST2 UAL1A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 52
February 1973
" tINTELLIGENCE UNIT"
Mr. Whitlam sent the following letter today to Mr. Snedden
in reply to his telegram yesterday:
Dear Mr. Snedden,
I refer to your telegram concerning events subsequent to
and consequent on Mr. Brenchley's article in the " National
Times" on Sunday 11 February regarding ' top secret'
Australian electronics intelligence unit" in Singapore.
This article appears to have been in breach of a ' D'
Notice issued by the Menzies Government. In these
circumstances I would hesitate to discuss the " electronics
intelligence unit" publicly or on the record. Presumably
it was on this basis that you yourself quite properly
declined to answer questions about it at your press
conference yesterday.
Nevertheless, since reports of the " electronic intelligence
unit" have now been published, I feel at liberty to remind
you that the Gorton Government, of~ which you were a member,
decided that Singapore was an inappropriate place for these
activities to be conducted and that they should be
transferred to Australia. My Government is pressing on
with that decision. I would be happy, with my officers, to
refresh your memory on the decisions taken by previous
Liberal Governments and acquaint you with the present
situation. I received your telegram only this morning but know that
you released it to the press last night. Accordingly, I am
also releasing this letter to the press, with the exception
of the preceding paragraph. As for the detailed questions
you raised, you will agree, I am sure, that the conduct of my
relations with the press is for me and my staff to determine.
Yours sincerely,
E. G. Whitlam ( sgd.) 



FOR I1,21EDIATE RELEASE
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 54
16 February 1973
AFS7 Nfl IA, LS
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS
In my press statement of 26 January about the establishment of the
Australian Council for the Arts, I mentioned that the basis of the work
of the new Council would be seven autonomous Boards, each dealing with a
different area of the Arts. The announcement contained the name of the
Chairman of each of the Boards
Aboriginal Arts Board Mr Dick Roughsey
Crafts Board Mrs Marea Gazzard
Literature Board Professor G. Elainey
Mlusic Board Mr Donald Banks
Visual and Plastic Arts Board Mr H. J. Bailey
Theatre Board Hr Peter Hall
Film and Television Board 1, r Phillip Adams
I am anxious for the work of these Boards to proceed as soon as
possible. They will be responsible for developing in each field
important new national policies and initiatives. They will be
responsible for their own affairs, and will be expected to plan a
programme of future support in each area which will be of lastinq
value to Australian artists and the public.
I have received from the Chairmen of the Boards their suggestion
for membership. The exception is the Aboriginal Arts Board, the
membersnip of which will be announced shortly. The membership of
the Boards contains a preponderance of practisinq professionals whose
wide experience and knowledge will be invaluable.
The Government is mindful that the arts are for audiences as
well as performers. The membership of the Boards, therefore, provides
for representation of what might be called the consumer. Since the
Boards will have to deal with finance, the structure of companies and
administering organizations, legal matters and a variety of concerns
where skills and knowledge other than those of the practising artist
will be required, people with a broad general knowledge in these fields
have also been invited to join the Boards. In addition, the membership
will include people whose work on previous advisory boards will be of
value during the early stages.
The invitations to new members provide for a regular inflow of
new ideas. All the initial terms of members will be for one or two
years. There will be provision for the Boards to co-opt one or two
additional members if they require them for particular purposes.
It is our hope over the coming years to involve in the public
administration of the Arts a wide cross section of interested and
knowledgeable people.
The people who have accepted my invitations to join the Boards are:-
MUSIC BOARD
iMr. Donald Banks ( Chairman)
Mr. John Hopkins, O. B. E.
Professor Frank Callaway, O. B. E.
Mr. Robert Hughes
1! r. John Painter
Miiss Elizabeth Silsbury
Ir. Rodney John Taylor
Miss Winsome Evans
Mr. Kenneth Tribe
Mr. Kim Williams
Miss Jeannie Lewis Composer, Teacher,
Administrator, Former
Director of Music
University of London,
Goldsmith' College
Creative Arts Fellow
ANU 1972/ 73 A. C. T.
Conductor, Federal
Director of Music, ABC:
Conductor Australian Youth
Orchestra and Prom Concerts: N. S. W.
Chairman, Department of Music, USA
Chairman W. A. Arts Advisory Board,
World President Inter-National
Society for Music Education, W. A.
Composer Cellist; Former Principal
Cellist with the SSO and Member
Sydney String Quartet.
Snr Lecturer in iusic at
Bedford Park Teachers College;
Pianist, S. A.
Director North Queensland
Conservatorium of I4usic;
Baritone, Qld.
Leader, Renaissance Players,
Harpsichordist; Music Tutor,
University of Sydney; Assistant
Musical Director Young Opera, N. S. W
Solicitor, Chairman Musica Viva
Australia; President Adult Deaf
and Dumb Society of NSW; N. S. W.
Composer, Actively involved with
Contemporary Music Societies in
Sydney. Leading Vocalist of Jazz, Pop,
Rock and Contemporary Music, N. S. W. 
FILM AND TELEVISION BOARD
vir. Phillip Adams
Mr. Tom Jeffrey
Miss Sylvia Lawson
Mr. Gill Brealey
Miss Dawn Brown
hr. John McQuaid
i. r. Joe O'Sullivan
Mr. Barry Jones, M. L. A.
Mr. Jim Harris
tr. Jack Neary
Mr. Richard Mason Film Producer; Governor
Australian Film Institute, Vic.
Producer/ Director Air Programmes
International, N. S. W.
Film Critic
Director S. A. Film Corporation,
Educationalist, Film Producer, S. A.
Educationalist, Vic.
Secretary of Australian Theatrical
Employees Association, N. S. W.
Director, Perth Institute for
Film Technology, W. A.
Member Australian Film Development
Corporation, Member Interim Council
for Film and Television School, Vic.
Lecturer, Swinburne Technical
College, Script Writer, Vic.
Principal of NLT Pty. Ltd.
Deputy Director Commonwealth
Film Unit; Governor of Australian
Film Institute, N. S. W. 
Professor Geoffrey Blainey
( Chairman)
Mr. Geoffrey Dutton
Professor A. D. Hope
Mr. Judah Waren
Miss Elizabeth Riddell
Mr. David Malouf
Miss Nancy Deesing
Mr. Thomas Shapcott
Professor Manning Clark
Mr. Richard Hall
Mr. Richard Walsh LITERATURE BOARD Professor Economic History,
University of Melbourne;
Former Chairman, CLF, Vic.
S Publisher Sun Books; Novelist,
Poet, S. A.
S Vice President Australian Society
of Authors; Poet, Former Member
CLF, A. C. T.
S Novelist, Vic.
S Journalist, N. S. W.
Poet; Critic, N. S. W.
S Critic; Poet, N. S. W.
S Poet, Qld.
S Professor of Australian History,
ANU, A. C. T.
S Playwright, N. S. W.
MSa naging Editor, Angus and Robertson;
Publisher, Nation Review
N. S. W. 
THEATRE ARTS BOARD
Peter Hall ( Chairman)
ir. T. C. Bray, C. B. E.
irs. H. W. Houghton
Miss Marilyn Jones
Miss Joan Hammond
Mr. Gary Hutchinson
Mr. John Stoddart
Mr. Anthony Steel
Mr. Tom Brown
Mr. Colin Cave
Mr. Ron Haddrick
hr. Don Crosby
Mrs. Patrician Wynn Architect Sydney Opera House;
Former Member of the Australian
Council for the Arts, N. S. W.
Former Managing Director
Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd.;
Former Member and Deputy Chairman,
Australian Council for the Arts
Qld. Former Member of the Australian
Council for the Arts; Tas.
Dancer, Vic.
Oera Singer, Vic.
Writer, Poet, Vic.
Designer, N. S. W.
General Manager, Adelaide Festival
Centre Trust; Artistic Director
Adelaide Festival, S. A.
Theatre Consultant, N. S. W.
Director CAE Victoria ( Vice-
President Arts Council); Vic.
Actor, N. S. W.
Actor, N. S. W.
Vic. 
PLASTIC ARTS BOARD
Mr. John Baily ( Chairman)
Mr. Ron Roberston-Swann
Mr. Nigel Lenden
Mr. James Mollison
Mr. David Thomas
Mr. Patrick McCaughey
Mr. Lenton Parr
Mrs. Anne Lewis
Mr. Fred Williams
Mr. Len French
Mr. James Fleeson
Mr. Udo Sellbach Director, S. A. Art Gallery
Chairman, Adelaide Festival Centre
Trust, Painter, S. A.
Sculptor/ Painter, N. S. W.
Sculptor, S. A./ Vic.
Director, National Gallery,
Canberra, A. C. T.
Director, Newcastle Art Gallery,
N. S. W.
Writer, Critic, Vic.
Sculotor, Director National
Gallery, Art School; Vic.
SG allery A, International
Committee of Museum of Modern
Art; N. S. W.
Painter Former Member CAAB; Vic.
Painter, Vic.
Painter, N. S. W.
Graphite Artist; Tas.
VISUAL AND 
CRAFTS BOARD
Mrs. Marea Gazzard ( Chairman)
Mr. Les Blakeborough
Miss Fay Bottrell
Mr. Ken Leveson
Mrs. Joy De Gruchey
: M-rs. Joan Campbell
Mr. Maurice Isaacs
Mrs. Marjorie Ritchie
Mr. Dick Richards
Mr. Kenneth Hood
Mr. Tom Heath
Mr.. F. Belgiorno Nettis Ceramist; Asian Vice-President,
World Crafts Council, N. S. W.
Community Crafts; Past
Director Sturt Workshops; now
at Art Department, College of
Advanced Education, Hobart. TAS.
Textiles; weaver,; teacher, N. S. W.
Jeweller; Potter; Educator in
Technical Colleges, VIC.
Director Craftsman's Market;
Interior Designer, QLD.
Ceramist; Educator, Country
and community programmes Youths;
W. A.
Sociologist; Businessman;
Collector N. S. W.
Crafts Marketing; Eltham
Community, VIC.
Jeweller; Administrator,
Curatoran S. A. Gallery; Member
Craft Inquiry, S. A.
Curator, Decorative Arts,
National Gallery of Victoria, VIC.
Architect; Art Critic, N. S. W.
Collector.; Transfield Biennale;
Chairman TRANSFIELD INDUSTRIES. 



No DATE
M/ 32 16 February 1973
260-TON HARBOUR DREDGE FOR MALAYSIA
The Australian Government is to give Malaysia a
* r Y
260-ton dredge for use in the harbours and ports of Sarawak.
SAnnouncing this today, the Minister Assisting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator D. Willesee, said that
the dredge, costing $ A545,000, would be provided under the
Australian aid programme.
The dredge has been designed and built by an Australian
Scompany, Kon-Tiki Engineering/ Pty. Ltd., of Killara, N. S. W.,
and will be used initially in the development of the port of
Kuching, and later at Sibu and other river ports in Sarawak
where there are substantial dredging requirements.
The vessel will be named " Barkuna" by Mrs F. E. Stewart,
wife of the Federal Minister foi Tourism and Recreation, at a
special ceremony near Sydney on Monday ( 19 February), which
will als6 be attended by the Acting High Commissioner for
Malaysia, J. r A. Faiz. ./ 2 
-2-
The dredge will then be dismantled into 20 sections,
each weighing 12 tons, and shipped to Sarawak where it will be
put into use as soon as possible.
( Note for editors: the naming ceremony will be held at Epsom
Road, Chipping Norton, near Sydney, at 2.45 p. m. on Monday
19 February. You or your representative are cordially invited
to attend.) 



NQ DATE
M/ 33 18 February 1973
STATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER
FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON DEPARTURE FOR VTSIT
TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA AND INDONESIA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlan, said in Canberra today that he hoped his first visits
to Papua New guinea and Indonesia as Prime Minister would serve to
emphasise his Government's commitment to the evolution of a secure,
united and friendly Papua New Guinea and to the consolidation and
further strengthening of Australia's vital relationship with its
nearest and largest neighbour, Indonesia.
In a statement on his departure from Australia today,
Mr Whitlam said that in Papua New Guinea he would be having talks
with the Chief Minister, Mr Michael S'omare, and other Ministers.
He would also visit Goroka where he would have discussions with the
local council and attend the Goroka show.
Mr Whitlam said that the visit to Indonesia would be
his eighth visit to that country, although his first since becoming
Prime Minister. Mr Whitlam said that in Jakarta he was looking
forward to frank and substantive personal exchanges of views with
President Soeharto and with a number of other Ministers including
the Minister for Economy, Finance and Industry, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs. While in Indonesia he would also address the 
-2-
Indonesian Parliament.
Mr Whitlam said that since President Soeharto had
visited Australia and his predecessor had visited Indonesia last
year, the situations in the Asian region had undergone important
changes. New Governments had come to office in Australia and
New Zealand, a ceasefire was now operating in Viet-Nam, and
active consideration was now being given to regional co-operation
by the countries of South-East Asia and by Australia and New
Zealand. Moreover, Indonesia and Australia had both recently
become members of the Security Council.
It would therefore be timely for him to discuss with
President Soeharto and Indonesian Ministers both the new approach
of his government to international affairs and the changed situation
in the Asian region.
Mr Whitlam added that Indonesia was the fifth most
populous nation in the world and the only country with which
Australia shared a boundary. A soundly based, close and lasting
Australian-Indonesian relationship was therefore of paramount
importance to both countries, now and in the future. He hoped
his visit would contribute to the strengthening of this
-relationship. Mr and Mrs Whitlam will be accompanied to Papua New
Guinea by the Minister for External Territories, Mr Morrison,
and Mrs Morrison, and to both Papua New Guinea and Indonesia by
/ 3 
-3-
Sir Richard and Lady Kirby, Miss Cathy Whitlam and Mr Bruce
Grant, and members of the Prime Minister's personal staff.
Officials accompanying the Prime Minister are, from
the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Secretary,
Sir John Bunting, and Mr M. J. Wilson; and from the Department
of Foreign Affairs, the Deputy Secretary, Mr K. C. O. Shann, and
Mr R. A. Woolcott. The Prime Minister is expected to return to Australia
on Sunday, 25 February. 



SPEECH DELIVERED BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
At a Dinner attended by the Government of Papua New Guinea.
PORT MORESBY 18 February 1973
Mr Chief Minister, I suppose one would be less
than human if one did not feel some measure of gratification
at the recent changes in our personal and political situations:
all I need say, Chief Minister, is that we have both come a
long way from the lounge of the Sepik Hotel at Wewak in
January 1970, when we were both virtually under seige and
when we were both deemed in certain quarters to be committing
political suicide by daring to talk about early independence
for Papua New Guinea.
I may say, Chief Minister, thatthe courage and
foresight you showed in those years marked you as a coming
man and as a genuine leader of your people. It is a deep
personal pleasure to me as well as a matter of great pride
that you and I shall be working together in the coming years
in the great work of creating a new nation in the South
Pacific, this nation of Papua New Guinea.
In the whole of modern history there is only a
select band of men and women to whom such a task has been
entrusted, and you Chief Minister, have joined with lustre
and honour the chosen few who have led their people to
nationhood. In the few short years since 1970 when even
self-govenrment, much less independence, was scarcely to be
mentioned in polite circles, Papua New Guinea had a piece of
unexpected good fortune. I refer to the appointment of Andrew
Peacock as the Australian Minister for External Territories.
I am glad, here, to pay my public tribute tL-o him and his work,
as I have in Australia. I have been lable to appoint an
admirable successor in Bill Morrison who, one way and another,
has had a remarkeable record in working himself out of a job
and that, of course, is the duty of the Minister for External
Territories. I was never a believer in the idea that the
Australian political parties should adopt thfroughout the early
a bipartisan approach on the future of Papua New Guinea.
I am convinced that the attempt to do so did great harm in
those years. Too often, Australian apathy, Australian arrogance,
Australian indifference masqueraded as a national consensus.
Nevertheless, what was a disadvantage in the ' 60' s could well
be an advantage in the mid ' 70' s as Papua New Guinea emerges
towards independence. Andrew Peacock did go a long way towards
restoring the consensus a genuine, progressive, concerned
consensus, not the phoney consensus of the
There are now three great areas of agreement among
the Australian political parties about Papua New Guinea's future.
The first is that a timetable for self-government and independence
must be set, and that essential elements for the timing of the
decision are the views and wishes of the House of Assembly. / 2 
As the Chief Minister and Mr Peacock agreed,
resolutions of the House on important issues should be by
recorded vote and by a substantial majority representative
of the nation as a whole. My Government reaffirms that
position. I cannot stress too often that the decision for
independence is not only a decision about Papua New Guinea.
It is about Australia and Australia's view of her own proper
role in the world. Australia is no longer willing to be the
ruler of a colony. And my Government is determined to divest
itself of that role in the lifetime of the present Australian
Parliament. The second area of firm agreement is that
Australia's aid to Papua New Guinea will continue after
independence. You will recall, Chief Minister, that in
my visits in 1970 and 1971,1 made the most solemn pledges
to your people on this matter. The pledges that I made to
your people ae as binding upon me, my Party and my Government
as any undertaking I have given to my own people in seeking
their support. I am acutely aware of the fact that if I had
not given these undertakings in 1970 and in 1971, the cause
of independence could never have made its spectacular progress
in the past three years. I repeat thzt-undertaking now.
The Australian Government has decided to give the
Papua New Guinea Government an assurance of continuing aid over
the period of the three year Improvement Program beginning in
1974/ 75. The detailed arrangements to give effect to this
assurance will be formulated in connection with the preparation
of the Improvement Program. These arrangements will, of course,
need to provide for review during the period of the Program as
necessary in the light of changing circumstances.
Papua New Guinea will have the first call on our
substantially increased foreign aid programme. We shall be
working with the Papua New Guinea Government through a specific
and guaranteed ' programme.
The third area of complete agreement between the
Australian political parties is that it is Australia's duty
and responsibility to hand over to the Central Government and
the House of Assembly a united Papua New Guinea.
My Government's policy, and it was the policy of
the late Government, is to hand over our remaining powers to
a national and representative government, freely elected by
the people of the whole of Papua New Guinea and able to
represent the wishes of the majority of the people. Relations
between our two countries will be conducted through the National
Government in Canberra and the Central Government of Papua New
Guinea. Australian aid will be allocated solely through the
Central Government. / 3 
On 20 December 1971 the United Nations General
Assembly, by resolution, urged Australia to discourage separatist
movements and to ensure that the unity of Papua New Guinea is
preserved throughout tne period leading up to independence.
On 14 December last year the General Assembly again reaffirmed
" the importance of ensuring the preservation of unity."
I know we cannot underestimate the difficulties in
maintaining unity. I know the strength of tribal and regional
feelings. These ties and loyalties are themselves valuable
an essential ingredient in the life and culture of the nation.
But if Papua New Guinea is to survive, if it is to progress, if
it is to find an honourable and honoured place among the nations
of the world, if it is to have an effective voice in the affairs
of our region, then the Central 6overnment and the House of
Assembly must have sufficient powers over the whole nation to plan
for the nation and to speak for the nation.
I hope you won't think it patronising of me to
remind you that Australia herself a federation of states
has problems in dealing with national matters. For example,
you will know the difficulties and delays we have met in
carrying out our determination to negotiate between our two
countries in the Torres Strait. Even in a country as developed
and sophisticated as Australia, one hears from time to time
rumbings and mumblings about secession. But it is folly for
anybody to believe that any section of Papua New Guinea would
serve its interests by going it alone. For it would truly mean
going it alone. Soon I shall be leaving for a visit to our great
neighbour, Indonesia. It's worthwhile reflecting that that
country has faced similar problems of diversity of cultures
and customs and suspicion from time to time of the Central
Governm1~ ent. But Indonesia is an example of one of the
outstanding facts of the post-colonial era. Newly independent
countries in Asia and Africa have made extraordinary exertions
to maintain the integrity of the borders inherited from their
colonial rulers. For such countries those borders are regarded
as the very foundation of the legitimacy of their government,
as the very guarantee and symbol of their independence, and of
their nationhood. It must be so with Papua New Guinea.
The members of this Government and the members of
the House of Assembly have, as I have said, a tremendous and
difficult task ahead. But it is a task of great honour and
privilege to be in truth the founding fathers of your nation.
You are writing a great page in your nation's
history. In Australia you have an assured friend and I believe
we shall forge a true partnership to the great advantage of
both our countries and for the welfare of both our peoples. 



THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 1973
ACTING PRIME MINISTER: Today the Cabinet considered a number of
submissions and the first one was on recreation leave and maternity
leave. The Cabinet gave further consideration today to papers
prepared for us which raised issues requiring clarification before
our earlier decisions on an additional week's recreation leave for
Commonwealth staff and maternity leave for them can be implemented.
On recreation leave the principle is that the additional week's leave
is to be restricted basically to members of a union whether registered
or otherwise, that is recognised by the Australian Council of Trade
Unions. As previously announced, provision will be made fbor
consciencious objectors who will be expected to pay an amount
equivalent to union membership fees to consolidated revenue with
the Industrial Registrar determining when an individual may make
such a payment. There are some complex legal issues requiring
resolution for aspects of the principle of four weeks annual leave
are decided and the Cabinet has referred them to the Welfare
Committee for study and report. A similar situation applies to
maternity leave where a particular question raised was how the rules
for servants of the Australian Government are to be brought into
conformity with the relevant I. L. O. convention. The issues relating
to maternity leave have also been referred to the Welfare Committee
for examination and report to Cabinet.
Probably one of the most important decisions that was made
today was the decision to give effect to the recommendations of the
Woodward Committee. You remember that this Committee was set up to
examine pay, conditions and allowances for serving members of the
Armed Forces. It sought the development of a cogent remuneration
policy to meet the needs of modern-day defence forces within the
framework of widely accepted wage fixing principles and community
wage standards; secondly, the total abandonment of the present
incomprehensible system and the introduction of a completely new
and simplified pay structure which will clearly show its real
meaning and value. 3. The adoption of the concept of commitment
to service to life and financial recognition of the obligations
accepted by members resulting from commitment through the provision
of a continuing allowance of $ 750 a year together with a series of
additional allowances to meet particular circumstances which arise
from time to time ( for example) separation of a member from his
family. Comparisons between rates of pay before and after the
Woodward Report cannot readily be made. The position of each
individual member will be different depending on whether he is
married or single; and because of the abolition of tax-exempt
elements in pay his income tax commitments. I must stress that
the new structure of service pay is a complete replacement of and
entirely different from the old structure. I draw your close
attention to the Report from which the difficulty of making ready,
accurate comparisons will be clear. However, except for some junior
officers who will now pay more for their rations and quarters,
noone will suffer a decrease in pay. Most in fact will enjoy
an increase. The figure of $ 73 million appearing in the final
report and which will now be available to you and which was the cost
of the recommendation as submitted by the Woodward Committee is now 
reduced to $ 63 million following the abolition of national service.
I will also be in touch with Mr Justice Woodward shortly about the
offer made by the Committee in its final report to meet again if
necessary to clarify or elaborate on any issue from the
recommendations it has made. I have the question of pdrmanent
services pay fixing machinery currently under consideration.
one of the recommendations of the Committee was that there should
be a permanent committee established to conduct frequent enquiries
into service pay allowances and conditions. I am now examining the
terms under which that committee will be appointed and who should
head it. Now what I've given you is only a brief outline of the
Woodward Committee Report, the changes that have been made in
relation to pay and allowances for serving members of the forces,
the fact that for example taxation laws will now apply to members
of the forces in a way that they were not previously applied. But
there is a full press statement available on this matter and it
will be made available to you immediately following this conference.
Secondly of course the Woodward Committee's Report is also
available. Now the Defence forces re-engagement bonus. You will remember
this is the $ 1,000 which was one of the policy matters that we
put to the people of Australia in the elections in 1972. There has
been some comment in relation to this matter that it would not be
the full $ 1,000, that if tax was considered, then something less
than $ 1,000 would be available to an ex-serviceman who re-engaged.
Cabinet considered this matter today and affirmed that the reengagement
bonus of $ 1,000 to be paid to eligible members of the
Defence forces will be exempt from tax. Appropriate amendments of
the Income Tax Assessment Act will be prepared.
I come next to the Tariff Board Report on cathode ray tube
display terminals. Cabinet today considered a Tariff Board Report
on cathode ray tube display terminals. The particular units under
reference comprise a cathode ray tube ( of the T. V. screen type),
various specially designed electronic circuits and a device for
connecting its terminals to other parts of a data processing or
communications system. They are used for airline reservations,
off-track betting, education and defence communications.
The reference to the Board arose from representations by a Canberrabased
firm Information Electronics and AWA now also manufacture
these terminals. Subsequent to the Board reporting on these units
the Government forwarded to it a reference on the electronics
industry generally. Bearing in mind the Board's own approach that
its examination of relevant issues can be more thorough in broader
industry reviews than in inquiries covering only one or two outputs
of an industry's total product range, the Government has decided
to defer a decision on the Board's present recommendation pending
its report on the industry generally. The Board is to be asked to
consider any changed circumstances with regard to the local
production of the units in its report on the relevant sections
of the electronics industry. It is understood that the Board has
this well in hand. In the meantime the present rates of duty
general rate 32.5 per cent will remain in force, and because the
Board noted in some cases that export prices were less than current
domestic values the question of dumping will now be investigated
by the Department of Customs and Excise. The Government is aware
that the continuation of the existing level of protection could
attract prospective new manufacturers. The Government would like
it to be clearly understood, however, that it does not wish
fragmentation to be caused in the electronics industry by reason 
of the continuation of the present protection and it will not
hesitate to take action which may prove necessary to prevent
fragmentation and excess capacity.
The National Pipeline System. The Cabinet approved the creation
of a national pipeline authority by legislation in the forthc oming
session. The authority will have the carriage of the planning and
construction of a national pipeline system and its subsequent
operation and maintenance. On this matter Mr Connor of course will
have further details.
On T. A. A. The Cabinet decided that it would move a step
further towards implementing its two-airline policy as set out in
the Platform. Again, I suggest that on this question Mr Jones would
be able to elaborate.
Trespass on Commonwealth Lands. Cabinet decided to the repeal
of sanctions 8A, 8B and 8C of the A. C. T. Trespass on Commonwealth
Lands Ordinance was approved. You remember that these sanctions were
introduced by the previous Government in the last session of the
Parliament. Cabinet also authorised the preparation of amendments
to the Ordinance to ensure adequate protection of Commonwealth land
in the A. C. T. while properly safeguarding the rights of citizens.
Cabinet determined and approved the guarantee for loan from Asian
Development Bank to Papua New Guinea. It approved the preparation
of authorising legislation to provide the necessary assurances to
the Asian Development Bank for the borrowing of $ 9.8 million U. S.
dollars by Papua New Guinea for the upgrading, realignment and
sealing of about 75 miles of the Highlands highway between Lae and
Waterais and the upgrading and new construction of about 62 miles
of the Hiritano Highway between Port Moresby and Bereina. The
legislation will be ready for introduction during the autumn sittings.
Further guarantee for overseas borrowing by Papua New Guinea.
The Cabinet authorised the introduction of appropriate legislation
to provide for a contractual guarantee by the Australian Government
of an overseas borrowing in the 1973 financial year by Papua New
Guinea in foreign currencies not exceeding the equivalent of
$ US 20 million.
The Broadcasting and Television Act. Action against breaches.
The Cabinet has authorised the Minister for the Media to issue a
notice of suspension to any television or radio licencee company
which may display in the future a blatant disregard of the standards
laid down by the Broadcasting Control Board on advertising content
and programs. Again this is a matter which the Minister for the Media
may wish to remark on and you'll be able to get the full information
from Senator McClelland.
The Home Brewing of Beer. Cabinet decided to introduce
legislation to amend the Excise Act to allow the brewing of beer
by individuals for their own consumption. Senator Murphy has the
full details. Wheat Delivery Quotas and First Advance. Cabinet today gave.
consideration to the question of wheat quotas for the 1973 pool
and the level of the first advance in relation to that pool.
Certain decisions were taken, but as you would know, wheat quotas
is a matter involving the States. The next step therefore is for the
decision to be conveyed to the States and discussed with them'. My
colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry, will be taking this
up and I'm sure he will release details as soon as he is able to do
SO. 
Gentlemen, that completes the business the Cabinet
Submissions, and the business of the Cabinet.
Q: Mr Barnard, could you give us some indication of the number of
troops that are going to be kept in Singapore when the battalion and
the artillery battery come home at the end of this year or early
next year?
Acting No, at this stage I cannot give you any indication.
The matter is quite clearly under consideration. The Prime Minister
has made a statement on this matter and I would not want to enlarge
Upon it except to say this, since I have no doubt that it will be
raised with me and I'm now referring to the question of the Signal
Section. As soon as I became informed on this matter I immediately
issued instructions that alternative arrangements were to be made
for facilities to be provided for the Signal Section back in
Australia. That information and that request that decision was
conveyed to my Department and they are acting on it. There are some-
I suppose if one dealt-with a breakdown of the forces in Singaporethere
are some forces probably that would be required but I would
not be able to give you at this stage precisely any accurate figures
in relation to the number who would be expected to remain for this
purpose. It has been suggested that 500 to 600 might be kept there.
Would this be an accurate estimation do you think?
Acting The matter is still under consideration.
If the Federal Conference of the Labor Party decides that all
troops come home will the Government bring them home?
Acting . If the Federal Conference of the Party makes a
decision then I think as it was suggested quite recently that the
Prime Minister would accede to a decision, a decision of a properly
constituted conference.
Sir, you said you'd given instructions for the Signals Unit
to come back. It was suggested last week by a senior source I
understand that this wouldn't be until 1975. Do you think that
it will now be advanced? And secondly can you tell us on the record
what the function of the Signals Unit in Singapore is?
Acting No, I cannot. That's the answer to your second part.
But in relation to the first part, then I can assure you that
whatever instructions and whatever decision I make in relation to
bringing the Signals Unit back to Australia will be made on the
basis that it should be done without any delay. Let me amplify that:
you cannot bring back a Signals Unit without certain facilities
being available for them.
Sir, that doesn't quite clarify the point. Will it be before
1975? Acting I'm not able to answer that question at this stage.
Sir, can we get some idea of your hopes on what you know...
Acting In view of what has been said and what I have said
that I would want to ensure that there is no undue delay.
Q: Mr Barnard, you make the point that when you were told of 
this existence of the Unit in Singapore you decided it should be
brought back to Australia. When were you told?
Acting At the same time as the Prime Minister.
Was there any discussion or decision in Cabinet about making
greater use of the Commonwealth Savings Bank loans for housing to
promote competition among the other banks?
Acting No.
Mr Barnard, did Dr Cairns raise the question of revaluation
and the way the decision was reached?
Acting No, he did not. I put it to the Cabinet that any
economic decisions should quite properly be left until the Prime
Minister returned to Australia and that was accepted without question
by the Cabinet.
Sir, have officials of the Department of Defence or the Army
advised the Queensland Premier that Australia should retain control
of the islands it presently holds in the Torres Strait for strategic
reasons? Were these discussions with Defence officials which
Mr Bjelke-Petersen is alleged to have said took place did they take
place with your knowledge were they official or unofficial?
Acting I have no knowledge of the matter at all. There has
been some discussion as you know by correspondence between the
Premier of Queensland and the Prime Minister.
But you are unaware that Defence Department officials have
spoken to the Queensland Premier?
Acting I cannot confirm or deny it. I have no knowledge
of it. Mr Barnard, as Shadow Defence Minister you toured Pine Gap.
As Defence Minister yesterday you toured Pine Gap. Can you tell us
whether you were shown things yesterday that you weren' t shown in
Opposition and can you give us some indication of whether you plan
to allow Opposition M. P. s and other M. P. s in Australia greater
access than you had to these bases?
Acting Yesterday and Sunday I visited Woomera and Alice
Springs. I had been to these centres before but you will remember
that I indicated when I was asked a question on this I think at
the first Press Conference that the Prime Minister held what
I would be doing about the bases in Australia. So I visited the
joint Defence establishment at these centres Sunday and yesterday.
I did that because I wanted to be in a position as I indicated
during that first Press Conference that I believed I had a
responsibility to make a statement to the national Parliament
and in doing so to inform the people of Australia. What I have said
in the past in relation to these matters and any criticism I've made
in relation to the Parliament itself was that there was never an
opportunity for an informed discussion. The purpose of my visit to
these areas was to bring myself up to date on these matters to enable
me to be able to present a statement to the Federal Parliament as
soon as possible. That statement will be considered by the Cabinet
by the Parliamentary Labor Party and by the Government and it will
be delivered in the Parliament.
Could I press you on the first point. Were you shown things as
Minister that you weren't allowed to see before you were Minister? 
Acting The only thing that I can say all I would say
in answer to that question is that when I visited ' the establishment
as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition I was shown the utmost courtesy
and my visit on this occasion was no different.
Sir, do you propose giving the Parliament the opportunity
for informed discussion on these installations?
Acting If I make a statement to the Parliament as I will be
then naturally that statement will be open to debate.
Sir, would the Government consider alloving the Press to
inspect the installations at Pine Gap member-s of the Press?
Acting I think that on these questions you should wait until
I have made the statements to Parliament. You'll be able to question
me further on them. Naturally one of the matters that I am looking
at if I have been critical in the past would be the rights of
Members of Parliament and others.
You'll be giving a detailed briefing to Parliament about
Pine Gap and Woomera. Can you give me some general indication now
as to what the bases are all about?
Acting I do not believe, as I have said before, that I
ought to make statements on these matters until I have the
opportunity to inform the Parliament. I have been critical myself
in the Federal Parliament on other occasions about statements on
important matters being issued outside the Parliament. I think
the nation has a right to be informed and it should be informed
through the Parliament and I will do that.
on a general note, have you learnt anything or were you shown
anything that could make anyone believe that Pine Gap or Woomera
might possibly be a nuclear target?
Acting I'm sure that when I make my statement to Parliament
you will have the answer to that question.
Mr Barnard, back to the Singapore Signals Unit why was it
apparently suggested last week that the reason for us keeping
Australian logistic troops in Singapore was to screen the Signals
Unit there when it was only two or three years ago that the main
Australian Army force moved from Terandah to Singapore and up to
that stage no screen was apparently thought necessary?
Acting I said a few moments ago that one could give a
breakdown I haven't the figures before me of troops who would be
stationed in Singapore of the men who are stationed now in
Singapore, but who certainly would have no relationship to the Unit
that you've just mentioned.
Sir, you've said that you can't give us any details of
Pine Gap and the other bases at the moment because you want to save
that for Parliament. But you've announced a number of major
decisions today Mr Whitlam has done so every Tuesday when he has
been in Canberra. Presumably you've got good reason for regarding
the Pine Gap business as something special. Could you tell us why
that must wait for Parliament when other major decisions can be
announced outside Parliament?
Acting Because the decisions that I have outlined today are
Cabinet decisions. They have been approved by Cabinet. The one that 
you've raised has not been considered by Cabinet. It will be
considered by Cabinet.
Will you have to get any clearance from America before you
make your statement about Pine Gap?
Acting This is not a matter for the United States
Government. This is a matter for the Australian Government, and
it will determine the issue since it's a joint Defence installation
I would regard it as a matter of courtesy that the statement, once
it is cleared by the Government, should be available to them.
Sir, do you intend to get in touch with them before you draft
the statement or in view of what you...
Acting No, I will not be getting in touch with them.
Mr Barnard, will the agreement with the American Government
in relation to American bases in Australia will the agreements be
tabled in Parliament to allow any form of debate?
Acting the agreements?
The agreements setting up the bases. Would they be tabled
as well?
Acting Again I'll be referring to those matters in the
statement. Mr Barnard, Mr Connor last week spoke to the Japanese
Government and has suggested that mineral contracts should be
re-negotiated in the wake of the currency decision last week.
Was there any discussion of this in Cabinet?
Acting No.
Sir, even if no discussion camne up in Cabinet today on the
matter of Commonwealth Bank interest rates, was a decision made on
this last week or has any concrete plan on lowering interest rates
before Cabinet at the moment?
Acting No.
Sir, again on the re-engagement bonus, you've cleared up the
tax side of it. I don't know whether you are issuing a special
statement on this, but it's not quite clear who decides who's
eligible how many you envisage would be eligible in any one year,
or this year, and what the cost would be?
Acting I will be able to get these figures. of course the
re-engagement bonus has been paid already to some members of the
forces. I haven't got the figures in front of me nor could I recall
them immediately but, no doubt this information will be required by
the Parliament and it is available.
Mr Barnard, was the subject of the Public Service Board's
circular sent last week to Departments dealing with the fourth week
annual leave for public servants discussed by the Cabinet in the
course of discussion on the subject of maternity leave. Was there
any criticism of the Public Service Board's circular in Cabinet?
Acting I'm sorry. I didn't get the last part of your
question... 
Did Cabinet or any members of Cabinet criticise the Public
Service Board's circular sent to the Departments last week dealing
with the fourth week annual leave?
Acting Cabinet had a submission before it in relation to
the four weeks annual leave question. It dealt with that and
nothing else on this subject.
Sir, in relation to the controversy over the Singapore
Signals Unit, Mr Hartley last week made a statement in which he said
that this showed there was a problem in relationships between the
Government and the Public Service. I've no doubt that you've seen
this statement since it was in most newspapers and it applied to
your Department. Would you like to agree with Mr Hartley?
Is there a problem in dealing with the Public Service? Is there a
problem in them trying to run politicians?
Acting The answer is no.
Could you elaborate obviously this impression is abroad.
Could you tell us why
Acting I can see no conflict of opinion in this. It's
merely an interpretation of the Government's decision and I think
it's reasonable that there may be a request for an interpretation.
The Government determined its attitude in relation to that to
the query that was raised in this way.
Was it on your instructions that a desk in your office was
allegedly cleared out by a Defence liaison officer or was it on
the Department's instructions?
Acting A desk in my office?
Yes, Sir,
Acting Well it certainly was not on my instructions and
I'm not aware of it.
Was it searched?
Acting I'm not aware of it, but what I can do, I can
assure you, is find out.
Sir, are you satisfied that the bases at Pine Gap are forming
pr: oper and correct function in relation to Australia's defence?
Acting P. M.: AAcgtiagi nP, M .: t his I will be stating in my statement. 



DEATMN OF
NQ DATE
M/ 34 20 February 1973
EMBARGOED for release until
0001 hours Wednesday 21 February.
PRIME MINISTER TN INDONESIA
Following is the text of an address by the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, at a
State banquet given by the Government of Indonesia in Jakarta
tonight, Tuesday, 20 February:-
" I regard this occasion as a narticularly hapry omeifor
me and my Government. It is one that brings me a special
personal satisfaction. T1his is my eighth visit to Indonesia,
and my first as Prime Minister of Australia. Apart from a
brief visit to New Zealand, this is my first visit as Prime
Mini'ster to an independent neighbourinE country.
This is not by chance. Relations between Australia
and Indonesia have always been cordial and strong. It is my
Government's intention that they will become stronger still.
I stressed this during the recent elections. The Australian
people have endorsed the objective. Individually there is much
our tw. o countries can achieve for the welfare of our region.
There is even more that we can achieve together. 
-2-
In visiting Indonesia I am most pleased by the
opportunity to renew personal contact with President Soeharto.
I attach great importance to establishing relations of mutual
confidence with him. I deeply admire his qualities of leadership
which combine dignity and realism with great positive
achievements. Under President Soeharto Indonesia's course
has steadied and become firm. This is a source of great hope
and encouragement to Australia.
What, Mr President, lies at the basis of this confident
relationship that we have? We can hardly be more different in
history, in size, both of population and area, in cinlture, in
language and in origin. It is, of course, a curious thought
that, had the trade winds not blown so persistently from the
south east, Australia could well have been, indeed almost
certainly would have been, a continent populated by Malays.
It nearly happened. There is much evidence of Javanese interest
in an abortive settlement in the north west of Australia.
We do not have a commonly shared colonial history. We
in Australia are a transplant. We are the descendants of the
colonial authority. In all too sad a sense we are the colonizers,
and my Government, Mr President, will strive mightily to right
the wrongs that have-been done to the original Australians. 3 
Of course, there is some recent history from 1945 on
which has contributed to our friendly relations. There are
national and neighbourly ties in security, in trade, and in
the contacts of proximity. Wc perceive that each of us is
really very important to the other. Others have come to the
area and have gone, or are going home. We are both going to
stay here. Our future is intertwined forever. And, for all
our differences, we share, I believe, tolerance, humour,
friendliness, reasonable modesty and an unshakeable belief
in the brightness of our destiny.
I believe that Australia and Indonesia and let it be
said, Papua New Guinea as well are necessarily involved in
one another's destinies. This has already been so. No countries
in the region have a firmer foundation of trust and co-operation
on which to build.
SAustralia was one of the first countries to support
Indonesia's struggle for independence in the postwar years.
The Australian Labor Party and the Australian trade union
movement actively encouraged your independence movement, both
bilaterally and in the international sphere. The United Nations,
through a Good Offices Committee on which Australia was the
Indonesian nominee, played a mediatory role in the peace
settlement which led eventually to the transfer of sovereignty tc
an Indonesian Government representing the Indonesian people.
That link is symbolised tonight by the nresence of the Honorable
Sir Richard Kirby, the President of our Conciliation and 
-4-
Arbitration Commission, who, as His Honour Judge Kirby, was the
Australian Representative on the Good Offices Committee, and
whose'affection and regard for your country has continued
undiminished. In the difficult days of confrontation there were
enough people of wisdom in both countries to keep up the bridges
of friendship. Today, Australia and Indonesia remain steadfast
supporters of the United Nations, of which Indonesia became
the 60th member in 1950 when her struggle for national independence
was won. I am sure it is an auspicious sign that Indonesia and
Australia will be working together in partnership especially
during the coming two years as members of the United Nations
Security Council. We welcome the great progress you have made since the
difficult days of 1965. We admire the efforts your country has
made to strengthen the security and Drosperity of our region.
Your concern for the welfare of the region has been shown by
your active suopport for ASEAN and your sponsorship of the Asian
Conference on Cambodia in 1970. We respect your free and active
foreign policy, and your reluctance to become involved in
obsolescent military alliances.
Cultural links, too, are of growing importance in the
relations between our countries. We are proud that Australian
universities are currently training more than 200 Indonesian
post-graduate students selected by your Government. I take
this opportunity to announce that Australia will contribute 
$ A200, OOO over five years to the UITE? C Fund for the Restoration
of the Temple of Borobudur.
I want now to explain to you the broad principles and
ideals that will sustain and guide my Government's international
relations. Let this be known to all:
With a new Government there will be a new emphasis
in Australian foreign policy of profound importance. I want
this nev! emn'hasis to be clear and unmistakable amonp, the nations
of our region, particularly here in Indonesia, where we attach
such importance to the warmth and cordiality of our relationship.
You may know that foreign nolicy decisions were among the very
first initiatives undertaken by our Government during its first
days of office. The aim of these decisions, as with all future
decisions, is to establish a re-nutation for Australia as a
natinn with an independent and distinctive foreign policy. We
want to be regarded as a friendly, tolerant and co-onerative
neighbour and at no time open to any suggestion of racism.
Let me be more snecific about Australia's intentions
in this region. We believe the oeaceful progress and development
of South-East Asia will-be more speedily achieved if the region
is insulated from great -power rivalries. We support the ASEAN
concept of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-
East Asia. While we support the concept and will encourage all
nations involved in our region to support it, we also acknowledge
our existing obligations to our friends.
We have declared our willingness, should Indonesia ./ 6 
-6-
so desire, to make arrangements with your Government and
equally with an independent Papua New Guinea to provide
assistance in the training of forces, and in technical facilities
and the supply of equipment. We seek no binding treaty or formal
alliance, merely an understanding based on mutual trust and
friendshipo. We will be charting a new course in our foreign
policy, with less emphasis on the kind of military pact that is
no longer relevant to the realities of the
The keystone of our foreign policy for the 70s will
be the search for regional co-operation. In this we look first
and foremost to our great neighbour and firm friend, Indonesia.
We will be discussing with Indonesia and all our friends in the
region the possibility of new forms of co-operation to complement
existing arrangements like A13EAN which we regard as a model of
regional co-operation. We see regional co-operation as offering
the best hope for peace and progress in our part of the globe.
Working together, in understanding and mutual trust, there is
much we can do to enhance the living standards of all our
neighbours and to mitigate the ancient scourges of poverty,
ignorance and disease.
This is our paramount task. We are impressed by what
your Government has already done, through its policies, and through
the national philosophy of Pancasila, to achieve progress for
your people and political and economic stability. We pledge our
continuing encouragement and support for a new form of regional
co-operation that will speed your progress and bring nearer the
fulfilment of your goals. 7 
-7-
The future peace and progress of South-East Asia will depend
largely on how quickly and successfully these goals are achieved.
This region, I believe, is entering a new and more
hopeful era. There are three principal reasons for my
optimism. The first is the ceasefire in Viet-Nam, which has
brought to an end 20 years of bloodshed, suffering and turmoil.
My second reason for optimism is in the Drogress which
Indonesia herself has made under your guidance, Mr President
to achieve peace and development, and to restore fully the
principles of-harmony and justice, democracy and freedom embodied
in your Constitution of 1945. A just and prosperous Indonesia is
an essential condition of a just and prosperous South-East Asia.
We in Australia have looked to you to set an example to our
neighbourhood of progress and social transformation. In this,
our expectations have not been disappointed. I am confident
that Indonesia's progressive development will continue.
The third reason for my optimism if T may be bold
enough to say is the election of a new Government in Australia
committed to close regional co-operation and determined in every
way to promote the peace and welfare of our neighbours, We hope
to gain increasing standing in the eyes of Indonesia and our
other friends as an independent, tolerant and helpful neighboulr.
There are still vast problems beforf us all, but also vast
opportunities. It is my earnest hope that, working together,
we can do much to advance the prosperity and happniness of all
our peoples. 



NQ DATE
20 February 1973
GOVERNMENT TO REVIEW AUSTRALIAN HIGH
COMMISSION, LONDON
SThe Government is to undertake a comprehensive review
of the Australian High Commission in London.
This was announced today by the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, who said that the review
would follow the recent transfer of the administration of the
High Commission to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Senator Willesee said that the review would be
conducted by Mr J. E. Collings, a Commissioner of the Public
Service Board since 1960.
Mr Collings would examine functions, methods, procedures,
organisation and staffing, with a view to achieving maximum
efficiency in the High Commission's operation.
The Australian High Commission in London is by far the
biggest of Australia's overseas missions, and includes both
public service and defence forces representatives. 
-2-
Current staff is about 1,100, of whom about 900 are
locally-engaged and 350 are engaged on immigration matters. The
last full-scale review was conducted in 1959/ 60.
Responsibility for administering the High Commission
was transferred to the Minister for Foreign Affairs from the
Prime Minister on 1 November, 1972.
Senator Willesee said that Mr Collings was widely
exoerienced in nublic service organisation. He was narticularly
familiar with Australian operations overseas, starting from his
service in the then Department of External Affairs in 1945/ 47.
During the review, Mr Collings will confer with
Ministers and Heads of the Government Departments represented
at the High Commission. 0
Mr Collings proooses to travel to London in April
this year and during his absence Mr F. C. Nordeck, will
act as Commissioner of the Public Service Board. 0
Mr Nordeck, a First Assistant Commissioner in the
Office of the Public Service Board, is closely associated with
the Board's major activities and has acted as Commissioner on
many occasions since 1960. 



NQ DATE
21 February 1973
CEASEFIRF AGREENEIRNT IN LAOS
0 The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator
Willesee, today welcomed the achievement of a ceasefire agreement
i n Laos. The Acting Minister recalled that the 1962 Geneva
Agreement on Laos, which Australia had supported, had not
succeeded in preserving peace in that country. He said that it
was Australia's earnest hope that this present agreement would be
fully observed and would lead to a durable political settlement.
Senator Willesee noted that the agreement in Laos,
following upon the recent ceasefire agreement in Viet-Nam,
represented another step towards the restoration of peac e
throughout Indo-China. It was to be hoped that a ceasefire in
the Khmer Re-public would not be long delayed.
Senator Willesee reaffirmed Australia's readiness to
assist generously in the peaceful economic reconstruction of all
the countries of Indo-China, and hoped that conditions on the
ground would soon nermit the formulation and implementation of
Australian aid programmes. 



w AFAIR
FA AR
NQ DATE
M/ 36 21 February 1973
AMBAZSADOR TO TURKEY
The Minister of State and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Senator Willesee, announced today the appointment of
Mr J. M. McMillan as Ambassador to Turkey to succeed Vice Admiral
Sir Alan McNicoll, who will retire in March.
Mr McMillan, who was born in 1913, was educated in
Melbourne and joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1937.
His most recent appointment has been as High Commissioner in
Ghana. He served overseas in Washington, Moscow ( twice),
London, Karachi, Paris and Jakarta before being appointed
Minister and later Ambassador to Israel from 1960 to 1962.
He was Australian Ambassador to Brazil from 1965 to 1970 and
has been High Commissioner in Ghana since the end of 1970.
Mr McMillan is married with one daughter.
In announcing Mr McMillan's appointment, Senator
Willesee also paid tribute to the retiring Ambassador, Sir
Alan McNicoll, for his long service to Australia. Senator
Willesee recalled his service in the Navy, in which be rose
to become Chief of Staff from 1965 to 1968, and his appointment
in 1968 as Australia's first Ambassador to Turkey. 



NQ DATE
M/ 39 21 February 1973
VISIT OF MAURITTAN FOREIGN MINISTER
~ The Foreign Minister of Mauritius, Mr Gaetan Duval,
will1 visit Canberra tomorrow, 22 February, as a guest of the
Government. Announcing this today, the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Senator Willesee, said that he and officials of the
Deartment of Foreign Affairs, Tourism and Recreation and
Immigration, looked forward to meeting Mr Duval and to discussing
matters of mutual interest with him.
During his visit to Canberra, Mr Duval will have
discussions with Senator Willesee and will begiealuc
in Parliament House.
Mr Duval, who is also his country's Minister for
Tourism and Emigration, is visiting Australia to represent the
Government of Mauritius at the International Eucharistic Congress
in Melbourne. ./ 2 
-2-
Mr Duval arrived in Australia from Tahiti yesterday
and will fly to Melbourne on Friday to attend the Congress.
He is accompanied by his Secretary, Mr I. T. N. Francois.
( Note for editors: Mr Duval is expected to arrive in Canberra
from Sydney tomorrow at 9.45 flight TN 499.) 



NQ DATE
M/ 37 21 February 1973
HIGH COI-'~ qlONER TO NIGERIA I
The Minister of State and AcigMinister forFoeg
ASin Foreign
Affairs, Senator Willesee, announced today the appointment of
Mr W. H. Bray as Australian High Commissioner in Nigeria to
succeed Mr P. N. Hutton. It is expected that Mr Bray will take
up his appointment in May. This will be his first appointment
as Htead of Mission.
Mr Bray was born in South Australia in 1921 and was
~ educated at Gawler High School and the University of Adelaide
where he obtained his degree of MIB. He joined the Department
of Foreign Affairs in 1939 and after war service rejoined in
1944. He has served in Chungking, Bangkok and New York ( where
he was Acting Consul-General in 1960-61). Mr Bray has had
wide experience in the legal field having represented Australia
at the United Nations General Assembly and at several
international conferences. He has worked for the ast seven
years on legal and treaties questions in the Deartment and is
currently Head of the General Legal, Antarctic and Treaties
Section. Mr Bray is married with two children. 



AF-A-S
NQ DATE
M/ 42. 22 Febr~ uary 1971
PRIfBMI r! rFi Arm2. m3mTw) Il A PA IAr. TANT
Fol~ lowing is the text of an addreos by the Prine Minister
and Minister for Foreign Afffair Mr kWhitlam, to the Dowan
Peri-. alciinn ) P,. kYat TRenxiblik Tndoncoia ( Ind-o7nc~ tia Parliament) in
O Jakarta today. The speech was delivered at about 1600 hours
Canberra time. I am ro-Loundly moved by th-e honnur yo) u ' have dlone me,
and through me, m-y Government and nation in inviting me to address
you. When a little over t.! o months . ao I became Prime
tirU'istpr, as leader of th-e majority party in the Australian
* Parliament, I placed a visit to Indones-: ia at tu e vnry ' he~ d of
my nriorities. I was highily gratified by -the warmth o. f President
Soeharto's invitation. I and those travelling with me members
of my family, my stiff, and my officials hnave been deeply
touched by hosnite-lity and pr-nerosity with, which we hnave all
been treated. This visit comes at a !-ime of great cl&gt; ange of grea. t
change in ry own nation and of great c'. arge in our region. I want
to em-ha! sise, h'-) wevf-r, at -the ouLtse-t, thnat my visit syrbolisec
continuity a5 well as change. 12 
. In June last year my prcdoceosor as Prime Minister of
Australia, the Rkt. Hon. William McMahon, visited Jakarta and
xrde, sed this ass-c-bl1y. On Petu. L~ i to Au~ siralia he ti h
pcople of Australia, as I shall tell them, of the friendship
which the -oeopole and rvirernment n. f T~ dnzahad extended to himi
and through him, to Australia. Mr Mc~ abon was able to report
that at the official level, his discussions had fuirther advanced
co-osoeratuiton betw; ceri our tk~ ro countric,,.
Tbere w~ kas and is no partioan kdisot iIn y utyo
this mratter. Thbe cr11a ngae o f G o vePr n ie n Iias iade no cl-ange in
Australia's desire for the closest co-operation with the Government
and people of Indonesia.
I know that that wish is shared by the Indonesian
Government and neople. Austra-li* an-Indone,,,' Iin friendship is a,
constant factor in a charging region and a changiLng w. orld.
The new Australian Government has macle many sigrificant
changes in Australia's international relations, It would have been
strange indeed had it Inot been so, for my Government was elected
by the people of Australia with a mandate for ch. n, or -,-an. PeS
at home and abroad. You will -ecall that m~ y T~ arty e Autralian
Labor Party had been out'of office for 23 years, InhAvi: ng lost
power before Indonesia finally won her great struggle for
independence. -I-
As an example of the changes that have taken place,
I cite the record of Australia's voting in the United Nations
General Assembly. In the 1971 General Assembly, Australia
voted against three resolutions on Southern Africa and three
others concerning the Indian Ocean, apartheid and selfdetermination
all of which Indonesia supoorted. But in the
1972 General Assembly, immediately after my Government took
office, Australia voted affirmatively with Indonesia on each
of those resolutions. On all important iissues of race,
decolonisation and self-determination, our voting now accords
with Indonesia's. On the day that I was sworn in as Prime Minister
of Australia I made this statement to our people, which sums
up the general approach of my Government. I said that I
wanted " An Australia which will enjoy a growing standing
as a distinctive, tolerant, co-operative and well
regarded nation not only in the Asian and Pacific
region, but in the world at large."
I will return later to the role of middle powers in
the world at large. Let me say something first about our
relations with our neighbours and our region. In the distant
past Australia tended to ignore South-East Asia. Generations
ago, we were still largely a European outpost, a part of the
old British Emnire, with our loyalties and nreoccupations in
Europe alone. In the oast 20 years we moved to an opposite
extreme. / 4 
Influenced by such events as the Chinese revolution
and the war in Indo-China, we became oreoccupied, even obsessed,
with South-East Asia as a new Australian frontier, even a frnntline
for our security. This led us into military involvements
and military pacts that are no longer relevant to the contemporary
needs of Australia or the region in which we live.
In the wake of a Vict-Nam settlement, it is my hope
that we will see South-East Asia in a calmer, more constructive
perspective. We -want our attitude to be based less on irrational
fears for our security, and directed more to peaceful political
initiatives for the welfare and nrogress of our neighbours.
My Government believes that it has a responsibility
to take a generous oart in any international effort for the
social and economic rehabilitation of Indo-China. There are
several reasons why such resnonsibility devolves on us.
Australia was one of the belligerents, although my
Government has withdrawn all its forces from Viet-Nam and ended
its military involvement. Over and above that, we are the
richest member of the community of nations in the South-East
Asian region, with a strong interest in the welfare of our
neig-bours. We believe that the problems that you and other
nations of the region face now are human and social problems,
nroblems that are common to all mankind. How best to raise
your stndards of living: how to bring literacy, cultural and 
educational opnortunities to your people: how to control the
growth of population and the environmental problems it will
bring in its wake as your cities become more industrialised:
how best to make use of the foreign aid resources at your
disoosal to overcome poverty and disease. It is in these
areas that my country is most anxious to help. We note the
measures you are now taking to achieve population control.
We would welcome, if your Government desires it, a long-term
study of the whole rnncept of foprain aid to determine how
best to apply it to urgent human and social needs. 2
Last month I visited N-w Zealand where a new Labor
Government has also been elected. The New Zealand Prime
Minister, Mr Kirk, and I expressed our intention of working with
our Asian and Pacific neighbours in making adjustments to
existing arrangements and. seeking new forms of co-operation.
We see great merit in an organisation genuinely representative
of the region, without ideological overtones, conceived as an
initiative to help free the region of the great power rivalries
which have bedevilled its progress for so long, and which would
be designed to insulate the region against ideological
interference from the great nowers. I must emnhasise that
such an objective is one which would take time and careful
consultation with all of our neighbours.
There is one very great change about to occur in
our region of very special imoortance and interest to Indonesi2.
and Australia equally. Indonesia and Australia at nre: e" t ./ 9 
a common border the border between Indonesia and Papua New
Guinea. Before long that will no longer be true. Indonesia
will share that border with an independent nation, the nation
of Papua New Guinea.
I have just visited Papua New Guinea to explain my
Government's plans to the Deople there. What I have tried to
put to them is that a decision about independence is not just
a decision on behalf of Papua New Guinea. It is also a decision
on behalf of Australia. It involves in a very real sense
S-Australia's vision of herself in the world. To put it nlainly,
Australia is not willing any longer to rule a colony.
We regard it as unacceptable that Australia, of all
countrie:, should be one of the world'-s last colonial powers.
It would be incredible if the Australian Labor Party, which, in
its last Government, wholeheartedly supported the cause of
Indonesian independence, were to accept willingly a colonial
D role for herself in the 1970s.
SIt is not only a question of our responsibilities to
the neople of Papua New Guinea, it is not only a question of
our clear responsibilities under the United Nations Charter,
it is a question of our responsibilities to ourselves.
We are determined that we shall be true to ourselves
and divest Australia of the colonial taint. This in no way
means that we are going to wash our hands of our responsibilities
towards the people of Panua New Guinea. We freely ana gladlY / 7 
accept that for many, many years to come, Papua New Guinea '. ill
need continuing and substantial assistnnce from Australia. She
shall have it and this again is a policy which would not be
changed even if there were a change i the Gover4; mcnt of Australia.
But our true role is as a friend and neighbour, not as a ruler.
I believe that Indonesia can also play a valuable part
as Papua New Guinea's friend and nearest neighbour. I hope the
Seopl. of Papua New Guinea will look to Indonesia as an example
of how neoples of different cultures and customs, of different
Slanguages, of different religions, at widely different stages
of deve. orment spread over a vast, divided and difficult terrain,
Scan come together, live together , nd grow together as one great
nation. If I might sum up the general lines that my Government
will follow, I should like to quote a brief nassame, I wrote
18 months ago when in Opnosition, for a book outlining for th,
0 Peoole of Australia, the lines a Labor Government, if they
elected one, would pursue. I wrote then:
" Essentially, a nation's foreign nolicy depends upon
a balance between commitment and Dower. Australia's first and I
fundamencal commitment is to. our own national security. This is
a commitment quite commensurate with our power and our re: source;.
Our second commitment is to a secure, united and friendly
Papua New Guinea. This too is well wit'in our nower. Our lack
of wisdom and foresight, rather than any lack of nower and influere,
is our real danger in this case. / 8 
Our third commitment is to achieving friendly relations 3
with our nearest and largest neighbour, Indonesia.
Our fourth commitment is more general, because in this
context our power becomes more generalised it is our commitment
to the peace and prosperity of the immediate region. Clearly
our ambitions and aspirations on this level run beyond our actual
power. Even so, we are far more influential than mere numbers
would suggest Our fifth commi tmient is to our own renutation: our
power in this case lies in our will, not our resources. This
taint of racism must be removed if w. e are to be a good neighbour
in our region." These are the five great pillars on which my Government
proposes to establish its international relations. But it is
not merely to ourselves, or even simply to our own region, that.
our ultimate commitment lies. Our ultimate interests lie in
helping to nreserve stable and peaceful relations between the
great powers. In military and industrial terms, Australia
and Indonesia can both perhaps be described as middle powers.
We have a common interest in seeing th.'. it stable balance is
maintained between the great nowers China, the Soviet Union,
Janan, the United States on whose decisions the peace of the
world will principally derend. As middle Dowers, we can both be
active in working for peace and understanding in the world at
large. It is in this broader context that I see the need for a
fresh and indenendent policy for Australia in international rel-"" 
It is in this context that I see great new opportunities for
co-operation with Indonesia.
Once more let me express my deep gratitude for the manner
in whici you and the Government and people of Indonesia have
received me. I am glad to have the opportunity so early in the
life of my Government to reaffirm the existing links between our
two countries and to forge new and stronger ones.
Living as we both do in a region which is in many ways
the world's most turbulent and economically deprived, we cannot
ignore the very great difficulties and complexities which lie
ahead, for us and for our neighbours. Yet, even so, it is
S impossible not to hold real hope for the future, even while
acknowledging the dangers.
There is a very real prospect that there will be no
major international conflict in our neighbourhood in the foreseeable
future. The region has seen 30 very dark and troubled years. It
would be naive to believe that we are now entering a period of
profound peace. But at least we may look forward to a period of
S comparative oeace uneasy, fragile, imperfect nerhaps, but if
we have the will and determination, it will be enough to allow us
to create the conditions in our rgiJon by which we can reduce the
scourges of ooverty, starvation and suffering. In that war a
war that is really worth waging I profoundly believe our two
great countries will cement a deep and enduring, an unbreakable
nartnership. 



PRIME MIINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT JAKARTA
THURSDAY 22ND FEBRUARY 1973
Ladies and gentlemen: The Prime Minister will make some
introductory remarks and then you can ask questions.
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen I am told you haven't yet
got a copy of the communique. The delay is to add a passage
following tne discussions that I had this afternoon with
SriSultan Hamencku Buwonolx and the other ministers involved in
economic affairs so I don't know if you want to wait unt ' il you
do get the communique or whetner if it comes while you'r6 asking
me questions you would like a phase to read it. I'm told the
communique can't be nere until six o'clock at the earliest.
Well ladies and gentlemen this limits it a bit I'm afraid.
By way of preliminary all I need say is that my main objective
in coming to Indonesia was to reinforce two tnings. The first
is the continuity of Australian Government interest in
Australia's nearest neighbour. Secondly to reinforce the personal
relations which I'd achieved with President Soeharto on the many
occasions I've met him since 1966. I believe both these objectives
have been very satisfactorily achieved. Are there any questions?
Q. Was there any special reason for your second meeting with
President Soeharto?
PRIME MINISTER: No. We had a long conversation yesterday you'll
remember and we both thought that if the President's programme
could be arranged it would be pleasant for us to have another
conversation and this I'm happy to say was achieved.
Q. What is your commentary regarding the outcome of the White
Australia policy. Is it still useful now or still necessary?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been substantial changes in the
Australian Government's immigration policy.' We now do not
discriminate on the basis of race or nationality or colour among
persons who are admitted to visit Australia or to settle in
Australia. But those that come to settle in Australia are
primarily now drawn not from government recruitment but from
nominations by people who are living in Australia and who want
close relatives to come and live there with them.
Q. Were there discussions on future naval exercises?
PRIME MINISTER: This was not discussed. There was a passing
reference to the success of the recent naval exercises between
the Indonesian and the Australian navies. I'm sure there will
be future such exercises not only between our naval forces but
indeed between other sections of our armed forces.
Q. Will there be another joint exercise this year?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't discuss my programme but there are
certain to be future naval exercises. We were both pleased with
tile results of the first one which was held recently. The 
Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, Mr Barnard, is the
M~ inister for Defence and he was here last year and he will be
here again in the first week of April.
Q. There is a report Prime Minister that there is a need for
a military pact between Australia and Indonesia. How far are
you adopting this idea?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been no discussions about a military
pact between Indonesia and Australia during my visit or as far
as I know ever. I don't think there has ever been a proposal
for a military pact between Indonesia and Australia. There are
as you know arrangements under which members of the Indonesian
Armed Forces receive training in Australia and members of the
Australian Armed Forces receive it in Indonesia.
Q. The speech of yours at the State Banquet last Tuesday night
have the impression that Australia would like to set up a form of
co-operation in South Asia, of regional co-operation.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. What's the Indonesian Government's and President Soeharto's
reaction about your suggestion?
PRIME MINISTER: The communique has this passage in the middle
of page 4. You've now got it have you. You see there:
" President Soeharto welcomed Mr Whitlam's objective of the
evolution of a widely representative Asian regional organisation.
The President agreed that while such a concept was unlikely to
come about in the short term he recognised its potential value
in the longer term"
Q. And what about ASPAC in the future. Australia has recognised
Peking while Taiwan is one of the members of ASPAC.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Its true that Australia, a member of ASPAC,
has transferred her representation of China from Taipai to Peking.
So too have two other members of ASPAC, Japan and New Zealand.
So this really does very greatly limit the utility of ASPAC. it
makes it anacharonistic as long as Taiwan is still a member of it.
Q. It was reported that you did offer to President Soeharto to have
a larger regional co-operation bigger than what we already have
in ASEAN, which would merge ASEAN. Could you tell us what is
behind this new Asian grouping you have in mind?
PRIME MINISTER: I never made in conversations with President
Soeharto or at any time such an offer and I didn't in my statement
with President Soeharto. Nor have I at any other time made the
suggestion that there should be a merger of ASEAN with any other
regional grouping.
Q. Well, maybe the new form of regional grouping other than
we already have.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well perhaps it might help you, I think
the Australian Embassy can probably give you a copy of it, but
I did discuss this general question three weeks ago three and
a half weeks ago when I opened the Australian Institute of
Political Science Summer School in Canberra. Well perhaps it
might help if I could read to you. ( Prime minister reads extract
from A. I. P. S. speech). 
3.
" To meet the new realities and our perception of them.
We shall be seeking new forms of regional co-operation. In its
present form ASPAC no longer reflects those realities. In
particular, the continued presence of Taiwan makes ASPAC
anachronistic. Three of ASPAC's members, Australia, New Zealand
and Japan, recognise Peking as the sole legal government of
China. We will not be withdrawing immediately from ASPAC
although we consider that unless there is a change in its present
membership it cannot function effectively or continue for very
long. In Wellington the New Zealand Prime Minister and I
expressed our intention to work with our Asian and Pacific
neighbours in making adjustments " i-o existing arrangements and
seeki* ng new forms or' co-operation. We shall be conm:: ulting with our
neicjibours including IndoneFsia, Japan and others, b-,: fore any
final decisions are reachedl on how wo. should proceed. There is
no question of seeking to change and enlarge ASEAN. We should
like to see all our ASEAN neignbours in a larger regional
association for Asia and the Pacific, but ASEAN itself is a
sub-regional grouping which is doing valuable work and any
enlargement of the organisation is a matter for its members.
Regional co-operation will be one of the keystones of
Australia's foreign policy for the seventies. We shall be
charting a new course with less emphasis on military pacts.
It will be based on an independent outlook on foreign affairs
and will be directed towards a new regional community geared
to the realities of the seventies.
The guidelines of the regional community that I foresee will
be an organisation genuinely representative of the region without
ideological overtones, conceived, as an initiative to help free
the region of great power rivalry that have bedevilled its
progress for decades and designed to insulate the region against
ideological interference from the great powers.
I do not intend that Australia should try to impose a
detailed formulation for setting up such a community and we shall
not seek to intrude beyond our realistic capacity to participate
and assist in tne realisation of this concept. We shall be
patient and punctilious in our consultation and prepared at
every turn to take account of and participdte in the genuine
aspirations of the region. So you see that I did discount the
idea of merging three and a half weeks ago.
Q. ( ABC) Prime Minister. What were President Soeharto's
objections to the short term value of this Asian concept that
you put forward as regional co-operation?
PRIM4E MINISTER: President Soeharto has no objections. He is
concerned that the situation in Indo China should become clearer.
Q. When do you visit Peking.
PRIME MINISTER: No arrangements have been made for me to
visit Peking at all.
Q. Or Tokyo?
PRIME M4INISTER: It is probable that some of my colleacrues, about
three of my colleagues and I will visit Tokyo at the end of next
October because there is due about that time the second of the 
annual meetings which take place between Japanese and Australian
ministers. Last year the first meeting took place in Canberra.
The next one is due to take place in Tokyo and the end of October
seems to be the most convenient time.
Q. Sir, since President Soeharto considers that the concept of
regional groupings could not come about for short term purposes
will you continue to seek for approval from other South East
Asian countries?
PRIME MINISTER: Whenever I meet heads of government or heads
of state or foreign ministers from any countries in South East
Asia I will discuss this general concept. I have done so with the
Prime Minister of New Zealand and the President of Indonesia.
And there will be other occasions to discuss it in the next few
months. For instance there will be a Commonwealth Heads of
Government conference in Ottawa in August and on that occasion
tnere will be the Prime Ministers of New Zealand and Malaysia
and Singapore as well as myself in attendance.
Q. Have you established any framework for ministerial exchanges?
What specific proposals were put to you on Australian investment?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been no specific projects finalised.
There are several matters under discussion but my visit was not
intended to finalise any of these arrangements. As you can see
I'm only accompanied by advisers from the Prime Minister's
Department and the Department of Foreign Affairs. I don't have
advisers from the Treasury or from other departments here with me.
The Sultan gave me an aide memoire on the whole of this subject
and of course I discussed many aspects of it this afternoon
with Dr Sadli and Professor Widjojo and Dr Subroto and
General Sudjono. You did also ask me about regular exchanges of
visits by Ministers. There is no framework for regular visits
by M'inisters each way although there are frequent visits as
you know. There is one at the moment isn't there to Australia.
And there are regular discussions between officials of the two
governments on all these matters.
Q. Prime Minister you said you would be talking to various
Asian and Pacific leaders about this concept of regional
co-operation? Can this be interpreted perhaps that your idea
will slow down a little from what you may hvave had originally?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Do you see any prospect of Australia calling together people
who might be interested in talking about this.
PRIME MINISTER: I have never expressed a view that Australia
should call such a conference. Never. Obviously I don't discount
that we could co-operate in calling such a conference but the
programme for visits to Australia and by me to other countries
hasn't changed. I've pointed out here just now the Commonwealth
heads of government conference in Ottawa is in August has been
arranged for about a month past and the meeting with the Japanese
Ministers in Tokyo at the end of October has been discussed for
about a month.
Q. If there was a new regional association in the long-term
how far ahead do you see it?
PRIME MINISTER: PIR IMwEoMuINlIdTnER': t discount the possibility of having 
it in a couple of years. I wouldn't expect it before a couple
of years. But I think there is a general realisation that the
existing regional associations to which Australia belongs are
inappropriate because they are transitory or because they're
anachronistic or because they are losing members. There's the
five power arrangements. That's the most recent one. Before that
there were the ASPAC arrangements which I mentioned and before
that again there were the SEATO arrangements. Well clearly none
of these are arrangements which would be made now. And the
sensible thing is to look for better arrangements. Ones which
are more representative of the region and less idealogical or
derivative than the existing ones.
Q. A simple point. Your visit is to reassure continuity with
the government. Can you specifically say the policy of the
new government in terms of defence co-operation with Indonesia?
PRIME MINISTER: I expressly welcomed the idea o f co-operation
in my policy speech not only with Malaysia and Singapore but
also with Indonesia, New Zealand and Fiji. I s9pecified those
three additional countries with which we would be happy to have
training procurement exercises.
Q. The policy here is to develop a national resilience. And
this has two prongs. The economic and internal security. Our
defence co-operation will be therefore part of the second.
Could you give a rationalisation of why our Australian aid
priorities are spread over the two and not just concentrated
say on the economic front.
PRIME MINISTER: I must make plain as I did to one of the
first questions that the defence co-operation does not take the
form of any pact. Indonesia has never entered into a military
pact with any country. I doubt if any countries from now on
will be entering into military pacts with any other countries.
The day of military pacts has gone. Indonesia never went through
that phase.. Indonesia believes that Australia can assist her
in developing the skills of her armed forces. Australia is very
happy to meet any such requests and Indonesia can also help
Australia's armed forces in the development of their skills
with particular application of course to this region and we
appreciate the assistance which Indonesia has given. You do
mention the policy of resilience or endurance. This policy comes
out in all discussions I find. With the Sultan yesterday and with
the President at our two " tete-a-tete and also on many
occasions. As you noticed we've been together in cars or on
platforms or at dinner. I can well understand the faith that
Indonesians have in this principle. It is a particular
application to their situation. Indonesia has resisted disruption
and subversion. She has achieved independence and identity through
her own efforts and Indonesia is indeed fortunate in the fact
she doesn't have the racial, linguistic, the economic
disparities that are characteristic of most other countries in
the region. And even where there is diversity as in religion
there is not dissension on that basis. Indonesia is very
fortunate. Indonesia realises that she has a cohesion which
is the basis of her strength. A cohesion extending over
centuries. A cultural identity. A political identity. A social
identity which can be a source of very great strength to the
whole region and indeed of envy to most members of it.
Q. Prime Minister, were you asked during your discussions
with the Indonesian leaders for specific grants of aid on
this particular trip? 
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. I was going to say if so, what were they?
PRIME MINISTER: See answer to first question. No, no specific.
Oh there was one, I beg your pardon there was one reference, the
first time I believe but of course no decision was sought on it
because it was a new concept. Perhaps you should check with
Mr Woolcott afterwards as to the dates and quantities. My
recollection is that the arrangements for particular assistance
to Irian Barat expire next year. They started in 1968. They
amounted to $ 30,000,000. The funds came I think from the
Netherlands and the proposal was made that Australia might contribute
to a continuation of this programme particularly to ensure that
there was parity of development between Irian Barat and Papua
New Guinea. I said I would certainly look at the proposal, refer
it to my advisers for prompt consideration. I did however
express the view that any assistance that Australia gave to
Indonesia or to any part of Indonesia would almost certainly
go through the government of Indonesia. This was a specific new
suggestion that was made. There were no other specific
suggestions. There was a discussion on existing or standing
proposals which are the subject of discussion. It was never
forecast that there would be any decisions made on any of these
matters or that there should be any substantive discussion on
them. Q. Did you happen to sort out the matter of the naval patrol
boats which was left in abeyance in the visit of the previous
Prime Minister last year?
PRIME MINISTER: There was no reference to the specific programme
of patrol boats. There was general reference to Indonesia's need
of patrol boats in this very dispersed archipelago for various
reasons of course. All sorts of, I don't know if the word was
used, " smuggling". But that's the impression I got. There was
a general reference to the desirability to improve maritime
communications and to safeguard them. Mr Barnard I would expect
would be discussing this matter more substantially when he comes
up here.
Q. It is concerning the aircraft, the Fl-ll. Australia tried to
acquire this. I am wondering whether you still intend to acquire
it. I believe that
PRIME MINISTER: I'll believe that they'll come when they arrive.
You should understand that these aircraft have already been paid
for by Australia. We paid for them so we might as well take them.
We can't trade them in. We can't return them and they will be
arriving I expect this year before the 10th anniversary of the
contract being placed for them. Australian taxpayers have already
paid for them so quite obviously we have to take
we might as well take delivery of them. 



A
NQ DATE
M/ 41 23 February 1973
AUSTRALIAN CONTRIBUTION TO A. IAN CENTRE
Australia. is to contribute the equivalent of $ US24,000
annually over a neriod of five years towards the establishment of
the Asian Centre for Development Administration in Kuala Lumpur.
Announcing this today, the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Senator Willesee, said that the centre would undertake
S high level training and research to help meet the needs for
qualified administrators of developing countries in the ECAFE
region. The centre would begin operating towards the middle of
this year and it was planned to review Australia's contribution
after two years. Senator Willesee said that the work of the centre
would be a comparatively new element in ECAFE's activities.
Australia had tnken an active interest in all aspects
of the work of ECAFE, which nlayed an imoortont role in the
promotion of economic development and co-operation within the
region. 
-2-
The two other ECAFE institutions to which Australia
contributes are the Asian Statistical Institute in Tokyo and
the Asian Institute for Economic Development and Planning in
Bangkok. ECAFE ( the Economic Commission For Asia and the Far
East) is one of the four regional commissions of the United
Nations Economic and Social Council. It was founded in 1947
to encourage the economic and social development of Asia and
the Far East. 



NQ DATE
M/ 44 23 February 1973
ACTING MINISTER CONTTENTS ON
LO0 OF LIBYAN AIRCRAFT
Commenting on renorts of the shooting down of a
Libyan airliner over Sinai on 21 February, the Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, said today
that the Australian Government denlored the loss of life.
It w-s greatly to be honed that this escalation
of tension in the Middle East would not lead to further
hostilities, he said.
Senator Willesee said that, on behalf of the
Government, he wished to extend his deepest symoathy to
the relatives of those innocent civilians who had lost
their lives in this tragic incident. 



NQ DATE
M/ 43 23 February 1973
AUSTRALIAN/ INDONE9IAN JOINT COMMUNIQUE
The following is the text of the joint communique
S issued at the conclusion of the Prime Minister's discussions
with President Soeharto in Indonesia:
" The Prime Minister of Australia, the Honourable E. G.
Whitlam, visited Indonesia from 20 to 25 February at
the invitation of His Excellency President Soeharto.
Mr hitlam's visit soon after assuming office as Prime
Minister reflected his Government's announced intention to give
priority to the strengthening of Australia's relations with
Indonesia. President Soeharto welcomed Mr Whitlam's visit to
SIndonesia because of the importance he attaches to maintaining
close understanding with the Australian Government. Mr Whitlam
while leader of the Australian Opposition met President Soeharto
several times. His first visit to Indonesia as Prime Minister
of Australia enabled the two Heads of Government to draw on and
consolidate this previous relationship.
President Soeharto and Mr Whitlam value relations of
nersonal confidence. At their wish comprehensive working discussions
were the focal Doint of the visit. The two Heads of Government / 2 
-2-
had lengthy private discussions. Their exchange of views was
wide-ranging and was marked by cordiality, frankness and harmony.
The understanding established between them marked an important
advance in relations between Indonesia and Australia.
Mr Whitlam received courtesy calls by the State
Minister of Economic, Industrial and Financial Affairs, His
Highness Sri Sultan Hamengku Buwon IX, by Foreign Minister Haji
Adam Malik and by the Governor of Jakarta, Lieutenant-general
Kko Ali Sadikin. He attended working meetings with Ministers
and senior officials responsible for economic development and
trade and with the Ministers for Defence and Foreign tAffairs
and senior officers of the Indonesian Armed Forces. Substantive
discussions took place on each of these occasions.
Talks during Mr Whitlam's visit covered matters of
common interest to Australia and Indonesia. These included the
prospects for intensified co-operation in bilateral relations,
the situation and outlook in the Asia/ Pact ,' ic region following
the ceasefire agreement in Viet-Nam, and questions likely to
arise in the United Nations Security Council to which Indonesia
and Australia were both elected at the 27th General Assembly.
Mr Whitlam explained to President Soeharto and his
advisers the direction that his Government is seeking to impart
to Australian foreign policy. He said this was towards a more
independent Australian stance in international affairs firmly based
on national identity, social justice, human rights and peaceful
regional co-oneration, and not onen to suggestions of racism. / 3 
-3-
This broad anproach had prompted his Government since coming to
office to take a series of initiatives designed to establish
Australia's standing as a distinctive, tolerant and co-operative
nation in the Asia/ Pacific region and in the world at large.
President Soeharto and Mr Whitlam expressed the hope that
detente among the great powers would improve the prospects for
peace and stability in the South-East Asia region. They welcomed
the conclusion of the ceasefire agreement in Viet-Nam and hoped
that this would lead to the resolution of differences among the
narties in Indo-China by negotiation. Mr Whitlam recognised
Indonesia's participation in the ICCS as a nositive and valuable
contribution towards peace in the South-East Asia region.
President Soeharto explained to Mr Whitlam the develooment
strategy of the new order in Indonesia and its relationship to
foreign nolicy. He said that in accordance with the concept of
national resilience, Indonesia was fully harnessing her resources
for national development and security. He emphasized Indonesia's
wish to have good relations with all countries and the importance
of peace and security for Indonesia's development.
President Soeharto said that, through its good neighbour
policy, the new order in Indonesia had sought oositive and
co-operative relations, esnecially with countries of the region,
to bring about favourable conditions for social and economic
progress. Indonesia attached great importance to regional
co-operation through ASFAN and by means of close bilateral
relations with neighbouring countries. / 4 
-4-
Mr Whitlam welcomed the progress achieved by ASEAN which
Australia considers a model of successful regional co-operation
in South-East Asia. He said that Australia had followed with
interest th-e initiatives of her A-) 3FNN neighbours to achieve a
zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia.
Australia suppiorted these efforts and would encourage other
countries to do likewise. President Soeharto explained to
Mr Whitlam his Government's arnroach to the idea of a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality, based upon the strengthening
of national resilience and co-operation among the member countries
of the rerpion so that they maintain effective control of their
destinies. Mr Whitlam discussed with President Soeharto and his
advisers the prospects for progress in regional co-operation in
Asia. Mr Whitlam affirmed that regional co-operation was a keystone
of Australian foreign policy. He looked forward to the eventual
emergence of a comprehensive regional organization, without
ideological overtones, to heln free the Asia/ Pacific area from
great power intervention and rivalries.
Mr Whitlam. said that in canvassing this idea Australia
would consult punctiliously with regional neighbours and would be
sensitive to their ideas and aspirations. His proposals were
preliminary and exploratory. He recognised that new forms of
regional co-operation would not be quiickly or easily achieved.
His ideas were intended to complement ASEAN and were in no way
com~ petitive with, or alternative to it. 
President Soeharto welcomed Mr Whitlam's objective of
the evolution of a widely representative Asian regiona
organization. The President agreed that, while such a concent
was unlikely to come about in the short term, he recognised its
potential value in the longer term.
Mr Whitlam addressed a plenary session of the Indonesian
Parliament. He was pleased by this opportunity to strengthen
relations between the representative institutions of Indonesia
and Australia. Mr Whitlam said that he looked forward to a visit
this year to Australia by a delegation representing the leadership
of the Indonesian Parliament.
President Soeharto and Mr Whitlam noted with satisfaction
the progress so far achieved in Australian/ Indonesian co-operation
in the fields of development assistance and defence. They
reviewed several important projects now in course and identified
others to be incorporated in future assistance programmes. They
agreed that both countries would oarticinate in a joint
feasibility study of the develonment potential in the Cilacap
area of Java. During his discussions with President Soeharto,
Mr Whitlam emphasised his Government's commitment to the provision
of expanded development assistance to the developing countries
of the region to assist them to achieve more nrosperous and just
societies. Australia's assistance would continue to be directed
closely to Indonesia's development priorities. President / 6 
-6-
Soeharto expressed anpreciation for past Australian development
assistance and expressed the hope that co-operation between the
two countries in this field would continue to reflect the
increasingly friendly relations between Australia and Indonesia.
The mutual benefits deriving from trade between the two
countries and from Australian investment in Indonesia w. ere
discussed. President Soeharto and Mr Whitlam recognised the
importance of Australian trade and investment contributing to
the economic nrogress of Indonesia and towards the expansion
of Indonesia's export capabilities. Both countries agreed that
consideration might be given by Australian investors to increasing
the local content in their production wherever economically viable.
The Minister of Economic Financial and Industrial Affairs
and the other Economic Ministers outlined Indonesia's economic
problems and the way in which Australia could help. The Prime
Minister undertook to put these matters to immediate and
symnathetic study.
The two leaders agreed to intensify bilateral exchanges
and co-oneration in cultural affairs. They looked forward to
the establishment in Jakarta of the projected Australian cultural
centre. Mr Whitlam said that Australia would welcome the
establishment by Indonesia of a cultural centre in Australia.
Mr Whitlam informed President Soeharto that Australia
would contribute $ A200,000 over five years to the UNESCO Fund
for the restoration o Borobudur. This announcement was warmly
welcomed by the President. / 7 
-7-
Mr Whitlam informed President Soeharto of his Government's
intention to ratify at an early date the Seabed Boundary Agreements
already negotiated bet",, een Australia and Indonesia. Both
Governments will also ratify as soon as practicable the agreement
relating to the boundary between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea
which was signed at Jakarta on 12 February, 1973, by Mr Malik
on behalf of Indonesia and Mr Somare, the Chief Minister of
Papua New Guinea, on behalf of Australia and Papua New Guinea.
Mr Whitlam and President Soeharto welcomed the rapid
nrogreqs of Papua New Guinea towards indenendence. President
Soeharto affirmed Indonesia's intention to open consular
representation at Port Moresby and looked forward to the develonment
of close and friendly relations between Indonesia and Papua New
Guinea. Mr Whitlam said that Australia was encouraged by the
prosnect of close co-operation betweel. Indonesia and Papua New
Guinea as neighbours sharing a common land boundary.
President Soehrto and Mr Whitlam noted with satisfaction
the broad areas of agreement and nrospects for close co-operation
between Australia and Indonesia in international organizations,
underlined by their concurrent membership of the United Nations
Security Council. They agreed that in future representatives
of both countries in international bodies and conferences would
be instructed to maintnin close consultation and to take into
account mutual interests in all appropriate issues.
At the conclusion of the official talks, the President
of Indonesia and the Australian Prime Minister expressed confidence
that in the years ahead the two countries would work together even / 8 
-8-
more closely and constructively than in the oast.
Before leaving Indonesia the Prime Minister and
Mrs Whitlam exnressed their aprreciation for the warmth and
cordiality that marked both the official and informal functions
during their stay in Indonesia. They said that they would long
remember the hospitality and friendship shown to them by
Indonesians at all levels. They exnressed the hope that President
and Madame Soeharto would make a return visit to Australia at a
convenient future date." 



3" II A1.1 A d PRESS STATEMENT
February 1973
PAPUA NEW GUINEA-INDONESIA
My visit to Papua New Guinea and Indonesia has achieved two
purposes. It has enabled me to renew my close personal contacts
with the leaders of Australia's nearest neighbours. It has
enabled me, for the first time since the election of the new
Government, to explain personally the new policies and directions
my Government will follow in its international relations, and to
hear the views of Indonesia and Papua New Guinea on issues of mutual
concern. My visit was in keeping with the four basic commitments of an
Australian foreign policy which I enunciated in my policy speech.
These commitments are, firstly, to Australia's own securuty;
secondly, to a secure, stable and united Papua New Guinea; -Chirdly,
to develop closer relations with our nearest neighbour, Indonesia;
and fourthly, to promote the peace and prosperity of our
neighbourhood. In Papua New Guinea I emphasised Australia's determination
to see Papua New Guinea achieve independence within the life of the
present Australian Parliament. This determination is well understood
and widely accepted. Papua New Guinea's problems will not be removed
by delaying or fearing independence. They will only he removed by
embracing it.
The striking difference between Papua New Guinea now and two
or three years ago is that all parties now accept the inevitabili-.
of independence and are working actively towards it. Arguments zii: out
timing or method there may be, but arguments about aims and princpies
have disappeared. In Papua New Guinea the tide has turned, and it
has turned in favour of change. There can be no stopping this process
now. Australia has a continuing and enduring role to play in
assisting the progress and prosperity of Papua New Guinea. One of
the aims of my talks was to stress that Australia's commitment to
Papua New Guinea would last well beyond the achievement of
independence. We are needed in Papua New Guinea and will be neecdd
for a long time to come. We shall not fail the trust that the people
have placed in us. 
-2-
My other aim in Papua New Guinea was to stress the need
for national unity. I made it clear that a secure and prosperous
independent nation would be established only through the unity
of many different tribal, cultural, regional and linguistic
elements. Our aid will be channelled through a national gcvernment
in Port M~ oresby. Our dealings with Papua New Guinea will be
between the national Government in Canberra and the national
Government of a united, independent Papua New Guinea. There is
no future, there is no hope, in fragmentation and parochialism.
In Indonesia, I believe I established a closer personal
contact-with President Soeharto. It is of great importance that
the leaders of Australia and Indonesia should be on the friendliest
terms. I was touched by the President's warmth and hospitality.
I wanted to explain to President Soeharto the new more self-reliant
and independent Australian approach to its foreign relations and
assure him personally that these changes would not affect the
continuing process of strengthening Australia-Indonesian relations.
I was impressed by the great differences between Australia
and Indonesia. But our history and our geography have combined
to give our two countries the unique oppogrtujnity to_ bridge these
differe7_ nces. we have an exciting opportunity to set -an' e'xaipJe;
to see that two such different societies can form a constructive
and mutually advantageous relationship of cordiality and real
and lasting value.
I did not go to Indonesia with any blueprint or firm plans
for a future regiona. organisation. Australia has no wish to
impose her views on her friends and neighbours. I had frank and
useful discussions on the future of the Asian region with
President Soeharto and his ministers. I found that fundamentally
the Indonesian and Australian Governments have very simil. ar views
about the future of the Asian and Pacific region. I was gratified
that President Soeharto welcomed our interest in the evolution of
a more broadly based and representative regional forum. If such
a forum is achieved it will be through close and detailed
negotiations..-with Indonesia and all other interested nations in
the South-East Asia region.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M4/ 45 26 February 1973
EMBARGOED for release until
1800 hours Canberra time,
Monday 26 February ' 973.
AUSTRALTIS RELATIONS WITH
NORTH VIET-NAM
I. The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, announced today that Australia and t-he Democratic
Renublic of Viet-Nam bad agreed to establish diplomatic relations.
The following is the text of the joint communique agreed
between the two Governments:-
" Desiring to develop friendly relations between
their two peoples, the Government of Australia
and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam have decided upon reciprocal
recognition from 26 February 1973 and the
establishment of diplomatic relations between
their two countries at the level of Ambassador.
This communique will be published simultaneously
at Canberra and Hanoi on 26 February 1973. / 12 
For the Government of Australia A. P. Renouf
For the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam Vo Van Sung"
Mr Whitlam said that, with respect to South Viet-Nam,
Australia continued to recognise the Government of the Republic
of Viet-Nam and did not intend to alter its diplomatic relations
with that Government, or its representation in Saigon.
Mr Whitlam added that a small team of Australian officialt
would travel to Hanoi in the near future to examine administrative
asnects of the establishment of an Embassy. " It is envisaged that
the Embassy itself will be onened shortly thereafter and that a
resident Australian Ambassador will be accredited later in the
year", Mr Whitlam said. A
I 



NQ DATE
M/ 46 26 February 1973
IANDROVERS FOR BANGLADESH
Australia proposes to provide 190 Landrovers to
Bangladesh under the Australian Aid Programme, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced today.
" Bangladesh's transnort resources, damaged extensively
during the war, are still being rehabilitated and the Bangladesh
Government urgently needs vehicles for a wide variety of purposes,
" The Landrovers will be supplied during 1973 and 1974
and at least half of these are exnected to be available for
delivery by June this year.
" The total cost of the project will be $ 750,000." 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 57
1 March 1973
PRIME MINISTER'S MEETING WITH PREMIERS OF N. S. W.,
VICTORIA AND SOUTH
AUSTRALIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, will meet with the Premiers
of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia in Canberra at
10.00 a. m. tomorrow ( Friday, 2 March) to discuss the problemas
of the River Murray basin.
Mr. Whitlam said today that the discussions would place
particular emphasis on water quality and the role of the River
Murray Commission in dealing with basin problems.
Mr. Whitlam said that water quality is of particular
concern to the Government of South Australia and that there
should be a useful discussion on the views of the fou~ r Governments
on this matter, and also on other aspects of the Commission and
River Murray water development and management that might arise.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. PROME-PUMOS7EK 



œ 4S
14, AUSTRALIA Pres's Statement' No.-58
1 March 1973
AUSTRALIAN FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL
The Government will make grants totalling
$ 19,270 as part of its programme of assistance to
film and television in Australia. The grants were
recommended by the Interim Council for the Australian
Film and Television School.
The grants will go to:-
1. ROLAND CANTLEY of Thursday Island, Torres Strait-,,
North Australia $ 3,000 to assist him in the
preparation of the final shooting script and
provisional narrative script for the film
" The Last Great Barrier Reef".
2. SYDNEY FILMMAKERS CO-OPERATIVE $ 15,000 to
assist the establishment of a full-time
film centre in the Sydney city area.
3. CHERYL PULLEN of Hooker Creek, Via Darwin,
Northern Territory $ 745 to assist with
fees and the cost of film-. stock and processing
for courses of study related to her work in
introducing film and video techniques for use
by aboriginal teachers and children.
4. GEORGE ANDERSON of 572 Glynburn Road, Burnside,
South Australia, a senior lecturer at
Flinders University $ 525 to cover living
expenses for three weeks research at the
Institute of Arts, California.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
1 March 1973 



EMBARGO: 6.00 P. M.
*\ AUST RALI A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 56
1 March 1973
VISIT BY TUN DR. ISMAIL
The Malaysian and Australian Governments announced jointly
today that Tun Haji Dr. Ismail bin Dato Haji Abdul Rahman, S. S. M.,
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Home Affairs
and Minister of Trade and Industry, will visit Australia-from 11
to 18 March 1973 at the invitation of the Australian Government.
While in Australia Tun Dr. Ismail will be visiting Canberra,
Sydney, Melbourne, Hobart and Armidale.
In Canberra he will have discussions with the Australian
Prime Minister and other Government leaders on matters of interest
to the two countries.
During visits to State capitals Tun Dr. Ismail will meet
the Premiers and take the opportunity to meet Australian
financiers, bankers and businessmen in relation to investment
opportunities in Malaysia.
In Melbourne, Tun Dr. Ismail will visit Melbourne University
where he graduated in medicine in 1945. He will also visit the
University of New England in Armidale where his son is a student.
Tun Dr. Ismail will be accompanied by his wife, Toh Puan
Norashikin and daughter Cik Zailah and an official party of
personal staff and senior officials of the Ministries of Forei
Affairs and Trade and Industry.
The party will arrive in Sydney on 11 March by Qantas FliQ&amp;
738 at 0635 hours and depart on 18 March for New Zealand.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



4JAUSTRIALIAPRESS STATEMENT NO. 59
2 March 1973
DUKE OF EDINBURGH'S AWARD SCHEME
In October The Duke of Edinburgh will arrive in Australia
a few days in advance of The Queen to attend an Australian/ Pacific
Conference for the Duke of Edinburgh's Award Scheme.
The Conference is to take place in Canberra on Monday
and Tuesday 16 October and it is hoped that a number of Pacific
Islands will be represented.
After The Queen's departure from Australia following the
opening of the Sydney Opera House His Royal Highness plans to
stay on and visit each of the Australian States to make contact
with Award Scheme groups.
His Royal Highness is expected to arrive in Canberra on
Sunday 14 October and to leave Australia early in November.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO.
2 March 1973
RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION
The Prime Minister announced today that at the request
of the Premier of South Australia a meeting had been held
between the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria and South
Australia and himself concerning the River Murray, the existing
powers of the River Murray Commission and the problems which had
arisen in ensuring water quality in the River Murray. The meeting
was also attended by the Hon. Moss Cass, Australian Minister
for the Environment and Conservation, the Hon. G. F. Freudenste'n,
the New South Wales Minister for Conservation, the ilono
Roberts Dunstan, the Victorian Minister of Water Supply,
the Hlon. J. D. Corcoran, the South Australian Ministej w-.
Works. The Prime Minister said that the original River Murray
Waters Agreement had been signed in 1914 and at that time : hce
major factor in interstate disputes had been navigation and
quantitites of water shared between the States. Although quite
a number of amendments had been made to the Agreement since that
cime it had become apparent that a 1973 model was now necessary
because of the vast changes in circumstances which had occurred
since the original Agreement was signed.
Increased use of the River's available water resources
has led to more complex problems involving not only the
availability of water but the quality of water in the river.
Problems include increasing salinity, pollution by pesticides.
weedicides and fertilizers; also the need to prevent pollu-cio...
from new and growing urban areas Albury/ Wodonga and Mon-o,.
The meeting agreed to establish a working party of senio.
officials of the Australian and State Governments concerned witLthe
following terms of reference 
1. Examine and recommend in an initial report
urgent interim measures which might be
implemented in the short term to deal with
the salinity problems of the River Murray
waters and the means by which those measures
might be financed and operated.,
2. Examine and recommend types of measures which
need to be taken to protect and where
necessary improve the quality of the River
Murray waters in respect of long term
salinity control, and other forms of
water pollution.
3. Examine and recommend changes which would be
required in the River Murray Waters Agreement
to enable the River Murray Commission to
undertake the measures referred to in 2.
4. Enquire into and report on other matters
referred to it by the Steering Committee.
Membership of the Working Party shall comprise
one official each from the Australian Government
and the State Governments. The Australian
Government will provide the Secretariat.
6. The Working Party is empowered to create
sub-Committees and to co-opt as necessary
to fulfill the above Terms of Reference.
7. An initial report is to be made by the Working
Party to the Steering Committee within six
months. The Steering Committee shall comprise the following
Ministers: The Australian Minister for the Environment
and Conservation,
The New South Wales Minister for Conservation,
The Victorian Minister of Water Supply,
The South Australian Minister of Works.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



EXTRACTS FROM A SPEECH AT THE TASMANIAN A. L. P.
CONFERENCE, DEVONPORT, TASMANIA.
4 MARCH 1973, BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
M. P.
LEADER OF THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARY LABOR PARTY
1. Exactly six years ago 16 March 1967
I made my first address to an A. L. P. Conference as the
Party's leader, here at Devonport.
2. It was a critical time in thehistory and
fortunes of our Party. We had just emerged from our
worst defeat. There were people inside and outside the
Party who genuinely questioned whether the A. L. P. could
long endure.
3. I said then
It There are literally millions of
ordinary Australians who wish profoundly to see
a Labor Government in Canberra; there are
thousands who are willing to work actively to
secure that Government; there are hundreds
upon hundreds who want to give their time,
ideas, energy and money towards it. No
party is so rich in its potential resources.
It is our duty to encourage, develop and use
those human resources of energy and goodwill.
4. That was what I set out to do. My gratitude
is deep and my debt immense to all those who joined in
that great crusade for it was nothing less than that.
The role of Tasmania and the Tasmanian Branch
and my colleagues from Tasmania has been decisive.
a) First there is my personal and political
debt to Lance Barnard
b. The Tasmanian Branch was the first to
support my efforts to secure re-organisation
of the party structure, and Tasmania gave
unwavering support at every stage,
culminating in the great re-construction
in the two great mainland States. This was
the key to victory.
c) Eric Reece's smashing victory last April
set the pace of Labor's Aational march for
the rest of the year. From that time on,
we never looked back.
d) The magnificent Tasmanian performance in the
House of Representatives elections a clean
sweep clinched the victory. ./ 2 
I may say in passing that there is cold
comfort indeed for our opponents in their claim that
the swing to Labor was not so great after all. This
is true only in relation to the great gains we made
in 1969 17 seats with a massive swing of The
1972 election was in essence the last round in a
six-year battle, and our share of the 1972 vote after
preferences was in fact greater 52% as against 51%
than the Liberal-Country Party achieved under Menzies
in 1949.
6. We now look to a great future, for our
country, and for our Party. Hard as the past years may have
been, they have had one great advantage. We were able to
use those years preparing relevant and modern policies.
No Australian Government has come to office so well
equipped with men and measures for the great tasks ahead.
That is why we have been able to move so swiftly in the
first few weeks. We did not wake up to find ourselves in
office and then wondering " Well, what do we do now
We knew exactly what we wanted to do and exactly what the
people wanted us to do.
The Parliament which has just opened will be
the great Reform Parliament in Australian history. It has
a double task to clear away the backlog of the past
23 years and to build new machinery adequate for the needs
and hopes of Australians for the rest of this century and
beyond. 



NO DATE
M/ 47 5 March 1973
PRIME TINTISTER'S PIESSAGES TO BELGIUM
AND U. AFTER KHARTOUM KILLINGS
In special messages to the United States Secretary of
State, Mr Rogers, and to the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Mr Van Elslande, the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
0 Affairs, Mr WVhitlam, said today that he and his colleagues had
been deeply shocked at the cold blooded assassination in Khartoum
of two members of the United States Foreign Service and the
Belgian Charge d'Affaires.
Mr Whitlam said: " Such unwarranted attacks against
diplomatic representatives strike at the very foundation of
civilised relations between states and are to be condemned by all
Sgovernments which value the rules of international law.
In his message to Mr Rogers, Mr Whitlam said: " Mr
Curtis Moore was well known to officers of the Austrnlian Department
of Foreign Affairs, who on various occasions had reason to be
grateful for his helpful advice and assistance during their visits
to Khartoum". / 2 
-2-
Mr Whitlam said that he should like to convey to both
Ministers and to the families of the United States and Belgian
officers, on behalf of the Australian Government, his deepest
sympathy for their loss in such tragic circumstances. 



PRESS RELEASE the Prime Minister will officially open the
recently completed Australian Government Centre in
Arm Street, Brisbane, adjoining Anzac Square, on
23 March at 3.30 p. m.
Mr. Fred Daly, the Minister for Services and
Property and Leader of the IHou announcing this today,
said that invitations to the opening had been sent to
the Federal Minister for Works, Senator J. Cavanagh,
the Premier of Queensland, the Hon. J. Bjelke-Petersen,
the Lord Mayor of Brisbane, Mr. Clem Jones, Federal
members of Parliament and State M. P. s, senior public
servants, trade urnion officials arid other citizens.
The $ 9.4 million, 20 level steel and
concrete complex provides 200,000 square feet of office
space. The title Australian Government Centre r. eplaces
the former name, Commonwealth Centre, and has been adopted
to establish the building's national identity.
It accommodates 11 Australian Government
Departments, employing 1,600 public ser-fants, as well
as providing offices for Ministers, Members and Senators
of the Australian Parliament.
The complex includes five levels of underground
parking for 120 cars, a theatrette for special presentations
and staff training programmes, and a cafeteria
to seat 290 employees.
The Meteorological Bureau occupies the top
floor to enable meteorological instruments to be located
on the roof of the building. . o/ 2 
Departments dealing most directly with the public-
Social Security, Housing and Repatriation have receptibn
areas on the Ann Street level. Ttiu:, 80 per cent of the
callers at the building are normally aible to conduct their
business conveniently at this level.
The opening ceremony will take place at the
plaza entrance, off Creek Street.
6 March 1973 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 6 MARCH 1973
PRIME MINISTER: This is very much more pleasant lighting and
accommodation. I might mention it's by favour of the President
that we are able to use this Committee Room.
Gentlemen, the Cabinet this morning made some appointments.
First of all, there were two vacancies on the Board of the
Commonwealth Trading Bank within the Commonwealth Banking
Corporation. One of ' the retiring men, Sir Brian Massy-Greene,
has been reappointed. The other position has been filled by
Mr Barnie Williams.
Four appointments have been made to help Professor Henderson
with his poverty inoufij. They are Professor Gates, the Professor
of Economics and Head of the Department of Economics within the
University of Queensland, Professor Sackville, one of the
Professors of Law within the University of New South Wales, the
Reverend George Martin, Superintendent of the Port Adelaide
Central Methodist Mission, and Mr R. T. Fitzgerald, the Chief
Research Officer of the Australian Council for Education Research
and Editor of the Quarterly Review of the Australian Education,
a member of the national Committee for Social Science Teaching.
Mr Hayden can give you the details of that inquiry and the
augmented terms of reference. A new administrator has beena'u. cd
to Christmas Island. It is Mr Francis Scott Evatt who has bcW
the Department of External Territories since November 1959 aiñ&amp; hc*
been Acting Administrator since last July. The Governor-Genc-al.
mentioned in his speech that the Government proposed to estab.ñ ih
a Protection Commission to advise on assistance for both Priwiary
and Secondary Industries. You will remember that the general out'line
of the Protection Commission was announced about ten months a : o
and its relation to the functions being carried out by the old
Department of Trade and Secondary Industry and the Department of
Customs and Excise and of course relevant matters from the Dezi&amp;::.-
ment of Primary Industry.
On the first of this month, I wrote to Sir John Crawford
inviting him to advise on the establishment of the Protecgtion
Commission. Yesterday Sir John replied agreeing to do so.
He is egn work on it. While Sir John is not going to con( uc
a public inquiry, he has indicated that he would be preparc: tLo
receive written submissions. Anybody wishing to take the opr; c
to put these forward should direct them to Sir John through the
Secretary of my Department by the end of next month.
There are several visitors coming this month, the first
half of next month, Mr PV" olichev, the U. S. S. R. Minister f or
Foreign Trade will be here betwecn 11 and 18 of this mont'h;
Tun Ismail, the Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, will be c.
between the same dates; Mr G. W. S. Malecela, the Foreign iicc
of Tanzania, is arriving on the 9th for some ten days; Mr Bijecsic,
the Prime Minister of Yugozlavia, will be here on~ 20, 21 and 22. 
He is making a visit to many countries in the region;
President Hammer de Roburt will be here from 3-5 April returning
the visit which the Special Minister, Senator Willesee made on
behalf of our new Government to celebrate the 5th anniversary of
Nauruan independence, and Mr Arnold Smith, the Commonwealth
Secretary-General, will be here from 3-16 April.
There were a very large number of decisions by the Cabinet
and I think if you want any further information on them, you can
ask me or ask my staff afterwards. We approved the drafting of
legislation to implement the Montreal Convention relating to
Protection of Aircraft, 1971; legislation to amend the Marriage
Act no consent required if you are 18 or more; legislation to
implement the 1966 International Convention on the elimination
of all forms of racial discrimination to which the Governor-General
made reference in his speech opening the Parliament; legislation
to change the terminology of magistrates to enable new Tasmanian
legislation to come into operation, the Companies act on the
Securities and Exchange Commission, Restrictive Trade Practices
Monopolies and Consumer Protection legislation those two items
are initial drafting to take advantage of the presence in Australia
for some months of two United States experts whom Senator Murphy
recruited, but the general framework has to go to the Economic
Committee of the Cabinet; legislation to incorporate the National
Gallery which was approved in principle in the Parliament before
last and not mentioned in the last Parliament; legislation for
further amendment of the Commonwealth Electoral Act, the principal
matter being to limit the variation from the quota of electors
from 20 per cent to 10 per cent. It will be remembered that in
1958 the Constitution Review Committee consisting of 6 Labor,
4 Liberal and 2 Country Party members unanimously said that
per cent was dufficient to cover all variations between censuses
and so we are implementing that recommendation and we will be
putting to the Parliament that the criteria for distribution should
virtually be restored to what they were until 1964-65, that is
one starts from the point of view of the quota; legislation to
cover the new Departments Appropriations legislation to cover
the Stevadoring Industry, to adopt amendments to the I. L. O.
Constitution, to introduce the general insurance legislation
which was tabled last Parliament; some further technical
amendments to the Income Tax Law. We'll be moving to reappoint
the Joint Committee on the A. C. T. We've approved amendments to the
Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisations Charter which were
approved at the Conference last year. We are establishing a
Commonwealth Occupational Health Service, grants to the States
for water projects, amendments to the National Regional and Urban
Development Authority Act it will be the Cities Commission
Act, acquisition of freehold land in Darwin, and at Oaks Estate
and Hall and Tharwa. The general principle of publication of
reports by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, the Bureau of
Transport Economics, Bureau of Roads, will be publishing all thosoc
reports. Amendments to the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporatio;
there are quite a number of them I haven't purported to give
the details of them. I have the submissions here.
Are there any questions?
Prime Minister, Mr Barnard is present with you at today's
Press Conference. Sir, is it proper to ask questions of him?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course. 
S~ J.
Then, M r Barnard, if I might direct a question to you,
you tabled in the ' House of Representatives today a statement
by your Permanent Head, Sir Arthur Tange, concerning the matters;
relating to Mr Lloyd's reinto rmyour staff. Do you a cce-, pc-
Sir Arthur Tange's version of these affairs completely?
MR BARNARD: There are some reservations that I would want to
make. Generally the statement is his version of what occurred at
the time.
PRIME MINISTER: Next question.
Mr Whitlam, either to you or Mr Barnard, whichever you think
is more appropriate: on the question of overseas bases-, can you.
now explain to us why it would imperil the furth-e-ruse of thlese
bases to tell us the general purposes as you promised the Labor
Government would? Can you tell us how it would be conceivable
that joint control should be exercised by the Australian Government
over them, I mean does this mean we intercept American signals,
we have a hand on the switch to turn the power off, what does it
mean, and finally can you tell us something which was rather
obviously left out of Mr Barnard's statement to what extent
would these bases be targets should the Americans become involved
in a war which did not necessarily concern us but which was a
conflict with another nuclear power?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't intend to elaborate on the statement
which Mr Barnard made after Cabinet and Caucus consideration la~
Wednesday. I've quite satisfied myself that to state the gcne;-..ñ
purposes of the satellites related to Pine Gap near Alice Spring~ s
and Nurunga near Woomera would be to render the function quitce
futile. I don't propose to state the purposes of them. I've
satisfied myself as regards those two facilities and also I
imagine everybody is satisfied as regards the facilities at
Amberley and Alice Springs that they are not part of any weapo.
system. They can not be used -any of them to make war on any
other country. I don't know -nobody knows the full implicationis
of the North-West Cape Station for which legislation was passed
in 1963. There are to be negotiations on that matter.
Mr Hartley said the other night that the North-West Cape
Station should be subjected to political control by the Austraiian;
Government. Will that be discussed in negotiations with the
Americans?
PRIME MINISTER: The fact that this would be discussed has been
announced by the Minister.
But will that point
PRIME MINISTER: The Minister has stated what he will be discu.:, sinc,.
Mr Barnard, you said you had some reservations about
Sirr thr Tiies statement that was tabled today. Could you tELL
us what those reservations were?
MR BARNARD: You have the statement now and it does give
Sir Arthur Tange ' s version of what happened at the time. I quitL-e
frankly admitted this afternoon that I only learned last night and
this morning that there were some circumstances which apply to this
matter which were not previously known to me. But what I do want
to make clear and want to emphasize is that when the question of 
the discussions were first raised with me I'm now referring to
the discussions which were to take place with Lord Carrington-
I sought advice from the Departmental Head about protocol, and
the information that was given to me was that it was not usual
because there may be some matters involving questions that were
the concern only of the two countries involved that it was not normal
for members of a Minister's staff to attend those discussions, and
at the time I accepted that advice. I subsequently thought about
it and believed it was in my own interests to have a member of my
staff present at the discussions and at that stage I advised
Sir Arthur Tange that there should be a member of my staff present
and I named Mr Woolner.
I named Mr Woolner because he was my research officer and he had
attended a number of the discussions with me. That is, on the
question of the rationalisation of thae aircraft industry, when
I have had discussions concerning the. Mr Woolner had
been with me and so I suggested that Mr Woolner should accompany me
to the discussions. Well, when I saw the report in the newspaper
the next day subsequent to Mr Lloyd's decision to resign, that
it was because he had not been invited, or had been told that he
should not attend the briefings between Lord Carrington and myself,
I immediately raised this question with Sir Arthur Tange. I said
' did you advise a member of my staff that he should not attend'
and the answer that I receivedi was ' no
Now it is quite clear that some matters have been made clear
to me which were not made clear to me at the time. All that I can
say to you further to this is that that position will be rectified.
No departmental head will advise any member of my staff abouil iLheir
duties and I want to make that perfectly clear. In the same way
I have also indicated that so far as decisions concerning the
policy of this Government are concerned I will make them. As a
result of the decisions of the Government, the Prime Ministe.,:
and the Government, I will make them not the Department. Now
I think this ought to be clearly understood.
Mr Prime Minister, do you consider that your statement
just now not to reveal the general purposes of the Pine Gap and
Woomera bases conflicts with Labor policy which states tiht
ge-neraf purposes shall be revealed?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course I don't. I don't think it conflicts
with anything in Labor policy.
Do you accept that the Labor policy does state this?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't got the text here.
Sir, could I then end with this: Do you agree with
Mr Barnard's statement in the House today that when he says tW
the Government will make the decisions and that the Governmen* twill
give due consideration to the-Party's decisions, do you
consider this conflicts with the policy which states that the
Conference is the supreme body which binds Party members?
PRIME MINISTER: I put the Party's policy for this Parliamon,-
in my policy speech. That stands. If the Party changes its pol. icy
then the changed policy will be put to the people at the next
elections. Sir, what progress has the Government made towards beefing
up the A. I. D. C. in its role of reducing foreign ownership of 
PRIME MINISTER: I'm sorry. We did do that this morning. I
haven't got the thing here. we approved a considerable number
of amendments to the A. I. D. C. Act to enable the drafting to
proceed. Some of them require final form after consultation
between Dr Cairns as the Minister for Secondary Industry and
the Treasurer and the Attorney-General. This is because there
are some matters of detail concerning the loan raising by the
A. I. D. C. which have to be considered in the context of the
financial agreement and the gentlemen's agreement which cover
loan raising by the Commonwealth on behalf of the States and
loan raising by semi-Government authorities with the approval
of the Loan Council. Also there are some details which have to
be carefully drafted in the light of the constitutionality of
them. For instance, the A. I. D. C. could no more carry on some
activities in its own right than the Commonwealth could carry
on those activities in any other form. But the Commonwealth can
carry on practically any activities if they're in the contexi.
of financial corporations as phrased in Section 51 of the
Constitution. But there are quite a number of amendments which
have been approved Dr Cairns can give you the details if you
like I suppose I can send for them now. They were in the Cabinet's
Economic Committee file which I didn't bring down.
Mine is on the question of the secrecy under which A. I. D. C.
operates. Is this being
PRIME ,' MINISTER: No, the amendments were ones to carry out
practically the full range of policies for the A. I. D. C. which
were mentioned in the policy speech. They are quite extensive
amendments, but you'll see the nature of them if you read~ th~ c
policy speech.
Mr Barnard if I may, I wonder if you could tell us, Sir,
on what grounds you yesterday offered a differing explanation...?
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen, I'm not going to have any more
of the Conference taken up on this. I'm not going to be party
to fomenting differences between the Minister and former members
of his staff or the Minister and the Head of his Department.
It can be done separately.
Sir, we were told by one paper today that the main event*-
in Cabinet was to be a go-woe contest between Mr Crean and
Dr Cairns on the subject of inflation or expansion. How did tChait
match finish?
PRIME MINISTER: Nothing in the Cabinet or the Economic Commitccc
of Cabinet bore any relationship to the forecast. I have mentio
I think, the subject of every matter which was debated in tL-he
Cabinet this morning.
Mr Barnard, has the U. S. Government cut down on the artoui-'
of information that it's supplying to Australian D~ efence experts
as alleg7ed5Mr Hartley and does this information also apply to
information also supplied by the British Government?
MR BARNARD: No.
Mr Whitlam, has the Yugoslav Government been notified of
what Senator Murphy is going to say in the Senate this week about
Croatian terrorists? If not, will it be notified, how and when?
And finally, will the Yugoslav Prime Minister be having talks
on this subject when he comes to Australia? 
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's very likely that the Yugoslav
Prime Minister will refer to the acts of political terrorism
which have occurred in Australia for many years past and the
outrages against Yugoslav diplomatic and consular premises in
Australia. We have been in touch with the Yugoslav authoritics,
our Ambassador in Belgrade, and their Ambassador here about the
movements of which we've been able to get some indication we
can't assess how many people of Yugoslav origin who have lived
in Australia have left in recent months on group tours for
Europe. There have been some reports that the number involved
we don't know the number involved -but that there have been
some such movements has come to our notice and we have conferred
in Belgrade and in Canberra about them. As I made plain in my
policy speech, we are determined to do all we can to stamp out
this political terrorism which has continued too long in Australia,
to the discredit of Australia.
I have this A. I. D. C. submission, but I think probably it'll
suit you if you get it from Dr Cairns. There were two
submissions and there are quite a number of recommendations, one
of them has three paragraphs and another has about 10 I think.
Sir, have you written to the Queensland Premier asking
Queensland to hand over Queensland's Aboriginal reserves to the
Federal Government? Has the Queensland Premier replied, and
refused? And if he has refused, what's the next step in view of
what you, through the Governor-Gdneral, said last week?
PRIME MINISTER: I have written about the reserves. I don'' C
think I put it quite so directly that they should be handed over.
I don't think a reply has come yet. However I will reassert what
the Governor-General said in his speech that the Goverrient i* s
determined to carry out the full range of responsibilities in.
respect to the Aboriginal people that were given to the
Australian Parliament in the 1967 Referendum. I mentioned thac'
the Cabinet had authorised the drafting of legislation to cerry
out the 1966 Racial Discrimination Convention. There is some
legislation of the Queensland Parliament which is contrary to
that Convention. I have written to the Premier of Queensland
about it. I think I wrote about it in December, but I don't
think he's replied.
Sir, you haven't spoken to the Queensland Premier since
you took office I don't think
PRIME MINISTER: No, he's the only missing Premier.
In view of the considerable conflict which has. beea
running is there any chance of you initiating talks with him
picking up the phone to talk to him?
PRIME MINISTER: There's been no difficulty in communication
each way with any other Premier or, in fact, with the DeputL-y-
Premier of Queensland when he has been acting Premier. For
instance I don't know whether this is characteristic of the cil~ y
and the last Country Party Premier in Australia, but last ~ iKy
for instance, there was a very fruitful, successful conferelicc
between the two Liberal Premiers, Sir Robert Askin and Mr h.~
and Mr Dunstan and me the first significant variation in ' the
River Murray Waters Agreement since it was first drawn up in
1915. We did that last Friday morning. No difficulty whatever.
I don't know what's wrong with Mr Bjelke-Petersen. 
0 7.
Prime Minister, at the last public Press Conference, Sir,
we discussed the question of troops being retained in-Singapore
after the withdrawal of the batallion we used the figure
then of 500 to 600 troops you expected would be retained
PRIME MINISTER: I think in answer to questions I have said
that, yes. Subsequently, Sir, you were quoted as having said at the
background conference that these troops were being kept there
to cover the presence of the Australian Signals Unit. Since
the presence of the Australian Signals Unit is now of world
knowledge, do you still intend to keep 500 to 600 troops in
Singapore? PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to fcrecast the number of
servicemen because it's not just soldiers involved in Singapore.
The two crucial items are well known. The batallion and the
battery will not be replaced when their terms expire which will
be in January. Furthermore, the Defence Signals Division Unit
which Australia operates in Singapore will be brought back as
soon as possible. the other numbers can emerge during this
year. There is no great urgency or panic about this question.
If there is no urgency or panic about the question of
the Defence Signals Unit, I'm not sure in my own mind why this
was an off-the-record briefing which you gave when it could have
been cleared up so simply and quickly by yourself, Sir, and
furthermore why some people, myself and my friend Jack Fingle'Co-n,
who is not perhaps a security risk and nor am I, were excluded
from it, Sir? before you answer that, because my question is
also along those lines
PRIME MINISTER: Go ahead.
I want to congratulate you on the number of Press conferencesthat
you have given. You've been extremely generous with -them.
Indeed I think it's true to say that already you've given more
than Sir Robert Menzies, Mr Holt, Mr Gorton and Mr McMahon in
twenty years. Sir Robert I might observe has done well. As my
colleague, Mr Harris says, a few weeks ago you cancelled your
usual Press conference and invited yourself or had invited for
you a special group of journalists who mostly represent the
three largest daily newspaper groups that almost monopolise th.-is
Press Gallery. Excluded: Mr Harris of the London Times,
myself, the A. B. C. and certain other people of news-gathering
media. Now does this mean that you yourself regard us as
untrustworthy, or possibly poor class journalists. As a Labor
Prime Minister, I'm sure you will recognise the important
industrial concept that's inherent in this. May we assume
that in future press conferences we'll be invited along with
the rest Mr Harris, myself and the A. B. C.?
PRIME MINISTER: I undertook at the Last time you invited mo to
the National Press Club that on any Tuesday when I was in
Canberra I would have a press conference. That I have done with
two exceptions. one was last Tuesday when I think it would be
conceded that it would have been impracticable on the day of the
Opening. The other occasion was two weeks before. On that occasion
the Cabinet sat all morning. It had to sit that afternoon. I had a 
dinner engagement at which I was to speak in Melbourne that
night. I put to the Chairman of the Gallery do you want a briefing
today or a press conference later in the week. He chose the
briefing that day. It had to be in my office, the one which I
inherited the temporary office and it is impossible, as anybody'
who's been in the office would know, to have radio or. television
equipment in it and accordingly the Australian newspapers were
there. A record was taken and any of the other media who wanted
to have the text of the record were able to get it in the usual
way and many availed themselves of it.
Have you yet come to the conclusion that five _ portfolios_-
Defence, Army, Navy and Air Force and Supply, held individually
by five Ministers in past Governments, is not too much of a
burden for Mr Barnard or for any other Minister for that matter?
PRIME MINISTER: On the contrary, I am quite satisfied that the
holding of the five portfolios by one experienced senior man has
made for much more prompt and satisfactory decisions. There are
a host of instances that can be given of this. The Supply
Department for instance was very often unable to place orders
because the client Departments couldn't make up their mind. The
one Minister now makes the decision. It is promptly implemented.
I am satisfied that this is the best form of Defence organisat: o:
that the country has had and the Mooreshead Report very largely
recommended it. It will continue.
As the Minister to whom the Tariff Board reports, you wo-ud
be aware that the Board reported recently adversely on th3 prospocus
of performance of one of the A. I. D. C.' s projects Information
Electronics here. Will you have Sir John Crawford to investigate
the possibility of extending the Protection Commission's optio.
to cover the implicit subsidy in A. I. D. C. operations?
PRIME MINISTER: This will be open to him to consider. I hope
he does. Mr Whitlam, the 1971 Federal Conference passed a re: olu'ion
protesting at the Federal Government's refusal to reveal the
details and possible consequences of Pine Gap and Woomera...
PRIME MINISTER: general purposes and possible consequences
wasn't it? general purposes and possible consequences. Do you ta. kC
that protest to apply to any Federal Government regardless of i
political complexion and do you also now agree with the previouz
Federal Government's decision not to reveal those general pur DCpo
and possible consequences?
PRIME MINISTER: I have said that it is not possible to reve.-
any more of the purposes of Nurunga and Pine Gap than has be: en
disclosed without nulifying the purpose of the Unit the
facilities. I think Mr Chamberlain was next.
Mr Prime Minister, will you be spending Easter in Parif;?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd love to. But I was thinking Rome woulC. be..
more appropriate. You're referring to the fact that the Fren. wh u
suggested there should be consultations between France and
Australia about the nuclear tests. We replied that we agreed
with this and believed they should be at Ministerial level and 
the French agreed to such discussions at Ministerial level in
Paris. Now our Parliament obviously the time which would suit
Ministers best to go to Paris would be in a week when the
Australian Parliament is not sitting. The first such week the
week after next is too soon for the French. The next weeks when
the Australian Parliament is not sitting are Holy Week and Easter
Week, those being the weeks before Easter Sunday and after Easter
Sunday. It would probably be in one of those weeks that a
minister or ministers will go to Paris. It may be that a Minister
or Ministers might go in one of the intervening sitting weeks.
That would be rather inconvenient for Australia but it is a
matter of great concern to Australia and if the French would
want to have the discussions earlier then we would be prepared
to have them earlier even if it was a sitting week.
There has been no discussion, still less decision as to who
should go. There has been suggestion that I might go. This is
by no means certain. I'd also like to say that there has been
speculation that I might not go as originally proposed to the
South Pacific Forum in Apia in Holy Week. I do intend to go to
the South Pacific Forum in Apia in Holy week.
I want to go back to the question that Wally Brown asked
about Party policy. Were you saying that if there are policyz
changes at-Surfers Paradise at the Conference that these would
not be binding on the Government until the next elections?
PRIME MINISTER: What I'm saying is that I would regard it as
inconceivable that the Federal Conference of the Australian
Labor Party would purport to change the Party's policy during the
currency of a Parliament on the election of which the policy
had been placed in the form which the Conference had endorsed
in 1971. I don't believe the Conference would purport to change
policy in the midst of a Parliament. Of course the Party could
change policy but the only proper time to do it would be for the
next Parliament. The advantage of the Labor Party's procedures
as far as the public is concerned, as far as the democratic
process is concerned, is that they are available in print for
everybody to read and we were elected on the basis of the
Platform which was framed at Launceston in June 1971 and
published in July or August 1971. That policy was put to the
people in November 1972. The people clearly endorsed it.
I don't believe that the Party Conference would purport to alter
the policy on which we were elected.
Given that you do not expect the Conference to change any
policy while you have a Labor Parliament in power, what would be
your position...
PRIME MINISTER: Wait a bit. I don't think they'll change Party
policy. What I did say is that I don't conceive the possibilitCy
that the Party would change the policy for a Parliament during
the lifetime of that Parliament. Now is that quite clear?
I don't think it's likely that the Party will change its policy
but if it does I can only conceive that it would change its
policy for presentation to the people at the next elections.
Given that, what if the Federal Conference orders you to
implement the policy as laid down by the 1971 Conference in
relation to...
PRIME MINISTER: PIR IMtEhMiINnIkT ERt; hat's a hyperthctical question. 



NQ DATE
M/ 49 7 March 1973
FOREIGN MINTST7R OF TANZANIA
TO VISIT APSTRAIIA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, said today that he was looking forward to the visit
of the Foreign Minister of Tanzania, Mr John Malecela, who will
be arriving in Australia on 9 March for what he has described as
a goodwill visit.
It is understood that one of the purposes of Mr Malecela's
visit is to convey to the Prime Minister a personal message from
the President of Tanzania, Mr Julius Nyerere. He has also intimated
that he wishes to discuss Australia's attitude to African questions
with the new Government.
0 In addition to his call on the Prime Minister, Mr Malecela
is exnected to have discussions with the Special Minister of State,
Senator Willesee, and with the Secretary of the Department of
Foreign Affairs, Sir Keith Waller.
As the first African Foreign Minister to visit Australia
since the new Government came to office, Mr Malecela's visit was
very welcome, Mr Whitlam added. ./ 2 
-2-
At the conclusion of his Australian visit, Mr Malecela
also plans to visit New Zealand.
( Note for editors Mr Malecela plans to reach Sydney on Qantas
flight QF 642 from Mauritius at 1320 hours on Friday, 9 March,
and to arrive in Canberra on a VIP flight about mid-afternoon
the same day.) 0 



A A
NO DATE
M/ 48 7 March 1973
RATIFICATION OF ILO CONVENTIONS
( This corrects our statement of yesterday,
which inadvertently referred in the second
paragraph to the Conventions, " numbers 87
and 108". The correct numbers are 87 and
98.)
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, said today he was pleased to announce that Australia
had deposited instruments of ratification of two Conventions of
the International Labour Organisation with the Director-General
of the ITO in Geneva.
Mr Whitlam said that the two Conventions, numbers 87
and 98, dealt with the rights of workers and employers to join
organisations of their choice, provided against Government
interference, guaranteed rights to protection against discrimination
within unions and oromoted collective bargaining.
" These are two of the important ILO Conventions dealing
with fundamental human rights, and have been widely ratified by
the 123 member States of the ITO," Mr Whitlam said. / 2 
-2-
" The Australian Government's ratification of these
Conventions is a significant step towards the goal of ratifying
all IIO Conventions in the field of human rights, in celebration
of the 25th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights on 10 December this year." 0 



A O
NO DATE
9 March 1973
AMBASSADOR TO AR. ENTINA, PERU
AND URUGUAY
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today the appointment of Mr H. A. Dunn as Australian Ambassador to
Argentina, Pern and Uruguay with residence in Buenos Aires, to
succeed Mr H. W. Bullock whose appointment as High Commissioner to
Fiji, Western Samoa and Tonga was announced recently.
Mr Dunn, who was born in 1923, was educated at Brisbane
Boys' College and the Uiiversity of Queensland. He was a member of
the AIF from 1943 to 1945 and was Queensland's Rhodes Scholar in
1948. He attended Oxford University and lectured at Toronto
University. Mr Dunn joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in
1952 and has served in Tokyo, Seoul ( as Australian representative
on UNCURK), Washington and Saigon. In 1966 he attended the National
Defence College in New Delhi and from 1969 to 1972 he was
Australian Ambassador in Tainei.
Mr Dunn is married with one child. It is expected that
he will take up his ap) nointment towards the middle of 1973. 



A AAF -b~ k
NQ DATE
M/ 51 9 March 1973
CREATION OF A S'RCOND ASIA DIVISION
IN THE DEPARTMENT OF FORIGN AFFAIRS
~ The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that a second Asia Division would be established within the
Department Foreign
Tho iitrfo Afefaigrs, rWilm none
It is expected that the new Division will become
operational in April.
Until now, there has been only one Division in the
ODepartment dealing with the whole Asian Continent.
The new divisional structure will enable the Department
to handle more effectively the work-load and policy requirements
of Australia's relations with Asia.
One of the Asia Divisions will be responsible for North
and West Asia and the other for South Asia, including South-East
Asia. In addition to some rearrangement of Branch and Sectional
responsibilities the changes also involve the creation of a new Branch
/ 2 
-2-
and a special Section to deal with regional developments,
Mr Whitlam said: " I have emphasised, both before assuming
office and since, the importance of achieving an independent stance
in Australia's foreign policy and the imnortance we attach to
Australia's position in the Asian/ Pacific region.
" The structural changes which have been introduced into
the Department of Foreign Affairs are intended to facilitate the
implementation of the foreign policy initiatives which I have
decided to introduce.
" The establishment of relations with China will entail
increased erfort particularly at the policy level. Our expanding
relations with Japan also require increased attention. The same
will be true with regard to my priorities for the development of
relations with Indonesia within the wider South-East Asian
context. " I have also announced my intention of seeking new forms
of regional co-operation geared to the situation in the Asia/
Pacific area following the Viet-Nam ceasefire, and to the realities
of the 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 13 MARCH 1973
PRIME MINISTER: First there's an Executive Council appointment.
The Executive Member of the National Pipeline Authority will be
Mr James Donald. I can give you details of his career afterwards
if you wish. Next we're sending our first Australian Government
Trade Mission to the People's Republic of China. Dr Cairns will
lead it. The business interests represented in the mission wili
be led by Sir Ian McLennon, the Chairman of B. H. P. The other
members we can give you afterwards also. Dr Cairns will be
issuing a press statement on it.
There were a very great number of Cabinet decisions th-is
morning. Many of them were confirming decisions made by the
Economic Committee and by the Urban and Regional Development
Committee. Perhaps you can get details from Dr Patterson on the
legislation for weirs on the lower Dawson River and assistance
for the first stage of the Ross River Dam; from Mr Johnson on
the terms of the new Commonwealth/ State Housing Agreement; from
Senator Wriedt on the details of the fruit-growing reconstrucuion
scheme and the rural reconstruction scheme. I can give you th. e
general terms of the arrangements we are willing to enter into
with New South Wales and Victoria about the Newcastle dockyLL.
and the new dock in Melbourne. The Minister for Transpulc. a e
Treasurer are authorised to negotiate an agreement with b,, u
respective governments under which the Australian Governme..,
provides the finance required for the construction of ilie , o ,-ka
new docks on the condition tha, the dockyards will be o
owned and operated by the Australian Government and the Neuw
Wales Government in one case, by the Australian Governmen-t ' l
the Victorian Government in the other case, the Australian
Government's share in assets and management being commensura. te
with its contribution. Mr Jones can give you more details o7 onis.
These are matters upon which Sir Robert Askin and Mr Hamer ., ve
written to me. They were also matters of course which were
considered by an inter-departmental Committee under the lat
government that it be left to us to make a decision and
proposal. There's also a matter concerning Evans-Deakin
Shipyards in Brisbane. I can give you details if you like
but then Mr Jones can go into greater detail with that also
if you wish. Also Mr Jones can give you the terms of the
we are suggesting that the Australian Government and the
Government should join in giving to maintain a shipping seo: v...
King Island. I can give you a fair amount here but perhaps yoo
might like to ask the Ministers concerned.
Now then, there's to be amending legislation to the Pul.
Service Act I suppose I'd better give you the details of l
It really means that an acting Head of a Department will hwve.
full authority that a Head has. There has been some doubt ou
up till this stage. 
Mr Beasley will be bringing in legislation for the Commonwealth
Teaching Service. Mr Morrison made a submission which we endorsed
on decisions taken by the Australian and Papua-New Guinea
Governments. Senator Murphy will be bringing in legislation to
amend the Book Bounty Act; to establish the Superior Court
promised ten years ago; to permit us to ratify the Convention on
Psycho-tropic substances; to appoint an ombudsman; and to
establish an Australian Law Reform Commission. Senator Willesee
will bring in legislation to amend the National Library Act;
Mr Morrison to carry out Metric Conversion; and the last one is a
proposal which we endorsed from Senator McClelland that there should
be a Committee comprised of the Department of the Media., wlich will
provide the chairman and secretarial services, the Departmei-of
Education, the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and
the Department of the Treasury to inquire into the nature and
extent of supplies and shortages of text and reference books
required by primary, secondary and tertiary students and to
recommend means of improving the supplies and overcoming the
shortages. We have in mind that we'll seek the assistance of
representatives of book publishing, printing and selling
organisations including government printers and university
presses. Those are the decisions we made or confirmed this
morning. Mr Whitlam, I was wondering what happened to the F111.
Has that been considered. If so, what has happened to it?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a submission on that. It has not
been determined by the Cabinet.
Are there any hold-ups?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But there might be a couple of score-of
submissions which we haven't dealt with yet. We haven't
determined this matter.
Sir, at a press conference today the Malaysian Deputy
Prime Minister made it clear that over-crowding would mahc the
Australian squadrons at Butterworth unwelcome by 1976. but, ho u
said that if the airfield facilities were expanded the Australian
squadrons would still be welcome. My question, which 1 w. s going
to address to Mr Barnard is: Will the Australian Governrmcnt help
expand the airfield facilities or will the squadrons be withdrw.',
in 1976?
PRIME MINISTER: This is too far ahead to determine at this stage.
By 1976 the Mirages will be pretty well obsolescent.
In view of Malaysia's decision to withdraw from ASPAC I
was wondering if Australia will follow the same line?
PRIME MINISTER: Wo won't withdraw from ASPAC at this stage. , W
are considering our membership of ASPAC because, clearly, the
usefullness of ASPAC is very limited indeed while Taiwan rcma-inj.
a member because three of the members of ASPAC Japan, New Zealand 
and Australia have now recognised the People's Republic of China
and not Taiwan. There is a Standing Committee of ASPAC meeting
in Bangkok at the moment. We are not attending it. We would not
be attending a ministerial meeting if one eventuates.
should have read to you incidentally another decision
which will interest you. I hadn't written a name against it so
that's how I overlooked it. Export incentives: We will extend
!. he present l] cgi slo. tion for one year.
Mr Wh. itlam, if I can ;. isk my weekly question on the American
bases. Coul. d you tell us how you can reccncil. e the Australian
Government's attitude as unnunc iated by you and Mr Barnard on
conti. nuing the prence of the lses and the secrecy of the bases
f. rstly with Labor policy on ANZUS which suggests that the ANZUS
TrecLaty should be mi. d~ into a s. lightly less militaristic thing
than it has been in the past, and secondly, now that the
Australian Government has ratified H. i, Nuclear Non-proliferation
Treaty, can you explain how we c; ni: conilinue either as part-owners
or a;. s not owners at all to have thli No. r-hL West Cape Base which
as everyone knows is concerned ih pi'laris submarines on our
so L?
PRIME MINISTER: The future manage. rment or joint management of
the North West C;. a p . Stiation wil. 1., be discussed by Mr Barnard as he
told you. If this is inconsistent with the Treaty to which we
are party, then that would have to be considered also that aspect.
Prime Minister, supplementary to that question, at your
Calucus Meeting last week we believe a substantial number, or tlie
majority of those present actually voted in favour of a motion
which would have allowed discussion of a proposal that Cabinet
should reconsider Mr Barnard's statement. That was defeated
because of a technicality. However, does the vote influence you
to take the matter back to Cabinet for reconsideration?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm led to believe that this matter arose too.
I was out of the Caucus when it happened. I was out discussing
the reply to what was to be a no-confidence motion in the Gove'rnient
or Mr Barnard on this subject. At any rate there has been nothi; g
on the Cabinet Agenda about this.
You are not interested to take it back to Cabinet as a result
of the vote which you and I both understand occurred in the Party
meeting? PRIME MINISTER: I think there are more pressing matters for the
Cabinet to consider at this stage as you'll see.
Sir, after your mooctings with Tun Dr. Ismail and President
Sooharto how do you feel the Australia. n proposals for a new
Asia-Pacific grouping are going how are they being received
now in your view at this stage? 
PRIME MINISTER: I found Tun Ismail was interested as, of course,
President Soeharto was in contemplating wider arrangements for
regular discussion among all the nations of this region. I
must say that when I answer questions like this, I'm not to
be taken to endorse terms such as " grouping" which I think is
the first time I've heard this one used. Also I know four-letter
words are popular. People use the term " pact". Now nobody has
suggested grouping; nobody has suggested pacts. What has been
suggested and it's been suggested by the ASEAN nations at their
meeting four weeks ago in Kuala Lumpur and it will be further
discussed at their next meeting next month the prospect of
having some wider forum for discussions. The particular relevance
to Australia is that there is only one arrangement to which we
are a party which would seem to have continuing validity like
that's ANZUS I don't really think one could say it was a
militaristic; it was the least militaristic of all the
arrangements we've had. It wasn't made the basis for Vietnam or
any other objectionable courses overseas. Similarly, Indonesia
and Malaysia value an association with the other three members of
ASEAN which also has continuing validity. The other arrangements
to which Australia is a party SEATO, ASPAC, which we've discussed
earlier, and the five-power arrangements are all anachronistic or
objectionable in part or transitory. Now in these circumstances
it's mere wisdom to contemplate contemporary arrangements which will
have some future.
Prime Minister, can you elaborate on the statement you made c
in Parliament this afternoon that there were reasons why Australiacould
not consider an approach to the International Court on
Chinese nuclear testing?
PRIME MINISTER: Because the winds from the Chinese nuclear L&gt; s-.. ing
don't come within thousands of miles of Australia. The winds from
the French ones do. The basis of our claim is that the French are
committing a nuisance in our environment and we are hoping that
the International Court of Justice will take steps to restrain
that nuisance; to enjoin the French from committing it the same
way as can happen between neighbours within the jurisdiction of
any of our domestic courts.
That environment applies only to Australia..?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. It applies to all the countries of the
same latitudes.
Doesn't the same argument apply to China, that other countr-e..-
are being affected by fallout?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Not Australia. Australia is not discernabiy
affected by nuclear tests by China. It is, we believe, discori:..,,. y
affected by nuclear tests by France. It is a sheer climatic m,. i;, er
that the winds encircle the world at particular latitudes. They
don't go from one hemisphere to another. 
Sir, are you accepting that with the return of the Pompadou
Government then that the only way this matter can be settled to
your satisfaction is going to the Court that you think the
Pompadou Government will go on with the tests irrespective of any
meeting you have in Paris?
PRIME MINISTER: We won't assume that; that the Pompadou Government
will prsist with the tests. We will have the ministerial
discussions which have already been the subject of discussions
between France and Australia. The French suggested there should be
discussions before an apprcach was made to the World Court. We
accepted the suggestion and suggested that they should be
ministerial discussions. The French accepted that suggestion.
Will you go to Paris and London?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's unlikely that I'll go. I think it
is likely that one of my senior colleagues will go, probably in
Holy Week. Whether it's Maundy Thursday or Ash Wednesday you're
getting a bit out of my ecclesiastical depth here. The Australian
Parliament will not be sitting in the week in which Good Friday
falls. That would seem to be a convenient week for Australian and
French ministers to discuss this matter in Paris.
Has any preliminary approach been made to the Court about
the proceedings?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no application has been made to the Cout;&gt;
Mr Whitlam, until 101 days ago when Labor was in opposiiUio
Labor members spoke frequently about the defence sign: ifica: lce o,
Omega. I remember Mr Barnard giving a learned exposition on 1io%
it could be used by nuclear submarines. Now when we contact
Mr Barnard's office we are told it is purely a matter for Mr Jones.
PRIME MINISTER: That's right.
When we talk to Mr Jones, we are told he doesn't want to
talk about it. Will you tell us what your Government's attilud
is to Omega what's going to happen about it, and do you expecany
problems within the Party over this?
PRIME MINISTER: It is a matter for Mr Jones and his Departme. V.
There are no submissions from him on the subject.
Is it of defence significance, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I would believe it would have some defence
significance. But 1 frankly don't know enough about it. I'm
leaving it to him to brief mc. But, as rational men, you will
know that there are ve ry few naiLgational, aids which dcn't have
some defence significance. 
Mr Barnard in the past has been quite outspoken about it.
You don't feel. that if perhaps, as the expert in what's now the
Cabinet, he should be consulted on this?
PRIME!' MINISTER: He has responsibilities in defence matters. This
is primarily, as far as I concern myself with it, a navigational
matter. You agree with the previous government?
PRIME MINISTER: As farc as I know, this is primarily a navigational
matter. It will be taken up by Mr Jones if it is taken up at al.
Prime Minister, could. I ask you a question. As Member for
Werriwa, how will you vote on the Bill of which notice was given
last week to allow abortion on demand?
PRIME MINISTER: In favour.
Prime Minister, in view of the statements by two Ministers
in favour of limiting Australia's population growth, can you
state a general Government policy on this, or ha~ s the Government
a. completely open mind pending the Bornie Report?
PRIME MINISTER: It's not of immediate concern to me I must
confess. It's not a matter the Government has discussed.
Everybody else i~ s discussing it. One would expect therefore thai-
Ministers would be among those who discussed it. I don't know how
long Professor Bornie is going to take over his report. hn
it's a couple of years on the original timetable.
On the Flll again, you mentioned that no determination had
been made by Cabinet. Is this because of the lack of time or
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
No other reason?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. There were no queries about some aspects of
PRIME MINISTER: We didn't have time to determine this matter.
Sir, will the R. A. A. F. still take delivery of the first pl
aircraft on Thursday as planned?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
A couple of weeks ago Mr Hartley said that the Defence
Department was being runi by America ns. Your comment?
PRIME MINISTER: I bclicvc it is bceing run by Australians. I'm
in a better position to know. 
Do you think the Americans have any control within the
Department? PRIME MINISTER: None whatever. Australians ccntrol the
Australian Department of Defence.
Prime Minister, in Tasmania last week a member of your
Cabinet, Senator Wriedt, was reported as saying that there was no
room in the Labor Party for the Socialist Left. Was this statemcnt
made will. knowledge and your consent?
PRIMLE MINISTER: I don't know. It wasn't made in my presence.
will not comment on reports of what people have said unless 11vo
seen a text.
You didn't see a text at this stage?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Sir, do you believe there is room in the Labor Party for the
Socialist Left?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to promote speculation on this
issue. Prime Minister, in the Parliament ( last Thursday I think) o
Treasurer, Mr Crean, said that the Government would be making q. ioe
substantial changes in the Australian taxation structure forx , Ah,
next budget. Can you assure the public that this will not inockj.-c
greater taxation on some members of the Australian public?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no submission before Cabinet on thl. s
matter. Qo: Have you any plans, Sir, for an overseas visit which woula
include Great Britain and the United States this year?
PRIME MINISTER: There are no definite plans that I've made uG
visit either Britain or the United States this year. It's quJLo
possible I shall. It might help you to know that I have made
definite plans to attend the South Pacific Forum in Apia in 11o i3
Week; to visit Japan to attend the ministerial conference
annual one between Japan and Australia, in Tokyo at the end
of October; to visit the People's Republic of China on the v,-. y
back; to visit Ottawa for the Commonwealth Heads of Government',
Conference in August.
Will you go to Washington during that trip, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is very likely, but no arrangeaenAts
have been made. There are a very great number of invitations
I've received Ambassadors and High Commissioners are brlng q:
me personal letters from their Heads of Government or Heads oi
State in great numbers. I told them that it will be pretty well 
impossible for me to accept these invitations this year. I
would hope to accept them next year or the year after. There
is one particular one which I must try to accept this year
India to which no Australian Prime Minister has made a visit
since 1959.
Mr Whitlam, have you received a report from the Foreign
Al'tairs Department yet on the arguments for and against the
Tieaty of Friendship and Commerce with Japan and can you say
what your attitude would be on the merits of Australia signing
such a Treaty?
PRIME MINISTER: I saw the paper on this a couple of months ago.
I've not made up my mind on the subject, I've not discussed
it with my colleagues. Anerica, Britain, Canada have such
treaties. That weighs with me clearly.
Qo: Prime Minister, would you say what youvould hope Dr Cairns
mission to China would achieve?
PRIME MINISTER: Increased trade,
Anything else?
PRIME MINISTER: Well that will be good0
I'm trying to clear up something Sir. Will the Cabiilt's
failure to have time to deal with the Fll today delay the
physically accepting the first ones later this week on
PRIME MINISTER: No. We're having a Cabinet meeting tomorrow " 6o
deal with this and some other unfinished business.
One other thing, Sir. When's Holy Week? Before Easter o'.
the week after?
PRIME MINISTER: You were better instructed than I was in -these
matters. You learnt them at school I had to learn them in the J'. r
Force. Under James 1, whom I follow, Holy Week is in the week ii.
which Good Friday falls. Easter Week is the following week
You and Evelyn Waugh, Sir, are the only people I know who
use the term.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, on my staff they refer to it as Pabsovei.,
Sir, your Government is in favour of trade union amalgamaio,.:.
Have you any views on the amalgamation of your political opponicns'
PRIME MINISTER: This is not a Dorothy Dix one As a mc ,, i
genera] principle I am convinced that the two-party system is wh,
makes the British Parliamentary system work. I believe that iV 
been the experience in Britain, New Zealand, the United States,
Canada, Australia. I believe that our Parliamentary system would
work very much better if there were two parties contesting each
election Federal and State each House, Federal and State.
I believe that the multiplicity of parties debauches the system.
Can I ask one final supplementary to that A public
opinion poll published today says that 55 per cent of Australians
are now in favour of ' first-past-the-post'. Is this likely to
influence your decision announced to a meeting that you won't
introduce it at the next elections but possibly the one after?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that we should change the system.
I undertook this before the elections. We should not change
the system on which the next House of Representatives elections
will be contested. I favour ' first-past-the-post' voting myself
but that doesn't mean that I feel that we should change the
system without having a mandate from the people. I therefore
believe that the next House of Representatives elections would
be contested on the present preferential system or at least on
the optional preferential system.
Gentlemen, I won't be able to give a Press conference next
week. I will be in Canberra for the very special reason that
the Yugoslav Prime Minister is visiting here in the course of his
tour through the whole of this region and that is the day when
there is going to be a Government House luncheon, and it is the
only time when I can have talks with him. We are therefore also
taking the opportunity of having Cabinet meetings morning and
afternoon, and that Night I have a long-standing dinner ongageicint
in Sydney with the High Court.
Will you be having a private briefing with newspaper heads?
PRIME MINISTER: Not unless you insist. 



41,4UST A L Press Statement No. 61
March 1973
PROTECTION COMMISSION SUBMISSIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today that
written submissions on the establishment of a Protection
Commission for Australian primary and secondary industries
would be received until 30 April.
Mr. Whitlam said that Sir John Crawford, in
accepting the position of adviser on the establishment of the
Commission, had said he did not wish his enquiry to be public
but would welcome written submissions. The submissions should
be forwarded to Sir John through the Secretary of the Prime
Minister' s Department.
Mr. Whitlam said the purpose in establishing the
Commission was to extend the system of receiving advice publicly
from an independent authority which was at present the basis
of government policy decisions on assistance to and development
of secondary industry, gthe rural sector of the economy.
Mr. Whitlam said that Sir John had informed hirm that
in conducting his enquiry he should have in mind the views
of people who might be affected by any change in existing
advisory arrangements. Sir John would not be reporting on the criteria to
be used by the Commission in arriving at its recommendations
to the government. His report would be concerned with the
functions, structure, membership and procedures of the
Commission. Submissions should be limited to these matters
Mr. Whitlam said.'
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
-AUSTR1ALIA,&amp; 16 March 1973
CORRECTION TO PRESS STATEMENT NO. 61
OF 15 MARCH 1973
PROTECTION COMMISSION SUBMISSIONSPARAGRAPH
3 OF THE ORIGINAL PRESS STATEMENT READ AS
FOLLOWS:-" Mr. Whitlan said the purpose in
establishing the Commission
was to extend the system of receiving
advice publicly from an independent
authority which was at present the
basis of-government policy deicisions
on assistance to and development of
secondary industry and the rural
sector of the economy."
PARAGRAPH 3 SHOULD NOW READ:-
" Mr. Whitlarn said the purpose in
establishing the Commission
was to extend the system of receiving
advice publicly from an independent
authority, which was at present the
basis of Government policy decisions
on assistance to and development of
secondary industry, to the rural
sector of the economy. o
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 54 16 March 1973
AUSTRPALIAN DELEGATION TO 29TH
ECAFE CONFERENCE
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam,
announced today that the Special Minister of State and Minister
assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Don Willesee,
would lead the Australian Delegation to the 29th Session of the
United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East
( ECAFE), to be held in Tokyo beginning on Wednesday 11 April.
Mr Whitlam said that the annual sessions of ECAFE
O review the economic situation in the region and the Commission's
activities throughout the previous year. They also decide the
Commission's future priorities and work programmes.
The Session will provide a welcome opportunity for the
new Australian G-overnment to demonstrate its willingness to
foster regional economic co-operation with the countries of
Asia and the Pacific.
Senator Willesee will make the Australian statement in
the General Debate at the Session.
The delegation will include officers of the Departments
of Foreign Affairs, Overseas Trade and the Treasury. 



NQ DATE
M/ 53 16 March 1973
AMBASSADOR APPOINTED FROM THE PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF CHINA
SThe Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that the Australian Government had given its agreement to
S the appointment of Mr Wang Kuo-ch'uan as the People's Republic
of China's first Ambassador to Australia.
Mr Wang was born in 1911. He was Governor of Jehol
Province until his appointment in 1957 as Ambassador to the German
Democratic Republic, a position which he held for six and a half
O years. In 1964, he became Ambassador to Poland where it is
understood that he took part in the Ambassadorial-level talks
S between the United States and China. He was a deputy to the Third
National People's Congress and is currently President of the
Chinese People's Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries.
Mr Wang is married. 



NQ DATE
Embargoed until 16 March 1973
8A. M on16
March 1973. APPOINTmENT OF AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR TO BURMA
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam,
announced today the appointment of Mr C. G. Woodard as Australian
O Ambassador to Burma to succeed Mr W. P. J. Handmer who will return
to duty in Canberra. This will be Mr Woodard's first aprointment
as Head of Mission.
Mr Woodard is a career officer of the Department of
Foreign Affairs and was born in 1929. He was educated at Prince
Alfred College in Adelaide and after graduating in Law from the
University of Adelaid joined the Department of Foreign Affairs
ni1n9 52. He has served previously in Korea ( as Australian
Alternate Delegate on/ NCRK), Singaore, London and Washington.
For the past three/ ears Mr Woodard has been Head of the National
Assessment Staff in the Department of Defence. He is married
and has two sons. Ii
I! ii 



EMBARGO 5.00PM SUNDAY 18 MARCH 1973:
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S ROLE IN EDUCATION
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE M. B. FLOOD SCIENCE BLOCK OF
ST. PATRICK'S COLLEGE,.. PROSPECT VALE, TASMANIA
SUNDAY 18 MARCH 1973
There has never been any qualification about
my Government s commitment to education. In my
policy speech last November I promised that education
would be the most rapidly growing sector of public
spending under a Labor Government. We see it as the
primary instrument for improving the quality of life
of our people and promoting equality of opportunity
for our children. Under previous Governments, education was
one of the most neglected fields. It was an area for
which Liberal Governments in the national Parliament
accepted little or no responsibility. Whatever
responsibility they accepted was grudging, tardy
and partial. Our responsibility will be wholehearted,
prompt and far-reaching. We are determined that
education will no longer be used as a weapon to
perpetuate privilege, inequality and division.
We are determined that every child who embarks on his
secondary education this year shall have the same opportunity
as any other child of completing that education and
advancing further. / 2 
-2-
Our approach to education has never been
based on elitist, regional, sectarian or other
discriminatory grounds. Our concern is for all
children in all schools, whether Government, Catholic
or otherwise independent. The debate in education
is no longer whether schools should receive assistance
from the National Government. That principle is
now accepted. It was established in 1964 when the
Liberal Government introduced its program of
Commonwealth assistance for science blocks, under
which this building was financed. It was
fully accepted by our opponents in May last year
when they announced some long-term but inadequate proposals
for assistance to secondary schools. So the question of
whether the National Government has a responsibility is
no longer an issue. The debate now is about the scale
and method of the national Government's involvement
whether it should be piecemeal or thorough, selective
or universal, arbitrary or planned, haphazard or co-ordinated.
Our preference is clear: It is for universality, for
planning, for co-ordination, and for generosity.
Our aim is to ensure that all schools receive assistance
according to their needs.
There can be nothing but praise for the efforts
of the poorer non-government schools, particularly
those in the Catholic system, to provide their children
with educational services of the highest standard.
This is no easy task. Within the Catholic system, this
college, of course, is one of the fortunate schools.
The Christian Brothers have set a noted example of
dedication and self-sacrifice in the cause of education.
I pay my own tribute to the Rev. Brother Michael Flood,
who gave 65 years of service to his Church as a Christian
Brother, whose memory is esteemed in Catholic education
circles throughout this country, and whose name is
commemorated by the building we open today. 
The educational system he served was
founded on the principle that parents have a right to choose
their children's education. But it is not enough to insist
that parents have a right to choose. So they should and do.
But the choice for all parents should be one between
systems and philosophies of education, not between
standards and opportunities. Too often under previous
Governments the only choice was that given to a wealthy or
privileged minority to choose a wealthier or more privileged
school. We can never be content with over-crowded,
under-staffed impoverished schools merely because a minority
have a right to opt out of them.
It is the Government's duty it is my Government's
determination to see that the right of choice carries with
it neither hardship for parents nor deprivation for children.
After all, the parents of Catholic children have suffered as
much as anyone from the old approach. The pupils of State
and Catholic schools I do not in this context include
St. Patrick's College have had less than half as good
a chance as the pupils of other independent schools to gain
Commonwealth secondary scholarships, and much less than half
as good a chance of completing their secondary education.
Throughout Australia only 4% of the pupils at
Government schools and 7% at Catholic schools qualify for
secondary scholarships. But 15% of the pupils at other
independent schools qualify for them. Only three out of
every 10 pupils at Government and Catholic schools reach
the final year of secondary education, whereas at other
non-government schools eight of every 10 reach the final
year. No democratic government can accept this disparity.
It is morally unjust, it is socially wasteful. To sell
our children short today is to sell Australia short tomorrow. / 4 
-4-
My Government has already begun to tackle the
problems of inequality in education. We will adopt the same
method to assist schools as previous Governments adopted to
assist universities and colleges of advanced education.
In December I wrote to a number of leading educationalists,
including representatives of the Catholic system, inviting
them to join an interim committee for a Schools Commission,
under the chairmanship of Professor Karmel, which would
examine and determine the needs of students in all schools.
In due course a permanent Australian Schools Commission
will be set up. Its reports will be published; its advice
will form the basis for my Government's assistance to
education. We will act quickly upon the recommendations of
the interim committee. In answer to a question in
Parliament last Tuesday,* I had this to say about the
progress of the interim committee's work:
" I have kept regularly in touch with
my colleague the Minister for Education
in regard to the deliberations of the
interim committee. I have met the Chairman,
Professor Karmel, on several occasions since it
was appointed. It is expected that the interim
committee's report will be made available as
requested before the end of May. This will
mean that it will be available in sufficient
time to be considered at the Premiers Conference
which should be held in June or maybe, if the
House gets up early enough, even in May. In
those circumstances the State Governments and the
non-government school authorities will have ample
opportunity to prepare for the 1974 scholastic
year in the light of the additional funds which
it is expected the Australian Government will
make available for schools." 
There is nothing unusual or even particularly
radical in a system based on priority of needs. It is
in fact rather simple and obvious. No company or enterprise
in the world would allocate its resources in any other way.
The Catholic education system itself determines its priorities
according to what it conceives to be the needs of its
children. Our aim is to avoid the old-fashioned system of
ad hoc decisions for special grants which took no account
of the long-term needs and planning requirements of the
beneficiaries of those grants. Everywhere in the old system
of grants one finds a pattern of disparity. If we look at
the breakdown of grants for science facilities approved in
1971 for the four years to June 1975 we find that some
States emphasise the needs of Government schools over
non-government schools, others give preference to nongovernment
over government schools. South Australia is
giving four times as much money under the science grants to
government schools as to non-government schools $ 2,647,125
against $ 663,525. Queensland is giving more money to nongovernment
schools $ 3,323,020 than to government schools,
who are to receive only $ 3,072,780. The science block
program, the grants for libraries, and system of per
capita grants approved by previous governments were
far from adequate responses to the real needs of our children.
They were not the solutions of a Government accepting
its responsibilities: they were in fact devices for
avoiding them. My Government has undertaken to continue in the
current year all grants to schools made under existing
Commonwealth legislation. I want to tell you now of the
Government's attitude to arrangements already entered into
with non-government schools for science facilities and
library programs. / 6 
The previous Government offered specific amounts
for individual science facilty projects for each year of the
present program to its conclusion on 30 June 1975.
These are firm commitments and will be honoured by my
Government. But the continuation of specific grants for
science laboratories in both government and non-government
schools after June 1975 will be a matter for the Schools
Commission or in the short term, the interim committee.
A similar approach will be followed for the
secondary schools libraries program. Specific offers
have been made by the previous Government for individual
projects up to 31 December 1974 when the present authority
will expire. My Government believes that these offers
represent commitments under the existing legislation and
they will be honoured. But after 1974 we will look to
the Schools Commission to make recommendations on whatever
library grants are appropriate.
We take the same view with general capital grants
for schools. On 12 December 1972 I assured the Premiers that
the $ 167 million appropriated under the State Grants Schools
Act 1972 for capital facilities in government schools would be
made available and that they could proceed with their programs.
I have given the Premiers a similar assurance that the $ 48
million appropriated for non-government schools will also
be available. But my Government agrees with Professor Karmel,
the Chairman of the interim committee, that from July 1974
the allocation of money remaining for the benefit of nongovernment
schools should be on the recommendation of the
Schools Commission or the Interim Committee.
We have also decided that Commonwealth per capita
grants to non-government schools for recurrent expenditure for
1973 will be paid at the rates already approved for 1973
that is, $ 62 per primary pupil and $ 104 per secondary pupil.
In December I wrote to Archbishop Carroll and to the National
Council of Independent Schools and told them of that decision.
After 1973 the interim committee will make recommendations for
recurrent grants for 1974/ 75 on the basis of needs and priorities.
In subsequent years such recommendations will be made by the
Statutory Schools Commission. / 7 
-7-
With these arrangements, we intend within the
lifetime of this Parliament, or sooner, to ensure that the
national Government~ s commitment to education is discharged
wholly on the basis of needs. I do not apologise for the
fact that the Government's emphasis is on meeting needs
where they demonstrably exist and on giving priority to
areas where the need is greatest. We are concerned with
inequalities; we are not concerned with the historical
sources of these inequalities. It is the child who
matters. For this reason we have announced programs of
assistance for isolated children and students at tertiary
education institutions who are in genuine need. For
this reason we have shown our concern for the education
of Aboriginal children. For the same reason again, we have
taken steps to increase the number of dental therapists and
social workers in training.
Again with our belief in equality of opportunity,
we have tackled the question of pre-school education. Our
approach is a simple one. We believe that pre-school education
with its many advantages should be considered a normal
part of the educational ladder, not an abnormal provision
for a percentage of our pre-school population. We want for
every Australian child the opportunity of a year of pre-school
trainiig. Thus we aim to make available to Australians a
basic educational service which has hitherto and with great
success been available to all children only in the Australian
Capital Territory. In this way my Government is doing more to help
secondary education than any previous government has done,
or any agency has recommended. In 1970 a nationwide survey
of the educational needs of government schools was conducted
by the Australian Education Council, consisting of State
Ministers for Education. It was at that time the only
comprehensive attempt to assess educational needs. My
Government welcomed it for that reason. It drew public
attention to alarming deficiencies. But there were weaknesses
in that survey, and some of its techniques were subject to
criticism. / 8 
-8-
It took no account of technical or pre-school education.
The investigation by the Interim Schools Committee, set
up by my Government, will be both more up-to-date and more
comprehensive. Since the 1970 survey was made, costs have
increased and the problems are more urgent. Many areas
of need were not considered at all by the 1970 survey.
By means of our proposed Technical Education Commission
and the Interim Pre-schools Committee already set up,
we will be examining fields which the needs survey did
not even touch. It did not consider the specific needs
of isolated, Aboriginal or handicapped children.
Our program does. It will go beyond anything attempted before.
In all its action, the new national Government has
shown its concern for all children irrespective of where they
live, whether they are in a state or an independent school, or
whether they are suffering from disadvantage. In this we
differ from our opponents. A good education, the best education,
is not something individuals must be forced to buy. It is
something the whole community must undertake to provide.
It is not the privilege of a few children but the right of all.
My Government will ensure that such a right is permanently
enshrined in Australian society. 



PRIME MINISTER
MINERALS AND THE FUTURE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE AUSTRALIAN MINING INDUSTRY COUNCIL
LAKESIDE HOTEL, CANBERRA, MONDAY 19 MARCH 1973
In the management of our mineral resources,
the mining industry and the national Government have a common
interest and a common responsibility. We are custodians of
much of the nation's natural wealth. We are custodians
of our country's soil and its physical riches. We have a
joint interest in ensuring that these resources are managed
in the interests of the whole nation, both for present and
future generations. Last December the Australian people
gave my Government a positive mandate to discharge this
responsibility in partnership with the mining industry and
its many associated enterprises. It is a duty we will not
shirk. No one can dispute the fact that in a
short time your industry has helped transform the face
of our nation. It has transformed our landscape; it has
transformed our balance of payments. It has brought
Australia immense benefits, immense wealth, immense
technological and industrial progress. While our gross
national product and the total value of our exports doubled
during the 19601s, the value of our mineral exports increased
eight-fold. Minerals accounted for 7% of the value of
our exports in the early sixties; they now account for
more than 20%. We have thus restored the position of the
gold rush days of 100 years ago, when gold and minerals,
accounting for 47 per cent of Australia's exports,
were our principal export commodity. For all practical
purposes Australia is now self-sufficient in major
minerals except crude oil and the prospects there
look increasingly bright. This story is one of the great
feats of modern exploration. It is due in large measure to
the vision and enterprise of the men in this room tonight. / 2 
-2-
But there are wider considerations that compel
the involvement of modern government in the mining industry.
Despite the size of our mineral reserves, it would be fallacious
and dangerous to regard them as inexhaustible. There are
limits, as other countries have already found. The notion
of unrestricted mining and exploitation is one we cannot accept.
We must be concerned at the effects of unbridled competition
on the stability of international trade. We must recognise
a growing concern in major industrialised countries at the
rapid depletion of traditional energy sources and their
increasing dependence on imports for their raw materials.
We must be concerned to see that our minerals are sold at
reasonable prices in world markets. We must be concerned
to see that our future energy needs and industrial
requirements are met. We must take account of the effect
of mining on the rights of our Aboriginal people, on the
environment and the control of pollution, problems
of undoubted significance for all mankind. We must ensure
the greatest possible measure of Australian ownership
and participation in the mining industry. The industry
is already 62% foreign owned. We do not want that figure
to go higher. In short, for all these reasons, we cannot
allow the future to take care of itself.
EXPORTS Accordingly, my Government is implementing
new policies. Our first step, as you know, has been to place
controls on all mineral exports, whether in raw or semi-processed
form. This, we believe, will ensure that exports are sold at
reasonable prices on the world market. Our measures will
encourage more processing of minerals in Australia, leading
to greater employment opportunities, greater industrial
self-sufficiency, and, not least, to a higher unit value
for our exports themselves. In the longer term, through
these controls, we can look to shipping economies for both
buyer and seller, by reducing the volume of low-value
materials being moved around the world. None of this
means that the Australian Government wishes to cut off
supplies of raw materials to valued business partners in
other countries. We shall do business, and we shall do it
with honour; but we do not regard the rape of our resources
as inevitable, and we certainly do not intend to lie back and
enjoy it. The basic objective of our new measures is to
obtain the best return for Australia consistent with the realities
of the market place and balanced mineral development. It would
be foolish in administering the controls to ignore the market
realities of an industry which has provided the main dynamic in
our balance of payments. But judicious use of the export
control powers will add to our foreign exchange earnings. 
-3-
My colleague, the Minister for minerals and
Energy, has already said that the Government's export control
powers will not be employed capriciously or vexatiously.
This is a unanimous attitude among members of the Cabinet.
We want to assure our trading partners that we are seeking
no more than a fair price in our mineral contracts with
them. It would be unreal to seek prices higher than the
market will bear when alternative sources of supply are usually
available. As the details of our policies are worked out in
the months ahead, we shall take every opportunity to explain
them in bilateral consultations and in international organisations
concerned with minerals trade. Indeed, I see great scope for
consultation between Governments on the problems of mineral
development and trade. We are particularly conscious of the problems
of Japan, our major market for minerals. Her vast industries
are especially dependent on imports for their energy needs and
raw materials. It is not, and I must insist on this, our
purpose to try to exploit that dependence. But we believe it
would be in the interests of both Japan and ourselves to work
together more closely to secure for Japan a more reliable
source of supply and to secure for Australian exporters more
reasonable prices. Ne~ ither of these aims is likely to be fully
achieved if trading arrangements are left almost entirely to private
commercial negotiation. Both will be achieved if our mutual'
interests our interdependence as trading partners are fully
recognised at both government and commercial levels.
The steps we have already taken will ensure that
the Government is kept fully aware of marketing arrangements covering
export prices and supply commitments. This is a prime purpose
of our export controls. We need to be satisfied that our mineral
export policies and practices are in the best interests of
Australia and our trading partners. It is perfectly clear that
large companies with interests crossing many national boundaries
may conduct their business in a way which, while maximising
returns for themselves, will be to the detriment of a particular
country. We will satisfy ourselves that those companies operate
in Australia in our interests as well as their own.
REVALUAT ION I know of your special concern with the effect
of recent currency fluctuations on your export contracts.
On this point I hope to reassure you. The effect of the
fluctuations, of course, is by no means uniform. Some currencies
have been appreciated, others depreciated, others remain at
their previous parities. As you know, companies with contracts
written in U. S. dollars, which include most iron ore contracts,
have suffered a reduction in their Australian dollar incomes. ./ 4 
-4-
But several factors tend to offset this loss. In many cases,
the immediate adverse effects on mining companies have been
avoided by taking out forward exchange cover. In addition,
the interest on and repayment of U. S. dollar borrowings
will cost less in Australian dollars. There should also be
increased shipments of minerals. For example, iron ore
exports from the Pilbara to Japan for 1973-74 are expected
to be substantially higher than in the current year. Other
mineral exporters are enjoying increases in the world prices
of their products, such as copper, zinc and lead. The
mining industry can expect its sales to increase as the
economies of customer countries expand.
The Minister for Minerals and Energy has said
that he expects appropriate relief to be given to exporters
through the re-negotiation of contracts written in American
dollars. In this he has the full support of the Government.
Needless to say, he has your support. For our part we will
be using our influence to see that suitable relief is
forthcoming. On 15 February Mr. Connor discussed this problem
with the Japanese Ambassador in Canberra. Mr. Connor pointed to
the need for early discussions between Japanese and Australian
businessmen. In a letter to Mr. Connor of 20 February, you,
Mr. Phillips, indicated that your council welcomed the
Government; s intervention to assist in renegotiation of contracts.
We shall use all our influence to see that suitable relief is
forthcoming. But I emphasise that any new negotiations would have*
little prospect of success if the Government were to indicate in
any way that it was considering compensation for mining companies
for the effect of recent currency changes.
For the future, it is certainly desirable that
contracts should be written in Australian dollars or provide
for stability ofreturns in terms of Australian dollars.
With long term contracts, built-in safeguards will be needed
to cope with currency changes and variations in demand. That
should be the aim. Mining companies must keep it in mind.
It is regrettable that this simple precaution was not observed
with many contracts already written, tome which still have
many years to run. It is also fair to remind you that some of
your industry's financial problems stem from individual negotiations
a few years ago with group buyers. I hope our new control
mechanism will work to prevent individual suppliers being picked off,
one by one, by overseas cartels.
While we want fair prices for our minerals, we
recognise that fixing appropriate export prices will need to be
handled with care. In some cases there is no single, readily
ascertainable price which can be regarded as a world price.
Quality differences and locations need to be considered. There
will also be times when it will be in the producer ' s and the
nation's interest to permit sales at low prices, perhaps as low
as the cost of production provided the nation and the producer
can earn a satisfactory profit at the lower price. This may be
necessary when we are trying to break into new markets. We know
that in many instances mining companies operate in a buyer's
market, and too rigid an application of controls could result in
contracts being lost to other countries. 
PROCESSING I have said that my Government wants more
processing of our minerals. It is the policy of my party
and my Government " to encourage the treatment and fabrication
of mineral resources in Australia." At every stage of
processing, the value of these resources is greatly increased.
Your council has indicated that it supports more local
processing, but that companies should not have to undertake
further processing if it would be uneconomic to do so.
This is a reasonable approach. Local processing places
a heavy demand on capital and other resources. Before
requiring a company to process in Australia, we will ensure
that markets are available for the processed product. The
State Governments, through the control they exercise over
mining and exploration leases, generally require mining
companies to undertake feasibility studies to determine
whether processing is economic. My Government supports
that requirement.
ABORIGINES High among my Government's ambitions is to
give natural rights to our Aboriginal people. We are determined
that their interests will be preserved in any mining operations.
Until the mid-1950s no mining in Aboriginal reserves in the
Northern Territory was permitted. Then it was decided to allow
prospecting and mining in the reserves, but to pay royalties
on minerals to an Aboriginal Benefits Trust Fund. The decision
to pay royalties into a fund for Aboriginal use was a somewhat
oblique acknowledgement of Aboriginal rights in the land.
The Crown, however, continued to collect royalties in the
first instance and to control prospecting and mining.
There are now two major mining operations in
the Arnhem Land reserve and another, of course, in what was once
part of the Aboriginal reserves on Cape York in Queensland.
All three developments are close to Aboriginal communities.
It would be difficult to draw up any social balance sheet of
gains and losses of these Aboriginal communities. The indications
are that none of the communities would wish to turn the clock back.
It is certain, however, that they face critical problems in
adjusting to the new situations, and that the benefits to the
Aboriginals in terms of employment and training, which had been
hoped for at the outset in the mid-50s, have not always been achieved.
The Government has announced its intention to
grant to the Aborigines title in the land in the Northern Territory
reserves. Mr. Justice E. A. Woodward's commission is to advise on
ways of implementing this policy. To avoid further complication of
an already complex situation, the Government imposed a " freeze"
on the issue of exploration licences and mining leases and of
leases of land. This action, we know will create problems for the
companies concerned. The Mining Industry Council has urged that
the rights of those companies committed to exploration programs in
the reserves should be renewed. These cases are being examined, as
are the needs of operating companies, which need additional mining
and land leases. Your council has also argued against any
abdication of Government responsibility for, and control over,
mineral resources. Decisions on this aspect of the land rights 
issue will be taken only after the Government has had an
opportunity to consider the report of Mr. Justice Woodward's
Commission. The Commission hopes to report within a few
months. The Mining Industry Council's submission will be
carefully considered.
ENVIRONMENT We must be equally concerned with the effect
of mining on the total environment. Last month the Australian
Government endorsed a policy of impact statement procedures
to ensure that the environmental effects of any proposal are
taken into account at all stages of decision making. Impact
statements will be required where a proposal has significant
environmental consequences, where Commonwealth funds are
involved, or where Commonwealth constitutional power is
involved. From January 1974 there will be public hearings
before an impact statement is prepared.
At this point, allow me to quote the words
of H. R. H. The Duke of Edinburgh, who is now visiting Australia
as chairman of the Australian Conservation Foundation.
Writing on 18 September 1972 he said:
" It might well be supposed that the
conservation of nature and natural resources
is something quite new in man's experience whereas,
in fact, every civilisation in history which did not
take active steps to control its growth had to suffer
the exhaustion of raw materials or food, or both,
and collapsed. The only difference today is that
our civilisation has come to rely on a different
set of the earth's resources which, until the
development of industrial processes, had remained
untapped. Technology has raised human standards
of existence to heights beyond the imagination of
previous civilisations, but it has also made it possible
for astronomical numbers of people to inhabit the earth.
" The problem is two-fold. Unchecked exponential
growth in population numbers, coupled with exponential
growth in the use of non-renewable mineral resources,
is an extremely serious threat to the standards
and very existence of our present civilisation.
The threat is most serious to those enjoying
the highest standards.
" At the same time, the proliferation of the
human population, the exploitation of natural resources
and the constant increase in the demand for more
food-growing land constitute an even more deadly threat
to the continued existence of the natural and wild
environment as we know it today." / 17 
These are among the reasons for my
Government's involvement in the mining industry.
The same concern is shared by Governments throughout
the world. It is not our intention to bring to an end
the truly magnificent achievements of the past decade
or so. Rather it is our firm intention to help your
industry, not hamper it; to encourage trade,
not frustrate it. But we must look to the broadest
long-term interests of our country. Your industry,
I know, will benefit from my Government's
participation. The one thing you can be sure of is that
the free-wheeling approach of the previous Government
is gone forever. We have much to share and much to gain
in our trade with the rest of the world. But it must
be clear that, in regard to minerals, Australia
henceforth intends to be the mistress of her own
household. CANBERRA 19 MARCH 1973 



i AUST ; AI. IA,&amp; Press Statement No.
March 1973
COMMONTIEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION
Cabinet today decided to amend the Grants
Commission Act to authorise a full inquiry into the
application o grants for Local Government purposes.
The Cabinet decision followed the undertakinr
in Labor's Eloction Policy Speech that legislation on
the amendments would be introduced in the first sitting
of Federal Parliament.
Today's decision will not alter the Commissinn's
function regarding special grants paid to claimant
States. The Commission however will be given the
additional tas: k of recommnending Section 96 grants to
the States for payment to Local Government.
Cabinet decided that:
Assistance for Local Government under the
amended Act should take the form of Section 96
grants to State Governments and be provided
only on condition that they are paid to the
Local Government organisations for which they
are intended.
Applications for assistance should be addressed
to the Special Minister of State with a copy
to the State Governments.
Applications eligible for reference to the
Gran;, s Commission to be coni. ned to
applications from regional organisations of
Local Government, approved for the purpose b
the r'inister for Urban and Pegional Developm., nt. 
The Grants Coirmission after investigation
of in application to recommend to the
Govrriment the amount of assistance
car. 3ictereci app ropriate.
* The Gr7ants Comrmission Act should provide
for the continuation of the Corunis3ion's
pres3ent functions in relation to applicaticis
for special grants by the claimant Sta es.
" ANBERRA, A. * T. 



NO DATE
20 March 1973
GOVERNMENT TO ACT ON CONVENTIONS
OPPOSING RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
On the occasion of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, has reaffirmed
that the Government was resolved to ratify the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
as soon as the necessary legislative and other
measures could be completed.
Mr Whitlam said that as a result of the Sharpeville
tragedy in 1960, the United Nations had decided to mark 21
March each year as a day on which the world should fix its
attention on the urgent need to eliminate racial discrimination
wherever it existed.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government had approved
the introduction of the legislation to enable Australia to
give effect to the Convention and this would be introduced
shortly. A bill was already before Parliament aimed at
repealing Section 64 of the Migration Act which was the
last remaining piece ( of Commonwealth legislation that could
be described as discriminatory on racial grounds. 
2.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government's intention
to ratify the Convention of the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination was in line with earlier positive steps taken
by Australia since December last year.
He recalled that soon after the Government had
assumed office, Australia, for the first time, had contributed
to the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, the United Nations Trust
Fund for South Africa and the United Nations Fund for Namibia.@
The Government's decision to deny racially selected
sports teams the right to visit or transit Australia
could also be seen in this light.
Mr Whitlam said that in order to pave the way for
ratification he had sought the co-operation of the Premiers
of Queensland and Western Australia in giving high priority
to the removal of the remaining minor pieces of discriminatory
legislation in those States. 



-y
. h AUS IAIlAl Press Statement mo. 64
March 1973
DO-JBLE TAXATION AGREEMENTF
Cabinet today ratified double taxation
agreements between Australia and New Zealand and
Australia and, Italy.
The two agreements were signed by the
former Treasurer on Australia's behalf during 1972.
The agreement with Italy is limited to the relief
of double taxation of international airlines.
It provides : hat Qantas will be exempt from Italian
tax and Alitilia from Australian tax.
The agreement with New Zealand covers i1l
forms of income flowing between Australia and New
Zealand. It replaces the existing agreement which
Cabinet was told was out of date. The existing
agreement wi. th New Zealand was concluded in 1960.
The new agreement has been drafted in the light of
changes in trie tax laws of each country and also of
the provisions of other double taxation agreeme. ts
Australia has signed with other countries since then.
It will mean that Australian residents will
no longer be doubly taxed on some items of income
earned in Nex' Zealand.
Oncc% it becomes lalr the new agreement x ill
have effect in Australia from 1 July 1972 and in New
Zealand from 1 April 1972.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 63
March 1973
AUSTRALIAN FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL
The Australian Film and Television School will be
established as a Statutory Authority. Cabinet decided today that
the School would have the status of a College of Advanced Education
and would provide a formal curriculum and other activities aimed
at developing creativet highly trained people for film and
television education and the industry generally.
A Bill establishing the School as a statutory body is
expected to be ready later this month. It will be introduced to
Parliament as soon as possible.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Press Statement No~.
March 1973
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION
Cabinet today decided to amend the Grants Commission Act
to authorise a full inquiry into the application of grants for
Local Government purposes*
The Cabinet decision followed the undertaking in Laborts
Election Policy Speech that legislation on the amendment would be
introduced in the first sitting of Federal Parliament.
Today's decision will not alter the Commission's function
regarding special grants paid to claimant States. The Commission
however will be given the additional task of recommending Section 96
grants to the States for payment to Local Government-.
Cabinet decided thatt
* Assistance for Local Goqvernment under the amended Act
should take the form of Section 9 grants to State
Governments and be proy'ided only n condition that they
are paid to the Local % overnmnent 4rg anisations for which
they are intended.
* Applications for assistance should be addressed to the
Special Minister of State with a copy to the State
Governments.
0 Applications eligible for reference to the Grants Commission
to be confined to applications from regional organisations
of Local Government, approved for the purpose by the
Minister for Urban and Regional Development.
o The Grants Commission after investigation of an application
to recommend to the Government the amount of assistance
considered appropriate.
o The Grants Commission Act should provide for the
continuation of the Commission's present functions in
relation to applications for special grants by the claimant
States,.
CANBERRA. A. C. T._ 



Press Statement No. 62
March 1973
ASSISTANCE FOR SOCIAL WORKERS
The Australian Government will give an extra $ 315,000 for
the training of social workers over the next three years. Cabinet
decided today that $ 240,000 would be provided for a training
programme through the University of Melbourne, and $ 75,000 for
training through the University of Sydney. The additional allocations
will cover the years 1973, 1974 and 1975.
Cabinet decided to give further consideration to a submission
from Flinders University regarding the contricution of special
assistance to students studying social work.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



t
M/ 57 21 March 1973
JOINT COMMUNI UE AT CLOSE OF VISIT
BY YUGOSLAV PRIME MINISTER TO AUSTRALIA
The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia accompanied by Mrs
Bijedic and a party of senior advisers, visited Australia
between 20 and 22 March at the invitation of the Australian
Government for discussions with the Prime Minister of
Australia. The Minister of the Yugoslav Government for
economic matters, Dr Ludviger, also had discussions with
senior officials of the Department of Overseas Trade and
the Treasury. Further discussions were held by the
Yugoslav Deputy Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr Petric,
with the Minister of State, Senator Willesee and senior
officials of the Departments of Foreign Affairs and the
Attorney-General.
The discussions took place in a warm and friendly
atmosphere and covered the main features of Yugoslav and
Australian thinking on foreign policy matters. Matters
of common concern in bilateral relations between Yugoslavia
and Australia were also discussed.
International Questions
Reviewing the international scene the two Prime
Ministers welcomed the existence of positive processes
which had led to growing detente among the major Powers
and to attempts to find solutions to problems through
negotiation and agreement. At the same time, however,
the two leaders recognised that there were still areas of
potential conflict which gave rise to anxiety.
The two Prime Ministers welcomed the conclusion of
cease fire agreements in Viet-Nam and Laos, and emphasised 2.. 
-2-
the necessity for all parties to the agreements to abide by
their terms in order to achieve the objective of peace in
Indo-China.
In considering the situation on the Indian sub-continent
the two Prime Ministers expressed the hope that there would
be a speedy solution of all outstanding issues so as to
establish lasting peace and security in this region.
The two Prime Ministers expressed their concern about
the situation in the Middle East and accepted that the terms
of Security Council Resolution 242 of 22 November 1967
offered the basis for a just and lasting settlement of this
grave problem.
Mr Bijedic informed Mr Whitlam of the present activities
of the non-aligned countries and of the preparations for the
Fourth Conference of Heads of State and Government of nonaligned
countries, at which their further actions in the
struggle for peace and security, development and democratisation
of international relations will be considered.
Australian interest in the work of these countries was
expressed by the Prime Minister of Australia who saw value
in closer Australian observation of such meetings.
Both Prime Ministers laid stress upon the interests of
their country within their own geographical neighbourhoods.
The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia outlined his Government's
thinking in relation to questions of European security and
co-operation between European countries. The Prime
Minister of Australia similarly stressed the great
importance attached by his Government to co-operation with
the countries of Asia and the Pacific. The Yugoslav
delegation appreciated the willingness of the Australian
Government to contribute actively to the development of
co-operation among the countries of the region.
Both Prime Ministers expressed their Governments'
determination to work for the elimination of the remaining
3.. 
vestiges of colonialism. The Prime Minister of Australia
outlined the progress that had been made in relation to
Papua New Guinea which would shortly achieve selfgovernment
and thereafter independence as soon as this was
practicable. The two Prime Ministers also expressed their
abhorrence of all manifestations of racial discrimination
wherever they might occur and their determination to support
efforts in the United Nations and elsewhere to eliminate
remaining instances of inequality between peoples of
Sdifferent colour.
Both Prime Ministers stressed the importance they
* attached to the role of the United Nations and agreed that
their foreign policies would be conducted within the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. They also
emphasised the importance of developing useful co-operation
between the representatives of Yugoslavia and Australia in
the United Nations and in other international organisations.
The two Prime Ministers underlined the willingness of
their respective countries to engage actively in constructive
measures designed to reduce the economic gap between the
developed and the developing countries. They agreed on the
indispensability of equal participation of developing
countries in the solution of the economic problems of the
modern world.
Bilateral Relations
The two Prime Ministers reviewed the state of bilateral
relations between Yugoslavia and Australia and agreed that
there was scope for their further development to the mutual
advantage of both countries.
The Australian Prime Minister said that his Government
was not satisfied that sufficient action had been taken in
the past towards the detection, suppression and expulsion
of extremists in Australia engaged in activities against
Yugoslavia, and foreshadowed more vigorous action in the
4.. 
-4-
future. The Yugoslav Prime Minister greatly welcomed this
assurance of the Australian Government's intentions.
In the field of economic relations, both sides expressed
their desire to develop trade in both directions, as well as
to promote other ways of achieving economic co-operation.
The Yugoslav side informed the Australian side about the
Yugoslav economic system and principles of functioning of
the Yugoslav free market economy. The need to increase
Yugoslav exports to Australia was pointed out, and the
Australian side expressed its readiness to consider the
creation of the necessary conditions to that end.
The Yugoslav Prime Minister, on behalf of his wife and
all the members of his delegation, as well as on his own
behalf, expressed the warmest gratitude for the extremely
friendly reception and hospitality extended by the Australian
Government during his visit.
The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia invited the Prime
Minister of Australia to visit Yugoslavia. The invitation
was accepted with pleasure. A 



NQ DATE
M/ 56 21 March 1973
AID FOR KARACHI WATER SUPPLY
Australia is to give aid worth $ 250,000
Stowards the maintenance and expansion of the Karachi
water supply.
SAnnouncing this today, the Minister Assisting
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, said
tie aid would be in the form of new equipment for the
factory where concrete pipes are made for the city's
water supply. It would also provide for an Australian
Sexpert to spend several months in Pakistan to supervise
the installation of the new equipment.
SThe pipe-making factory and its existing equipment,
made by Rocla Industries of Victoria, were given
to Pakistan by Australia under the Colombo Plan in the
early 1950' s.
The Karachi water supply was built between
1960 and 1964 and the Australian equipment has been used
to provide pipes for the system of canals, mains, tunnels
and siphons which carry water to Karachi from the Indus
River seventy miles away.
The new equipment will be used to make pipes
to replace corroded sections of the existing lines and to
extend the reticulation system to meet the needs of Karachi's
growing population. 



EMBARGO: 4. OOPM FRIDAY 23 MARCH 1973 6 1./
4 &gt; A U S RL A&amp;
PRIME MINISTER
THE PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CENTRE,
ANN STREET, BRISBANE, FRIDAY 23 MARCH 1973
This is my first visit to Queensland since
my Government took office. It is a happy occasion for me.
It has also provided me with my first opportunity as
Prime Minister to talk to the Queensland Premier and his
Ministers. This, too, has been personally gratifying.
Our talks have been no less cordial for being overdue, and
I thank Mr. Bjelke-Petersen for his invitation to meet him.
I trust that no one will detect any sinister symbolism in the
fact that my first official duty here is to open new offices
for the national Government. This splendid building should
be regarded in no sense as a foreign mission. Contrary to what
some people are saying, Queensland is still part of Australia.
My Government's interests and Australia's interests are one and
indissoluble, and for my part we are determined to work together
to advance them. My Government's commitment to the welfare and
progress of Queensland is both general and specific. It is
based on two great themes. There is first our general commitment
to the cities. In Queensland 60 per cent of the people live in
Brisbane and its suburbs. It is in these areas that my
Government's attack on the problems of land and housing costs,
schools opportunities, hospitals, public transport, unemployment,
migrant welfare and access to community resources for recreation,
sport and culture are principally directed. We have already
established a Department of Urban and Regional Development to
co-ordinate our work of rebuilding and regenerating our cities.
Queensland will share in that process. The related task of
bringing new standards of social welfare to the people a
fundamental theme of all Labor governments has been entrusted
to our new Department of Social Security. I remind you that
this Department is headed by a Queenslander, my colleague
Bill Hayden. / 2 
-2-
The second part of my Government's commitment to
Queensland is a specific one. It is in our policies for
northern development. That Department is also headed by a
Queensland Minister, Dr. Rex Patterson. It is our aim, in
co-operation with the Government of Queensland, to develop
the vast and valuable resources of northern Australia for
the benefit of the Australian people. It is in the north
that the great sugar and cattle industries and much of our
mineral industries have been established. It is in the north
that Australians face their greatest challenge in retaining
the ownership of the nation's resources and developing new
industries under Australian control.
My Government has made one other specific pledge
to the Queensland people. We have undertaken that one of our
two main initiatives in regional development will be concentrated
in Townsville. I said last year in my policy speech that the
national Government was already responsible for decisions which
have determined the growth and the burdens of Townsville
more than any other Australian city except Canberra itself.
What is being done for Albury-Wodonga in the southern States
can be done for Townsville and other centres in Queensland.
Albury-Wodonga is one of the best examples to
date of what fruitful collaboration between the States and the
new national Government can achieve. It is the sort of
co-operation we must foster and preserve. My meeting with
Mr. Hamer and Sir Robert Askin on 25 January was the first time
the Governments of the two oldest States had come together-with
the Commonwealth to plan the development of a new city.
I trust that with similar co-operation in Queensland the
prospects for the future growth and prosperity of Townsville
will be as bright as those for Albury-Wodonga.
As one instance of my Government's determination
to give greater importance and prestige to Townsville, we have
undertaken that Townsville will be made an international airport.
Townsville, the gateway to the Barrier Reef, is vital to our
developing tourist industry. It is vital to Australia as a whole.
There has been one other notable example since my
Government took office of what co-operation between the States
and the national Government can achieve in the interests of all.
Early this month, I met the Premiers of New South Wales, South
Australia and Victoria to discuss the future use of the waters
of the River Murray. This meeting was called on the initiative of
one of the States South Australia. Its results will be
largely to the benefit of that State. I believe the measures
which will flow from that meeting will improve the quantity and
quality ' of the waters of the Murray available to South Australia.
I am proud that my Government, through its participation in that
meeting, will help bring these benefits to that State, and I hope
that through similar co-operative ventures we will bring similar
benefits to the people of Queensland. / 3 
-3-
Since My Government took office I have made
numerous offers to the State Governments, including Queensland,
to assist them with local and regional problems common to all
of us. One of these was an attempt to control the soaring prices
of land and housing, which are denying a decent home to thousands
of Australian families. My Government proposes to set up Land
Development Commissions to acquire and make available residential
land on reasonable terms. I have Vritten . to all the Premiers
proposifigi action on these lines.
I have also written to the Premiers offering-special
grants to overcome the backlog in sewerage services in the principal
cities. I have written to them outlining the terms of my Government's
offer to take over the uneconomic State railway services which im~ pose
crippling financial burdens on all State Governments. My Government
has offered the States additional funds totalling $ 52 million for
unemployment relief works of which Queensland's share was
$ 5.6 million. We have approved for Queensland an extra $ 5,124,000
from the $ 27.5 million increase in the borrowing program for the
States' local and semi-governmental authorities.
Our most recent action was my Cabinet's decision this
week to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act to allow us to
make special grants to the States for local government. This is
in line with our policy of allowing local Government full participation
in, and access to, the fund-raising processes of this country.
I am confident that in all these initiatives we will
receive the ready co-operation of the States. I am confident that
the people will not be side-tracked and hood-winked by specious
slogans about centralism and States rights. What our opponents
like to call centralism is the overdue recognition by the national
Government of-its responsibilities in areas which that Government
alone can discharge. our responsibility is t6 ensure Viable
and efficient local government. Local government in this city
happens to be the most efficient and progressive system of local
government in Australia.
I It is efficient and progressive because it is
organised on broad regional lines. It is, if you like, the most
distinctive example of centralism in Australia. Similarly, when
we talk of States rights, let us remember that the rights of people
are more important that tne rights of Governments. My Government
emphasises people's rights their rights to a decent home, to a
modern transport service, to a full education, to a pleasing and
unpolluted neighbourhood, to an equal share in life's opportunities
for recreation, leisure and cultural fulfilment. These are the
rights we hold paramount.
I pay tribute to all those who planned and built
this new Government centre. It will provide a link between
Governments and people. I hope it will be seen as a symbol of the
co-operative spirit that must prevail between Queensland and the
Australian Government. The true progress of our people depends on this
co-operation. There is much that our Governments can do alone; there
is much more they can do together. The greatest enemy of progress,
development and efficiency in our country has been the old-fashioned,
discredited rivalry that has prevailed between States and between
centres within the States. Queensland in many ways is the State
which has best managed to suppress these rivalries. It is in many
ways the proudest and most individualistic of States. Despite its
enormous size it has a unique cohesion and corporate pride. 
-4-
It is of all States the least urbanised, the
most decentralised, the most diverse in its climatic conditions
and natural resources. I make this earnest appeal to you all:
Let us work together in co-operation and good will for a
greater and more prosperous Queensland in a greater and more
prosperous Australia. It will be a tragedy for the Queensland people
if local jealousy, parochial sentiment and intolerant suspicion
are allowed to stand in the way of Queensland's progress.
I offer a lasting contract of mutual goodwill and shared
purpose between our Governments. Our ultimate interests
are the same, and I am sure that our common aims will be
approved by the people of your great State and by your
fellow Australians.
23 MARCH 1973 



3 A
A at," NQ DATE
M/ 58 24 March 1973
EMBARGO: Not to be used
in any form before midnight
on Saturday 24 March 1973.
D) IPOMATIC REIlATIONS WITH THE VATICAN
~ The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
announced today that Australia and the Holy See had agreed
to enter into diplomatic relations and agreed to the following
joint communique: " Australia and the Holy See, wishing to promote
mutual friendly relations, have decided to exchange diplomatic
representation, with the rank of Embassy on the part of
ustralia, and of Apostolic Nunciature on the part of the
Holy See." Mr Whitlam said the names of the respective Heads of
Mission would be announced shortly, adding that the Australian
Ambassador to the Holy See would be arccredited on a nonresident
basis. Mr Whitlam noted that Australia had become one of
over 70 countries, of which 12 were members of the Conmonwealth,
which maintained diplomatic relations with the Holy See. In so / 2 
-2-
doing, it joined ten of the most influential and populous of
its Asian neighbours, including Indonesia, India, Japan, Pakistan
and Thailand. The Holy See maintains resident diplomatic
representation in over 60 countries at the level of Nuncio or
Pro-Nuncio ( equivalent to Ambassador), as well as having
Observer status to some 12 international organisations, including
the United Nations, the European Communities, and a number of the
Specialised Agencies of the United Nations.
Mr Whitlam said he expected that the Apostolic
Delegation in Sydney would, in due course, become an Apostolic
Nunciature in Canberra.
The Minister said he had taken careful note of views
put to him by individuals and organisations before a decision
on this question had been made. He emnhasised that the step
was one of several actions which the Government had taken to
normalise its relations with other States and should be seen in
this secular light. The nature of any exchanges between the
two States would be that of normal diplomacy and would in no
way provide privileged access by the Catholic Church to the
Australian Government.
L 



ORATION BY THE PRIM~ E MINISTER AT THE HAND) ING OVER TO
THE BATHUJRST CITY COUNCIL OF THE COTTAGE OF J. B. CHIFLEY,
BATHURST 24 MARCH 1973
It is a profound measure of weight and force of Ben Chifley's
personality that of the 14 Australian Prime Ministers now dead, he is
outstandingly the one whose memory is clearest and strongest in the
hearts and minds of his countrymen. The Chifley legend I use the
word in its nobler sense has a force and meaning, even for the
new generation which never knew him. Each of us will have our own
opinion about who was the greatest of Australian Prime Ministers. I
venture to suggest, however, that there would be no dispute as to who
was the best loved.
One of the sources of Chifley's ability to inspire affection
was the simplicity of his life style. This cottage his only real
home in or out of office symbolised it. That is not to say that
Chifley was a simple man. He had inner reserves and an outer reserve
which sprang from a character of great complexity. There was a very
private Chifley unknown to the public, known perhaps not entirely
even to his closest colleagues. For all his great warmth, for all
his easy fellowship, for all the loyalty and love his inspires, he
was in fact never " one of the boys". In this sense there was another
Chifley apart, above, even dare one say it aloof.
So great is the hold of the Chifley memory on the Australian
Labor Party that it is usually forgotten how untypical of Labor leaders
he actually was; paradoxically he has become the archetype for our
leadership. There is something naturally very appealing to the Party
in the rise of an engine driver to Prime Minister; yreat of the 11 of
us who have led the Parliamentary Labor Party, only he and Matthew
Charlton fit the classic type. So in this, as in so many other ways,
Chifley was in a class of his own.
It is a great thing for us all to be here at Ben Chifley's
home not just this cottage but in this city which was so very much
his city. It is a very moving thing for me to be here as the first
Labor Prime Minister of Australia since Chifley. For us allt for the
Australian Labor Party, Bathurst holds a very special meaning at his
birthplace, his only real home; among the people who shared with him
the bitterness and frustrations of the thirties, the victories and
achievements of the forties. He was a Bathurst man through and through.
He used to say " No Chifley ever left Bathurst except feet first".
He did leave Bathurst to give on the national scale the same service
that he had, for so many years, given Bathurst in local affairs,
But it was to this city and the people of this city that he always
returned and did return to his last rest.
It is saddening to find that after 22 years his grave has
fallen into disrepair. When we looked into the matter we found there
was no machinery available to fulfil what is clearly a national
responsibility and should be a national charge, so I have decided that
henceforth the Australian Government shall assume responsibility for
maintaining the graves of all former Prime Ministers and I have asked my
colleague Don Willesee, the Special Minister of State, to make the
necessary arrangements. It is fitting that monuments and memorials of our great should
be preserved and cared for. We are not so rich in the memorabilia of
history that we can afford to allow them to be lost or neglected. I
congratulate all those who have worked for the preservation of this
cottage. Nonetheless, Chifleyts lasting memorial lies in what he
achieved for his nation and he himself has his true resting place in the
hearts of his countrymen. Those monuments are imperishable; that place
cannot be moved. 



SUNDAY, 25 MARCH 1973
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, TO
THE VICTORIAN GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE ALP, ST. KILDA TOWN HALL
This is the first General Assembly of the Victorian
Branch since the . House of Representatives elections. It's the
first time I've spoken in this St. Kilda Town Hall since the
great rally winding up the campaign for those elections.
That meeting, the biggest and most enthusiastic political
meeting I've ever attended is now part of Australian history.
Among other things, that meeting symbolised the coming together
of all the elements which now make Victoria a truly great branch
of the Australian Labor Party. We won the elections federally
because we won in Victoria and particularly in the capital of
Victoria and we won in Victoria because the people of Victoria
believed that the reconstruction in 1970 was a genuine
remaking and remoulding of the Branch. That belief was not
misplaced. I'm told by the Press that there's to be a
confrontation today. The only confrontation that my Government
is involved in in Victoria is not in the St. Kilda Town Hall
but further up St. Kilda Road.
In this room are represented all viewpoints of the Party
any member of the Party who wanted to attend can come here today.
Your time and efforts ' created the first Labor Government
federally for 23 years. It's with your help that I'm now
Prime Minister of Australia. I come here to co-operate
not to confront you. I come here to thank you not to
challenge you. You can all be proud of what you have done
to create it. The Australian Government is your Government.
You helped to make it. I come to thank you and to work with you.
I think it's now quite clear what a Labor Government is all
about and I think that the work of this Government has helped
make clear what the reconstruction was all about. The point
at issue in the years before 1970 was whether the aims of
our Party could be achieved through Parliament and whether a
change in the Government party would mean a real change in the
direction of Australian society. The reconstruction was carried
through in the belief that a party which wished to win the
support of half the people of Australia should itself be
representative of the views of at least half the people of
Australia. We believed that such a party would be able to use
Parliament and the Parliamentary system to affect great and
real changes in the nation. We offered a chance to change.
The people took up our offer. We are making the most of the
opportunity they gave us. We have to acknowledge that
significant sections of our people had come to despair of the
Parliamentary system. If we hadn't won on 2 December the
effective survival of the system wouldn't have been able to
get much of an insurance policy. 
I believe that what we've done in the last three months
and even more what we are going to do in the next three years
and the next three Parliaments, not only restores Parliament
to its proper role as the effective instrument for economic,
social and political change, but will prove that, if used
properly, Parliament is the real instrument the only
instrument for achieving democratic socialism in our time.
Make no mistake about what we've been doing for the last
three months. The Governor-General himself said in his speech
opening the Parliament, our program is designed to achieve
basic changes in the administration and structure of
Australian society in the lifetime of this Parliament. We are
well on the way towards achieving this. We are determined to
affect our reforms in such a way that our reactionary opponents
will not be able to dismantle what we have created should they
ever again be given the opportunity.
And let me say this in passing about our opponents:
take no comfort at all in the fact that Mr Snedden or Mr Lynch
eminent Victorians as they may be have proved so ineffective.
The real result of their default is that the dominant voice
on the right is the voice of reaction. The Liberal Party is
moving under the control of men who speak the doctrine of
fear and hatred. The voice of the Liberal Parliament which
you now hear the Liberal Party which you now hear in the
Federal Parliament and outside is the echo of the early fifties.
These men haven't been chastened by defeat. They have merely
been further embittered by it. That is, they are a party bent
not on reform but on revenge, and it's our job to see that
they never get that opportunity.
It will be our fault if they get that chance to take
revenge to put the clock back, to dismantle the new structure.
I think it's fair to say that no government in Australia's
history has moved so rapidly and successfully to implement
the program for which it was elected. I have to confess that
when we were compiling the policy speech we anticipated that
it would take much longer to achieve substantial retention of
our promises. Yet setting aside for the moment the great
continuing matters the matters on which it will never be
possible to say we've done enough -' things like schools or
hospitals or cities setting them aside, we've already
implemented or set in train 70 per cent of the specific
promises in our policy speech. The real meaning of this,
the significance of our Party's future and Australia's
future is that by acting so competently we are freeing
ourselves we are preparing ourselves to take the political
debate in Australia to a new and yet even higher level. We
will be able to do this much sooner than we expected in
December. In 1975 we'll not just be standing on our record,
though that record will, I believe, be a very proud one.
We'll be seeking the people's support for a new program,
a new mandate on new issues that will take this nation to a
new and higher level of progress and progress and government. 
It amazes me that people at home even some people
abroad have expressed surprise at the speed with which
we moved. Did anyone believe that we wouldn't do what we've
been saying we'd do for years and years. I'd suppose it's really
an illustration of how our opponents in their 23 years
debauched the standards of Parliamentary politics and the
standing of politicians. People had ceased to believe that
politicians could be trusted to keep their word. I remember
before the campaign that the draft resisters gave us only
grudging support. They gave it to us not on the grounds that
we were committed to the abolition of conscription but on the
grounds that we might be more susceptible to pressure than our
opponents. The first act of my first Government the
duumvirate with Barcnard and Hasluck. The first act was
to end the draft, to end national service prosecutions, to
free everybody imprisoned under the Act. Should anybody have
been surprised. We promised to do it. It was something we could
do by administrative action and we did it in the very first week.
Should anybody have been surprised that we immediately withdrew
the vestigial military force, the advisers which had been
left in Vietnam, that we cut off all military aid to South
Vietnam. Admittedly that took longer. It took place in the
second week. But we promised to do it. It could be done by
administrative action and we did it. Could anybody have been
surprised that, in the third week, before Christmas, we had
secured the recognition of the People's Republic of China
and the exchange of diplomatic representatives with them.
We promised to do it. It took over two weeks to do that.
We had to negotiate with another country, but we did it.
We successfully negotiated with them.
Could anybody have been surprised that when America
resumed the bombing of Hanoi, we protested. We did immediately.
Should anybody have been surprised that when the ceasef ire
took place we immediately set in train and in a week secured
the recognition and exchange of diplomatic representatives
with North Vietnam? Now all these things, ladies and gentlemen,
were things which could be done by administrative action or by
negotiation with other countries. We did them all. Nobody
could have done them more effectively, more promptly.
All these things were things for which we sought a mandate,
for which we secured a mandate, on which we discharged the
mandate. Now I suppose this is an appropriate point for me
to bring in some other matters of Foreign Affairs. You might
have read about them.' I noticed in the agenda, that it is
supposed that we say that we should get rid of all U. S. bases
from Australia. We will carry out the mandate for which we
were elected, for which we sought the mandate.
And you will remember that the general context of
a great number of suggestions are made that we are wanting to
break the alliance with the that we are wanting to get
out of ANZUS, and anything that anybody in the Party says
which might have that effect is certain to have the maximum
publicity. But that's not what the Platform says. It's not what
the policy said. It's not what the mandate sought. Because
what the Platform says is: the Labor Party seeks close
continuing co-operation with the people of the United States
and New Zealand to make the ANZUS Treaty an instrument for
justice and peace and political, social and economic
advancement in the Pacific area. And in the policy speech 
as in every other respect I've followed it word for word:
the close and continuing co-operation with the people of
the United States and New Zealand to make it an instrument for
justice and peace and for political, social and economic
advancement in the Pacific. That's what the policy speech
said. It's what it had to say because it was in the Platform,
and that's what we want to make ANZUS. We want to make it
what the Platform says it should be. We want to make it
what the policy speech repeated that it should be. We want
to make it what we sought a mandate to achieve. We want
to make it what we were given a mandate to achieve.
Now let me point out that there are five bases
facilities ( that's a more appropriate term in most cases)
which have some defence significance which the U. S. has
arranged to have here. With two of them there has been a
great deal of mystery for a long, long time. One has been
at Alice Springs. It was to look at disturbances in the
atmosphere and attendant phenomena. We revealed to the
people and the Parliament that it was to detect nuclear
explosions in the atmosphere. It's because it's able to
do that that the U. S. felt confident to enter into the
treaty with the Soviet Union and Britain to ban nuclear
explosions in the atmosphere the treaty which China and
France will not sign. The other one was at Amberley
Air Force Base near Ipswich and it was to disturb tremors
in the underground and of course to distinguish earthquakes from
nuclear explsions underground. We are able to reveal that that's
what it did and it's because it's able to do that that the
United States is confidently working towards a comprehensive
nuclear treaty to ban it all. Now, nobody now would say that
these were not valuable. They were valuable. We ought to be
supporting it. And we have promptly ratified every nuclear
treaty which has ever been made. Our opponents had to drag
the chain. We had the conflict. But about those two things,
nobody could learn. They now know what they were for, and
nobody would object to them. They've helped to remove the
spectre of nuclear war from the face of the earth and they
could be effectively done from our part of the hemisphere.
Now the next two things are secret. One is at Pine Gap
near Alice Springs, one is at Nurunga near Woomera. I
emphasise that they are not part of weapons systems. They
can not be used to make war on any country, and the Ministers
whose job it is Foreign Affairs, Defence, Barnard, myself,
Willesee and Bishop all have verified that fact. We know
what goes on there. It's not our secret. One goes till
1976, one goes till 1979. They are expressed in the ANZUS
context. I repeat they are not part of weapons systems.
They can not be used to make war on any country. We can not
disclose any more about their purposes because they're not
our secrets. But ladies and gentlemen, what we want to
recognise is this: that if we seek to govern this country,
the people are entitled to believe that we will do it
responsibly. 
We never told the people at the elections that we
would disclose other countries' secrets if we knew them.
We never told the people that we'd break agreements that
went into 1976 or 1979 and we knew this. These were public
documents. Anybody can get copies of the Treaty.
Now you can't now say to people that you'll break
them. We didn't seek a mandate on that. But I urge you if you
want to know more about these, read what Barnard has said after
the discussion in Cabinet and Caucus. Don't go on subsequent
glosses about it. Read what was said. What the Cabinet and
Caucus heard. Then there's a final one, and that's the North West
Cape. Because Australia and the United States entered into
correspondence which said that the Australian Government
had no right to know the messages that went through, we
don't know.* We are determined to find out. The agreement
goes to 1988. But Barnard has said on behalf of the Cabinet
and the Caucus in the Parliament that he will make it this
year we would be negotiating that. We would never have
kept the silly secrecy that there was about the original
thing in Alice Springs the nuclear atmospheric one, or the
silly secrecy about the Amberley one the nuclear underground.
You now know. I can assure you that when in due course it's
regarded as proper to release the information as to what is
done at Pine Gap and Nurunga, you will find it just as acceptable
as you now find what's been done at the old one at Alice Springs
or at Amberley. Then you say that helps to see that the great
powers don't have this ignorance of suspicion of each other which
leads to wars. Because the wars that have taken place this
century have been due to the ignorance of rival powers upon each
other's doing. It's been due to the over-reaction of what great
powers have committed themselves to in ignorance and suspicion
of their rivals. These ones there will allay the suspicion
and remove the ignorance.
The North West Cape is unsatisfactory. No self-respecting
Government should ever have entered into it. No Government in
the world would now enter into such an arrangement. And it's only
fair to give us the opportunity when the Parliament gets up to
negotiate with the Americans to do a proper contemporary thing.
But believe me, we are determined to see in the terms of the
Party Platform that Australia will not be party into undertaking
or entering upon a war without knowing what it's all about and
how it's being done.
We have said through the conferences in the past that
members of Parliament in Australia should have just as much
right to see these things a's United States congressmen and that
has already been conceded it has been agreed there's no
difficulty about that. We achieved that promptly by putting
our cards on the table and it was seen to be reasonable.
Now don't blame the yanks for everything you don't like in this
country. It's not their fault that go many of our companies
and cattle stations are being bought overseas by them. It's
the fault of our predecessors. Don't blame the Republicans
and the Democrats for what the Liberals did. 
Now I'll hurry on to some of the other things here.
If things are capable of being done by Federal administrative
action we've already acted because already there's been a very
great deal done to transform the social security systems of
Australia. We already, before Christmas, set up the Interim
Schools Commission which will make its report before the end
of may which will, we expect, be put into force in; tie coming
bcudget and which, with the co-operation of the States, to which
we've written, will mean that the Commonwealth can take over
in the terms of the Party Platform, in the terms of the policy
speech, in the terms of Sir Paul's opening address to the
Parliament, will enable the Commonwealth to assume the
responsibility for planning and financing tertiary education
in Australia on the condition that the money so saved is spent
on other forms of education. It can all be done this year.
As far as we are concerned the report from the Committee which
I set up when I was Minister for Education in the thirteen
days before Christmas will be received before the end of May,
and with the co-operation of the States it will all be fully
implemented in the next scholastic year.
Some of these things involve legislation. It takes a
bit longer to get legislation but we are resolved to see that
our legislation will be in the terms of the mandate we sought
and which we got. Then the remaining thing is of course the
things which have to be done by co-operation with the States.
Things where the Commonwealth can't do it single-handed.
Admittedly, where international affairs are concerned the
Australian Government the national Government is the only
one which has any standing at all. Nobody could have acted
more promptly and fully than we did then. And when there are
administrative things, such as discharging prisoners or
discontinuing prosecutions or entering the draft, we did them
promptly immediately. We've already brought in the first
three weeks of this new Parliament more bills than any Government
has ever brought in federally in such a period all within the
terms of our mandate. We believe they should go through the
Parliament. If any of them are stalled, there's no question
what the public response will be when we put them to the people
at the Senate elections whether or not that is the whole of
the Senate or whether it is jointly with another House of
Representatives election.
You in this State have the great opportunity within the
next couple of months to have a State election and there are so
many things that we can only do by co-operation with the States.
If you want to do anything about the use and the cost of land,
if you want to do anything about public transport, if you want
to do anything about the environment, or the national estate
in general, the federal people can't do it single'handed.
The State people can't do it single'handed. We don't have,
federally, many of the constitutional powers, State governments
don't have financially many of the necessary powers, but between
us we could do any of these things. Now your great opportunity
in a couple of months is to elect a State Labor Government
again. 
I've known Clyde Holding for many years. I've worked
with him constantly. There's never a week goes by but we are
in touch with each other and I can assure you that if you want
an effective administration of this nation, of this city,
the only certain way to get it is to have a federal Government
and a State Government which without any inhibitions will
carry out a joint program. Governments, Federal and State,
which are both committed to the Platform of the Australian
Labor Party. I didn't seek a mandate on anything which is
not there. We got a mandate for things that are in there.
I know we will not seek a mandate for anything which isn't
in there, and it will all be in there, the lot of it will be
in his program, between us without division, we will co-operate
in seeing that this Platform is fulfilled. That's where we seek
a mandate. That's the mandate we can expect to get. Now,
the public, in the Victorian elections, will vote for Labor
candidates if they believe that the Labor Party will discharge
the mandate it seeks promptly and fully and that the Party
will back it. Now we've carried out the mandate that we
sought federally. I believe we are entitled to get the
support of this great assembly, the most representative gathering
of any political party in any State in Australia, and I believe
if we get that backing for the mandate we sought and got and
are discharging, that is the best hope of seeing that you have
success in the Mtate elections. The Party backs its Government.
That Government discharges its mandate.
Ladies and gentlemen, Clyde Holding and I, and our
colleagues between us seek a mandate consistent with the
Party Platform. We have shown federally that fully and
promptly we will discharge that mandate. That's why the
public are supporting the Party federally. I believe that
the public of Victoria are entitled to a reassurance that the
Labor Party will back the Government for which it works
the Governments for which the public gave a mandate. In that
way, ladies and gentlemen, at the time of your next assembly
you can not only have the Prime Minister and his Ministers but you
can have once again a Premier and a Labor Ministry as well. 



R 7 NQ DATE
M/ 59 26 March 1975
APPOINTMENT OF AMBASSADOR TO TEBANON
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
announced today that Mr P. N. B. Hutton had been appointed
0 Australian Ambassador to Lebanon. Mr Hutton will succeed
Mr H. N. Truscott, who will return to Canberra to take up
duties in the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Mr Hutton, who was born in 1928, was educated
Sat St Virgil's College, Hobart, and the University of
Tasmania. He joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in
1949 and has served in Bangkok, Rangoon, Ottawa, Noumea,
SJakarta and Geneva. Mr Hutton has been High Commissioner
in Lagos since May 1970. He is married and has five
children. 



PRESS STATEMENT No. 66
27 March, 1973
THE PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO LONDON
The Prime Minister announced today details of a
forthcoming visit to London.
He said that it had been a matter of priority in his
mind that he should make a visit to London as soon as
reasonably possible. Its purposes would be, as Prime Minister,
to meet the Prime Minister of Britain, Mr Heath, and also very
importantly, as Prime Minister, to call on the Queen.
For both purposes he felt that he should make the visit
to London before August that is before the Prime Minister's
Conference in Ottawa, especially as Her Majesty also will be
present in Ottawa at that time.
The Parliamentary break at Easter presented a suitable
opportunity. The Prime Minister said he had beer! in touch with the
Australian High Commissioner in London, who was able to tell
him that a visit at that time would be suitable and in addition
Her Majesty would wish Mrs. Whitlam and him to stay with her
at Windsor on the night of Friday,
It happens that Saturday, 21st, is the Queen's birthday.
The Prime Minister is already committed to be in Apia
for the South Pacific Forum just prior to Easter. He will
need to leave Apia on Wednesday, 18 April, which is the day
befo're the conference ends. This has been explained to the
Prime Minister of Western Samoa and other Heads of Government
and Senator Willesee will take over from the Prime Minister
on the final day.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



A
NQ DATE
27 March 1973
S PRIR MINISTER TO VISIT IMIA
~ The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, announced today that he would make a short visit
to New Delhi from 4 to 7 June.
Mr Whitlam recalled that, at his press conference
* on 13 March, he had said he hoped to be able to accept an
invitation from Mrs Gandhi to visit India this year. He had
also said that no Australian Prime Minister had visited India
since 1959. It had, therefore, given him considerable pleasure
to hear last week from Mrs Gandhi that the dates in June which
he had proposed were acceptable to her.
Mr Whitlam said that the visit would be to India only
and would involve his being absent from Australia for slightly
less than a week in all. He would be accompanied by his wife
and by a small party of officials. ./ 2 
-2-
Mr Whitlam went on to say that India, with its
population of 548 million people, was known and accepted
as the world's largest democracy. It was also a significant
industrial and military power with an important part to play
in the Asian region and a member of the Commonwealth. It was
the predominant power in the Indian sub-continent. For all
these reasons it was of considerable and growing importance
to Australia. Mr Whitlam added that in recent years there had been
increasing bilateral consultations and contacts.
" Australia has sought to help and co-operate with
India in tackling some of its economic problems," he said.
" We have both followed with close interest and attention
developments in South-East Asia and the Indian Ocean. Annual
consultations are held between our respective Departments of
Foreign Affairs." Mr Whitlam said he looked forward to discussing at
first hand the various facets of our relations with India and
to exchanging views with Mrs Gandhi on matters of common interest
affecting our two countries.
Mr Whitlam said that his visit to India was important
also in the context of Australia's relationship with the Asian ./ 3 
-3-
region as a whole. He had recently made a successful visit to
Indonesia. Later in the year he hoped to visit China and Japan.
The forthcoming visit to India should be seen as part
of a pattern of developing first-hand contacts at the head of
government level with Australia's Asian neighbours.
Mr Whitlam said he hoped that the visits he would be
making this year would be followed up later by visits to other
countries in the region. 



NQ DATE
M/ 61 27 March 1973
FOOD AID FOR BANGLADESH
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced today that Australia would give
Bangladesh a gift of 12,600 metric tons of wheat.
0 Mr Whitlam said the gift was in response to appeals
by the Bangladesh Government and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for assistance in supplying food grains to
Bangladesh.
0 The gift, valued at $ 940,000, augments the 54,000
metric tons of wheat which Australia shipped to Bangladesh
0 during 1972 and brings the value of Australian gift wheat to
Bangladesh during the current financial year to almost
million. Australia will pay the freight costs of the gift. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 27 MARCH, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladles and gentlemen, because it was
anticipated that the statement on political terrorism would
be made in the two Houses at the ordinary time at which I give
this Press Conference on Tuesday I'd arranged with you to give
the Press Conference at 3.30 p. m. There was a procedural
change in the Senate and so I've therefore waited until
the statement was concluded in the Senate before coming down
here. Nevertheless, this will probably have to be fairly
brief because I've made other engagements on the basis that
I'd be seeing you all at 3.30 p. m. and I've put off everything
as long as I can, but I have got other commitments.
There will be a few statements, some of them I think
already given to you, about visits that I'll be making
overseas. You probably know that I'll be visiting Apia
for the South Pacific Forum I think that's already been
announced hasn't it in the week before Easter all the
Commonwealth countries. Then over Easter, I'll be visiting
England. There will be a press release given to you within
the next few minutes. It might even come while we are still
here. The essence of it the chief points in it are that
I'm to stay at Windsor on Good Friday night. It's the Queen's
birthday the following day, and I'm seeing Mr Heath on the
Tuesday and there will be other appointments made in that week
after Easter.
Then I mentioned to you earlier that I was hoping to be
able to accept Mrs. Ghandi's invitation to visit India. We've
pursued those arrangements and I'll be making the visit from the
4-7 June. There is a statement which Foreign Affairs has put
in your boxes already. I think I mentioned to you previously
that this is the first time that an Australian Prime Minister
has visited India since 1959, so it's certainly long overdue.
Perhaps I might add that it will be the seventh occasion that
I have been there in that time.
I'd like to point out that in visiting Indonesia and now
India1. I'm not overlooking the ASEAN countries to which we
continue to attach the greatest importance. Tun Dr. Ismail,
the Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia has just made a very
welcome visit to Australia and New Zealand. The Foreign Minister
of Singapore and the Foreign Minister of the Philippines are
also expected to visit Australia this year. I'm hoping to
visit the ASEAN countries as soon as I can but, because of
other arrangements of which you are already aware, it will
be impossible to do so this year. Those are the things I
wanted to mention: the South Pacific Forum, England and
India. 
When you go to Windsor, ill you discuss the future
Governor-Generalship?
PRIME MINISTER: I saw it as a suggestion but I wasn't
expecting to.
Is it likely you will?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so. I think any speculation
on the Governor-Generalship is quite premature.
Will you be taking a short list with you?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But it's quite premature to discuss
the question of the next Governor-General.
Would you as Prime Minister and leader of the country
make a general comment on the statement that has just been made
to Parliament by Senator Murphy and do you believe that there is
a case to answer for the previous Government or Opposition, Sir.
And in particular the Attorney-General, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly it's a case to answer as I'm sure
you will have noticed from the statement, but I don't think
since both Houses will be discussing this matter I expect
they'll be debating it not only today but possibly on other
days I don't want to duplicate what will be said in
Parliament maybe by me among others.
When will legislation come in, Sir, to deal with ASIO
the reforming or re-organising?
PRIME MINISTER: There was no mention in the statement about
legislation on ASIO.
No, but you said there would be Changes in the legislation
in the law?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it was referring to legislation which
in fact was recommended to the previous Government to give
Commonwealth law enforcement agencies the Police, for instanceauthority
to investigate crimes under Commonwealth legislation.
As you realise, the Commonwealth Police can only investigate
crimes under Commonwealth legislation, and there are some
particular crimes for which the Commonwealth could legislate
and I expect there will be recommendations to Cabinet-on this
as there were to the former Government.
Was there any recommendation made today in Cabinet on this?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Were there any Cabinet decisions or referrals today, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: The only matter discussed by Cabinet today
was the statement that Senator Murphy has just made and which
Mr Enderby will be making later. 
Prime Minister, there has been a lot of speculation
as to why the Attorney-General found it necessary to go to
the ASIO headquarters in the fashion in which he did
PRIME MINISTER: Now I said I will not duplicate ' anything...
He made no mention of this, Sir. It was singularly
absent from his speech...
PRIME MINISTER: I was asked questions about this in the
House of Representatives today. There may easily be questions
asked again on this matter. I don't propose to duplicate
anything that can arise in the Parliament. This Press
conference is not a substitute for the Parliament.
If I could ask you about something, Sir, which you
yourself said last Wednesday when you spoke before Mr Bijedic,
the Yugoslav Prime Minister, you spoke of the possibility of
the reorganisation of the Australian Security and Intelligence
Services.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Now did that mean ASIO, or did that mean what it
literally said: that our security services and our intelligence
services encompassing JIO and ASIS and other services?
PRIME MINISTER: I had in mind ASIO and the Commonwealth Police.
Sir, on quite a different subject...
PRIME MINISTER: By the way I was asked about OMEGA. Mr Jones
has it in mind we didn't reach it today to recommend that
we refer to the Joint Select Committee on Foreign Affairs and
Defence which I'm told by Mr Bowen, who has the conduct of the
matter on behalf of the Opposition, will not be opposed by the
Opposition. We have it in mind to recommend that that Committee
should inquire into and report upon any Foreign Affairs or
Defence aspects of OMEGA.
That Committee is not formed yet?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But it will probably come up tomorrow
tomorrow night. Mr Bowen asked that it come on tomorrow
night. We've agreed. I asked whether he would be opposing it.
He said he wouldn't.
Mr Whitlam, has your Party chosen its membership?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But we probably will tomorrow knowing
that it will not be opposed.
Sir, on another subject, in one of his more recent
statements on Foreign Affairs, Dr Cairns, the Minister for
Overseas Trade and Secondary Industry said that Australia would
be represented in any fleet of ships which sailed into the
French testing zone, and that he felt Australia should supply
a tanker for such a fleet of ships. As Minister for Foreign
Affairs, do you think Australia will be represented, or should
send a tanker? 
PRIME MINISTER: I've not decided. The Government hasn't
decided. I don't propose to make any statements on contingencies
until after we know the result of the negotiations the
ministerial discussions which will take place in Paris just
before or just after Easter, and contingent on those discussions,
proceedings in the Court.
Although the next set of tests might well have taken
place before the
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe they will.
Mr Prime Minister, as you are going to Britain at Easter
time, it won't be very hard to fly across to Paris. Will you
do so?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd love to, but I don't think I can....
I don't think it's likely.
Well the French Government is quite anxious to welcome
you, Sir.
PRIME MINISTER: That's very nice.
We got the cable this morning, Sir.
Sir, on the question of the tests, are we to understand
that the Government's not planning any direct action other
than discussions and the I. C. J. case?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to say anything more on this
subject. I do this on a full consideration of the legal
implications of anything that I say on occasions like this.
I can assure you I will not be making any comment on this
subject until after we know the result of the discussions in
Paris or proceedings in the Court.
Will you be going to Washington in the near future, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll be in North America in August. It's
very likely I'll be going to Washington and/ or New York.
Would you be visiting the President in Washington, Sir?
Do you have an invitation there?
PRIME MINISTER: Well one would expect one would, but there
have been no arrangements no approaches. 



Press Statement ED3.
Review of Previous Government's Programmes
The Prime Minister ( the Hon. E. G. WVhitlam, MP-) announcid
today t~} at the Government was establishing a high level " task force"
under the leadership of Dr, H. C. Coombs to undertake a close scrutiny
of the continuing policies of the previous Government. The de-cision to
undertake this scrutiny resulted from recent discussion by Cabtnet of
the broad question of expenditure priorities and the review would relate
to the spending programmes ( including " disguised expenditure" through
the tz; xation system)~ which were in being when the Government took office.
The Prime Minister said that, quiet apart from any other
consideration, thorough-going review of the policies of the previous
Government in these regards was highly desirable in its own right. Over
and above that, the Government and undertaken to introduce a wide range of
policies and programmes involving substantial expenditures of its own
and, in doing so, it would be important that it should have the widest
possible options available to it. Otherwise, there was a clear risk
that the introduction of its own programmes could be impeded or even
frustrated by the continuing demands on resources represented by the
programmes of its predecessors. The Government was determined to avoid
any such outcome.
The terms of reference given to Dr. Coombs, and the membership of
the task force he is to lead, are set out in the attached copy of the
Prime Minister's letter of 28 March to Dr. Coombs. 
28 March 197?*
Dear Dr. Coombs, The purpose of this letter is to confirm to you the outcome
of our recent discussions, arising out of' Cabinet's Decision that
" Action be set in train to apply a close scrutiny to
continuing policies of the previous Government so that
room may be found for our own higher priority programmes."
As you know, I regard the importance of such action as
self-evident. Quite apart from any other consideration, a thoroughgoing
review of the policies of our predecessors seems to me highly
desirable in its own right. Over and'above that, we have a lot to do
ourselves and it will be important that we should have the widest
possible options available to us in instituting our own programmes.
In the light of our idscussions, I have concluded that the
only effective way in which the close scrutiny of the previous
Government's continuing policies can be carried out is through the
setting up of a high leveal " task force" for that purpose. You have
agreed to serve as the leader of that task force.
It is essential, I, think, to keep the task force small and I
am proposing the appointment of six people of appropriate standing and
capacity to assist you, namely
Mr. M. A. Besley, First Assistant Secretary,
Department of External Territories.
Dr. S. F. Harris, Deputy Secretary,
Department of Overseas Trade.
Mr. R. D. Phillips, Deputy Director-General,
Department of Civil Aviation.
Mr. J. J. Spigelman, Senior Adviser to the
Prime Minister.
Mr. J. O. Stone, Deputy Secretary ( Economic),
Department of the Treasury.
Mr. P. P. McGuiness, Senior Adviser to the
Minister for Social Security,
I am requesting that these officers should serve in their
personal as distinct from departmental or other capacities.
As leader of the task force, you will have the tight to call
on departments for such information, and for the preparation of such
papers, as you deem relevant to your enquiries.
So far as purely administrative aspects are concerned, you
have authority to make such arrangements as you deem appropriate in the
circumstances. No doubt those appointed to assist you would in any
case be able to draw on their own departments for " back-up" in the
pursuit of your enquiries.
In order to avoid any problems that might arise in preparing
a report from the task force as a whole, I am placing responsibility
for its report upon you personally. That is, I envisage that the
task force as a whole would discuss what should go into your report;
but you, as leader, will decide. 
-2-
I should be grateful if you would arrange for your report
to be available to me well before the Budget. I would then propose
to bring it forward for consideration by Ministers in the Budget
context. Yours sincerely,
E. G. WHITLAM
Dr. H. C. Coombs,
Bank House,
24-26 Ainslie Avenue,
CANBERRA CITY. A. C. T. 2601 



NQ DATE
M/ 62 29 March 1973J
SIGNATURE OF AUSTRALIA AUSTRIA
EXTRADITION TREATY
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, and the
Austrian Ambassador His Excellency Dr Franz Pein, today signed
an Extradition treaty in Canberra on behalf of their respective
countries. The Prime Minister said that the Treaty was the second
treaty on reciprocal arrangements for the surrender of fugitive
criminals signed with a foreign government in the past fortnight:
W a similar treaty was signed with Sweden on 20 March this year at
Stockholm. It is expected that further treaties will be signed
with other countries in the near future as part of Australia's
overall revision and modernisation. of its extradition arrangements.
Mr Whitlam said the Treaty with Austria contains
special provisions directed against the hijacking of aircraft
and related offences, trafficking in drugs and the crime of
genocide. It is expected that this Treaty will come into force
after the exchange of instruments of ratification later this
year. 



3 A
NQ DATE
M/ 63 30 March 1973
APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSIONER
TO GHANA
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
announced today that Mr R. J. Percival had been appointed
Australian High Commissioner to Ghana. Mr Percival will
succeed Mr J. M. McMillan who has been appointed as
Ambassador to. Turkey.
Mr Percival, who was born in 1926, was educated
at Canberra High School and the University of Melbourne
Swhere he received a Bachelor of Arts degree. He joined
the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1941 and has served
Sin Japan, India and The Netherlands. More recently, he
has been Assistant Secretary in charge of the Pacific
Branch of the Department of Foreign Affairs since July
1972. Mr Percival is married and has four children. 



NQ DATE
? M/ 64 2 April 1973
AID TO GILBERT AND EILTICE ISLANDS
Australia is to give assistance to the value of
$ 450,000 to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony for the
~ construction of a water supply system in the town of Betio
on the Tarawa Atoll.
Announcing this today, the Special Minister of
State and Minister assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Senator Willesee, said that the assistance included equipment,
Spipelines, pumps and storage tanks. These materials will be
supolied through the Department of Works, which will also
provide an engineer tosupervise teproject. Fudfoth
scheme will be taken from the GEIC's share of the current
Australian $ 15 million aid pledge to the South Pacific area
up to the end of 1975, and it ties in with the GEIC Administration's
Three Year Development Plan which gives water supply a high
priority. The town of Betio has 665 households and a ponulation
of 4,600 according to the last census. With this relatively high
population density and lack of adeauate sewerage facilities the
water sources are subject to contamination and a piped water supply
system will eliminate the currently high risk to public health. 



NQ DATE
IvI/ 652 April 1973
AID TO FIJI
Australia is to give Fiji two large mobile rock
crushing plants, costing a total of $ 190,000.
Announcing this today, the Special Minister of
State and Minister assisting the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Senator Willesee, said that the rock crushers
are required by the Ministry of Communications, Works and
Tourism which is responsible for the construction and
maintenance of major roads throughout the islands.
With Fiji placing increasing emphasis on construction
of roads and airfields on outlying islands where roads
surfacing material is not available in natural form, the
shortage of rock crushers is becoming critical and the supply
of two mobile rock crushers by Australia will help overcome
this situation. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 67
2 April 1973
VISIT TO CANBERRA OF HIS EXCELLENCY HAMMER DeROBURT PRESIDENT
OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAURU
The Prime Minister, The Honourable E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today that His Excellency Hammer DeRoburt, President of' the
Republic of Nauru, would officially visit Canberra from ' April 3 to
April During his visit the President of Nauru will have talks with
Mr. Whitlam and several other Government Ministers on matters of
mutual interest between Australia and Nauru.
His Excellency will arrive at RAAF Base,, Fairbairn, on a
VIP flight from Melbournef at" 4. O0pm tomorrow ( Tuesday). He will be
greeted by the Prime Minister and given a salute of 19 guns. The
President will attend a dinner given in his honour tomorrow evening
by the Governor-General and Lady Hasluck.
On Wednesday the President will have a busy programme of
official engagements at Parliament House after making an inspection
of the Australian War Memoria'. He will also attend a ministerial
luncheon and reply to addresses of welcome by the Prime Minister and
the Leader of the Opposition.
His Excellency will have further talks at Parliament House
on Thursday morning before leaving Canberra for Melbourne..
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



J,, U S T R IA Press Statement No. 68
3 April 1973
MATERNTTY LEAVE
Cabinet today decided that all pregnant officers
and employees, irrespective of whether they are married or
unmarried, and irrespective of whether they were pregnant
or not when first employed by the Commonwealth, shall have
the right to receive at least 12 weeks' maternity leave
on full pay. This leave is to commence six weeks before the
expected date of confinement and shall continue for six
weeks after the date of confinement.
Each permanent officer proceeding on leave of
absence for maternity purposes, must be re-employed at the
end of her period of leave ( which may extend to 52 weeks,
inclusive of leave without pay) in her former position or
in a position at a level as near as possible to the
position held by the employee at the commencement of her
maternity leave.
Temporary employees returning from maternity
leave shall be given preference of employment over any
other person seeking employment with the Commonwealth.
male employees will be provided with additional
leave of one week with pay at the time of birth of a child
where the employee requires the leave to take care of the
mother and/ or children during the immediate post-natal days.
Legislation will be introduced as soon as possible
to extend the new provisions to all Australian Government
employees. These benefits will apply from 1 January 1973.
These benefits will not be dependent upon union
membership. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



, U ST R LIA Press Statement No. 69
3 April 1973
FURLOUGH LONG SERVICE LEAVE
Cabinet today decided that the basic qualification
period for furlough in Australian Government employment
will be reduced from 15 to 10 years.
Pro rata furlough entitlement shall be payable to
officers and employees on cessation after 5 years of service,
providing that in cases where employment ceased through
death, ill health, retrenchment or retirement on account of
age, pro rata furlough entitlements shall be payable after
one year of service.
The accrual rate for furlough shall be three
months for the first 10 years' service and half-a-month
for each year thereafter.
For the purpose of assessing the increased rates
of accrual, ' service' will be calculated retrospectively
to the date of commencing employment.
Those now employed who have taken furlough will
be granted their total furlough entitlement under the new
provisions, less the period of furlough granted.
Furlough will be availableto all employees
including part-time employees and full-time employees employed
for only part of each year.
Officers and employees who had or have the necessary
service with the Commonwealth on or after 1 January 1973
shall be entitled to the new furlough entitlements regardless
of whether they left its service before the passage of the
amending legislation. Commonwealth staff who have transferred from Local
Government bodies will enjoy the same furlough rights as
are now enjoyed by staff who transferred from State Government
into the Commonwealth Public Service.
Legislation will be introduced as soon as possible
to extend the new provisions to all Australian Government
employees.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 66 3 April 1973
AUSTRALIA TO ATTEND~ O. A. S. GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The Special Minister of State and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, announced
today that Australia had accepted an invitation to attend the
third regular session of the General Assembly of the Organisation
of American States ( OAS) to be held in Washington between 4 and
14 April. Senator Willesee said that Australia would attend in
an observer capacity and would be represented by Mr M. G. Williams,
the Counsellor at the Australian Embassy in Washington responsible
for Latin American affairs.
The OAS, a regional agency within the United Nations,
is an international organisation founded in 1948 to foster mutual
understanding and co-operation among the nations of the Western
Hemisphere. The OrganizationL, whose 23 members are all, apart
fromn the United States of America, countries from the Latin
American and Caribbean areas, operates through a variety of
councils and specialized bodies in the economic, social,
cultural and juridical fields. The General Assembly provides
a forum for an annual review of the whole range of OAS activities. ./ 2 
-2-
Senator Willesee said that Australia's decision to
attend the GAS General Assembly reflected the Government's
interest in Latin America and was a recognition of the
important role played by countries of that region in various
aspects of international affairs.
The Government, he said, intended to send official
Australian observers to other important meetings of Latin
American countries as these occurred.
Senator Willesee added that the Department of Foreign
Affairs was already holding informal consultations on a regular
basis with the diplomatic representatives of Latin American
countries in Canberra.
L 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS, CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 3 APRIL, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: There are a very considerable number of
decisions which the Cabinet made this morning. Most of them
you can get details about from my colleagues, and I've told
them that you might be asking them details.. There are some
however which come within my responsibility so I'll give a
bit further detail about them.
We decided on two significant improvements'in the
conditions of service for Australian Government employees.
The first deals with maternity leave and the second with
furlough long service leave. Legislation to implement these
decisions will be introduced as soon as possible but the
improved conditions will be effective from 1 January last.
I'll be issuing press statements which will give the details.
They'll go to some pages. They include however, in the case of ( a)
maternity leave a minimum of 12 weeks paid maternity leave
and up to one week's leave with pay for employees who require
it to care for the mother or children. In the case of
furlough an increase in the accrual rate of long service leave
to half a month for each year of service after 10 years,
reduction in the qualifying periods for long service leave
and for payment in lieu. These decisions are consistent with
my Government's policy that as the largest single employer
in Australia, we have a duty to advance the cause of all
employees by establishing new and improved standards of
employment for our own employees. The maternity leave provisions
in particular, of course, have been ILO standards since 1919.
Cabinet decided to establish a task force to apply close
scrutiny to continuing policies of the previous Government so
that room may be found for our own higher priority programs.
The Chairman of the task force will be Dr. Coombs who will
be responsible for the final report. To assist him I have
sought and obtained from their respective ministers the release
of the following officers from their normal departmental duties
so that they can serve on the task force in a personal capacity:
Mr M. A. Besley, First Assistant Secretary, Department of External
Territories, Dr. S. F. Harris, Deputy Secretary, Department of
Overseas Trade, Mr R. D. Phillips, Deputy Director-General,
Department of Civil Aviation, Mr J. 0. Stone, Deputy Secretary,
( Economic), Department of the Treasury. They will be joined on
the task force by Mr P. V. McGuinnes of Mr Hayden's office and
Mr J. J. Spigelman of mine. Mr Walsh will be releasing to you
the letter I've sent to Dr. Coombs.
We have decided to set up a National Commission on social
welfare. The Chairman will be Mrs. Maree Coleman, the Deputy
Chairman will be sought by advertisement. The part~' time
members will be Professor R. G. Brown, professor of Social
Administration at Flinders, Mrs. Sadie Canning, Matron of the
Leonora Hospital, Western Australia, Mrs. Edna Chamberlain,
Head of the Department of Social Work in the university of 
Queensland, Professor Harris, Professor of Economics at
James Cook University, Mr Tom Roper, Lecturer in Education
at La Trobe University, Professor E. G. Saint, Dean of the
Faculty of Medicine in the University of Queensland, the
Reverend Keith Seamnan Superintendent of the Adelaide
Central Methodist Mission, Mr Greg Sullivan, of the
N. S. W. Bar, and an A. C. T. U. representative who will be
nominated by the President of the A. C. T. U. Mr Hayden can
give you more details of the terms of reference I have got
them here actually but I don't suppose you want me to take
up time in reading them to you. Now to the other decisions.
Mr Barnard, as Minister for Defence, and I as Foreign
Minister, will be referring to the Joint Select Committee on
Foreign Affairs and Defence any Foreign Affairs and Defence
aspects of the Omega Navigation System. The Attorney-General
will draw up a bill to repeal those sections of the Crimes
Act which permit the deportation of citizens who were born
overseas and the declaration oil organisations by the High Court
or a State Supreme Court. These sections have been in the Act
I think since 1926. Mr Uren can give you the details of the
inquiry into the leasehold system of land tenure. Mr Justice
Else-Mitchell will preside over the inquiry and the terms are
being settled in consultation with him by Mr Uren and Mr Enderby.
Mr Uren will give you the details of the establishment of
Australian-State Land Commuissions. Dr Patterson and Mr Enderby
can give you the details of a survey into a regional township
in the Aligator River area. Dr Patterson can give you details
of our suggestions on a Burdekin River Authority. Mr Crean can
give you details of a technical bill to make defence expenditure
a charge on loan funds. Mr Jones can give you details of the
reappointment of the Select Committee on Road Safety which the
House of Representatives established last year. Senator Wriedt
can give you details of the Wool Research Grants which we've
approved for next financial year. Senator Wriedt is leaving
for a meeting of the International Wool Secretariat tomorrow.
He can also give you details of our proposals for a national
brucellosis and animal tuberculosis campaign, and Mr Morrison
can give you the details of a bill to amend the Marine Science
Institute Bill and details of the Ord River Research Program.
Are there any questions?
May I ask you two questions please: one is on the
Rhodesian Information Centre and the powers of the Government,
the Foreign Affairs powers, to close that if the New South Wales
Government doesn't deregister it under the Companies Act.
I'm not clear about those powers, Sir, and the other question
was legislation being introduced by Senator Murphy ultimately
with regard to the integration of law enforcement authorities.
I think some people are worried that this could put too much
power of the law enforcement of an investigation and of a
prosecution character into the hands of one man, and I wonder
how you see this particular problem in terms of a free society?
PRIME MINISTER: First of all, the Rhodesian Information Service.
There are proceedings pending in the Supreme Court of New South
Wales to strip that shop of its title. if it turns out that the
New South Wales law is not adequate to deal with the situation
then we would introduce in the Parliament a bill to implement
the United Nations Security Council resolutions. We would under 
Foreign Affairs power have the jurisdiction to pass such a
bill. At present we are supporting the application to take
the title away in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. The
other legislation about, say, a Federal Bureau of Investigation
or a bill to unite or co-ordinate the Commonwealth Police
forces the Commonwealth Police Force, the Australian
Capital Territory Police Force, the Northern Territory Police
Force and various law enforcement agencies in different
Federal departments that bill has not been discussed by the
Cabinet at all. There can be no question, however, of any powers
given to any agency exceeding those to which we are accustomed
and to which in particular the Australian Labor Party gives
weight. There can be no question of there not being a due
process of law in all these matters. Not only would we not
wish to diminish in any ways these civil liberties, but the
Constitution probably wouldn't let us.
Can I follow this up with one more question: it's a
question of using these powers at a particular political time
in the. country. Now yesterday the homes of a number of
Croats were in fact entered by police forces with warrants
legally, but these acts did happen at a time when the
Attorney-General was under criticism for not producing enough
evidence in the Parliament of Croat terrorist activities. The
Government has been in power for something like four months
and it could be asked why these visits didn't take place say,
two months ago
PRIME MINISTER: or four years, or two years ago. These
questions can be well asked.
I am particularly implying to this Government. Why
PRIME MINISTER: It would be fair to ask why weren't these
actions taken four years or two years ago. I don't propose to
answer questions on that subject because there are Court
proceedings pending.
Prime Minister, could I ask you about your statement in
the House concerning a conspiracy by some public servants. You
indicated that some action was pending and about to be taken.
Would you say what action?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Could you say how many people were involved?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I didn't raise the word'conspiracy'
Mr Snedden used that word. On the face of the document as I
said, and I quoted it, there would appear to be conspiracy
between representatives of two Departments at this meeting on
2 March. As I said in the House, I will not say who the persons
were who attended that meeting, and as I said also in the House,
I'm not going to cast dispersions on people who, it might turn
out, don't deserve to have dispersions cast on them.
Sir, will you be making an ultimate report to Parliament
on this, the subject having been raised in the fashion it has been?
PRIME MINISTER: PIRI'MlEMlIN ITsERe: e what happens. 
Would you explain why you believe it's a conspiracy,
Mr Whitlam?
PRIME MINISTER: This is being televised and the people who
see it mightn't have had the advantage of listening to
Question Time so I'll read the passage from the report which
I read at Question Time. You'll remember that this was a
passage from a report made on 5 March by the ASIO representative
at a meeting of representatives of several departments which
was held in Canberra on 2 March apropos of a statement
which the Attorney-General made on 1 March to the effect that
he'd be making a statement on Croatian terrorism, and this is
the extract which I read at Question Time:
" The Department of Foreign Affairs made two points
on the proposed statement, that is the statement which the
Attorney-General, Senator Murphy, said that he would be
making in the Senate. The first was that the statement should
not be at variance with the interim reply given to Yugoslavia
in response for the aide memoire presented to Australia
following the Bosnian Incident in 1972. The Bosnian Incident
you will remember was that in which nine former residents of
Australia ( six naturalised Australians) had been picked up in
an incursion into Yugoslavia. The second was that unless there
were reasons to the contrary, they prefer the statement to be
deferred until after the visit to Australia of the Prime
Minister of Yugoslavia from 20-22 March 1973. The Attorney-
General's Department accepted the first point, but argued on the
seconid point that the Attorney-General might find it necessary
to table the statement at an earlier date."
Sir, on such Inter-departmental Committees does the
representative of the various departments have responsibility
to report to the Head of the Department or the Minister in each
case. In other words, would the Foreign Affairs ñ epresentative
there have a responsibility to report to the Head of the
Department or to report to you as Foreign Affairs Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what his responsibilities are
to the Department. There are of course a very great number
of Inter-departmental Committees having meetings all the time
and I would imagine there is only a small number of those
meetings which are ever brought to the attention of the
ministers concerned. on this occasion, it is somewhat surprising
that none of the ministers concerned were told about the meeting.
Prime Minister, Senator Murphy has told the Senate that
you in fact are conducting the investigation into this subject.
Can you tell us what procedures have been adopted. Are you
questioning people personally? Have you delegated someone to
do it?
PRIME MINISTER: The latter.
Can you tell us who?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
What's the aim of the investigation? is it just to confirm
that that report is accurate and what action is open to the 
Government if you find that it is accurate?
PRIME MINISTER: Most of these men would be public servants
and, if this were true, and I'm making no assumptions, I would
assume there has been a breach of duty by one or more public
servants. What will be the penalty if there is a breach?
PRIME MINISTER: Whatever the Public Service Act requires.
If any action is taken against any public servants
would you make that action public?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what the procedure is. In some
cases, action against public servants has to be gazetted.
I wouldn't be conducting the investigation or, if it is
appropriate, imposing any penalties. It's not for me to do.
Sir, is it a member of your staff who is conducting the
investigations?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't answer any more on this.
Sir, one more question. When do you hope to have the
findings of this investigation?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
Sir, you referred in Question Time to the previous
Government having lied to the Yugoslav Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Are you convinced that such a strong statement is
justified and might this not just have been normal diplomacy
to try and avoid trouble between the Governments?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I think what I said was accurate, it was
strong, and deservedly strong. For many years the Yugoslav
Government has been protesting to Australia bringing it to the
notice of the Australian Government organised activity
against Yugoslav missions and representatives. The previous
Government always said that there was no evidence on which to
prosecute individuals. It always avoided the question that
there was organised activity. Nobody reading or listening to
the ministerial statements last Tuesday would doubt that there
was organised activity. The former Governments of Australia
did not accurately put the position to the Yugoslav Government.
Prime Minister, could you have known publicly about some
of these organisations like J. I. O. and ASIO and D-S-CCould
I ask you about the Australian Secret Intelligence Service
which comes under your ministerial control if you could tell
us who heads that operation, where it has its headquarters and
what its operation is?
PRIME MINISTER: I will answer no questions on security matters.
Nobody in my position has and I won't and I'm certain you know
that. 
Sir, on the March 2 meeting, did ASIO have any
responsibility to report either to yourself as the Head of
the Government or to the Attorney-General as the Administrator?
PRIME MINISTER: I've already said I don't know what the
duties are in this case. I would have thought that a meeting
which, among other things, discussed a pending statement by
a minister would have been brought to the notice of the
ministers who had departmental officers at that meeting.
I don't know what the duty of the ASIO representative was.
All I should perhaps add at this stage is that from now on
meetings of this character will have agreed minutes.
When did the investigation which you refer to begin?
PRIME MINISTER: Immediately after Senator Murphy discovered
the document from which I have quoted this extract. I heard
of this on the 16th, yes.
Prime minister, Senator Murphy rests his case on visiting
the ASIO headquarters in Melbourne on the basis of the discovery
of this document at the ASIO offices in Canberra. We still don't
know why he made a midnight visit to the ASIO offices in
Canberra. Can you tell us why?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know why, but you will see the result
of it and I think you'd be very interested that this information
about this meeting and such a report of it as I've quoted were
discovered as a result of Senator Murphy's visit to the ASIO
quarters in Canberra,
Sir, Senator Murphy has said that this document which
he discovered at ASIO headquarters in Canberra -the original
of it was in the ASIO headquarters in Melbourne -should have
been brought to his knowledge, but was not brought to his
knowledge. Is that not prima facie evidence that the Head of
ASIO has not carried out his responsibilities to his Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what the duty is this is the
third time I've said it. I do believe that ministers should
have been told of the meeting discussing this matter. I think
Senator Murphy should have been told, but whether it was
ASIO's job to tell him I do not know.
They had the record. They were the ones who kept the
record of it.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
He said it should have been brought to his knowledge
and was not.
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not saying whether ASIO should have
brought it to his knowledge. I don't know if it was their
job to do it. But I do think it should have been brought to
his knowledgje, yes.
Q: Mr Whitlam, you said that we would be interested in the
information that was found but why weren't we told about it.
We, meaning the public, when Senator Murphy spoke to the Senate 
or prior to that the fortnight before, and had it not come out
the way it did, did you ever intend to release this information
which you released today?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I wouldn't have released it.
What is the objection of the Government to releasing
the information contained in the document other than the
security aspects of it?
PRIME MINISTER: That is the reason, and it's a sufficient
one, but Senator Murphy said that in the Senate last week and
he said that it was on the advice of the Director-General of
ASIO. Having read the document I can well believe that he
would have given that advice and I would believe it sound.
But, Sir, surely there's no...
PRIME MINISTER: I think there's another gentlemen down there..
Prime Minister, can I ask you has the Government considered
the continued appointment of Mr Barber as Director-General of
ASIO? PRIME MINISTER: No.
Has it considered varying the terms and conditions
of his appointment?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Will it do-either of these things?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
You say you don't know. Would a decision on that rest on
the subject of your inquiry that you are carrying out now?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't think that the inquiry which is
being conducted into the accuracy or not of the report of this
meeting would concern Mr Barber. Mr Barber was not there.
Prime Minister, why couldn't Senator Murphy have rung
Mr Barber in Melbourne and requested him to provide this
information? What is the reason for that?
PRIME MINISTER: You ask him.
Prime Minister, as it was the ASIO representative who
wrote the report in attendance at the meeting on March 2 as
an official representative of ASIO and if so to whom does he
report? PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
Did he take part in a discussion?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
Prime minister, on a different topic, you mention the 
task force examining the previous Government's expenditures:
is there any suggestion that this task force could also examine
your policy expenditures. Is there any suggestion that some of
those might be curbed in appreciation of this?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
This whole idea of a task force you said Eric's going
to release a letter on it can you give us an idea of the
structure. A task force's an institution we haven't heard of
before. Is it going to call for public evidence or is it
going to have access to departments?
PRIME MINISTER: It will have access to departments.
Full time? I mean the personnel you've got there are
pretty high-powered
PRIME MINISTER: Aren't they? It won't be taking public
evidence, and I doubt whether they can do it full-time. I expect
them to give a lot of time to it.
Have you set a time on when they report?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
When do you expect a report?
PRIME MINISTER: It would obviously be before we were discussing
the budget. Sir, it seems clear that one of the reasons for the
task force is concern about inflation. can you give us an idea
of the extent to which the Government is concerned about the
problem how serious it is at the moment?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think I'll go into that here. Of
course we're concerned about it. This is one aspect of it.
Prime Minister, in view of the decision in the United
States and also in New Zealand to introduce price control on
the sale of red meat, would you consider taking similar action
here in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I wish we could, but the Federal people can't
do it. As Mr Crean pointed out, the States have power in this
respect. Two-thirds of the Australian people live in New South
Wales and Victoria. There is nothing to limit those Parliaments
bringing in price control on red meat as has happened in the
United States and New Zealand. Nothing to prevent them. We
would obviously applaud them doing it, but we can't do it
federally. Will you ask them to do it?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But they really should be able to take
some initiative themselves in these matters. 
There's fairly regular correspondence between yourself
and the Premiers..
PRIME MINISTER: Correspondence between the Premiers and me
relates to things that we do jointly. There is nothing that
we can do with regard to price control on such commodities.
Prime Minister, there seem to be now only two States which
the previous Government kept at a distance for ideological
reasons Albania and Cuba. Are relations with these two States
being considered? Has there been an approach from. Cuba?-Are our
considerations of this being swayed by in deference-to the
United States?
PRIME MINISTER: We recognise both Albania and Cuba. We always
have. We don't have diplomatic representatives in or from
Albania or Cuba. We're not discussing having diplomatic
representatives in or from either of them. There is a suggestion
that there should be a Cuban Consulate in Australia. There is
in fact quite a considerable trade between Cuba and Australia.
Prime Minister, the task force will be reconsidering
former Government decisions in a number of areas, but what
state is your review of the former Government's apparent
decisions. I understand you called for all-out standing reports
from the Board. Are you going to consider such decisions as the
decision to protect the Chain Factory at Benalla?
PRIME MINISTER: This is just what I'm not going to do go
into ad hoc imposition or demolition of tariffs. This is the
matter that Sir John Crawford's looking into.
Sir, on this inquiry, will Dr. Coombs, as the man who's
responsible for it, be mainly full-time on it?
PRIME MINISTER: No, he can't be full-time on this because he
is doing a lot of other things too as you know.
Prime Minister, in announcing the Cabinet decisions, you
said that yourself and Mr Barnard had agreed to refer to the
Joint Committee on Defence and Foreign Affairs any aspects of
Omega which have defence significance. Does this mean that
Cabinet has decided that Omega does have some defence significance?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it hasn't discussed it whether there are
Defence or Foreign Affairs aspects of Omega. There are many
people who assert it has. They'll have the opportunity to
ventilate their views and to have those views examined or
exposed in public before the Committee.
And will this delay any decision on the future of
our Government until that Committee has reported?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think we would be making a decision
until the Committee has reported but how quickly the Committee
reports is up to the Committee. All these Parliamentary
Committees, listeners and viewers may not realise are composed
of representatives from all the political parties in the
Parliament. 
Have you or the Government considered the abolition
of the D Notice system?
PRIME MINISTER: This has never been considered. You must
be from the Nation Review. They're the only D Notices whose.:
existence I would ever acknowledge.
May we take that seriously, Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: You'll take it as it was meant, I'm sure.
Prime Minister, in the Cabinet decision or endorsement
to refer the Omega question or defence aspects of it to the
Joint Parliamentary Committee, was there any wider discussion
by Cabinet on the question of defence facilities in this
country? PRIME MINISTER: No, not at all.
Prime Minister, did you discuss Senator Murphy's proposed
divorce legislation today?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Prime Minister, the Treasury would normally be the
Department that would exercise continuing scrutiny over past
government commitments wouldn't it?
PRIME MINISTER: It would be one of the Departments, and a
very senior member of that Department is on the task force
Mr Stone. I was going to ask you do you think that the job it was
doing in this respect was deficient so that you had to set up
this Committee two personal staff representatives from the
Government on it. Unusual, the point I'm trying to make
PRIME MINISTER: You're referring to Mr McGuinnes from
Mr Hayden's staff and Mr Spigelman from mine?
Yes, it's unusual to have a mixed committee like that.
PRIME MINISTER: The fact that it's unusual doesn't make it
improper or undesirable. Mr McGuinnes is not disqualified from
the fact that he used to write perceptively for the Financial
Review, and Mr Spigelman is a well-known author.
Speaking of which, Sir, what is the Government going to
do about the question of open government?. What's happening to
all of the reports that were reviewed by Mr spigelman and by
other Ministers?
PRIME MINISTER: We're waiting for some of them to come in
from the Department.
I take it from your answer to Mr Lombard previously that
you don't intend to discuss security matters.
PRIME MINISTER: PNRIoME MINtIThERa: t's right. 
11.
That you include Secret Intelligence Service within this
on the basis that it would appear to impinge upon the security
of other countries. What harm could be done to the national
interest by entering in general questions such as are you
satisfied with the operation of the Australian Secret
Intelligence Service? Are you satisfied that it fits in with
our foreign policy and does no harm to it?
PRIME MINISTER: V. 11l repeat I'll not answer questions
in Parliament or here or anywhere on security matters. That is
a procedure which is followed has been followed by all my
predecessors. It is a procedure which I shall follow too.
Some of you have mentioned some organisations by name. I will
not confirm or deny or correct any such names. The reason is
obvious. By asking sufficient number of questions and then
getting denials or confirmations or corrections people can
find out about the security procedures of this country. I will
not answer questions on these matters.
Prime Minister, may we ask a question on the role of
Australia on South-East Asia?
PRIME MINISTER: Could you limit the question?
What new possible role can Australia obtain in South-East
Asia after Labor took over?
PRIME MINISTER: It's a very wide subject. I've written a lot
of articles on this. You don't want me to to expatiate on this.
The general historical context is that we want peace to be
established in this area. We do not want arrangements such as
were made after the end of the Korean War or at Geneva in
1954 to miscarry a second time. We are therefore in active
consultation diplomatically with all the countries of that area
in the hope that the latest agreements ( ceasef ire agreements)
in Vietnam and Laos will succeed and that such agreements can be
made in the Khmer Republic. Secondly in the overall economic
or social context we want to see that the great disparity
between relatively developed countries such as Australia,
New Zealand and Japan and all the countries in between is
reduced. And there again internationally, diplomatically,
we are doing what we can to see that developed countries help
to raise the standards in developing countries. Even Japan
can't do it single-handed. we can make some impact, but a
marginal one. obviously the countries of Europe east and west
and of North America must also contribute to that end. And a
concluding thing I could point out is that we are the only
country which has never been ruled by another people, except
Thailand. Every other country within thousands of miles has
within the last generation been ruled by other countries. We
ourselves have ruled some other countries, conspicuously
Papua New Guinea. So therefore our policies are designed quite
deliberately to rid Australia of any colonial or colour policies.
I think that was German T. V. wasn't it?
I thought you were going to ask me about the Mercedes. 



NQ DATE
M/ 68 4 April 1973
RELATIONS WITH FRANCE
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, announced today that the Attorney-General, Senator
Lionel Murphy, will represent the Australian Government at the
Ministerial talks to be held with the French Government in Paris
O on 18 and 19 April.
Mr Whitlam said that Senator Murphy's visit to Paris
and the discussions he would have there with French Ministers
were important in the Government's continuing and strenuous
efforts to prevent further nuclear tests being conducted in
the South Pacific. Because of the value it attaches to its wider
relations with France, the Australian Government was
determined, Mr Whitlam. added, to explore all possible avenues
in seeking to achieve a solution to this one, but very
important, disagreement between the two countries. 



NO DATE
M767 4 April 19' 73
INTERNATIONAL CON'FERENCE ON
COLOWIA1ISV -ANI) APARTHEID
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that Au~ stralia would be represented at an International
Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism
and Apartheid in Southern Africa to be held in Oslo from 9 to
14 April. Mr John Petherbridge, Australian Ambassador to Sweden,
Norway and Finland and Mr J. Trotter, Counsellor at the Australian
Embassy in B'onn, will attend the Conference which is being
organised by the United Nations in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity.
Mr Whitlam. said that the purpose of the Conference
would be to formulate a constructive program of peaceful action
to facilitate and hasten the process of decolonization and the
elimination of apartheid.
Participants at the meeting would seek ways and means
by which to obtain the largest possible support from the
international community towards finding a solution to the present / 2 
-2-
situation in southern Africa.
Mr Whitlam said that emphasis was expected to be laid
on an assessment of the future needs and requirements in the
vajrious fields of humanitarian assistance to the people
suffering as a result of colonialism and apartheid.
The Conference would also discuss possible future
diplomatic, political and legal action that might be taken by
the United Nations, governments, non-governmental organizations
and liberation movements. 0 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 71
April 1973
PORTRAIT OF PRIME MINISTER
It was announced today that Mr. Clifton Pughts Archibald
Prize winning painting of Mr. Whitlam had been acquired by the
Historic Memorials Committee as the Prime Minister's official
portrait. The painting is presently on exhibition in a Melbourne
gallery. It will be sent to Canberra after the exhibition and will
go on display in Kings Hall, Parliament Hous. e
The Historic Memorials Committee, consisting of the
Prime Minister, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, the Vice-President of the Executive
Council, the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives
and the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, is the body
charged with acquiring official portraits of Governors-General,
Prime Ministers, Presidents of the Senate and Speakers of the
House of Representatives.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AF ARA
-if A AF
NQ DATE
M/ 69 5 April 1973
AUSTRALIAN DELECTATION TO ECAFE
The Special Minister of State a. nd Minister assisting
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, announced
today that he would leave for Tokyo tomorrow ( 6 April) to lead
Sthe Australian Delegation to the 29th Session of the Economic
Commission for Asia and the Far East ( ECAFE),
The 29th Session of ECAFE, from 11 23 April, will
review the work of the Commission during the nast year and
Sdecide on policy and programs of work for ECAE for the coming
year.
0 The Minister said that the Australian Delegation would
seek to be as helpful as possible to ECAFE in its attempts to
promote economic and social development in the ECAFE region.
He expected to deliver Australia's principal statement
in the general debate at the 29th Session on 13 April and to
provide further details in that statement of the Government's
approach to the work of ECAFE and to regional economic and
social co-operation. ./ 2 
-2-
Senator Willesee will return to Sydney on 16 April and
proceed to Apia on 17 April to participate at the meeting of the
South Pacific Forum, from 17 to 19 April.
Senator Willesee will then proceed to Tonga on 21 April
at the invitation of the Prime Minister of Tonga, H. R. H. Prince
Tu'ipelehake. During his visit to Tonga he will discuss with
the Tongan Government matters of mutual interest.
The Minister announced that the Australian Delegation
to the 29th Session of ECAFE will be: 0
The Special Minister of State, Senator Willesee Leader
The Honourable Gordon Freeth, Australian Ambassador to
Japan
Mr J. R. Kelso, Assistant Secretary, Department of
Foreign Affairs
Mr J. S. F. Bowan, First Secretary, Australian Embassy,
Bangkok
Mr J. A. Benson, First Secretary, Australian Embassy, Tokyo
Mr B. L. Ryan, Trade Policy Officer, Department of Overseas
Trade
Mr N. Stuparich, Senior Finance Officer, The Treasury
I
Mr C. G. S. Willis, Second Secretary, Australian Embassy,
Tokyo
Mr J. A. Tilemann, Private Secretary to the Minister of State 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 74
6 April 1973
ABORIGINALS AND~ SOCIETY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the
Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
circulated to a conference of Commonwealth and State
Ministers concerned with Aboriginal Affairs in Adelaide,
Friday, 6 April, 1973
The referendum of 1967, by an overwhelming majority, gave to
the Commonwealth concurrent powers with the States in respect of
Aboriginals. The constitution provides that in matters where concurrent
powers are held Commonwealth legislation will prevail. It is my
Government's belief that Aboriginal Affairs is a matter of national concern,
requires the exercise of the fullest range of legislative, executive
and financial powers, and represents in the eyes of the world a test of
the integrity and humanity of the whole people of Australia. My
Government intends therefore to assume full responsibility for policy
ana finance in respect of Aboriginal Affairs and will take any necessary
legislative action to this end.
At the same time, my Government is convinced that, in
formulating and giving effect to its responsibility, it must draw upon
the knowledge, experience and services of all sections of Government.
It will not therefore aim to establish an omnibus Commonwealth Department
of Aboriginal Affairs. It will instead seek to devolve upon a wide
range of Commonwealth, State and local authorities, as well as upon
organisations of Aboriginals themselves, responsibility for carrying
out the policies decided upon by my Government. These authorities
would be responsible for Aboriginals in the same matters and in the same
way as they now are functionally responsible for the community generally.
We have already taken some steps towards a rationalisation of
our own administration of Aboriginal Affairs in the Northern Territory
by combining the former Office of Aboriginal Affairs and Welfare ' Division
of the Northern Territory Administration and by transferring responsibility
for Aboriginal health and education to the Ministers for health and education.
Further transfers of functional responsibilities will be arranged. I
believe that we have already made significant progress in rationalisin~ g
the administrative structure and welding into a single unit those
responsible for t he initiation of planning and policy proposals.
In matters of State constitutional responsibility such as health,
education and so on, my Government will be seeking the help of all State
Ministers and their Departments both in assisting the Commonwealth Minister
and Department of Aboriginal Affairs to formulate appropriate policies
and in giving effect to them within their State jurisdiction. I hope
that Ministers will collaborate with us in the next few months to enable
their officials to confer with ours to work out the most effective
means of putting this plan into operation. c.* o/ 
-2-
The basic object 9f my Government's policy is to restore to the
Aboriginal people of Australia their lost power of self-determination
in economic, social and political affairs. The Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs, Mr. Bryant, will be introducing into Parliament, I hope during
the budget session, legislation to enable Aboriginal groups and
communities to incorporate for the conduct of their own affairs. We see
these incorporated societies, set up for purposes chosen by their
Aboriginal members, determining their own decision-making processes,
choosing their own leaders and executives in ways they will themselves
decide, as the primary instruments of Aboriginal authority at the local
and community level.
The Government will also set up, on the advice of Aboriginals,
procedures for the election of freely-chosen Aboriginal representatives
from the various regions of Aboriginal population to form a consultative
council with which the Government will confer on matters affecting
Aboriginals. Mr. Bryant has already convened initial meetings towards
the establishment of this body.
Traditional Aboriginal societies have had close associations with
specific areas of land, and there are many Aboriginal communities which
have maintained that association substantially unbroken. In respect of
land reserved for Aboriginal use and benefit it is the firm policy of the
Government to vest such lands in the Aboriginals, as far as practicable
in ways which accord with traditional Aboriginal law and practice. Mr.
Justice E. A. Woodward has been commissioned to confer with Aboriginal
communities concerned and to advise the legislative and administrative
actions required. His enquiry will also, of course, extend to land
outside reserves0 The Government will await wit# interest his
recommendations in respect of those situations where traditional association
can be established for such land outside reserves,.
In the meantime, my Government plans, as opportunity offers, to
purchase or acquire land which it will vest in the resident Aboriginal
communities and you will be aware that it has undertaken to provide
million per year for the next 10 years for this purpose0 In this way my
Government hopes to restore as far as possible the traditional association
of Aboriginal communities with their land and also provide them with a base
for their economic and social development.
This policy of re-establishing the traditional association of
Aboriginal communities with the land is linked with support for the
preservation and development of Aboriginal languages and culture generally.
A start has already been made in ' basing education of Aborigines on
literacy first in their own tribal tongue0 Increasing support will be
given to the Aboriginal arts and Aboriginals will be helped where they
wish to do so to maintain the active ceremonial life on which these arts
were traditionally based.
An opportunity for self-determination and independent action
would serve little purpose if Aboriginals continued to be economically
and socially deprived. The Government therefore plans to help them as
individuals, groups or communities, in crafts, trades and professions
and as business enterpreneurs. To this end programs of socially valuable
special work projects, vocational training and grants and loans in support
of enterprises, will be actively promoted. 
-3-
More generally, my Government is anxious that 200 years of
despoliation, injustice and discrimination have seriously damaged and
demoralised the once proud Aboriginal people. The Government, on behalf
of the Australian people, accepts responsibility for their active and
progressive rehabilitation.
We will legislate to outlaw all forms of discrimination and will
allocate greatly increased resources to overcome the handicaps under which
Aboriginals now labour and to improve their health and capacity generally.
We will not rest until they have taken up, as a distinctive and honoured
component in the Australian society, the position to which their rights
as the first Australians entitle them, 



PRIME MINISTER 7 April 1973
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF
WESTERN MINING CORPORATION' S NICKEL SMELTER,
KALGOORLIE, 7 APRIL 1973
The opening of this smelter is more than a great new
milestone in the remarkable history of the Kalgoorlie
area; it is a mark of confidence of the Western Mining
Corporation in the area's futdre. And I come here today to
express and demonstrate my Government's complete confidence
in the future, not just of this area, but of the future of
the great and diverse resources of this vast western and
northern area of Australia.
Kalgoorlie itself is in a way a living symbol of
Australia's good fortune and it is a symbol also of Australia's
interdependence. Some of the very worst ravages of the
depression which struck the eastern colonies, particularly
Victoria, in the nineties were reduced by the timely discovery
of gold here. It is a matter of record that the personal and
family links between the west and the east, formed as a result
of the gold rush, played a key part in preventing the breakup
of the Federation, or West Australia's secession from it a
generation later. Kalgoorlie itself fell on hard times;
yet today even the gold industry is probably in better shape
than any time for the last decade. The future of the area
is probably brighter than any time in its history.
I would like to give a general outline of my Government's
attitude to the mineral resources of Australia and relate it
to this particular resource of nickel. We have to recognise
that the interests of the mining industry must be placed in the
perspective of the interests of Australia as a whole.
We do not ignore, but we cannot be pre-occupied with the short
term interest of a particular section of the economy or a
special interest within the economy. In short we have to plan
for the economy as a whole, in the interests of industry as a
whole and in the interests of the people as a whole. 9. 9 2/ 
And in such planning we have to take account of the wider
international realities. We have to recognise that Australia's
resources, great as they are, are not unlimited.
We have to recognise the growing concern in major industrialised
countries at the rapid depletion of traditional sources of
energy and raw materials. We have to see that our minerals are
sold at reasonable prices in world markets. We have to preserve
the interests of Australians yet unborn, to ensure that our
prosperity is not bought at the price of impoverishment
of future generations. And I mean not only material impoverishment
but the impoverishment of their environment. We have to preserve
for ourselves and for the generations to come the greatest
possible measure of Australian ownership and participation in
the mining industry.
These are the considerations behind the actions my Government
has already taken and those that we plan to take in the years
ahead. Nickel, of course, is basically an export industry.
Australian consumption is less than 8% of current Australian
production so I am very much aware that this industry has
been directly and in the short term, I acknowledge, unfavourably
affected by certain of our measures. You know that we have
placed controls on all mineral exports whether in raw or
semi-processed form. We aim to ensure that exports are sold at
reasonable prices on the world market. Our measures will
encourage more processing of minerals in Australia, lead to
greater employment opportunities, greater industry self
sufficiency and ultimately to a higher unit value for our
exports themselves. We can look to shipping economies for
both buyer and seller. I assure you, however, that in our quest
for these results we will use our powers and apply controls
judiciously, selectively, realistically.
We will be applying the same common sense judgement to
industries and to areas immediately affected by broader economic
adjustments such as those forced on us by developments in the
world currency situation. As you know we have taken certain
necessary steps to protect the Australian dollar. We would have
been failing in our duty to the Australian people as a whole
had we not done so. No section of Australian industry should
place a short term advantage against the long term well being
of the whole Australian economy.
I have said that my Government is determined to have more
processing of our own mineral resources. We are determined that
Australians shall have a greater degree of ownership and control
of their industries. On both these counts I am delighted to be
personally involved in this project today. The shareholding
of Western Mining Corporation is predominantly Australian and
its Board of Management is completely Australian. I know that
foreign companies have made overtures and these have been
resisted by Western Mining Corporation. My Government will
strongly support the Corporation in such efforts and such
resistance. This smelter is being located near Kalgoorlie partly
at the request of the West Australian Government. It signifies
participation by industry in plans for more balanced development. 
It is a splendid thing that the great mining skills built up
over generations in this area should be preserved and used in
the area. As a mark of our confidence, as a mark of our determination
to provide opportunities for youth to live and work in the place
where they were born and grew up, the Government proposes to
contribute to the new student residence being built at the
Kalgoorlie School of Mining. We will be contributing $ 75,000
to it and $ 35,000 to a recreation complex being built in
association with the school.
If we are to have more balanced development, if we are to
provide opportunities for our young men and women, if we are
to maintain and build up our national skills, if we are to
achieve more processing in Australia of Australian resources
we will need to have a greater and continuing co-operation
between governments and industry. We cannot achieve these
things without effective planning and we cannot have effective
planning without that sort of co-operation. In this State
we have already embarked upon some far reaching measures for
co-operation and participation in the development of its
mineral resources. Proper planning must transcend State borders;
for example we have agreed upon a feasibility study to determine
the route of a pipeline bringing the natural gas from
Palm Valley in the Northern Territory to Kalgoorlie then to
Perth and thence to the North-West Shelf. We hope to achieve
an assured and cheap supply of energy for the great industries
based in Kalgoorlie. The whole scope of our national pipeline
project is breathtaking but its the kind of thinking, the kind
of planning which we must have if Australian resources are to
be put to the best use for the greatest benefit of all
Australians. I believe that against long term prospects for
development now opening up before us the short term difficulties
fade into insignificance.
I congratulate the Corporation on its achievement and its
contribution. I congratulate this great and historic area of
Kalgoorlie on the great new chapter now unfolding in its history. 



EMBARGO:-6uL,,
AU ST RALIAL PRESS STATEMENT No. 72.
8 April 1973
HEART WEEK 1973
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today ( Sunday)
launched Heart Week 1973.
Heart Week is the focus of the education effort
of the National Heart Foundation of Australia.
This year the foundation is concentrating on
encouraging early recognition and treatment of high blood
pressure which it has found to be a major causal factor
in about 52,000 deaths every year.
Mr Whitlam said today: " In opening Heart Week
1973, I support the National Heart Foundation's efforts
to inform people of the dangers of high blood pressure.
" High blood pressure is easily the most common
chronic disease in Australia.
" It afflicts an estimated 1,200,000 Australian
adults and more than half of them are unaware of their
condition. " That is why the Foundation is emphasising this
problem in its education campaign th~ is year.
" The campaign will stress the point that, while
high blood pressure is a serious disease, its treatment
can be simple and effective.
" The first step is for people to have their blood
pressure checked regularly and I am happy to joint the
Foundation in urging all Australian adults to do this.
" This alone will lead to a lowering of illness
and death from coronary heart disease, strokes and other
conditions of which high blood pressure is a major cause.
" If Australians follow the Foundation's advice,
we will have a healthier nation." 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 73
8 April 1973
APPOINTMENT TO PRIME MINISTERtS STAFF
The Prime Minister announced today the appointment to his
personal staff of Ms Elizabeth Reid, 30, a senior tutor in philosophy
at the Australian National University. Ms Reid will conduct research
and advise the Prime Minister on a range of' domestic issues, especially
those bearing on the welfare of women.
Ms Reid was born in Taree, New South Wales. She has worked
for the Bureau of Census and Statistics and for Control Datat
Australia. She has been active in women's organisations, including
the Women's Electoral Lobby, the Women's Liberation Movement and
the Association for the Study of Woman and Society. Slie was educated
at Canberra High School and the Australian National University, where
she graduated Bachelor of Arts with first-class honours in Philos ' ophy..
She also holds the Degree of Bachelor of Philosophy in the University
of Oxford. Ms Reid's salary will be in excess of $ 10,000 a year. The
precise figure will be determined by the Public Service Board.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
N. B. Miss Reid will be available to meet the Press at her home,
53 Scrivener Street, O'Connor, at 5.30 p. m. on Sunday. She has asked
that the interviews should not take more than half an hour. Her
telephone number is: 479047. 



to
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO.
9 April 1973
CORAL SEA WEEK GUEST OF HONOUR 1973
The US astronaut, Dr. Harrison Schmittx will come
to Australia for the Coral Sea Week celebrations this year,
Dr. Schmitt's official itinerary will begin in Sydney
on Monday 30 April and from there he will visit Newcastle,
Brisbane, Canberra, Melbourne and Adelaide in that order.
He is scheduled to leave Australia on Monday 7 May.
Dr. Schmitt, a geologist employed by National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, was the first scientist
to visit the moon as a member of the Apollo 17 Mission. He
is a bachelor.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 10 APRIL, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks ladies and gentlemen. There were
a few procedural matters. There were about a score of decisions
which I can tell you from this morning's Cabinet meeting.
It will save your time here if I tell you the names of the
Ministers from whom you can get the details. They are expecting
your questions. There are a couple that I can give you myself.
Yesterday Mr Hamer, the Premier of Victoria, telegraphed
me with the suggestion that we might follow up what Mr Crean had
said about State jurisdiction in matters of prices by having a
Premiers Conference to discuss a national incomes and prices
policy. The Cabinet accepted the suggestion this morning.
I have telegraphed Mr Hamer. I think he has released the telegrams
at 5.00 this afternoon. I was proposing to but I was in the House
as you know. We've suggested that there should be a Premiers
Conference to discuss prices and incomes matters and all other
aspects of inflation. I have suggested Friday, 4 May. That is the
earliest week-day that my overseas commitments or the sittings of
the House would permit me to attend. I've suggested that Mr Crean
and Mr Enderby ( because he has jurisdiction over the territories)
should accompany me.
Cabinet also decided to hold again this year the usual economic
consultations, presumably in June. The same organisations with
whom consultations were held last June will be invited to have
consultations. We shall, however, ask the various consumer
authorities and associations to confer with us.
We decided on the forms of revaluation assistance to secondary
industry. They will be on similar lines to the scheme already
announced to primary industry and will be limited to cases of
hardship. Dr. Cairns will give you the details. Mr Bryant will
give you the details on the establishment of an Aboriginal Land
Fund. Also on the system of mining royalties on Aboriginal
reserves in the Northern Territory. Senator Murphy will give you
the details of a scheme for a $ 2 million grant to the States to
supplement legal aid services this year. Also details of legislation
relating to offences at sea. The situation is that if somebody from
Australia were to take a pot-shot at visitors, in say, the Gulf of
Carpentaria beyond the ordinary territorial limits, there is no
Australian legislation making it an offence. Mr Jones will tell
you about the foreign ownership of air service organisations and
airport business concessions. Mr Daly on proposed legislation to
provide two seats in the House of Representatives for the Australian
Capital Territory, and two senators from each of the Territories
those senators to be elected on the proportional system and to be
elected, both of them, on the same date as there is an election
for the House of Representatives. Dr. Cass on the Joint
Parliamentary Committee on Environment. v .2/ 
Mr Stewart will give you the details of legislation to regulate
the operations of travel agents. Also amendments to the
Public Works Committee Act so that the Committee only has to deal
with works which are estimated to cost $ 2 million or more. The
establishment of a national archives system. Those two latter matters-
Mr Stewart will be representing Senator Willessee. Senator Bishop
will give you the proposals for reasons to be given for the
decisions under the Repatriation Act and the Seamen's War Pension
and Allowances Act.
Also the expansion of the capacity of Repatriation hospitals
to allow their use for non-repatriation patients. Mr Crean will
tell you of income tax treatment of domiciliary care benefits.
Senator Cavanagh on behalf of Senator Wriedt will tell you about
amendments to the Fisheries Act and the Continental Shelf Living
Natural Resources Act. Mr Bowen, the proposed amendments to the
Posts and Telegraph Act. Mr Hayden, additional computer capacity
for the Department of Social Security, and Dr. Patterson the joint
study with'Western Australia on the Pilbara.
Are there any questions?
Q: Prime Minister, if I could refer to statements made by you
in the House last Thursday that an ASIO representative had given
a wrong report on an inter-departmental meeting held on 2 March,
what consideration is being given by the Government to protecting
ordinary citizens against incorrect reports about them by ASIO,
and in the case of a person seeking employment in the Public Service
but is rejected because of an adverse report from ASIO, would the
Government give that person the opportunity of examining information
in the report and the right of appeal against any errors in it?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government is committed as you know in the
terms of the Australian Labor Party's platform to providing a means
of judicial appeal against decisions which are based upon security
reports. We won't be able to bring in the legislation this session,
but you will remember what the platform had to say about that,
generally in the context of the proposed Superior Court.
Perhaps I should say this: the reports which ASIO makes are given
to, say, the heads of Commonwealth Departments and also to the
Department of Immigration respectively for prospective public
servants who are to be appointed or existing public servants who
are to be promoted and migrants who seek naturalisation. The
Heads of the Departments make what use they think fit of those
reports. The ASIO isn't an executive body.
Q: On the prices and incomes question: do you favour the
national prices income policy that of the national Labor
Government? PRIME MINISTER: I'll discuss that in more detail after the
meeting with the Premiers.
Q: Do you feel in any way that this is merely a pre-election
gimmick by Mr Hamer?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I do not. There are different views of
course on the efficacy of prices and incomes policies but in the
short term such as President Nixon brought in for I think six
months and then extended for a further period, there is good reason
to believe that they can be effective, but I want to make it plain
3/ 
that we don't believe that prices and incomes policies are the
only cure for inflation. There are a very great number of aspects
of inflation, some, of course, within Federal jurisdiction such
as various forms of subsidies or deductions, and some in the State
field. Clearly however, in our Federal system, if there is to be an
effective policy on inflation and you'll notice we'll use the
phrase "~ all other aspects of inflation" it is necessary to have
a combined Federal and State program. Mr Hamer for instance said
" with the relevant constitutional powers divided as they are between
the Federal Government and the State Governments, the implementation
of such a policy could only be effective given close understAnding
and co-operation between the Commonwealth and the States".
He is quite right.
Q: Sir, how about incomes? Nobody has the constitutional power
in respect of incomes, do they?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The Federal Parliament could not pass laws
freezing incomes except for its own employees. State Parliaments
could only pass legislation freezing incomes in respect to people
covered by State awards. There would be an immediate application
to the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission for
any persons whose incomes were so frozen.
Q: Do you favour an overall freeze Sir? Incomes
PRIME MINISTER: Let me discuss it at this meeting.
Q: Mr Hamer's been the one who's called most for a Premiers
Conference. Do you think in view of his coming election that he
will try to bring up the whole matter of finances and
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. He's not suggested that in the
telegram he sent yesterday or the letter which, I presume,
might have come today, but which the telegram yesterday embodied.
Q: Would you be prepared to discuss these matters with them,
since
PRIME MINISTER: The meeting will be on the subjects of the
telegram.
Q: Will the Premiers Conference chaired by you be open to the
Press? PRIME MINISTER: They always are. Even my predecessors had
Premiers Conferences open to the Press.
Q: It's very rare
PRIME MINISTER: Aren't you thinking of the Loan Council?
Q: No, sir.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I'll see what the Premiers Conference says
on this.
Q: Sir, can I ask you a question about your visit to London
please? I think you said some time ago it's not possible for
the State Parliaments to abolish appeals to the Privy Council.
That would need the approval of the Queen on the advice of the
British Government, Sir, will you be asking the British Goyernment 
to advise the Queen to abolish appeals from the States to the
Privy Council?
PRIME MINISTER: We will be discussing this Mr Heath and'I
and I hope that we will arrange we mightn't be able to arrange
it during the brief time I'm in London but I would aim to
promote the position where this is determined by arrangements
between the British and the Australian Governments.
Q: Prime Minister, another question... ( British Broadcasting
Corporation) on the eve of your visit to Britain, how would
you characterise in general terms the differences between your
Government's attitudes towards Britain and that of the previous
Liberal Government?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose I'd better be getting used to these
general questions it was the German T. V. last week that asked
a similarly wide question. I think Britain should realise that
the change of government in Australia after 23 years of unchanged
government has brought to a head a whole number of matters which
it accumulated over many years. It's true that in many respects,
economic matters in particular, trade matters, the links between
Britain and Australia are much thinner than they used to be,
but I don't think that Britain should think that there's any
lessening of the other ties the ties of sentiment between
Australia and Britain. Australians regard Britain with veryi
great affection, but very obviously, for geographic, historic,
commercial reasons, the ties are less formal, less institutional
than they were.
Q: Can you be slightly more specific, Prime minister. What is
the future of the British investment in Australia in the light
of what's been called the new nationalism?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there'd be no difference in the Australian
Government's attitude towards investment from Britain than there
is towards investment from any other country. Britain, I don't
think, any longer expects to have any particular privilege
or immunity in Australia. Britain realises that Australia is
a completely independent country and Britain would, I'm sure,
realise that the attitude towards overseas investment in Australia
from whatever source is much the same as the attitude towards
overseas investment from overseas including Britain became in
Canada under Diefenbaker and his successors. Very obviously
Australia wants overseas investment where that will give her access
to skills which she hasn't got in sufficient quantity herself or
give her access to markets which she can't penetrate adequately
by herself, but we are becoming more selective in investment from
overseas. Australia is a very safe place for investment. We believe
that we ought to have some say in where the investment goes.
Q: Prime Minister, the judicial inquiry that Mr Snedden proposed
that you have rejected in the interests of
PRIME MINISTER: the House rejected that...
Q: you said in the interests of the former Government. You're
not generally quite so charitable. Is there some other reason?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I gave the reasons.. 9. 
Q: Sir, in the A-M program on the A. B. C. today, Labor Minister
Cameron very trenchantly criticised the Treasury wholly on the
advice given by the Treasury to the Reserve Bank, and I quote:
" Almost every pred-iction the Treasury and the Reserve Bank make
even about simple things usually turns out to be wrong, so don't
bewilder me by asking me questions about what the Reserve Bank
should have done or is going to do or what the Treasury experts
are recommending". Do you share Mr Cameron' s views on the
inefficiency of the advice given by the Treasury?
PRIME MINISTER: I never doubt the accuracy with which you
represent the views expressed by my colleagues. I can't believe
that Mr Cameron could have said anything so irresponsible.
Q: It's in the transcri pt, sir.
Q: Mr Whitlam, how strong is the Labor Party's commitment to
low interest rates if the needs of economic management were to
dictate perhaps that higher interest rates were necessary?
PRIME MINISTER: The only excuse I can see for high interest
rates is inflation. We hope to keep both low.
Q: Sir, has your Government taken any action or will it take
action in the United Nations or elsewhere over the gaoling after
the secret trial in Salisbury of the journalist, Peter Niesewand,
and could I. invite your opinion?
PRIME MINISTER: The attitude I must express on any conduct by
the rebel regime in Zembabwee is the same as that expressed by my
predecessors. Legally it is still a British colony. Accordingly
any representations that Australia makes must go through Britain.
Britain has already protested. The Australian Government will be
supporting all the resolutions which the United Nations has hitherto
passed on the Smith regime and I would imagine be supporting any
further measures which are found necessary to bring it to acceptable
courses of conduct. Perhaps I should make it more pointed there.
The Australian Government would not have any communications with
the Smith regime. our predecessors didn't, to their credit.
We certainly shall not.
Q: Mr Whitlam, there was an announcement today on the banking
arrangements for Papua New Guinea but there was no mention of whether
New Guinea should have its own currency. Will this question arise
soon and have you any views on it?
PRIME MINISTER: It's only a matter of time isn't it? Of course
New Guinea will be having its own currency but it's not my province
to express a view on it. This is a matter which is determined
between the two countries. Nauru, for instance, still uses
Australian currency. Maybe New Guinea will for some time.
Q: In view of the continuing increase in job vacancies will you
support an increase in the migration intake in the next financial
year PRIME MINISTER: This hasn't been discussed by Cabinet in the
light of the latest employment figures. That report which the
Department of Urban and Regional Development has produced and which some
of you have secured really comes to the nub of our migration problems.
The migrants can't be told where they'll go. They do, in fact, go 
to Sydney and Melbourne and the most crucial urban problems in
Australia occur in Sydney and Melbourne and one of the big
contributors to those problems is migration. In general terms,
fewer migrants will be coming to Australia.
Q: Thank you, Mr Whitlam. Does your expression of confidence
in Senator Murphy's incident mean that you intend leaving him in
control of ASIO or have you considered an ASIO report directly
to you in future?
PRIME MINISTER: The administrative arrangements orders make the
Attorney-General responsible for ASIO. The phone-tapping
legislation makes the Attorney-General responsible for ASIO.
Q: Prime Minister, following on your answer to Bill Norman
regarding the report that.....
You said Cabinet had not discussed this in relationship to the
latest employment figures. Has it discussed the overall question
of migration and do you agree that the Urban Affairs report could
point to a suspension of migration for a period?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There'll be no suspension. Do you mean a
cessation of all migration? We are concentrating as we promised
on family reunion instead of government recruiting. We are not
intending in any way to stop family reunion or to deter family
reunion. The migrants who are happiest here, the ones who stay
here longest are those who already have relatives here and who are
sponsored by those relatives, they will still be coming. But we
will not, as our predecessors were accustomed to do, sponsor
migrants as a Government.
Q: This is finished. We will not be sponsoring any migrants
by the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I won't go as far as that, but the emphasis
has changed as you know. We won't be stopping migrants who've
already been promised a passage or whom their relatives here are
hoping to nominate. There are proposals for there are still
programs for the Government paying for people whose skills are
needed here but there's not the old blanket, you know, all
applicants from some countries being able to get passages and so on. 



Press Stanteen-t No*.* v
12 April 1973
AUSTRALIAN. NATIONAL. 2\ NTl11 CUEST
On 26 January the Prime Minister announced that the public
would be invited to submit entries for thoj xYorels and itisic for a ne-w
national anthem hnd that the Anuslralian peopl~ e woul( l ba consultedee in
t-he -Fina-. l choice.
As the first stage of this contest, entries a-ro now invited for
the word., 2 of: an anthem0These( ntr-ies will cloc-o on 31 May. DAtries
may be i~ ritten without any tune iin mindl or to the tune of one ofj tChe
1: aiiilJiar Esonqs which n ave some. claimi t*-o being accepL--c ars a nationi.-1
L snlectionl Of ttsfroiii among tns uc tdwill h2
: EIACIe-_ 1a-pCAnel of judgfes andl r-ahl -LhceI in a booklet1. This will3.
oo iav 1; ia: ble to all intoreste-d Lpo2ilc fro?, t the begi nin of uy
Members of the puhlic will. then be invited to submit the mnusic
and word., for an anthem. Tihenic may boe set i,: o wordls qwritteo byth
composer hLiself or by a collafborator, If the compose-r . pr,-efers his
music IIIV ho. set to One of theo ~ chosen for tho liookle. fl ai
of this-xecond stage of the contest the catlling' and -judging of rausic
ontric. s will be announced elarly in July.
it is anticipated that a panel of judges will choose six or
mere anthems, from which the-public wilhelp make i-fina. choice on or
bofore 20' January 1974 a Aiuonc these s aai: heins will bn ait least t-wo
2amiliar or tratlitional songis. The Australian Council " or the ArtsE,
in consultation with the Australian~ Covnrnmcnt., re~~ rettsof'-the
rtiedia, the AO~ n. C. and other interested orgqanisa-: tionr. i, will Lleten-i. nn the
mtihocl by which the public's preference will be expressend.
An award of $ 5,000 will, be made to the writer of the word.-chosen
for the national. anthem. A similar award will be, made to the co-nmfoFsc...
of the music of the aiithem, unless the music is thaLt of a-. n ttlroedv
iia ong. Awards of -500 wil11 be made for the words a i the
mtusic of any entry select-ed for t'he publicl s cons ide(' rto
Entry forms and details of the conditions of ent1ry may be
obtained by sending a: stamaped adcla-esse::_ d envenlope to-.
Aust~ ral1ian National Anthemn The st,
Anst alisan Councitl forc vi', k rts
P. O. fllr&gt; 372,
NORCH-fli~ N. S W. 20G0
A number of people have already submitted entries, in consequence
of the Prime Minister's c lnovinci-itn-Z-or' 26; L. ax-itizry. 1. chore \ Yho en'i. xihave
been receivocd by tL'he usrlia Cc, uncii. for the h. o. vcJtry
f orms.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
Iv/ 7 1 12 A'DrilI 1973
k~ llA2 ~ DSP" 0 TES* Cf
The rNinister for Foreign Affairs, Tqr V. Jhiitlam, announced
Loday the appointment of Mr Roy Cameron as Auostr' 1]. ian Ambasador
to the Organisation for Economic Co-oneratirn anrd Development
to scceed S0ir Ronald W1, alker, C. T3. E. who w,, ill retire at th e end
of July. Tir Cameron, who is 50, is Fir-t Assistant Secretery in
the Treasury in charge of tin. e Transportation and Industry Division.
lie 1) a7, rer. ve. d in this nosition sinice 1966. THr Cameron w! s
educated at Adelaide Har: va,) rd Universities. Hle served in t'he
from 19043-46. F~ e a TLecturer in ' Economic'--a-t tbe
Canberra Uiniver7sity College during -the period 1949-51 arid served
eaq economri. st vihthe Tnterratinoral B, a nk -for Reconst-ru,. ction and.
. Dvooprent * frorm 19'-Nr6 Cameron served as Senior TreEosury
Representative in T~ ondon in 19' 66 at hich,, Ftage 1he returned to
Canberra -' focre 7-ie 1-a been. st,' ti _) ned tsince.
Th" l-e 1 i-rister notecd that Australia nlaced conside'-able
4_ t' Cnorae on tS n.-4ici--tion in all a-' spects of t'he l.: ork of -the
0. ECI"). He said tfiat THr kareron had had broad experience in
economic and financial mattnrs and would be a fitting sluccessor to
S.' r Ronald Walker who head Fgiven long and distingiiished service -to
Astralia in th! economic '. ield and in international relations
ieneral ly, 



NQ DATE
12 April 1973
ADDRESS BY SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE
The attached is the text of an address by the
Special Minister of State, Senator Don Willesee, to ' he
0 29th Session of E. C. A. F. E. ( 12 Aoril 1973) which is
currently meeting in Tokyo.
Senator Willesee was elected one of six Vice
Chairmen of the meeting ( others were Indonesia, China,
Iran, Neral and the Philippines). Ambassador Tsuruoka of
Japan was elected Chairman. 
I join in extending the Australian delegation's
warmest congratulations to you, Mr Chairman, and to our
Japanese hosts for the excellent arrangements for this
29th Session. Australia enjoys especially friendly relations
with your country which have an assured and firm foundation
in the interdependence of our economic relations. It is the
intention of Australia's new Government to work for still
better understanding between Australia and Japan and with all
countries in the ECAFE region.
Mr Chairman, the 29th Session of ECAFE holds promise
of marking the beginning of a new and more hopeful era in the
affairs of the ECAFE region. There are three major elements
in the present situation which call for special comment.
The first is the signing of the ceasefire agreements
in Viet-Nam and Laos. These agreements have been welcomed
throughout the world and particularly by the people of our
region. Although it would be unrealistic to overlook the
problems that are being encountered in carrying out the
various provisions of the agreements, it is our hope that
they will lead to the re-establishment on a firm basis of
conditions of peace in Viet-Nam and Laos. It is our hope
also that, despite the continuation and indeed the recent
intensificiation of fighting in Cambodia, a ceasefire may
soon be achieved in that country as well.
An end to hostilities throughout Indo-China would
improve the prospects of a successful assault on the major
obstacles and barriers to economic and social development / 2 
-2-
in a major area of South East Asia which forms such an important
part of the ECAFE region. We in Australia acknowledge that
there will be a great need for rehabilitation and reconstruction
in the post-war period in Indo-China and our Government intends
that Australia should assume a generous share of the reconstruction
effort. The first principle of any effective policy of
development assistance, whether multilateral or bilateral, is
that no programme can be effective unless it accords with the
expressed wishes of the receiving countries. It is perhaps too
early to attempt to identify the role which the United Nations
including ECAFE, may be called upon to play in the reconstruction
effort in Indo-China, but it is clear that the wishes of the
countries of Indo-China itself will determine the extent and
scope of such a role. If ECAFE is given a role in the work of
reconstruction, it will have Australia's full co-operation.
The task for all countries interested in contributing
to the reconstruction effort will be to find effective ways in
which to act. The winding down of the war may open up new
possibilities for the Mekong scheme and we shall be following
the possibilities with close attention through our association
with the work of the Mekong Committee. We would hope that,
under more peaceful conditions, the energies of the people of
Indo-China could be directed to the economic development of
their region Australia stands ready to participate with them
in this task through the Mekong and other schemes. Meanwhile 0 / 3 
-3-
I should like to record that the Australian Government is willing
to grant up to $ US500,000 for the second phase of the Nam Ngum
dam project. The Australian Government has established full diplomatic
relations with the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and we are
now in the process of setting up an Embassy in Hanoi. A
significant part of the work of this Embassy is likely to be
concerned with possible Australian aid activities. We look
forward to the time when the Government of the DRV will be able
to make its contribution to regional co-operation.
The second element to which I refer is that China has
now taken her place in the community of nations and a delegation
from the People's Republic is present at this Session of ECAFE
for the first time. The Australian delegation extends a warm
welcome to the delegation of China. Our Government moved to
recognise and exchange diplomatic missions with China as soon
as we came into office. We believe that the absence of contact
with China had led to a build-up of inflexible attitudes which
inhibited the scope for co-operation and progress in our regioh
The ~. ssumption of its rightful place in ECAFE by the largest
country in the region should help to accelerate the movement
towards better understanding among all regional countries and
to give greater authority to the deliberations of ECAFE. The
Australian delegation looks forward to fruitful and constructive
co-operation with the delegation of China. / 4 
The third element concerns the administration of ' ECAFE
itself. This will be the last session at which U Nyun will be
present as Executive Secretary. I associate myself with the
leaders of other delegations who have paid tribute to his service
to the cause of advancing the economic and social wellbeing of
the Deople of this region for 14 years. He has been tenacious
in overcoming obstacles and in advancing the process of Asian
co-operation in the Asian way.
ECAFE has notched notable achievements during his oeriod
of office of which the creation of the Asian Development Bank
has possibly had the most impact. The Executive Secretary is
justified in taking -pride in his achievements, especially since
the last few years have been a difficult period for the region
and inevitably for ECAFE.
U Nyun will be succeeded as Executive Secretary by
Ambasspdor Maramis of Indonesia. Ambassador Maramis has had
a long experience in the Government and foreign service of his
country and he already has a strong background of work and
achievement in the economic field. We are confident that, under
his leadership, the Secretariat of ECAFE will meet the new
challenges of a more hopeful era. The new Executive Secretary
will have Australia's full support and co-operation.
Mr C'iairman, Papua New Guinea is represented at this,
as nt previous recent ECAFF sessions in its own right, on this
occasion by the Minister for Finance, Mr Julius Chan, who will 
explain the policies of his Government. All that I want to say,
as Australia's representative at the session, is that our
Government's policy is to move with all due speed towards the
creation of an independent, united Papua New Guinea. We propose
to reach this objective in the closest consultation with the
Government and the House of Assembly of Papua New Guinea within
the lifetime of the present Australian parliament. It is our
intention to introduce legislation providing that Papua New
Guinea should be self-governing by 1 December of this year or as
soon as practicable thereafter. Australia is deeply committed
to continue a substantial programme of economic aid to an
independent Papua New Guinea.
The peace and prosperity of the ECAFE region is a major
commitment of the Australian Government. We see our participation
in this Economic Commission as affording opportunities by which
we will be able, as a significant economic power in the region,
to identify and adopt constructive policies aimed at honouring
this commitment. We shall be looking to the discussions within
ECAFE for guidance and stimulation.
The Secretariat is to be commended for its systematic
presentation of social and economic performance in the region
for the First Biennial Review of the second United Nations
Development Decade in conjunction with the Economic survey for
1972. The Survey shows, however, that the performance of
individual developing countries are continuing to fall short of / 6 
-6-
desirable levels of achievement. The average weighted annual
growth rate for all ECAFE developing countries reached almost
7% by 1969, but had fallen back to 5.6% in 1971 and the survey
states that it may have been below this level in 1972.
The rapid and sustained reduction in mass poverty,
which is recognised as a special priority goal for the ECAFE
region, is not being achieved at current rates of growth in
production, while population continues to increase at high
levels in some cases up to 3.5% per annum. The table on
page 34 of the English language text shows that in 1971, GNP
per person grew at substantial rates of over 7% in only two
of the nine countries listed Iran and the Republic of Korea.
Indonesia achieved an encouraging 3.8% per capita but the per
capita rates for the other countries were all below and in some
countries will below 3%.
The survey explains the slower growth rates in terms
of two major short-term factors: the slowing down in the
economies of Japan, Western Europe and North America and the
droughts and other adverse conditions which afflicted agriculture
and crops in most ECAFE countries in 1971 and 72.
The first of these factors points up the need to
solve the problems of basic economic stability and growth in the
advanced economies so as to provide the essential conditions
for stable trade and payments. The survey rightly draws
attention to the benefits for the developing countries from
steady growth and high levels of employment in advanced ./ 7 
-7-
economies accompanied by a rational solution to the current
international monetary problems.
7CAFE will not be able to do its best work until these
problems are being successfully tackled. Individual developing
countries will be able to plan effectively for their development
and for the welfare of their people only in circumstances which
offer reasonable predictability of income prospects and trade
returns. These are the preconditions for making more resources
available for human welfare.
The restoration of order in the international monetary
system will require concerted efforts by individual countries to
achieve equilibrium in their own balance of payments. Australia
is working actively within the Committee of Twenty to further the
possibility of reforming the international monetary system and
it is reassuring that the developing countries of our region are
represented in the Committee by India and Indonesia.
In the latter part of the year, a further round of
trade and tariff negotiations within the GATT should commence
and we will be working for meaningful results which recognise
the particular interests of the developing countries as well
as countries like Australia which are major exporters of primary
products. We hope that developing countries, particularly the
countries of this region, will avail themselves of the opportunities
available under Australia's scheme of tariff preferences for / 8 
-8-
developing countries which has now been in operation for seven
years. Our Minister for Overseas Trade recently announced a
further extension of the scheme and we have been active in bringing
concessions under the scheme to the attention of regional countries.
I would like to stress that our representatives are always
available for consultation on ways of taking advsntage of the
scheme. Against the background of uncertainties surrounding the
future of international tri'de and payments, it is not surprising,
though disappointing, that the total flow of resources from the
adva~ nced economies to developing countries in the region has
continued to decline. In 1971, the developed countries as a
whole contributed only .35% of their GNP to the developing
countries in the form of official aid compared with .53% at the
beginning of the 19601s. Australia has maintained its good aid
Derformance of the recent Dast and the annual flow of official
development assistance from Australia remains at over of
GNP. Meanwhile we have continued to surpass the 1% Target for
the'transfer of all resources, official and private, for each
of the last three years and this situation seems likely to
persist at least for the next year or so. The total value of
Australiats official aid for the current financial year is likely
to be $ A220 million or $ US308 million and has been increasing at
around 11% per annum. As delegations are aware, nearly all of
this assistance goes to the countries of this region.
Our Prime Minister has indicated publicly that Australia's
intention is to have a substantially increased foreign aid 0 1/ 9 
-9-
programme and we are currently working to improve still further
the quality of the programme.
We expect these efforts to result in a closer alignment
of our programmes with the policy measures which are emphasized
in the survey. In collaboration with recipient countries we will, for
example, be looking intensively into the nossibilities of giving
greater emphasis to sovial fields and to the effects of our
programmes on income distribution and employment uroblems.
We will also be looking into the possibilities of
increasing the number of our projects in rural areas so as to
bring benefits more directly to the people of developing
countries. Mr Chairman, there are many practical problems in
achieving effective regional co-operation in an area as vast
as the ECAFE region and the Australian delegation is concerned
that the approach of ECAFE to questions of regional co-operation
should be constructive and pragmatic. Accordingly, it would
seem desirable to outline, in broad terms, some thoughts on
ways in which ECAFE might strive to develop more effective
techniques for tackling some of the practical problems of
regional co-operation.
In recent years there have been criticisms that the
sheer size and scone of the Commission's activities, although 
well intentioned, have imposed a heavy administrative burden
on the Commission and on Governments. For understandable
reasons, ECAFE has given much of its attention to approaching
problems on a region-wide basis. A number of the Commission's
projects have been of considerable value to the region, but
other proposals have not been launched because of the difficulties
of Dutting them into practice.
Sub-regional approaches have been adopted but usually
in regard to a limited range of topics of interest to a small
number of countries. Some examples are seen in the work of the
TyTIihoon Control Cor. mittee, the Mekong Co-ordination Committee,
the Committee for Off-shore Oil Prospecting and the Asian Commodity
Communities. These activities have generally been of considerable
value to member countries and we feel that the Commission might
be encouraged to apply more of its resources to ways and means of
developing sub-regional approaches to problems. One technique
might be to select groups of member countries with common
problems, and to deal with tlhem through task forces cutting
across individual disciplines and sectors where necessary.
We are not, of course, suggesting that tI-e Commission
abandon regional projects of proven value and indeed we encourage
all measures of regional co-operation which are feasible and
practical. We feel however that a greater degree of emphasis
on the sub-regional approach could lead to a more positive
identification of solutions for pnarticular problems and could
facilitate tI-e mounting of projects which have clearly
identifiable and attainable aims. Regional developing countries
have themselves been showing the way. 
-11-
Mr Chairman, there are two broad areas which are
currently the subject of intense discussion internationally and
within countries: these concern the environment and population.
There have been profound chianges in the attitudes of governments
in our region to these two matters in the recent past. Australia's
attitude to both questions is positive and our government looks
forward -to effective co-operation with Asian ana Pacific countries
in these two areas.
We understand and sympathise with member countries in
their efforts to arrive at an appreciation of where the emphasis
should be placed as between the objectives of economic and social
development on the one hand and the maintenance of a sound
environment on the other. We consider that the most fruitful
approach is to regard the objective of maintaining a sound
environment as complementary to, rather th-an in conflict with,
the objectives of economic and social development. The problems
are com~ lex, however, and ECAFE should be able to assist
Governments to formulate realistic policies for environmental
protection as they pursue their developmental goals.
ECAFE will have a sound basis for its work in the
relevant proposals of the Stockholm conference which have been
adopted by the General Assembly. Australia has already shown
its support for international co-operation on environmental
matters by pledging a contribution of $ US2.5 million to the
U. N. fund. ./ 12 
-12-
There is widespread acknowledgement by regional
governments that the adoption of effective measures to limit
rates of population growth is an important factor in the
achievement of improved living standards.
The Australian delegation welcomes the work of the
R. CAFT7 Secretariat in the population field. The contribution of
the Secretariat was a major factor in the success of the Second
Asian Population Conference held in Tokyo last November.
Australia is now contributing funancially to the major
international population funds and we expect that in future we
will he able to assist ECAFE countries on a more vigorous basis
in this im-oortant area. The contribution of the ECAFE region to
the World Population Conference in 1974 will he a particularly
significant one. We shall be aiming to ensure that Autai'
position at the Conference is closely aligned with that of
our friends in this region.
Mr Chairman, the Australian Goverhment intends that
Australia should. have warm, friendly and co-operative relations
with all countries in the region. Our attitude on United Nations
matters is in close alignment with those of our friends in this
region. This anplies here in ECAFE, as well as in the other
organs of the United Nations, including the Security Council.
The Australian Government will work strenuously for the
improvement of co-operation in the region and intends to give its
full backing to the valuable contribution of ECAFE to the tasks
of economic and social progress in this the most populous part
of the world. 



J) AUTHALIA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 77
13 April 1973
APPOINTMENT AS AUDITOR-GENERAL
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced
the retirement of the Auditor-General, Mr. V. J. W. Skermer,
as from 7 May 1973, and the appointment of Mr. D. R. S. Craik,
as Mr. Skermer's successor.
The Prime Minister paid tribute to Mr. Skermer's
long and distinguished career in the Public Service, particularly
since his appointment as Auditor-General in 1961.
Mr. Craik is at present a Deputy Secretary in the
Treasury, in which Department he has served since joining the
Taxation Branch in 1940.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 72 15 April 1973
PRIE MhINISTOTO ATTETN-D SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr E. G. Whitlam, said today that he was greatly looking forward
to attending the Fourth meeting of the South Pacific Forum, to
be held in Apia, Western Samoa from 17 to 19 April, 1973.
He and Mrs Whitlam will fly from Sydney on Tuesday
( 17 Anril) and arrive in Apia the same day.
Mr Whitlam said that meetings of the Forum provided
an invaluable opportunity for the Heads of Government of the
independent and self-governing countries in the South Pacific
region to exchange views on matters of mutual concern at
first-hand and to get to know each other better.
In addition to the regular Forum members ( Australia,
Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Tonga and Western Samoa) the Apia
meeting would be attended for the first time by Papua New
Guinea and Niue.
Mr Whitlam said that ratters to be considered at the
meeting would include French nuclear tests, relations with the 
-2-
European Economic Community, regional shipping, and the South
Pacific Bureau for Economic Cooperation.
" Long before my Government assumed office the Australian
Labor Party had carefully considered Australia's relations with
the Island States and Territories of the South Pacific region,"
Mr Whitlam said.
" It is the wish of the Government that Australia should
deepen its cooperation with its Pacific neighbours and, where
suitable opportunities present themselves, to initiate positive
proposals for increased cooneration."
Mr Whitlam said that Australia would be presenting to
the South Pacific Forum at Apia some new ideas to enhance
cooperation within the South Pacific region.
He regretted he would be unable to remain in Apia
for the full period of the meeting owing to his commitments in
London, but he was very pleased that Senator the Hon. Don
Willesee, the Special Minister of State and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, would be with him in Apia
and would take his place on the last day of the meeting.
Mr Wfhitlam said both The and Senator Willesee would be
accompanied by their wives. The Prime Minister's narty will
also include Miss Cathy Wbitlam and a team of senior advisers
from t" he Departments of Foreign Affairs, the Prime Minister
and Cabinet and Overseas Trade. / 3 
-3-
After Apia, the Prime Minister and his party will
proceed to London, and then return to Australia via Rome
and Mauritius, arriving in Canberra on 30 April. 



-~ AUSTRCALIA Press Statement No. 78
16 April 1973
ACTION ON PRICES
The Australian Government today dedided to seek
urgently proposals for the stabilisation of domestic
prices of meat.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today
that Cabinet had decided that the minister for Primary
Industry, Senator Wriedt, should seek the proposals from
the Australian Meat Board.
The board will be asked to submit a plan for the
stabilisation of domestic meat prices for consideration
by the Government before the Premiers' Conference on
Prices and Incomes Policy.
The Premiers' Conference will be held in
Canberra on 10 May.
This was one of several decisions on prices reached
by Cabinet today.
Cabinet authorised the urgent preparation of
legislation to establish a prices justification body.
The Treasurer, Mr. Crean, will draft the legislation
in -consultation with the Attorney-General, Senator Murphy,
in time for its introduction and passage during the present
Parliamentary sittings.
Cabinet decided that in the development of the
legislation the following points should be taken into
account: The approach should be directed towards prices
justification rather than price control;
The name of the new body should be the
Prices Justification Board; ./ 2 
S The board should be an independent body
responsible to the Prime Minister; and
S The board should not be limited to considering
only matters referred to it but should be given
authority to initiate investigations on its own
account where significant price increases are
noted.
In other decisions on prices, Cabinet decided that
the Economic Committee of Cabinet will be responsible for
developing for the Cabinet the Government's policy in
respect of prices and, in particular, for studying and
reporting upon all Ministerial proposals which can
affect prices. A special secretariat will be established in the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to assist
the work of the committee.
Cabinet decided to arrange for the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on Prices to conduct immediate inquiries into prices
of goods with high import content which have not fallen
following the exchange rate appreciation in December 1972.
In addition, Ministers who are members of the
Economic Committee are to be invited to submit, as a
matter of urgency, proposals for action which
might affect prices.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



NO DATE
M/ 73 18 April 1973
SOUTH PACIFIC FORUM
The following statement was issued in Apia tonight by
the Australian delegation to the South Pacific Forum Meeting:
S" The Chief Minister of Papua New Guinea, Mr Michael
Somare, denied categorically that he had been involved in any
' horse play' with sailors from HMAS Vampire in Aggie's Hotel
on Monday night. Both Mr Somare and the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam,
t1 ad been engaged in some light-hearted encounters with crew
members from Vampire and one sailor had mistaken the Chief
Minister's identity. He at once apologised for the mistake.
At no time was Mr Somare man-handled by the sailors
in any way. In fact, Mr Somare, like Mr Whitlam, much enjoyed
his informal encounter with members of HMAS Vampire." 



NQ DATE
M/ 74 19 April 1973
FCOE IG AISr APPOI. TTnITS
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Lance
Barnard, announced today a number of senior dinlomatic
appointments. Mr J. C. Ingram, currently Ambassador to the Philippines,
has been appointed High Commissioner for Australia in Carada.
Mr P. G. Henderson has been apnointed Australian
Ambassador to the Philirpines, his first appointment as Head
of Mission. Mr F. B. Hall, at present Australian Ambassador to Greece,
has been accredited as non-resident High Commissioner to Cyprus.
Mr Ingram was born in 1928 and educated at De La Salle
College and the University of Melbourne. He joined the
Department of Foreign Affairs in 1946 and has served in Tel Aviv,
Washington, Brussels, Jakarta and at the Permanent Mission to the
United Nations New York. He has been Australian Ambassador to
the Philipoines since July 1970. Mr Ingram is married with
three children. / 2 
-2-
Mr Henderson was born in 1928 and educated at Geelong
Church of England Grammar School and the University of Oxford.
He joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1951 and has
served in Washington, Jakarta, Geneva and London. He is at
present Assistant Secretary in charge of the Southern Asia
Branch of the Department in Canberra. Mr Henderson is married
and has four children.
Mr Hall has served in Chungking and Nanking, Singapore
New Delhi, Wellington, Kuala Lumpur, and as Australian
Ambassador to Iran from 1968 to 1972. He has been Australian
Ambassador to Greece since September 1972. Mr Hall will be
resident in Athens but will visit Cyprus from time to time.
Mr Barnard said that the anpointment of Mr Hall as
High Commissioner to Cyprus marked the formal establishment of
diplomatic relations with that country at Ambassadorial level.
He pointed to this development as evidence of the Australian
Government's intention to further strengthen its ties with
Cyprus. 



NQ DATE
27 April 1973
AUSTRALIA GIVES FOKKER AIRCRAFT TO BANGjADESH
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee,
announced today that Australia had given two Fokker Friendship
F27 Series 200 passenger aircraft to Bangladesh for use by the
Bangladesh national airline, Bangladesh Biman.
Senator Willesee said that the total cost of the
aircraft, together with spare parts, was $ 950,000.
The first aircraft was handed over by the Australian
Ambassador to the Netherlands, Dr Lloyd Thomson, to representatives
of the Government of Bangladesh at Schipol Airport, The Netherlands,
on Wednesday, and the second aircraft is due to be handed over today.
Senator Willesee said that Australian aid to Bangladesh
* was directed to assist the rebuilding of the country's shattered
economy. A major problem was the re-establishment of an internal
transport system, and the two Fokkers would greatly assist in this.
Senator Willesee said that the staff of Bangladesh Biman
was well experienced in the operation of Fokker Friendship aircraft
and had been operating this type on its internal routes.
The Australian gift would enable the airline to extend its
services to more parts, such as Cox's Bazaar, Thakurgaon
Shamsernagar and Rajshahi.
Bangladesh Biman have named one of the aircraft " City
of Canberra". 



0010 W A
No DATE
M/ 76 30 A'nril 1q73
APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR TO PAKISTAN
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
announced today the appointment of Mr A. M. Morris as Australian
Ambassador to Pakistan in succession to Mr F. H. Stuart who will
be given another assignment.
Mr Morris was born in 1919 and educated at Geelong
Grammar School and the University of Oxford. He served with
the British Army from 1939 to 1945 when he joined the
Department of Foreign Affairs.
He was stationed in Berlin, Bonn and New Delhi before
his appointment as Australian Minister and later Ambassador to
Laos from 1960 to 1964.
From 1966 he was Australian Ambassador to Austria and
from 1968 was concurrently accredited as Australian Ambassador
to Switzerland until 1970. He has been Ambassador to South
Viet-Nam since 1970.
Mr Morris is married with three children. He is
expected to take up his appointment in June.
WO Wp I 



A~ 29
AUSTRALIA Press Statement No. 79
1 May 1973
PUBLIC SERVICE BONDING
The Prime Minister announced today the
discontinuance of bonding of staff in the Commonwealth
Service. Opinion throughout the community is increasingly
opposed to the bonding of trainees. The Karmel Committee
of Enquiry into Education in South Australia in 1970
recorded its opposition to the whole principle of bonding
and thought it should be abolished as soon as circumstances
permitted. The Bell Committee of Inquiry into Teacher
Education in N. S. W. in 1971 expressed similar views. The
Senate Standing Committee on Education, Science and the
Arts in 1972 concluded that bonding was so financially and
socially wasteful that it should be scrapped.
The Public Service Board considers that in current
circumstances in the Commonwealth Service bonding is no
longer appropriate. Existing bond commitments will not be enforced.
Money paid by people in respect of contracts they have
previously breached will not be refunded.
Other aspects of cadetships and other trainee
schemes are being reviewed in the light of the current
circumstances and where appropriate these will be discussed
by the Public Service Board with staff associations.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 77 1 May 1973
MR WHITLAM'S OVERSEAS VISIT, APRIL 1973
Attached is the text of a statement delivered
to the House of Representatives on 1 May 1973 by the
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr E. G. Whitlam. 
I wish to report quite briefly to Parliament on the
overseas visit from which I returned yesterday. Subject to the
requirements of the legislative program, I hope later in the
session to be able to make a comprehensive statement to the House
on the broad perspectives of the Government's foreign policy.
Honourable Members will know that I led the Auistralian
Delegation to the Fourth Meeting of the Pacific Forum from
17 to 19 April in Apia, Western Samoa. For the first time there,
seven Commonwealth countries were represented by their Heads
of Government, as were the two countries with observer utatus,
Papua New Guinea and Niue. Through leading the Delegation to
this meeting myself I wished to emphasise the very deep interest
which the Government takes in the affairs of the South Pacific.
The Australian Government seeks to play a co-operative and
helpful role in this area but in no way wishes to dominate in
the region. The Forum itself is so arranged that the great differences
in size and economic strength between Australia and New Zealand
on the one hand and the Pacific Islands on the other can be
ameliorated by meeting as equals in its informal atmosphiere.
I believe that on this occasion, as before, the meeting
of the Forum was useful and successful. I am sure that these
meetings will continue to consoli9--te regional co-operation between
Austrailia and New Zealand and the islanders in the South Pacific.
At its first session, the F~ orum adopted a Joint
Declaration deploring French nuclear tests in the Pacific. This
declaration was an Australian initiative fully supported by the
Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Kirk, and promptly agreed to
by all other members of the Forum. We hoped that a declaration
would have more impact than a reference in the communique. We
were able to cable this declaration to Paris on the first day of
the meeting while the Attorney-General, Senator Murphy, was there
for the talks which he was conducting at that time with the French
Government. 
The Forum also requested me to take up with the British
Government later in my visit the question of French tests in the
Pacific, since that. Government is responsible for dependent
territories in the area including Pitcairn Island, the British
Solomon Islands Protectorate, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands
Colony and, in part, the New Hebrides. This I did.
I was also pleased to announce to the Forum a voluntary
contribution of $ NZ250, OOO for 1974. This contribution, which is
made to the South Pacific Commission, is in excess of our assessed
contribution and in addition to the SA15 million three-year aid
program announced in 1972.
Fiji, and other members of the Forum, also accepted an
Australian proposal that there should be a conference of Labour
Ministers from Forum countries to discuss labour and related
matters in Australia later in the year.
I also indicated Australia's willingness to organise
an international training course in export development for the
island members of the Forum in Australia in November.
I left the Forum for Vancouver and London before the
final day, on which the Special Minister of State led the Australian
Delegation. In Vancouver, the Prime Ministe~ r of Canada, Mr Pierre
Trudeau, extended to me the courtesy of meeting me in Vancouver
for private talks while my aircraft was in transit,
The value of these talks was in no way diminished by
the informality of the occasion and they confirmed my long-held
belief that there are many areas in which Australia and Canada
should co-operate more closely than in the past. We face similar
problems in relation to our need to improve the status of our
Aboriginal people. We face similar problems related to Foreign
ownership and foreign investment. We can, I believe, develop * a &amp;/ 3 
-3-
fruitful and more regular consultations on trade matters of
common interest, our approach to questions in the United Nations,
and law of the sea and multi-national corporations.
I have arranged with Mr Trudeau that our Governments
should consult more closely and directly on these mL-ters and
that we should telephone each other as a matter of course when
matters of mutual interest arise which affect Canada and
Australia. Before going into details about my London discussions,
I would like to place on record the Government's general approach
to relations with the United Kingdom.
The Australian Government's aim is to make our
relations with Britain an integral and important part of our
general international relations and not something apart as they
have tended to be in the past.
Our relationship with Britain is inevitably changing.
The changes we have made or propose to make on such matters as
the powers of the Governor-General, appeals to the Privy Council,
a new national anthem, the Queen's Style and Titles and the
amendment of the oath of allegiance are in no way directed
against Britain. They are solely intended to put our relationship
on a more mature and con ;-emporary basis and to reflect the
development of a more -dependent Australian identity in the
world. Indeed, what the Australian Government is seeking to
achieve in its relations not only with Britain but with a number
of other countries the United States, China, Canada, and our
Asian neighbours, for instance is to give formal recognition
to what has already happened, as the necessary foundation for a
realistic, more independent, more mature foreign policy. What
we seek to do is no artificial convulsion of contrived nationalism.
This is certainly well understoo(' and appreciated in London. 
-4-
My talks with Mr Heath, Sir Alec Douglas Home, Lord
Carrington, Lord Hailsham ana other Ministers covered a wide
range of matters of mutual interest in the foreign affairs,
defence and constitutional fields.
I explained to Sir Alec Douglas Home and other
Ministers and officials the decision of the South Pacific Forum
in relation to French nuclear tests. I said that I was not
speaking only on behalf of Australia but of the seven countries
of the Forum, all of which were associated with the Commonwealth.
I indicated that the Forumn countries believe the United Kingdom
should talk to the French. This would appear to be a natural
consequence of our close Commonwealth relations, of Britain's
major role in the negotiation of the partial Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty and of its responsibilities, as an administering power,
in respect of a number of Pacific territories. Honourable
Members will be pleased to know that Sir Alec Douglas Home said
he would study the views expressed at the Pacific Forum meeting
and by myself and that he would draw them to the attention of
the French Government. Sir Alec also pointed out that the
United Kingdom had already urged the French to sign the partial
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
In Rome I was received by His Holiness the Pope in
private audience. I regard myself as privileged to have been
able to discuss many matters with this gentle and wise man.
He welcomes the establishment between Australia and the Vatican
of diplomatic relations, as a convenient means of communication
and as facilitating the practical matters which need to be
transacted. The Holy Father said, however, that even this
sensible development of diplomatic machinery could not increase
the depth of his regard for Australia and its people, and the
warmth of his recollections of ' his visit to this country.
I took advantage of my brief visit to Rome to call
on the senior Italian minister in Rome during my visit, Signor
Golombo, who is, as honourable members will know, the 
predecessor of the present Prime Minister of Italy, Signor
Andreotti, who was away from Italy. Signor Colombo has an
especially high reputation in E. E. C. circles.
I outlined to Signor Colombo the present Government's
thinking on foreign policy matters. I found a close identity
of views between our two Governments on all matters which we
discussed, for example, the recognition of China and North
Viet-Nam. I also explained to Signor Colombo our attitude to
continued French nuclear testing in the Pacific. I posed the
question to him that, if the tests were as clear and as harmless
as the French suggested, then could they not be conducted in
Corsica. I was given to understand in clear terms that the
Italian Government understood the concern of Australia, New
Zealand and the Pacific Islanders in a continued atmospheric
testing in the Pacific and I was left in no doubt as to what
the reaction of Italy would be if the French were to conduct
nuclear tests in the Mediterranean.
On the way home I had talks in Mauritius with the
Governor-General and the Prime Minister and Leader of the
Labour Party, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam. I told the Prime
Minister that we would welcome Mauritian representation in
Australia and, apart from our need for area consultation, the
opportunity that this might provide to tell Australians of the
great pleasure they could derive from visiting the star and
key of the Indian Ocean; that we were happy with the way in
which the 26,000 migrants from Mauiitius have settled without
difficulties in Australia. I also assured the Prime Minister
that our modest aid program under the Special Commonwealth
African Assistance Plan would continue, and offered further
assistance in the trade promotion field and marketing.
I raised, as I did in each country I visited, the
question of French atmospheric nuclear tests. The House will
understand that traditional French influence in Mauritius is / 6 
-6-
substantial. Nevertheless, the Prime Minister indicated that he
would consider what he might say on this matter when he visits
Taris shortly, and, in the meantime, indicated that he would have
the question raised with the French Ambassador in Mauritius. The
Prime Minister is clearly aware that, travelling as it does from
west to east, fall-out from French testing affects his country as
much as it does ours.
In conclusion, I would inform the House that during the
14 days I was away, including Easter Week, I believe I was able to
emphasise our growing interest in regional co-operation in the
South Pacific, to take steps to put our constitutional relationship
with the United Kingdom on a more mature and rational basis and
to clear away any misconceptions that may have existed about our
relations with the United Kingdom, to establish as Prime Minister
personal contact with Her Majesty the Queen and the Pope, and to
pay a goodwill visit to the small but important Commonwealth
country of Mauritius.
In each of the four areas in which I stopped, the South
Pacific, the United Kingdom, Italy and Mauritius, I was able to
outline the general direction of the Government's foreign policies
and the more independent stance we are taking in four diverse and
widely separated areas of the world. 



? C)
-1L,, AUST ALI( A&amp; Press Statement No.
1 May 1973
ROYAL VISIT 1974
The following statement has been released from
Buckingham Palace today
" The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh have
accepted invitations from the Governments of New
Zealand and Australia to visit those countries in
the first quarter of 1974.
The Duke of Edinburgh, accompanied by The
Princess Anne, will arrive in New Zealand in time
to open the Commonwealth Games in Christchurch on
24 January 1974.
The Queen will arrive by air in New Zealand on
or about Wednesday 30 January to attend final stages
of the Games and perform the closing ceremony on
Saturday 2 February.
At the conclusion of the Games, Her Majesty and
Their Royal Highnesses will visit some other parts of
New Zealand departing in the Royal Yacht BRITANNIA on
or about 8 February.
Thereafter they will visit Norfolk Island and
Papua New Guinea.
The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh will then go
by air to South Australia, Western Australia and the
Northern Territory.
In South Australia their visit will coincide with
the centenary of the University of Adelaide."
My Government and I are delighted that The Queen and
The Duke of Edinburgh have been able to accept an invitation
to re-visit Australia in February/ March next year after the
Commonwealth Games in New Zealand and so soon after their
visit in October for the opening of the Sydney Opera House. 
We are also pleased that The Queen and
The Princess Anne will make their first visit to Norfolk
Island the Papua New Guinea.
( The Duke of Edinburgh has previously visited
Papua New Guinea in 1956 and in 1971. He has twice visited
Norfolk Island in 1956 and again in 1968.)
I discussed the prospect of the visit to Papua
New Guinea with Mr. Somare when I was in Port Moresby in
February. He told me that he would be pleased if such a
visit could be made.
Princess Anne however, cannot participate in
the visit to the Australian mainland.
The precise amount of time to be spent in South
Australia and Western Australia has not been determined
though it is unlikely in either instance to exceed three
days. At Darwin The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh will
rejoin the Royal Yacht for their departure from Australia.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 1 MAY, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, this morning Cabinet
made several appointments, or at least approved recommendations
for appointments to the Executive Council. The Executive Council
won't be meeting until Thursday probably and so I can't announce
them yet. My Press Office is releasing two statements this afternoon.
The first announces that the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh,
at the invitation of the Australian and New Zealand Governments,
will visit New Zealand and Australia in the first quarter next
year. The second is announcing the discontinuance of bonding of
staff in the Commonwealth Public Service.
Cabinet today decided to refer the Meat Board Report on
meat prices to the Joint Committee on Prices. That's the
Parliamentary Committee which will operate once the opposition
parties have chosen their members. Cabinet authorised Senator
Wriedt to release the Report. Cabinet spent a considerable amount
of time discussing v~ rious proposals concerning prices. When
finalised, these will be announced at the special Premiers'
Conference on Thursday next week. A preliminary draft of
legislation to establish the Prices Justification Board was also
considered today.
Are there any questions?
Q: Mr Prime Minister, was the Government serious when it asked
a producer-exporter dominated Meat Board to bring a recommendation
on meat stabilisation, and is it prepared to carry the question on
further, such as asking its officials in the Department of Primary
Industry to bring down their own scheme?
PRIME MINISTER: The Meat Board is the only statutory body
responsible for the Commonwealth. Therefore it was the only body
( only official body) on whom the Australian Government could call
for advice. You can see the Report as it is. Obviously the
Government will also get advice from its officials on these matters.
Q: Gordon Bryant has been reported several times in the last
couple of weeks as saying that the Australian Government will
not hand over the Torres Strait Islands to New Guinea and that
there'll be an enclave arrangement adopted. Is this the firm
policy of the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: I will not answer questions based on summaries
of what other people have said whether they are my colleagues
or not. As I've said very many times to you and also in other
public places the border between Australia and Papua can at the
moment be determined by the two Governments if the Queensland
Government will co-operate. The Queensland Government shows no
signs of co-operating. In fact all the actions it takes seem
designed to inflame the issue. When Papua New Guinea is 
independent the matter will fall for determination through
international channels such as the International Court of
Justice where only the Australian and Papua New Guinea
Governments will have the right to be heard.
Q: Sir, on that subject I asked you several months ago
actually at your first press conference whether something
could be done about whaft's called the Offshore Legislation
in time for the conference on the Law of the Sea, and I now
ask you again when you think the Commonwealth is likely to
put up its own legislation so that the test case can be made
so that some of this stuff can go to International Courts?
PRIME MINISTER: The legislation was approved by the Legislation
Committee of Cabinet this morning. I expect it will be introduced
this week or next week. I'm not so optimistic that we can in
this Session introduce the companion legislation about
fisheries, but the basic legislation incorporating the
Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill which was brought
in on behalf of Mr McMahon three years ago this month I think
that will be brought in this week or next.
Q: Does it go much beyond the Bill which was brought in by
the previous Government?
PRIME MINISTER: it includes mineral legislation too, other than
oil, which is the subject of existing legislation.
Q: Sir, you aim to put that through this Session?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q: on the question of the executions, Sir, are you contemplating
any action against Mr Bijedic for not contacting you or the
Department of Foreign Affairs over the matter of executions and if not,
why not?
PRIME MINISTER: This was, as I said in the Parliament, both
the Attorney and the Ambassador assumed that the other would
tell the Foreign Affairs Department. Now I'm certainly not
contemplating any action against either. This was a misunderstanding.
Of course the proper procedure should be for the Ambassador to
approach the Foreign Affairs Department. I notice in some of
the papers while I've been away that there was the allegation
that I'd been too busy to see the Ambassador or had declined to
see him. There is no truth in tlis whatever. Nobody from the
Embassy asked the Department or my office to see me, and we
checked with the Embassy and they agree that there was no approach
to see me or the Department at any time.
Q: Prime Minister, why then did they go and see the Attorney-
General? Do you have an explanation for that?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I can only assume that since they didn't
approach me and I was away that weekend and Senator Willesee
was abroad with ECAFE that they approach the third Minister
who had been involved in all the discussions when the Yugoslav
Prime Minister was in Australia. 
0: Sir, are you perfectly satisfied with Senator Murphy's
handling of the whole situation regarding the Yugoslavs,
beginning with the ASIO raids and concluding with the fact
that he did not inform you of the executions?
PRIME MINISTER: You've already heard me and I've got nothing
further to say about the ASIO. About the other, Senator Murphy
should have told me or should have told the Department it
doesn't have to be me. But as I said in the House, these are
all side issues. They don't affect any major issue between
Australia and Yugoslavia or within Australia. It was quite
irrelevant.
Q: Mr Whitlam, having spoken to Senator Murphy last night
do you accept that the information was given to him unofficially?
PRIME MINISTER: No information between an Ambassador and a
Minister and a Minister's Office can be unofficial.
Q: Sir, are you confident that this will not occur again?
Have you taken steps to ensure it will not occur again?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm certain that their Ambassador and other
Ambassadors and the Attorney and other Ministers will see that
the information which they wish to exchange comes to the
notice of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Q: Prime Minister, was this issue discussed in Cabinet this
morning? If so, what was the tenor of that discussion and can
and can you tell us what was said when Senator Murphy dropped
round to your Office yesterday to welcome you home?
PRIME MINISTER: I will say nothing of what happened on either
occasion. You know I wouldn't.
Q: Prime Minister, you mentioned that these were side issues
which did not affect our relations with Yugoslavia. A number of
people however are concerned that the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia
visited and had discussions with you only three days after the
executions. Does that not affect our relations with Yugoslavia?
Will you make a further protest that he didn't inform you then?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I will not make a further protest on this.
I was asked in the House about this matter and I pointed out as
evexybody knows that the Yugoslavian Prime Minister had left
Yugoslavia some days before the executions took place. As a
result of the discussions that Senator Willesee, Senator Murphy
and I had with the Yugoslavian Prime Minister we have now got
information which we hadn't got before. The incursion into
Yugoslavia took place in June or July last year and no information
could be elicited before in fact they came here. As a result of,
the discussions that took place when they did come here we now
have all the information which has come out.
Q: Wouldn't you agree, Sir, that he was less than frank however
in not telling you that these men were about to be executed
when he left Yugoslavia?
PRIME MINISTER: I think he could have said that they'd been
convicted yes. 
Q: Sir, will you consider any form of compensation to the
families of the executed men?
PRIME MINISTER: This hasn't arisen.
Q: Will it arise?
PRIME MINISTER: Wait till it is raised.
Q: It was raised in the Senate this afternoon, Sir.
PRIME MINISTER: It hasn't been considered by the Government.
One can't assume one just doesn't know but one can't assume
that the convictions were wrongly based. What we object to is
the fact that people whom we claim to be Australian citizens
were not put in touch with Australia's representatives in
Yugoslavia. That's what we complain about, and it's what my
Government has complained about all along, and now at last the
issue is being discussed between our Ambassador in Belgrade and
the Yugoslavian Ministers there following on the discussions which
took place between the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia and the
Assistant Foreign Minister when they were in Australia.
Q: Sir, as these trials which culminated in the executions
were in secret and we have a number of citizens of Yugoslav
extraction, would you approach the Yugoslav Government to ask
at least that diplomatic representatives be present at these
secret trials, that which we protested in countries other than
Yugoslavia?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know w1&amp; ther they were secret trials.
They were certainly not publicised. I don't know who could
attend the trials. None of us know that. It's something we're
trying to find out. But of course we are trying to ensure that
whenever any persons whom we acknowledge to be Australian
citizens are arrested in Yugoslavia then our representatives will
be informed. As I said in the House this question of dual
nationality with the dominant nationality being that of the
country where people are residing at the moment this is not
just a matter which concerns Australia and Yugoslavia. It also
concerns Australia and Italy, Australia and Greece, Australia
and the United States. Those other three countries as well as
Yugoslavia have always taken the attitude that if a person whom
they regard as one of their citizens and whom we regard as one
of our citizens visits one of those countries then he can be
called up if he is in the proper age group for military service.
Now this is not nearly as serious a matter as a trial and an
execution. This is just the latest, the gravest manifestation
of this problem of dual nationality. It affects a great number
of our naturalised citizens. Now it might help if I were to say
at this stage that there is provision under Yugoslavian law
for Yugoslav citizens to renounce Yugoslav citizenship.
There is provision for that and any Australians of Yugoslav
origin who want to renounce their Yugoslav citizenship should
take steps to do so. The Yugoslav Government takes the attitude
and so too do other Governments which adhere to this principle of
dual nationality, that it is not sufficient for the person and
the Government of the country of his adoption to agree that he
should renounce his original citizenship. That must also be
terminated by agreement between the person and his country of 
original citizenship. People should take these steps, and
it is available under Yugoslav law.
Q: Do you think Sir that the renunciation has to take place
on Yugoslav territory or can it be done
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so. I think it can be done
through the Yugoslav Consulates and Embassy in Australia but
this is something where if anybody in Australia is concerned
he should seek the advice of the Department of Immigration.
Mr Grassby has been very actively considering this matter.
Q: Have you seen or spoken to the Yugoslav Ambassador since
your return?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q: Well through what means do we know that Mr Bijedic thought
that Senator Murphy had told the Foreign Affairs Department?
Has he spoken to Foreign Affairs since then, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know the exact details of what
communications there have been. I've been away as you know
for a fortnight. I saw Mr Bijedic at his request on the 16th.
I left that night.
Q: Sir, do you know whether any other people in similar
circumstances are being held in Yugoslavia?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we are trying to find out.
Q: You don't know?
PRIME MINISTER: No, if we knew, we would tell the people
concerned the relatives and if they wished we would
announce it publicly. But we don't know. We are trying to find out.
Q: Sir, it's more than a fortnight since you sent off your
protest to Yugoslavia. You still haven't had a reply I think?
PRIME MINISTER: No, on the contrary, we have had some
information and further action is being taken. For instance,
as a result of the protest which I think went on Friday 13th
and as a result of the interview with Mr Bijedic on Monday 16th
I have got the information which was given to you yesterday and
which I read in the House today, namely the date of the
executions. I wanted to know that of course because there are
Australians who will want to have that information for legal
purposes quite apart from the point of view of setting their
minds at rest and that information has been secured, and I
announced it in the House in full and some of it was given to
you yesterday.
Q: It wasn't a formal reply to your protest note though?
PRIME MINISTER: There's no written reply yet but this
information has come as a result of my discussion with Mr Bijedic
on Monday 16th.
Q: Prime Minister, there are reports from Paris today that 
the French Government is about to resume its nuclear tests at
Mururoa Atoll. There are also reports that the scheduled
number of tests will be reduced. Do you as Prime Minister have
any information on this?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The French Government refuses to give
any information to anybody on this subject. Senator Murphy
could give it to you more predisely because he received it
orally. The French Foreign Minister said personally he gave
his assurance that the tests would not take place during the
scientific discussions which are to take place between French and
Australian scientists in Australia next Monday and the following
few days.
Q: Sir, how will you decide whether those talks have broken
down and therefore you intend to go to the International Court?
PRIME MINISTER: We'd come to this conclusion in a very few
days I would expect.
Q: A few days?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q: Mr Whitlam, Mr Barnard announced yesterday that the Supply
would go with New Zealand as a last resort
PRIME MINISTER:. Yes.
Q: did you endorse the statement and how close will the
Supply go to the test zone if it does go?
PRIME MINISTER: I discussed this matter with Mr Barnard when
he was in New Zealand yesterday. I don't know how far. This
is a matter for discussion between New Zealand and the
Australian navies.
Q: Prime Minister, when do you plan to table the Report by
the three Australian scientists who went to the French test site?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not sure.
Q: why you haven't up till now?
PRIME MINISTER: All these matters bear upon the court case.
Q: Sir, has Cabinet or any of its Committees yet considered
the detailed proposals for new Trade Practices legislation?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I hope we'll do it next week.
Q: I think in your absence Sir, Ampol entered into a contract
with XL to refine oil and as a result of that XL has
substantially cut prices in Melbourne garages. The Victorian
Automotive Chamber of Commerce, I think is the correct title,
claims that you were somewhat taken aback by this cut-price war
and have proposed a full-scale investigation. Are these facts?
PRIME MINISTER: I've made no such proposal. I wasn't aware of
the general situation. I haven't had the opportunity to be
taken aback. 
My emotions are described, in various terms while I'm away.
I see I'm angry, I'm furious. I hadn't heard that I was so
moderately affected as to be taken aback.
Q: You're not upset at the cut-price war then?
PRIME MINISTER: Not in the least.
Q: Sir, would you like to correct the descriptions of your
state of mind while you were away about the Murphy incident?
PRIME MINISTER: As you know I don't bother to confirm or
deny any of these emotions which are attributed to me.
I don't engage in long-distance controversy.
Q: Did you think it was an anti-climax in the House today
the Murphy uproar?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, completely.
Q: Sir, on that-subject...
PRIME MINISTER: I know it's too unsporting of me to disclose what
our predecessors have said in writing to each other. I'm
supposed to keep that from you as they kept it from the public
insofar as they could.
Q: Do you believe that should be made public.., this
correspondence
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's a reasonable reposte for those
people that try to insinuate there are differences about us.
The fact is that Mr Grassby, Senator Murphy and I are trying
to do something about it and we have done something. We want
to do more, but we are completely in agreement on wanting to
secure the rights of people who accept Australian citizenship
or who are given Australian citizenship. Secondly, we are
completely at one in wanting to stamp out political terrorism.
Q: Sir, I think you said in the House today that you found out
on Saturday April 14 that Senator Murphy had advance knowledge
of the announcement about the executions. It has also been
reported that you talked to Senator Murphy not long before he
left Australia about 7 o'clock on that day. The implication is
that you knew about this before he left. Could you say if
that's so, and if so did you raise it with him on the phone
and if not, why not?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't know before he left. I didn't raise it,
therefore with him before he left. I spoke to him on the phone
about his mission to Paris about the French nuclear tests.
Q: I got the impression you might have made a mistake when
you said the 14th.
PRIME MINISTER: It might have been Sunday the 15th. I don't
remember this. It was sometime at that weekend and I learnt
as I said from a cable from Belgrade our Ambassador in Belgrade
and I looked in my diary to see what day it was. I can't be
sure what day it was, but it was on that weekend. I think it's 
more likely that it's the Saturday, because I notice I was
rather freer in my engagements on Saturday than I was on Sunday.
Q: I thought you'd only learned when you say the Ambassador
on the Monday?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I might have learned of it on the Sunday.
I think it was the Saturday.
Q: Will Australian sailors on H. M. A. S. Supply be in any danger
when they go into the French nuclear test zone?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope not. They'll be volunteers so they
would be accepting such risks as there might be but I don't know.
Q: When you say they'll be volunteers, they will be asked to
volunteer for the trip or what?
PRIME MINISTER: Any persons going into any danger zone will
do so as volunteers. There will be no compulsion on any R. A. N.
personnel. There will be no orders given to R. A. N. personnel
to go into this zone.
Q: But there will be R. A. N. personnel...?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but I don't know if they'll be in the zone
because the French have not said where the tests will be.
Their practice hitherto has been I think to issue orders for
aircraft and shipping a couple of days beforehand.
Q: Would we break those orders. I mean would we sail within
the zone?
PRIME MINISTER: Every nation shares the high seas and no
nation has the right to close them to any other nation. 



Press Statement No. 81
2 May 1973
SOUTH AU STRALIAN RAILWAYS
( Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Honourable
E. G. Whitlam, M. and the Premier of South
Australia, the Honourable D. Dunstan, M. L. A.)
Talks are about to begin on the transfer to
the Australian Government of responsibility for the
South Australian Railways, excluding suburban services.
This was announced today in a joint statement
by the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam and the Premier of
South Australia, Mr. Dunstan.
Their statement said:
" Our two Governments have today agreed to begin
discussions with a view to devising a mutually
satisfactory basis for the transfer.
Agreement has been reached on the composition
of a joint Federal/ State committee to begin immediate
investigation on this matter.
At the same time the Governments have agreed
that the present employees of South Australian
Railways be given an unequivocal guarantee that,
irrespective of the final decision on the
responsibilities to be transferred, they will be
employed in either the State or Commonwealth services.
We consider this to be a matter of basic
principle fundamental to the negotiations."
The Commonwealth/ State committee which has been
appointed will report jointly to the Federal minister
for Transport, Mr. C. K. Jones, and the S. A. Minister of
Transport, Mr. G. Virgo. It will be supported, as
necessary, by specialist sub-committees. A standing
sub-committee will be established to report on Conditions
of Employment for South Australian Railways employees.
This sub-committee will include a senior officer of the
South Australian Trades and Labour Council.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT No. 83
3 May, 1973
ABORIGINAL ARTS BOARD
Aboriginals have been given full responsibility for
developing their own programs in the arts under a new Government
policy to revitalise cultural activities through the Australian
Council for the Arts. Artists and craftsmen from remote centres,
towns and cities have been appointed to the Aboriginal Arts Boar6
of the Council. The Board's Chairman, as previously announced,
is the Aboriginal author and artist, Mr Dick Roughsey, of
Mornington Island.
The members of the board are:-
Mr Raphael Apuatimi
Mr Albert Barunga
Mr Harold Blair
Mr Ken Colbung
Mrs. Kitty Dick
Mr Chicka Dixon
Mrs. Ruby Hammond Skilled traditional dancer from Bathurst
Island. Actively involved in dance groups
in the Northern Territory.
Leading Aboriginal councillor at Mowanjum
in Western Australia and member of many
Aboriginal committees.
Noted tenor engaged as a music teacher
with the Victorian Education Department.
Sponsor of the. Harold Blair Holiday Scheme
for Aboriginal children from outback areas.
Co-ordinator of Aboriginal Cultural EIterpi
Society, Perth. Active in fostering the
arts in the Aboriginal urban communities.
A leader in ceremonial life among the womer
of Weipa in north Queensland.
Waterside worker of Sydney and manager of
Aboriginal pop groups performing in Clubs.
Central figure in Black Political Movement.
Leader of Aboriginal delegation to China.
Foundation member of the South Australi-an
Aboriginal Art Co-operative and actively
engaged in community development projec-, s.
2/ 
Mr Tim Leura Jabaidjari
Mr Eric Koo'oila
Mr Albert Lennon
Mr Mick Miller
Mr Wandjuk Marika
Mrs. Vi Stanton
Mr Terrence Widders Outstanding traditional artist of the
Pintubi/ Walbiri School at Papunya in
Central Australia.
Authority on ceremonial life at Aurukun
in Queensland. Guide to anthropologists
Ursula McConnel and Donald Thomson.
A leading member of the Pitjantjatjara
group of north-west South Australia.
School teacher of Cairns. Member of
Association for Cultural Education of
Childre'n of the Peninsula. Has great
knowledge of north Queensland where he
is well known.
Tribal leader at Yirrkala in Arnhem Land.
Known for his deep understanding of
traditional life.
Part-Aboriginal deeply involved in giving
encouragement in arts and craft activities
to Northern Territory Aboriginal women.
Vice-President of Northern Territory
Aboriginal Development Foundation.
Armidale Teachers College. Involved in
country programme for the revival of
interest in traditions. Trainee film maker.
The decision to place control for the arts in the hands of
Aboriginals is intended to stimulate indigenous Australian arts
and lead to the preservation of many art forms almost lost since
the settlement of Australia by Europeans.
The Board will investigate ways of involving Aboriginals
in a wide range of cultural activities in the visual arts,
performing arts, film making and literature. Projects aimed
at the preservation of Aboriginal Art, crafts, dance and music
will be sponsored in communities throughout central and northern
Australia. Assistance will be given also to establish community museums
where cultural property can be housed safely and where the younger
generation can be taught an appreciation of their own heritage
in accordance with traditional custom.
Inter-community visits will be supported to assist local
groups to share the music and dance which have been handed down
to them over many thousands of years..
Craftsmen will have new opportunities to use their traditional
skills to develop independent enterprises. Workshops will be
arranged for those wishing to experiment with new art forms such
as weaving, leatherwork, pottery and batik.
The Board will study a form of quality control and a system
.3/ 
of orderly marketing for arts and crafts.
An intensive program is underway for Aboriginal theatre
in urban communities. Support will be offered to extend this
to the country where increasing numbers of Aboriginals are becoming
interested in theatre as a form of expression.
Sponsorship will be available also to Aboriginal authors and
film makers. Subsidies will be provided for publications so that
Aboriginals can express to the wider community something of the
richness of their culture.
The new board will sponsor the first National Seminar on
Aboriginal Arts to be held in Australia. This is planned from
21 to 25 May at the Australian National University in Canberra.
About 200 people have been invited. They will be predominantly
Aboriginals. The recommendations of the seminar will largely
influence the board in its future policy planning for the
stimulation and revitalisation of Aboriginal arts throughout
the country. 



J A UST A L AL PRESS STATEMENT NO. 82
3 May, 1973
APPOINTMENT OF MR. D. L. LINEHAN AS A
COMMISSIONER OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
The Prime Minister ( Mr E. G. Whitlam) today announced ' the
appointment of Mr D. L. Linehan to succeed Mr A. B. McFarlane
as a Commissioner of the Public Service Board.
Mr Linehan, aged 46, is an ex-serviceman, an Associate
of the Australian Society of Accountants and a Member of the
Industrial Relations Society.
Mr Linehan, who joined the Public Service in 1945,
is on leave from the Taxation Office while Federal Secretary
of the Administrative and Clerical officers' Association which
has more than 40,000 members in the Public Service. He has
held that position since 1968 and has been President of the
Council of Commonwealth Public Service Organisations ( members
of whose affiliates total about 140,000) since 1969. Mr Linehan
has been Deputy Chairman of the Joint Council an employer/
employee body which advises the Public Service Board on general
conditions of employment since 1967 and has also served as
Contributors' Representative on the Superannuation Board.
Mr Linehan has long and wide practical experience in
industrial relations in the Public Service. His understanding
of union and public service affairs has attracted the respect
of both employees and management.
Mr Linehan's appointment is for a period of five years
commencing on 1 June 1973. 



O7 AUSTIAI. IAPRESS STATEMENT NO. 84
4 May, 1973
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
The Hon. E. G. Whitlam M. P.
PUBLIC SERVICE AGE LIMITS
The Prime Minister announced today that the upper age
limits applying to appointments to the Commonwealth Service as
Clerk, Clerical Assistant and Typist have been removed. This
move will greatly increase the opportunities for employment of
middle-aged and married women in the service.
The age limits have been 28 for clerks, 30 for clerical
assistants and between 30 and 45 ( depending on circumstancks)
for typists. The removal of the limits results from a spe. cial
review being carried out by the Public Service Board of all age
limits currently applying to recruitment to the Commonwealzh
Service. This review is being made in the light of the current
recruitment situation and in relation to present day social
and economic conditions. The review has shown that the need
of the Service for a proportion of career entrants can, in the
present circumstances, be served adequately without mandatory
age limits. The removal of age limits is a contribution to the
flexibility of the work force. People such as those displaced
by technological change and married women seeking to re-enco:
the work force will no longer be debarred by age from cowmpeting
for permanent appointment to the Commonwealth Service.
If present trends continue, it is probable that in the
future many women will return to work when their children &amp; re
old enough and will usually have about twenty to thirty years
of working life ahead of them. To enable women to resume
their careers when they wish to do so, and to ensure tnat t. i:
abilities, training and experience are not wasted, the Govecn..; cnt
hopes that other employers will be prepared to plan career ditterr
for women which includes a break in service. 2/ 
In other words, if there is to be real equality of
opportunity, we must accept the fact that the work pattern
of women is different. A woman should not be unduly penalised
in employment by requirements such as unbroken service,
full-time working hours and other conditions governing her
eligibility for security of employment and opportunity for
advancement beyond junior status.
This decision of the Public Service Board is the beginning
of a realistic policy enabling women to reconcile domestic
responsibilities with a career. It is hoped that further steps
will include the introduction of permanent part-time work and
other forms of employment as well as flexible working hours.
The community as a whole will benefit in the long run. 



SAUSIRA. LIALPress Statement No.
4 May 1973
Re-Appointment of Chairman of the Tariff Board
The Prime Minister announced today that the
Executive Council had approved the re-appointment of
Mr. G. A. Rattigan, as Chairman of the Tariff
Board after his existing appointment ends on 15 May 1973.
In accordance with Mr. Rattigan's wish his extended term
of service would be until 15 November 1976 instead of a
full five year term.
The Prime Minister expressed the Australian
Government's appreciation of the continuation of
Mr. Rattigan's services in this very important position,
and especially at a time when a major review of the Australian
tariff is being undertaken.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPEECIH BY. THE PRIME MINISTER,
1TE lION, E. G, WHITLAM, M. P,,
AT THE i'ITH ANNUAL CONVIENTION OF THE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SOCIETY OF N. SW.,
HOTEL FLORIDA, TERRIGAL, N, SJW., 5 MAY 1973
PRICES, INCOMES AND INFLATION
IT IS TEMPTING TO BELI'EVE THAT A SUCCESSFUL PRICES
AND INCOMES POLICY CAN BE A MAGIC REMEDY, NOT ONLY FOR
INFLATION, BUT FOR ALL THE ILLS OF SOCIETY, IF ONLY
-GOVERNMENTS COULD CONTROL PRICES AND WAGES SO THE ARGUMENT
GOES WE WOULD BE WELL ON THE WAY TO A MORE JUST AND
PROSPEROUS NATION. THE DILIGENCE WITH WHICH PRICES AND
INCOMES POLICIES ARE PURSUED IN MANY WESTERN COUNTRIES IS
TESTIMONY TO THE POWER OF THIS IDEA. THAT THESE POLICIES
HAVE SO OFTEN FAILED OR AT BEST MET WITH LIMITED SUCCESS
HAS NOT DETERRED OTHER COUNTRIES FROM ATTEMPTING THEM,
11/ 2,, 
AUSTRALIA IS NO EXCEPTION, MY OWN GOVERNMENT,
AS YOU KNOW, IS COMMITTED TO A RANGE OF ANTI-INFLATIONARY
POLICIES INCLUDING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PRICES JUSTIFICATION
TRIBUNAL, BY WHICH WVIE INTEND TO BRING THE MOST FORMIDABLE
OFFICIAL AND PUBLIC PRESSURE TO BEAR IN AN EFFORT TO KEEP
PRICES DOWN, NEXT THURSDAY" WE SHALL BE MEETING THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS IN CANBERRA TO D'ISCUSS ' THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION
AND POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS TO IT,
FOR LET THERE BE NO DOUBT OF HOW SERIOUSLY MY
GOVERNMENT REGARDS THIS PROBLEM OR THE STRENGTH OF OUR
DETERMINATION TO TACKLE IT, INFLATION IS INCREASINGLY
RECOGNISED AS THE MOST FORMIDABLE AND INTRACTABLE PROBLEM
OF ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT, MANY GOVERNMENTS AROUND THE WORLD
NOW BELIEVE THIS TO BE SO. THE PACE OF INFLATION HAS
QUICKENED IN THE 1970s IN MOST COUNTRIES, AUSTRALIA INCLUDED,
IT IS ALREADY BECOMING CLEAR THAT THE THREAT OF
INFLATION WILL BE THE MOST SERIOUS ECONOMIC PROBLEM
FACING THE GOVERNMENT, THE LABOUR MARKET HAS MOVED RAPIDLY
IN RECENT MONTHS TOWARDS FULL EMPLOYMENT LEVELS AND THE
TREND SEEMS CERTAIN TO CONTINUE, WE WELCOME THIS; WE
ENCOURAGED IT, BUT IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES THERE IS THE
MAXIMUM OPPORTUNITY FOR PRODUCERS TO RAISE PRICES, THE
LEAST INCENTIVE TO RESIST INCREASING COSTS, AND THE LEAST
OPPORTUNITY FOR EFFECTIVE CONSUMER RESISTANCE, 
PROBABLY THERE IS NO SINGLE SOLUTION PRACTICABLE
OR IMPRACTICAL, JUST OR UNJUST TO THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION,
THERE ARE, HOWEVER, SOME CLEAR CONCLUSIONS TO BE DRAWN FROM
AUSTRALIAN AND OVERSEAS EXPERIENCE ABOUT THE REQUIREMENTS
OF AN EFFECTIVE ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICY, A PRE-CONDITION
FOR SUCH A POLICY IS EFFICIENt MANAGEMENT OF OVERALL DEMAND
BY SOUND BUDGETARY AND CREDIT POLICIES, No POLICY, OR
COMBINATION OF POLICIES, DESIGNED TO AFFECT PRICES OR
INCOMES DIRECTLY CAN BE SUCCESSFUL IF EXCESSIVE PRESSURES
ON RESOURCES ARE'ALLOWED TO DEVELOP,
SECONDLY, THE OVERALL ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT MUST BE
RIGHT, THE EXCHANGE RATE MUST BE APPROPRIATE, POLICIES
ON RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES, TARIFFS AND CONSUMER PROTECTION
MUST ENCOURAGE COMPETITION AND LIMIT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
PUSHING UP PRICES, GOVERNMENTSAND THEIR AUTHORITIES MUST
FOLLOW RESPONSIBLE POLICIES ON PRICING AND EMPLOYMENT
CONDITIONS, THIS IS THE CONTEXT INTO WHICH PRICES AND
INCOMES POLICIES HAVE TO BE FITTED, THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES
THAT THERE IS A PLACE FOR SUCH POLICIES, BUT IT DOES NOT
BELIEVE THEY ARE A CURE-ALL FOR INFLATION, v 
THERE ARE, OF COURSE, FAVOURABLE FACTORS IN THE
PRESENT SITUATION, THE RISING STRENGTH OF THE LABOUR
MARKET SHOULD ENABLE POLICIES DESIGNED TO RESTRAIN PRICES
TO BE UNDERTAKEN WITHOUT FEAR , OF CREATING GENERAL UNEMPLOYMENT.
THE STRENGTH OF THE CURRENT BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE HIGH
LEVEL OF INTERNATIONAL RESERVES ( DESPITE THE WITHDRAWAL OF
SOME FUNDS AFTER THE RECENT CURRENCY REALIGNMENTS) ALSO MEAN
THAT WE CAN CONTEMPLATE AN INCREASED INFLOW OF IMPORTED
GOODS WITHOUT ANXIETY ON THE INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNT.
WE HAVE ALSO TAKEN HELPFUL ACTION ON THE EXCHANGE
RATE. AN EXCHANGE RATE WHICH UNDERVALUES THE DOMESTIC
CURRENCY INCREASES THE COST OF IMPORTED GOODS, INCLUDING
MATERIALS FOR INDUSTRY, PREVENTS EFFECTIVE COMPETITION BY
IMPORTS, REDUCES RESISTANCE BY PRODUCERS TO RISING COSTS,
AND HELPS MAKE THE CONSUMER HELPLESS IN THE FACE OF ORGANISED
PRICE INCREASES, OUR REVALUATION OF THE DOLLAR LAST DECEMBER
WAS A VALUABLE ANTI-INFLATIONARY MEASURE, 1/ 5. 
FURTHERMORE, my GOVERNMENT HAS UNDERTAKEN A RANGE
OF SPECIAL ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICIES, DON'T WANT MY
REMARKS TO SOUND TOO MUCH LIKE A RECITAL OF GOVERNMENT
POLICY THE PROPER PLACE FOR THAT WOULD BE IN VICTORIA
RATHER THAN TERRIGAL BUT I SHALL MENTION BRIEFLY SOME OF
THE THINGS WE ARE DOING. L HAVE REFERRED TO OUR PRICES
TRIBUNAL. WE HAVE ALSO ESTABLISHED A JOINT PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE TO REVIEW PRICES IN KEY SECTORS, WE WILLSTRENGTHEN
THE LAWS AGAINST RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES,
WE WILL USE OUR POWERS THROUGH TARIFFS, SUBSIDIES AND CONTRACTS
TO PREVENT UNJUSTIFIED PRICE RISES WHEREVER WE CAN, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS THE NATION'I S BIGGEST SINGLE CUSTOMER
AND MOST IMPORTANT SINGLE CONSUMER, As SUCH IT CAN EXERCISE
A CONSIDERABLE INFLUENCE ON PRICE MOVEMENTS, BY HELPING THE
CONSUMER TO A BETTER AND INFORMED AWARENESS OF THE PRICE AND
QUALITY OF AVAILABLE GOODS, WIE CAN DO MUCH TO DISCOURAGE
EXORHITANT OR IRRESPONSIBLE PRICE RISES,
IN THE LAST RESORT, HOWEVER, THERE IS A LIMIT TO
WHAT ANY GOVERNMENT CAN DO TO CONTROL THE LEVELS OF PRICES
OR WAGES, IT IS TRUE GOVERNMENTS CAN R'ESORT TO A STATUTORY
FREEZE IMPOSED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER, SOME COUNTRIES HAVE
ATTEMPTED THESE CONTROLS; NO COUNTRY HAS REGARDED THEM AS
ANYTHING BUT A TEMPORARY MEASURE, IN DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
THERE IS A LIMIT TO THE WAY THESE POWERS CAN BE USED. THERE
IS A LIMIT TO THEIR EFFECTIVENESS,# THERE IS A LIMIT TO THEIR
POLITICAL ACCEPTABILITY IN A FREE SOCIETY, THERE IS A LIMIT
TO THEIR ENFORCEABILITY, THERE IS A LIMIT TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE
MACHINERY NEEDED TO SUPERVISE THEM, 
6,
IN OTHER WORDS, IN ANYTHING SHORT OF A TOTALITARIAN
SOCIETY, GOVERNMENTS ARE RESTRAINED IN THEIR ABILITY TO ADJUST
WAGES AND PRICES AS THEY PLEASE. OUR PROPER CONCERN, THEREFORE,
IS NOT WITH WHAT GOVERNMENTS CANNOT DO, BUT WITH WHAT THEY
CA. AND SHOULD DO. THE QUALITY OF LIFE WHAT USED TO BE
CALLED THE STANDARD OF LIVING..-DEPENDS ON A WHOLE RANGE OF
CONDITIONS AND SERVICES WHICH GloVERNMENTS CAN DETERMINE AND
PROVIDE, WHICHi GOVERNMENTS ALONE CAN DETERMINE AND PROVIDE.
A MANUFACTURER CAN INCREASE THE PRICE OF HIS GOODS; HE CANNOT
PROVIDE A HOUSING SCHEME, A DOCTOR CAN RAISE HIS FEES AT
LEAST HIE MAY THINK HE CAN BUT HE CANNOT PROVIDE A HEALTH
SERVICE. A BUSINESS F* IRM CAN INCREASE ITS CHARGES: IT CANNOT
PROVIDE MORE SCHOOLS, BETTER ROADS'OR IMPROVED COMMUNITY SERVICES,
THESE THINGS ARE THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENTS,
ISIMPLY MAKE THE POINT THAT THE SEARCH FOR A PRICES
AND INCOMES POLICY HOWEVER DESIRABLE IT MAY BE MUST NOT
BECOME A SUBSTITUTE FOR ACTION IN AREAS WHERE GOVERNMENTS HAVE
A REAL AND UNCHALLENGED POWER TO IMPROVE THE STANDARDS OF OUR
LIVES, NOR MUST THE FEAR OF INFLATION BLIND US TO THE FACT
THAT THERE ARE WORSE ECONOMIC EVILS, IDO NOT ACCEPT THAT THE
DELIBERATE CREATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT CAN * EVER BE AN ACCEPTABLE
REMEDY TO INFLATIONARY PRESSURES. [ HIS VIEW IS STILL HELD BY
SOME OF OUR OPPONENTS. IN THE PAST, BUDGETS HAVE BEEN FRAMED
AND ECONOMIC POLICIES IMPLEMENTED IN BLIND SUBSERVIENCE TO THIS
CRUEL AND DISCREDITED THEORY, EVEN IF THE. THEORY WERE TRUE, MY
GOVERNM~ ENT WOULD UNHESITATINGLY REJECT SUCH AN APPROACH, THE
CURE WOULD BE WORSE THAN THE DISEASE, 1 17 a 
7,
THE REAL VICTIMS-OF INFLATION ARE THOSE ON SMALL
INCOMES -MORE ESPECIALLY THOSE ON FIXED INCOMES, FOR THE
MAN WHO MUST SPEND NEARLY ALL OF HIS INCOME IN ORDER TO LIVE,
INCREASES OF A NEW CENTS IN THE BASIC COMMODITIES ARE KEENLY
FELT. THEY MAY INDEED BE CRUCIAL TO HIS HEALTH, HIS WELL-BEING,
HIS COMFORT. HIoW THEN CAN A HUMANE GOVERNMENT BEST ASSIST HIM?
THE TRUTH IS THAT EVEN IF INFLATION IS CONTROLLED, THE MAN ON
SUCH AN INCOME IS STILL AT A CRIPPLING DISADVANTAGE. GOVERNMENTS
CAN THEREFORE HELP HIM BY ATTACKING THE SOCIAL INJUSTICES THAT
DISCRIMINATE AGAINST HIM AND RENOVATING THE INEFFICIENT PUBLIC
SERVICES HE IS FORCED TO USE.
LET US TAKE THE TYP-ICAL ' AUSTRALIAN TYPICAL AS
PORTRAYED BY THE STATISTICIANS. YOU WILL NOTICE TONIGHT THAT
IHAVE REFRAINED FROM USING TOO MANY STATISTICS. ISUSPECT
THAT IN THE PAST 24i HOURS YOU HAVE HAD A SURFEIT OF THEM. IT
IS IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER WHAT WALTER BAGEHOT SAID OF STATISTICS:
" THE ECONOMIST USES STATISTICS MUCH AS THE DRUNKARD USES LAMPPOSTS
FOR SUPPORT RATHER THAN ILLUMINATION." NEVERTHELESS,
WE MAY CONSIDER AN AUSTRALIAN EARNING $ 1011 A WEEK AS AN EMPLOYEE
( THOUGH THE AV'ERAGE WAGE MUST NOT BE REGARDED AS THE TYPICAL
WAGE), BRINGING up 2AL CHILDREN AND LIVING IN A SUBURB OR TOWN
OF 10,000 PEOPLE, THE FIRST AIM OF A MODERN GOVERNMENT MUST
BE TO ENSURE THAT HIS EMPLOYMENT IS SECURE, 1/ 81 1 
8,
BY ABOLISHING THE INEFFICIENCY AND UNFAIRNESS OF
THE PRESENT HEALTH SCHEME WE CAN REDUCE THE COST OF CONTRIBUTIONS
OF THE AVERAGE MANI WE CAN REMOVE THE FEARS AND DOUBTS OF
THOSE WHO STILL HESITATE BEFORE MAKING AN EXTRA VISIT TO THE
DOCTOR, BY ATTACKING INEQUALITY IN EDUCATION FROM PRE-SCHOOLS
THROUGH TO UNIVERSITIES WE CAN ENSURE THAT THOSE ON LOW
INCOMES WILL NOT BE DISADVANTAGED MORE THAN OTHERS THROUGH
THE EROSION OF THAT PART OF THEIR INCOME THEY SPEND ON
EDUCATION FOR THEIR CHILDREN, PENSIONERS THOSE ON FIXED
INCOMES, THE PRIMARY VICTIMS OF INFLATION MUST BE ASSURED
THAT IN ILLNESS THEY WILL GET ALL POSSIBLE CARE, AND THAT
THE ABOLITION OF THE MEANS TEST AND THE INTRODUCTION OF
NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION WILL HELP REMOVE THE HARDSHIPS OF
RETIREMENT, WHEN THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION ARE MOST UNSPARING,
NONE OF THESE MEASURES CAN BE REGARDED AS-A CURE
FOR INFLATION, THEY ARE NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR A SUCCESSFUL
PRICES AND INCOMES POLICY, ANY MORE THAN A PRICES AND INCOMES
POLICY CAN BE A SUBSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL REFORM, MY GOVERNMENT
BELIEVES THAT RESTRAINTS ON PRICES, ANDTHE ORDERLY DETERMINATION
OF PERSONAL INCOMES, ARE MERELY ONE INGREDIENT IN THE RECIPE
FOR A MORE JUST AND PROSPEROUS NATION, 
IHA\' E NO DOUBT, FROM THE ATTENDANCE AT THIS
SEMINAR, AND œ EEING SO MANY DISTINGUISHED SPEAKERS, THAT YOU
HAVE MADE A VALUABLE STUDY OF A DIFFICULT AND PERHAPS
INTRACTABLE PROBLEM, I CONGRATULATE THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES ON. ITS MOST SUCCESSFUL MEETING.
IT IS A TRUISW TO SAY TH4AT THERE ARE NO EASY SOLUTIONS TO
MODERN INFLATION OR THE FEASIBILITY OF PRICE-INCOME POLICIES.
MY CONCERN IS TO REMIND YOU THAT WHILE WE MAY NOT KNOW THE
ACCEPTABLE SOLUTIONS, AT LEAST WE KNOW THOSE WHICH ARE NQT
ACCEPTABLE. N'O SOL. UTION IS ACCEPTABLE IF ITS BURDENS ARE
NOT SHARED FAIRLY BY THE WH1OLE COMMUNITY, NO SOLUTION IS
ACCEPTABLE IF IT DISCRIMIIATES AGAINST THE VEAKEST AND MOST
DEFENCELESS SECTIONS OF SOCIETY. No SOLUTION IS ACCEPTABLE
IF IT TOLERATE: HIGH LEVELS OF UNEMPLOYMENT, NO SOL. UTION IS
ACCEPTABLE IF T IGNORES THE NEED FOR FUNDAMENTAL REFORMS,
IT IS WITHIN THOSE LIMITS, AND UPON THOSE CONDITIONS, THAT
INFLATION MUST BE FOUGHT. MY GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT WITH
YOUR CO-OPERATION, THE CO-OPERATION OF ALL SIDES OF INDUSTRY,
THE BATTLE CAN BE WON. 



NEW SOUTH WALES-ZIONIST COUNCIL.
CELEBRATIONS OF ISRAEL's 25TH ANNIVERSARY
ADDRESS'BY THE PRIME MINISTER.-MR E. G. WHITLAM
SYDNEY TOWN HALL 6 MAY 1973.
THE REQUIREMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY DO
NOT ALWAYS PERMIT THE FULL EXPRESSION OF A NATION'IS DEEPER
FEELINGS ABOUT INTERNAT. IONAL AFFAIRS.". FOR EXAMPLE, THE.
POLICY ON THE MIDDLE EAST DISPUTE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTMY
OWN AND ALL THOSE WHO PRECEDED IT IN THE LAST TWO DECADESHAS
BEEN OFFICIALLY EXPRESSED IN THESE TERMS:-
" AUSTRALIA'S POLICY TOWARDS THE MIDDLE EAST DISPUTE
IS ONE OF NEUTRALITY AND OF SYMPATHETIC INTEREST
IN A SETTLEMENT. AUSTRALIA HAS MAINTAINED FRIENDLY
RELATIONS WITH BOTH SI-DES BECAUSE WE HAVE NO MAJOR
ROLE IN THE AREA AND HAVE AVOIDED ACCORDINGLY
STRIKING A PARTISAN ATTITUDE."
Now, WHILE THESE HAVE BEEN THE BROAD GUIDELINES FOR
SUCCESSIVE GOVERNMENTS AND WOULD BE A FAIR ENOUGH EXPRESSION
OF AVERAGE AUSTRA LIAN OPINION, I CANNOT. IMAGINE THAT IT WOULD
BE REGARDED BY ZIONISTS OR THE JEWISH COMMUNITY GENERALLY AS
THE DEFINITIVE VIEW ON THE MATTER. AND THE FACT IS, OF COURSE,
THAT WHILE SUCCESSIVE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS.-MAINTAIN NEUTRALITY
ON THE DISPUTE THEY HAVE NOT BEEN NEUTRAL AND ARE NOT NEUTRAL
ON BASIC ELEMENTS OF THE DISPUTE. WE ARE NOT NEUTRAL ON THE
QUESTION OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF ISRAEL; THE SOVEREIG NTY OF ISRAEL
IS NOT NEGOTIABLE. THE RIGHTS OF JEWS TO GO TO THE NATIONAL
. HOMELANDA ND TO LIVE THERE IN FREEDOM AND PEACE ARE NOT TO BE
DENIED. THE RIGHT OF ISRAEL TO DEFEND HER BORDERS AND PRESERVE 
INTACT THE GREAT DEMOCRACY WHICH FLOURISHES THERE IS NOT A MATTER
ON WHICH THIS OR ANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS EVER BEEN NEUTRAL.
WE NOT ONLY ACCEPT ISRAEL's MORAL RIGHTS IN ALL THESE MATTERS BUT
ACCEPT OUR OWN MORAL RESPONSIBILITY As EUROPEANS AND AS
BELLIGERENTS IN THE WAR AGAINST FASCISM AND PERSECUTION TO
UPHOLD THOSE RIGHTS. AND THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY THE
PARTY OF HERBERT VERE EVATT FREELY ACKNOWLEDGES ITS SPE CIAL
RESPONSIBILITIES, AND ITS INTIMATEASSOCIATION WITH THE
GOVERNMENT AND +' EOPLE OF ISRAEL. THERE ARE OTHER MATTERS ON
WHICH WE CANNOT BE NEUTRAL. WE CANNOT, FOR INSTANCE, BE
NEUTRAL TOWARDS THE WORLD-WIDE PATTERN OF TERROR AND REPRISAL
THAT HAS DEVELOPED FROM THE MIDDLE EAST DISPUTE AND FROM WHICH
CITIZENS OF ISRAEL, INNOCENT MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN HAVE BEEN
AMONGST THE CHIEF VICTIMS.
IT IS AGAINST THE BACKGROUND OF THESE ATTITUDES THAT
IWISH TO PUT AUSTRALIA'S RECENT STAND IN THE SECURITY ' COUNC IL,.
A STAND WHICH HAS BEEN MISUNDERSTOOD IN SOME QUARTERS. -ON 21
APRIL AUSTRALIA VOTED IN-THE SECURITY COUNCIL WITH BRITAIN,
INDIA, INDONESIA, FRANCE, AUSTRIA, YUGOSLAVIA, SUDAN, KENYAf
PANAMA AND PERU CONDEMNING THE RAID BY ISRAELI FORCES INTO
LEBANON ON 10 APRIL. NO MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL VOTED AGAINST
THE MOTION BUT THE UNITED STATES, THE SOVIET UNION, CHINA AND
GUINEA ABSTAINED. OUR ACTUAL VOTE TELLS ONLY A VERY SMALL
PART OF THE ACTIVITIES ON THIS MATTER TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AND ITS REPRESENTATIVES IN NEW YORK. ON 13 APRILTHREE
DAYS AFTER THE RAID -ISENT THE FOLLOWING GUIDELINES TO
OUR REPRESENTATIVE ON THE SECURITY COUNCIL: 
3.
FIRST, THAT ANY AUSTRALIAN STATEMENT SHOULD DEPLORE
VIOLENCE AND TERRORISM BY EITHER SIDE IN THE PRESENT
SITUATION; SECONDLY THAT WE SHOULD IN OUR STATEMENTS
AND ACTIVITIES SEEK TO MAINTAIN THE ESTABLISHED POLICY OF
NEUTRALITY AND EVENHANDEDNESS; THIRDLY THAT WE SHOULD
USE OUR EFFORTS TO ACHIEVEA RESOLUTION WHICH WOULD WIN
UNANIMOUS SUPPORT AND THAT WjOULD O-PERATE TO QUIETEN
RATHER THAN-FURTHER INFLAME THE SITUATION; AND FINALLY
THAT IF A RESOLUTION STRONGLY UNFAIR TO EITHER SIDE SHOULD
BE SUBMITTED, THE DELEGATION SHOULD USE ITS. DISCRETION TO
OPPOSE IT OR TO ABSTAIN.
ACCORDINGLY OUR DEELEGATION WORKED FOR A RESOLUTION WHICH, WHILE
CENSURING ISRAEL FOR ITS INTRUSION ON LEBANESE SOVEREIGNTY, TOOK
A BALANCED APPROACH TO THE WHOLE PATTERN OF VIOLENCE AND REPRISAL
IN THE MIDDLE EAST. BUT NONE OF THE DRAFT RESOLUTION'S OF THEIR.
AMENDMENTS INTRODUCED PRIOR TO THE ANGLO-FRENCH DRAFT OF 21
APRIL.-WHICH WAS THE ONE UPON WHICH THE VOTE WAS TAKEN -WERE
ACCEPTABLE To AUSTRALIA.
SO IT WILL BE SEEN THAT THERE WERE TWO IMPORTANT
PRINCIPLES EXPRESSED BY OUR APPROACH THAT NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
MUST BE UPHELD AND THAT TERRORISM MUST BE OPPOSED. IN THE LONG
TERM, FOR THAT MATTER AT ANY TIME 7ISRAEL'IS OWIN INTERESTS AS
MUCH AS ANY OTHER NATION'S -ABSOLUTELY REQUIRE THAT THOSE
PRINCIPLES ARE UPHELD.
IN HIS STATEMENT TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON 1.7 APRIL
OUR AMBASSADOR, SIR LAURENCE-MACINTYRE, EMPHASISED THE NEED TO 
BREAK THE CYCLE OF VIOLENCE. HE SAID, ON BEHALF OF AUSTRALIA:-
" IN AUSTRALIA'S VIEW THE FIRST AND, WE BELIEVE, THE MOST
POSITIVE AND HELPFUL STEP TOWARDS A JUST, SECURE AND
LASTING PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST MIGHT BE TO BREAK THE
CYCLE OF AGGRESSION AND REPRISAL AND THUS TO TURN BACK
THE WAVE OF MURDEROUS VIOLENCE AND TERROR THAT HAS SPREAD
OUTWARDS FROM THE MIDDLE EAST ACROSS THE WORLD. IF WE
ARE RIGHT IN THIS BELIEF, THERE SEEMS TO BE LITTLE POINT
IN CONSIDERING THE LATEST ISRAELI ACT IN ISOLATION FROM
THE LAST OF'THE HORRIFYING MATRIX OF RECENT INTERNATIONAL
VIOLENCE-AND TERRORISM. WHETHER THE ACTIONS ENGAGED BY
THE GOVERNMENT OF ISRAEL ARE TO BE REGARDED AS AN ACT
OF AGGRESSION OR RETALIATION, OR PRECAUTION OR SELF
DEFENCE, IT IS ONLY ONE OF A SUCCESSION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
IN RESPECT OF WHICH SOME OF ISRAEL'S NEIGHBOURIN GOVERNMENTS
CAN SCARCELY ESCAPE CHARGES OF COMPLICITY OR AT LEAST
ACQUIESCENCE. IT IS PART OF A VICIOUS CIRCLE AND CANNOT
BE SEPARATED FROM ITS SURROUNDING PATTERN OF VIOLENCE, IF
THIS COUNCIL IS TO GEN ERATE A NEW MOMENTUM IN ITS EFFORTS
TO BRING ABOUT A JUST, SECURE AND LASTING PEACE IN THE
MIDDLE EAST. IF THE UNITED NATIONS FAILS TO PUT AN ENDTO
THE FURTHER ESCALATION AND PROLIFERATION OF
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM IT IS, LIABLE TO HAVE MATTERS
TAKEN OUT OF ITS HANDS."
THE SECURITY COUNCIL HAD BEFORE IT A DRAFT-RESOLUTION
FROM LEBANON CALLING UPON ALL STATES TO REFRAIN FROM PROVIDING
ISRAEL WITH ANY ASSISTANCE WHICH WOULD FACILITATE MILITARY ATTACKS 
AND THREATEN FURTHER SECURITY COUNCIL ACTION IF SUCH ATTACKS
WERE REPEATED. WE CONSIDERED THAT THESE ONE-SIDED TERMS WERE
UNACCEPTABLE AND FURTHER MODIFICATIONS PROPOSED BY BRITAIN
STILL FAILED TO MAKE THE DRAFT SUFFICIENTLY FAIR TO ISRAEL TO
ATTRACT OUR SUPPORT.
FOLLOWING SIR LAURENCV'S STATEMENT A NEW ANGLO-FRENCH
DRAFT WAS INTRODUCED ON 19 APRILI WE BELIEVED THAT THE CHANGES
WENT SOME DISTANCE AT LEAST TOWARDS INJECTING A MEASURE OF
BALANCE INTO THE RESOLUTION AND OUR REPRESENTATIVE BELIEVED THAT
ALTHOUGH THE NEXT TEXT WAS NOT ENTIRELY SATISFACTORY, AN
AFFIRMATIVE VOTE WAS POSSIBLE. IN EXPLANATION OF OUR VOTE
SIR LAURENCE SAID:-
" IN THE VIEW OF my GOVERNMENT A CONDEMNATORY JUDGEMENT
WHICH WOULD HAVE TREATED THE PARTICULAR ACT,
REPREHENSIBLE AS IT WAS, IN ISOLATION FROM THE REfST
OF THE PATTERN OF PROVOCATIVE VIOLENCE, TERROR AND
REPRISAL OF WHICH IT IS UNDOUBTEDLY A PART, AND WHICH
IS ENCROACHING ON THE SAFETY OF LIFE EVERYWHERE, WOULD
HAVE AMOUNTED TO A DISTORTION BY THE COUNCIL OF THE
REALITIES OF THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND WOULD
SCARCELY BE LIKELY TO HELP TOWARDS A SETTLEMENT OF ITS
STUBBORN PROBLEMS. 
6,
THE CHANGES THAT HAVE BEEN MADE GO SOME DISTANCE
AT LEAST TOWARDS INJECTING A MEASURE OF BALANCE INTO
THE RESOLUTION TO A POINT WHERE, EVEN THOUGH WE
STILL DO NOT REGARD IT AS ENTIRELY SATISFACTORY, WE
HAVE FELT ABLE TO SUPPORT IT,.
I THINK YOU CAN SEE FROM THIS PATTERN OF EVENTS
AND THE STATEMENTS OF OUR AMBASSADOR THAT THE VOTE OF
21 APRIL CAN IN NO WAY BE REGARDED AS A BASIC CHANGE OF
ATTITUDE ON MY GOVERNMENT'S PART OR A BASIC DEPARTURE FROM THAT
OF PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS, FOR EXAMPLE, WE DID
ABSTAIN FROM VOTING ON A RESOLUTION ADOPTED 86-7 WITH
31 ABSTENTIONS BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON 8 DECEMBER LAST AS
REPRESENTING A FURTHER ONE-SIDED CRITICISM OF ISRAEL IN TERMS SIMILP
TO THOSE USED IN RECENT YEARS, WE ABSTAINED IN 1971 ON A
RESOLUTION IN ALMOST IDENTICAL TERMS, ON THE OCCASION OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION WE BELIEVE THAT CONSISTENT ADHERENCE
TO THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY AND OPPOSITION TO
TERRORISM DID REQUIRE SUPPORT FOR A RESOLUTION, IN ITSELF,
IN MANY WAYS, UNSATISFACTORY,
I AM NOT IN THE BUSINESS OF TELLING ISRAEL WHAT
IS FOR HER OWN GOOD, I KNOW THAT SUCH ADVICE FROM'ME WOULD
BE GRATUITOUS AND SUPERFLUOUS, I CAN ONLYSPEAK ABOUT THE,
MOST USEFUL COURSE, FOR AUSTRALIA CANNOT TAKE THE SAME
PESSIMISTIC VIEW OF THE UNITED NATIONS AS I THINK-ISRAEL TENDS
TO DO. IT IS TRUE THAT THE MIDDLE EAST HAS NOW BECOME THE 
I7.
CENTRAL STAGE OF CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THE TWO GREAT POWERS
OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION, AND IT IS TRUE THAT
IN SUCH CONFRONTATIONS THE UNITED NATIONS HAS IN THE PAST
PROVED INEFFECTUAL, EVEN IMPOTENT. THERE IS NO MORE CERTAIN
WAY TO ENSURE THE CONTINUED INEFFECTIVENESS OF THE UNITED
NATIONS THAN THAT THE SMAL[ ER NATIONS OF PEACE AND FREEDOM
SHOULD DESPAIR ABSOLUTELY OF THAT , QNE WORLD BODY OF WHICH
THEY FORM A MAJORITY. THE GREATEST VICTIMS OF THE BREAKDOWN
THROUGH DESPAIR OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS WERE THE JEWISH PEOPLE.
NO NATION WOULD HAVE MORE TO LOSE THAN ISRAEL B9Y A BREAKDOWN OF
THE UNITED NATIONS.
WE HAVE AFFIRMED, AND ' WE CONTINUE TO BELIEVE, THAT
THE BEST PROSPECT FOR AN ENDURING PEACE IN THE MIIDDLE EAST
WILL FLOW FROM AN AGREEMENT FREELY ARRIVED AT BETWEEN THE
PARTIES. M'Y GOVERNMENT WILL WORK TO SECURE SUPPORTFOR
NEGOTIATIONS TOWARDS SUCH AN AGREEMENT, BOTH IN THE U..
AND IN ALL OUR DIPLOMATIC ENDEAVOURS. 



.), AUST11AII Press Statement No. 86
6 May 1973
CO-OPERATION IN SPACE PROJECT
Australia will have access to special information
obtained through America's proposed " Skylab" manned space
laboratory. Federal Cabinet today was told that access to the.
information would be provided under the Australian/ U. S.
agreement on scientific co-operation through the new
Ministry of Science.
The channelling of the information through the
Science Ministry will mark the start of an overall move of
projects associated with the U. S. National Aeronautics an
Space Administration from the control of the Ministry of
Supply to that of Australia's Ministry of Science.
A special meeting of Cabinet in Sydney was -o] d
that because of Australian co-operation in the " Skylab"
venture, Australia would be able to make special requests
to the " Skylab" team for photographs and reports on Aust: ralia.
These would be valuable in planning mineral exploration,
assessing the extent of pollution and discovering disease
in major forest projects.
The handover of the chief participatory role in
America's post-Apollo space programme from Supply to the
Department of Science will continue gradually in coming
months.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



' 16
1 LNi
AUsiuAIIA~ g-
Press StatementC No. 88
6 May 1973
COML14ITTEE TO EXAMINE CITIZENSHIP PROBLEM
Federal Cabinet: at'-its meeting in Sydney toCiay
decided to refer invzcstigation of the problema of dual
nationality of Australian citizens t'Lo the Defence anQ,
Foreign Affairs Coccictee.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Au , ili LL
J ' UV i L'
Press Statement No. 87
6 May ' 1973
SALARY INCREASES FOR NoT. COUNCILLORS
Federal Cabinet today decided to give salary
increases to all members of t-he Northern Territory
Legislative Council.
The increases are the largest in the Council's
history. The salary for ordinary Council members will
rise from $ 2,750 $ 7,250.
The salary of the Chairman will rise from $ 3,350
to $ 8,700. There will also be increases in expenses of
Council members. The rises are the first for the Council since
1968. Cabinet its special meeting in Sydney was told
that the increase was warranted because of the increased
amount of constituoncy work done by Council members
following a rapid :,-ise in the Territory's population.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



a Sr I Ael F f
NQ DATE
M/ 79 7 May 1973
APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR TO AFGHANISTAN
0 The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that Mr A. M. Morris, whose appointment as Australian
Ambassador to Pakistan w-s announced on 1 May, has also been
concurrently appointed as Australian Ambassador to Afghanistan.
Mr Morris will be resident in Islamabad but will Day visits to
Afghanistan from time to time.
Mr Morris was born in 1919 and was educated at Geelong
Grammar School and the University of Oxford. He served with the
British Army from 1939 to 1945 when he joined the Department of
Foreign Affairs. He was stationed in Berlin, Bonn and New Delhi
before his appointment as Australian Minister and later Ambassador
to Laos from 1960 to 1964. From 1966 he was Australian Ambassador
to Austria and from 1968 was concurrently accredited as Australian
Ambassador to Switzerland until 1970. He was Ambassador to South
Viet-Nam from 1970 until his recent appointment to Pakistan.
Mr Morris is married with three children. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 8 MAY, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: I only have one Cabinet decision to give
you. The other decisions were given to you last Sunday because
Cabinet sat last Sunday, since the usual meeting time, Tuesday
morning, has been occupied by a meeting of the House of
Representatives. The decision that I now give you was made
last Sunday but there had to be consultations with other
countries. It concerns controls over strategic exports.
The Government has taken a decision on a report by departments
on the question of strategic export controls over commercial
trade. It's been decided that Australia will no longer
maintain on commercial trade with the Soviet Union, Eastern
Europe, China, North Korea, North Vietnam and Cuba restraints
different from the restraints on commercial trade maintained
on any other country. The controls which have been maintained
by Australia have not proved in recent years to have much
relevance to our production and it has therefore been decided
to treat trade with all countries on a similar basis. It's
well known that controls by other western countries have been
progressively reduced and the United States and European
countries are selling highly sophisticated material to the
communist countries. We have notified a number of our closest
friends of this decision and have assured them that Australia
will not be a means towards circumventing any controls which
they may maintain over their own production. This decision
has no bearing on the controls which are maintained by Australia
over the export of arms and war-like stores and atomic energy
material. The embargo on trade with North Vietnam is being
removed and we consider this is appropriate in view of the
establishment of relations with that country.
I might also inform you that Professor Gruen, Professor
of Economics at the Australian National University is taking up
an appointment as consultant to the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet. The appointment will be on a part-time
basis. Professor Gruen will continue in his position at the
University but will be available for advice and consultation
to the Department and to the Prime Minister on economic
assignments. Professor Gruen has occupied his present position
at the Australian National University since December 1972.
He was formerly Professor of Agricultural Economics at Monash.
Are there any questions?
Q: Does Professor Gruen's work supplement that of Dr Coombs,
Sir, or replace it 
PRIME MINISTER: No, supplements it.
Q: Sir, on the announcement you've made about trade with
various countries, can you tell us if this will affect our
trading relations with Rhodesia, South Africa. Are we saying
that trade with any country will now be O. K.?
PRIME MINISTER: There is an exception in the case of Rhodesia
because the United Nations has passed resolutions the Security
Council has passed resolutions on that subject. I should
of course have added that those controls will be strictly
applied. Q: What are the strategic exports that will be now allowed
to be exported to these countries?
PRIME MINISTER: The trade with those countries will be the
same as with all other countries. The restrictions on trade
with these countries will be the same as the restrictions on
trade with other countries, namely war-like stores and atomic
energy material.
Q: Prime Minister, following the national wage case decision
today, Mr Cameron issued a statement in which he said there was
no justification in this decision for manufacturers to put up
their prices. In the light of the community's great concern
about prices and inflation generally and your meeting with the
Premiers this week on this subject, are you prepared to ask as
Prime Minister that manufacturers not immediately put up their
prices, and that perhaps unions might consider the increase
they got today as perhaps something that they can go along with
and stay their hand for a little while?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to say anything more on this
subject. I'm of course preparing quite busily today and tomorrow
what I'll be saying at the Premiers' Conference on Thursday.
And Mr Cameron I saw his statement I've got nothing to add
to it.
Q: Did you approve that statement Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q: Prime Minister, since your Government has expressed the
intention of closely co-ordinating inter-departmental policies
on protection, could you tell us what action has been taken
to co-ordinate the protectionist policies at this stage?
PRIME MINISTER: A new Protection Policy division has been set
up in my Department. IT was approved by the Executive Council
the other day. Vacancies will be advertised in the Gazette this
Thursday and some senior positions in the daily press. There is
an inter-departmental committee on assistance to industries
which will be the focus of departmental and inter-departmental
co-operation in work on tariffs and other selective forms of
assistance to industries. This committee will be chaired by my
Department and also it will have as members the Treasury and the
Industry Department or Departments relevant to the particular
matters it's considering. other Departments such as Labour or
Defence will be co-opted as appropriate. 
Q: You said last week that this week's Cabinet would
be discussing details of the Trade Practices legislation
PRIME MINISTER: No, I was too optimistic. It didn't.
Q: Last week, Prime Minister, you said that you weren't
sure about when you would table the report by three Australian
scientists about the French tests. Are you any more sure now?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q: When will you be?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm no more sure.
Q: When will you be any more sure than you are now?
PRIME MINISTER: I tabled four reports I think it was last
Wednesday on the consequences of atomic tests. That was last
Wednesday. Q: but now the three Australian scientists?
PRIME MINISTER: I made a reference to their report in it.
Q: You didn't table it?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q: will you?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm thinking about it.
Q: Prime Minister, can you give us any progress report on the
talks between the French scientists and the Australian scientists?
PRIME MINISTER: They've proceeded throughout today. They may
go into tomorrow I'm told.
Q: Will we be given any statement on what's been discussed?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so.
Q: Are they making any progress, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
Q: Prime Minister, supplementary to that other question about
the report by the three Australian scientists, you did in answer
to my question last week say that you couldn't table it because
of the case of ours being prepared in the International Court of
Justice, and yet you did table the others. May I ask then why
you can't table the one by the Australian scientists?
PRIME MINISTER: I took all the advice on this matter about the
four that I did table last Wednesday. You must appreciate I've
got to be quite careful as to what is released pending these
proceedings which may take place before the International Court
of Justice. 
Q: Sir, why won't we be told what's happening between the
scientists? PRIME MINISTER: There again, I will take advice on this in
the light of any proceedings which may ensue.
Q: Prime Minister, on the question of French nuclear tests,
can you tell us one way or the other, do you support industrial
action by Australian trade unions against the French Government
and their carrying on with the nuclear tests?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't encourage it. If it takes place
there's no more we can do about it than our predecessors.
Q: Do you then endorse it though Sir, when you say you don't
encourage it?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't encourage it.
0: Prime Minister, in the light of the appointment of Mr Gruen
as mentioned today in the establishment of the new Protection
Policy division, do you anticipate that your Department
PRIME MINISTER: He's not necessarily associated with the new
Protection Policy division
Q: No, I appreciate that, but they are both appointments
in the economic policy area...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q: Do you anticipate your Department taking on the sort of
major economic policy role that Mr Chifley anticipated in the
Prime Minister's Department some 25-odd years ago when he lost
an election?
PRIME MINISTER: The Prime Minister's Department is the appropriate
Department to co-ordinate matters, and of course, there are quite
a number of matters which have to be co-ordinated in the protection
field. Up till now there has been no adequate investigation of
claims for protection in primary industry. There has been very
little co-ordination, if any, in the protection given at the
instance of the Department of Secondary Industry as it now is,
or the Department of Customs and Excise by-law exemption,
and accordingly, if there is to be proper co-ordination in the
two Departments which have had responsibilities in protection
up till now and also in respect to Primary Industry naturally
the Prime Minister's Department should provide that co-ordination.
Q: Do you anticipate the Prime Ministers Department actually
initiating the policy proposals?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't anticipate that. The title of the
Department is the Department of the Prime! Minister and Cabinet,
and accordingly it is the natural Department to co-ordinate
matters between other Departments, and, as you know, I am now
technically responsible for the Protection Commission which
Sir John Crawford is investigating.
Q: Mr Whitlam, are you opposed to Ansett having 24 per cent
of the national airline in Papua New Guinea? 
PRIME MINISTER: I'm only concerned in this what
Ansett Transport Industries does in Papua New Guinea insofar
as that affects other Australian airlines. What the Government
of Papua New Guinea does is its affair except insofar as
Australian companies or instrumentalities are concerned.
So, in isolation I don't object to Ansett Transport Industries
having 24 per cent. I would think it wrong however for Anlsett
Transport Industries to have a predominant role over the roles
of other Australian airlines.
Q: Sir, do you believe that an Australian Government should
be able to dictate to the Government of Papua New Guinea on the
composition of its airline?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that, and I don't believe
the reverse either.
Q: As the Prime Minister, you are aware no doubt of today's
report by the Committee on Commonwealth superannuation.
When will the Government act upon this?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, this is being given to Cabinet for
information but we haven't considered it yet. You will
appreciate that we are tabling reports practically as soon as
we get them. Now, that is before we have decided an attitude
about them. We are quite happy to get people's views on those
reports. Other people can see them almost as quickly as we do.
Q: Sir, is there anything to announce about your tour to
India or your tour to Africa? Progress at all?
PRIME MINISTER: We're leaving on Sunday the 3rd. It will
take us all day to get there and we ' re leaving on the return
trip from New Delhi just before midnight on Wednesday the 6th,
so we'll be in India for three complete days.
Q: Prime Minister, the Bishop of Sandhurst has advised his
flock not to vote for the Labor Party at the Victorian
elections on the abortion issue. Do you think it's appropriate
for the Bishop of Sandhurst to give this advice, and secondly,
will you be voting on the Abortion Bill on Thursday or will
you have to avoid that ordeal because of the Premiers'
Conference? PRIME MINISTER: I expect, if it's at all possible, to be
voting on the Bill, and I expect that the other Ministers at
the Premiers' Conference will be voting also and in the same
way. I have no comment to make on this Stewart except that
the Bourbons would have been prnud of him.
Q: As Bishop Stewart has advised his flock to vote against
the Labor Party but not against the Bill in the Victorian
State elections, would you consider providing subsidies for
those people who want to indulge in politics outside the Church
in the same way as subsidies are provided for those inside
the Church. I'm thinking of the religious subsidy of rate-free
land etc.?
PRIME MINISTER: The Commonwealth gives no subsidies to any
Church in respect of rate-free land or any other respects. 
Q: It does in the A. C. T. perhaps
PRIME MINISTER: Does it I don't think Bishop Stewart
would get a see in the A. C. T.
Q: Today the Government declared the Conciliation and
Arbitration Bill urgent. Do you regard it as being so urgent
and important as to seek a double dissolution if the Opposition
twice rejects it in the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. This would be a Bill of substance.
Obviously if the Senate were to reject this Bill, then that
is one of the Bills whose rejection we would seriously consider
in the context of a double dissolution.
Q: Mr Wh~ itlam, do you agree that airport development funds
should be withheld from Papua New Guinea if Ansett has
24 per cent of the national airline?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Jones and Mr Morrison are going up to
Port Moresby on Friday of next week to discuss this matter
with Mr Somare. I've nothing further to say on it.
Q: Supplementary to the question on protection policy,
the Department of Secondary Industry is encouraging the
production of industry panels
PRIME MINISTER: Wait till Sir John Crawford has made his
report. Q: You wouldn't favour this ( inaudible).
PRIME MINISTER: No. That's why I've sought advice from
Sir John Crawford on this and other matters. I don't propose
to pre-empt the advice.
Q: Prime Minister, may I seek clarification of an answer
you gave me earlier? I asked you if you believed that
Australia should dictate terms to Papua New Guinea on the
composition of its airline...
PRIME MINISTER: I've got bothing more to say on that.
As I've said...
Q: You don't want to even explain what you said earlier Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I would have thought it was quite clear.
It was to everyone else.
Q: You've said that controls will remain on arms sales
from Australia. What guidelines has the new Government laid
down on arms sales and what restrictions, and could you give
us examples, say, when you sell arms to Brazil, the Philippines,
Taiwan, India, Pakistan...
PRIME MINISTER: The guidelines and the regulations themselves
are unchanged from since last year when we took over.
Q: Sir, can you tell us what sorts of things we couldn't
export to the countries you mentioned before which we now
will be able to export? Can you name some of the goods? 
PRIME MINISTER: You will remember all the controversy there
was over the steel and tallow in previous years. Permits were
always given for them to be exported but there had to be the
procedure of seeking the permits, so all that the procedure
involved was more paper work. The net result was the same.
Q: Mr Whitlam, on this occasion, you said earlier that you
would be technically the minister in charge of tariffs.
Does that mean that some other Minister or Ministers will be
in practical terms the Minister, or do you take on the burden
of running the whole of the tariff policy on your shoulders?
PRIME MINISTER: I've told you the Inter-departmental Committee
will take the burden off my shoulders. My Department will chair
that Committee. This will be a collective responsibility.
Any instrumentality has to be responsible to some specific
minister. The Tariff Board at present is the Protection
Commission I guess will be responsible to the Prime Minister
because the Prime Minister and his Department co-ordinate the
activities where several ministers or several departments are
concerned. Q: Sir, have you reached the stage now where you have
divested yourself of the burden of Foreign Affairs?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I find it most exhilarating.
Q: Prime Minister, have you had any response from the
Yugoslav Government to your protest note? Secondly, have you
had any response from the Chinese Government on your protest
note on the nuclear testing?
PRIME MINISTER: The protest to China was oral, so there'd
be no written response. The protest to Yugoslavia was oral
also but it was in terms which were set out by me in writing
and there have been further discussions between our Ambassador
in Belgrade and the Yugoslav Foreign Office on this general
question of dual nationality. Last week it was Wednesday
I think I gave the House the names of some twelve persons
about whom we had sought information from the Yugoslav
authorities ten names I think there were. Eight, as far
as I know information has not yet been given. The other twoit
came out I mentioned one case and there was another case
which came out in the paper the following day. I think there
are still eight cases about which information is still being
sought. I think you were told weren't you after the Cabinet
meeting on Sunday that when the Joint Select Committee on
Foreign Affairs and Defence is established ( I guess it will be
today) I shall be asking it to inquire into the subject of
dual nationality.
Q: Prime Minister, do you expect to have any trouble in
getting the Territorial Sea Bill through the Senate and will
your determination to push ahead with it be affected by
opposition from Labor Premiers, and do you class that legislation
in the same category as the industrial legislation in the context
of a double dissolution?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect that the Senate would pass
the legislation. After all it is the same legislation as the
previous government promised. It was in the Governor-General's 
speech opening the last Parliament. It was in the Governor-
General's speech opening this Parliament. I would imagine
therefore that all except half a dozen senators would, one
way or another, have been committed to that legislation.
Accordingly the question of a double dissolution wouldn't
arise. Q: Sir, a two-part question: first of all, some weeks ago
I asked you about whether the Premiers' Conference would be open
to the Press, and you were going to check up on what the
likely thing was going to be. Can you say now whether it's
going to be open or whether you'll be recommending that it will be
open; and secondly, why is the Press conference going to be cut
off after 25 minutes?
PRIME MINISTER: On the first, it's the Premiers' Conference
itself decides whether it's to be open to the Press. I'm quite
happy for it to be open to the Press. The second one, anybody
who's rising is doing so for the second time, including yourself.
Q: There has been quite a bit of discussion in the last week
or so about the Convention which allegedly governs access to
and use of Cabinet documents and ministerial correspondence
and that sort of thing. Could you explain to us your
interpretation of that Convention, as it operates in Australia
and perhaps explain why the Whitehall Convention doesn't
operate here why it's not good enough for Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: The Whitehall Convention applies to Cabinet
documents and it has been observed in Australia. There isn't
a Whitehall Convention concerning correspondence. The
correspondence which has been published bears upon matters
which are of very great public moment. It's obviously of
concern to the public to realise as this correspondence has
revealed that our predecessors were at loggerheads over these
matters which we are tackling unitedly. There can be no doubt
that the correspondence which has been revealed doesn't tally
with what some other Liberal Ministers have now been saying.
Q: Are you prepared to reveal correspondence between your
Ministers? PRIME MINISTER: The question hasn't arisen.
Q: Could I just have your reaction to the Croatian newspaper
report published in America saying that the executions of
three Australians took place on April 10, the day after
Senator Murphy was informed?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a completely unsubstantiated report.
Nobody in fact will take the responsibility of verifying this
journal which is a notoriously polemical journal on the right
in America. I think it is even, I'm told, being investigated
by the F. B. I. 



PRfIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 89
8 May 1973
STRATEGIC EXPORT CONTROLS
The Government has taken a decision on a
report by Departments on the question of strategic
export controls over commercial trade.
It has been decided that Australia will no
longer maintain on commercial trade with the U. S. S. R.,
Eastern Europe, China, North Korea, North Viet-Nam and
Cuba, restraints different from the restraints on
commercial trade maintained on any other country.
The controls which have been maintained by
Australia have not proved, in recent years, to have
much relevance to our production and it has therefore
been decided to treat trade with all countries on a
similar basis. It is well known that controls by other
western countries have been progressively reduced and
the United States and European countries are selling
highly sophisticated material to the communist countries.
We have notified a number of our closest
friends of this decision and assured them that Australia
will not be a means towards circumventing any controls
which they may maintain over their own production.
This decision has no bearing on the controls
which are-maintained by Australia over the export of
arms and war-like stores and a+ tomic energy material.
The embargo on trade with North Viet-Nam is
being removed and we consider this is appropriate in
view of the establishment of relations with that
country.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Press Statement No.
8 May 1973
APPOINTMENT OF CONSULTANT ECONOMIST
Professor Gruen, Professor of Economics at
the Australian National University, is taking up an
appointment as consultant to the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet. The appointment will be
on a part-time basis.
Professor Gruen will continue in his position
at the University but will be available for advice and
consultation to the Department and to the Prime Minister
on economic assignments.
Professor Gruen has occupied his present
position at the Australian National University since
December 1972. He was formerly Professor of
Agricultural Economics at Monash University.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER v
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Q, C.
FOR THE PROTECTION OF CONSUMERS qy. 3
IN THE POLICY SPEECH WHICH I DELIVERED ON"
BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY AT THE LAST FEDERAL
ELECTIONS, I MADE PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO THE POLICIES
OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT IN RELATION TO PRICES. IN THIS
CONTEXT I REFERRED TO THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSUMER PROTECTION
ACTIVITIES, CONSUMER KNOWLEDGE OF THE PROPERTIES AND
QUALITY OF PRODUCTS CAN SERVE AS A POWERFUL RESTRAINT. ON
UNJUSTIFIED PRICE INCREASES,
OUR APPROACH WILL FOLLOW TWO PRINCIPAL PATHS.
NAMELY: 1, THROUGH THE FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
OF A FRAMEWORK OF STANDARDS DESIGNED TO
PROTECT BOTH THE PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC INTERESTS
OF CONSUMERS; AND
2. THROUGH A FRAMEWORK OF APPROPRIATE LAWS.
MY PURPOSE AT THIS TIME IS TO FURNISH INFORMATION
ON THE PROGRESS THAT HAS BEEN MADE IN REGARD TO THE FIRST OF
THESE BROAD APPROACHES. ,/ 2 
THE GOVERNMENT IS ACTIVELY ASSESSING BOTH THE
NEEDS OF CONSUMERS AND ITS OWN EXISTING CAPABILITIES
IN REGARD TO MEETING THOSE NEEDS, THIS EXAMINATION IS
PROCEEDING, BOTH PROGRESS AND PLANS FOR FUTURE ACTION
WILL BE REPORTED TO THE HOUSE AT APPROPRIATE TIMES,
CONCERNING THE QUESTION OF STANDARDS FOR THE
SAFETY, QUALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF CONSUMER GOODS,
THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE NEED FOR SUCH STANDARDS TO BE
AT THE ONE TIME1 BOTH REALISTIC AND EFFECTIVE, -THE
CONSIDERABLE BODY OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL EXPERTISE
NOW EXISTING IN AUSTRALIA HAS MUCH TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE
ACHIEVEMENT OF ACCEPTABLE BALANCES BETWEEN THE NEEDS AND RIGHTS
OF CONSUMERS ON THE ONE HAND AND THE PROBLEMS OF MANUFACTURERS
ON THE OTHER, THE GOVERNMENT WILL THEREFORE MOVE TO EXPLOIT THE
CAPABILITIES OF ITS OWN SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL RESOURCES,
VARIOUS DIVISIONS OF THE CSIRO AND LABORATORIES OF SEVERAL
DEPARTMENTS ARE REPOSITORIES OF EXPERTISE ON WHICH WE CAN
CAPITALISE IN FORMULATING SOUNDLY BASED AND REALISTIC STANDARDS
FOR CONSUMER GOODS,
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
CO-ORDINATING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF CONSUMER STANDARDS
AND HE WILL SHORTLY OUTLINE THE ACTIVITIES OF AGENCIES, WITHIN
HIS DEPARTMENT, OF RELEVANCE TO CONSUMERS, ,1/ 3 
I PROPOSE SUGGESTING TO STATE PREMIERS
AT THE PREMIERS CONFERENCE TOMORROW THAT THEY ASK
THEIR APPROPRIATE MINISTERS TO MEET WITH THE MINISTER FOR
SCIENCE TO DISCUSS* WAYS OF ARRIVING AT UNIFORM STANDARDS
AND ENSURING THAT THE ACCEPTED STANDARDS ARE OBSERVED,
IHAVE DRAWN ATTENTION OVER MANY YEARS
TO THE POTENTIAL ROLE OF THE DEFENCE STANDARDS LABORATORIES
IN THE DEPARTMENT OF SUPPLY, MANY OF THE ITEMS TESTED BY
THE LABORATORIES WERE RAW MATERIALS AND OTHER PRODUCTS NOT
GENERALLY OF CONSUMER INTEREST, ON OTHER OCCASIONS.
TESTS HAVE BEEN COMMISSIONED BY PRIVATE ORGANISATIONS,
THE RESULTS OF WHICH BECAME THE PROPERTY OF THE ORGANISATIONS
CONCERNED, NEVERTHELESS TESTS HAVE BEEN CONDUCTED
OF PRODUCTS WHICH COULD BE OF INTEREST ALTHOUGH THEY
DID NOT INCLUDE ALL BRAND NAMES REASONABLY AVAILABLE
NOR DID THEY GENERALLY RELATE TO ALL PROPERTIES OF THE GOODS,
THE DEFENCE STANDARDS LABORATORY HAS, FOR EXAMPLE,
TESTED KITCHEN KNIVES, BICYCLE COMPONENTS, HACKSAW BLADES,
HERBICIDES, SHOELACES, TOOTHBRUSHES, PENCILS, DETERGENTS AND
CLEANING COMPONENTS, SUNGLASS LENSES AND FLOOR TILES,
OTHER LABORATORIES IN THE COMMONWEALTH HAVE CONDUCTED TESTS
PARTICULARLY IN RELATION TO PROCUREMENT OF STORES FOR THE
COMMONWEALTH SERVICE, THE COMMONWEALTH STORES SUPPLY AND
TENDER BOARD HAS TESTED A WIDE RANGE OF OFFICE EQUIPMENT AND
SUCH'-OTHER MATTERS AS ELECTRIC LAMPS, CLOCKS AND TOWELLING,
MANY OF THESE TESTS WERE CONDUCTED FOR THE BOARD BY THE PMG,
WHICH HAS, IN ITS OWN RIGHT AS A MAJOR PROCUREMENT DEPARTMENT, i S 4 
CONDUCTED OTHER TESTS SUCH AS ASSESSMENTS OF THE VALUE
OF RETREADED TYRES, THE LABORATORIES OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF WORKS TO GIVE A FINAL EXAMPLE, HAVE TESTED ANTI-CORROSIVE
COATINGS AND FLOOR TILES.
UNFORTUNATELY, THE TESTS CONDUCTED HAVE NOT BEEN
IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONSUMER PRODUCT TESTING PRACTICE.
MANY HAVE BEEN DIRECTED SIMPLY TO DETERMINE COMPLIANCE
WITH CONTRACTUAL SPECIFICATIONS AND OTHERS HAVE NOT BEEN
DESIGNED TO PROVIDE COMPARATIVE RESULTS. THE MOST SEVERE
RESTRICTION FOR CONSUMER PORTECTION PURPOSES ARISES FROM
THE FACT THAT THE PRODUCTS TESTED WERE NOT PURCHASED FROM
SOURCES OF SUPPLY AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC.
TESTS CONDUCTED BY THE LABORATORIES GENERALLY INVOLVE
PRODUCTS SUPPLIED BY THE MANUFACTURER AND AS IS WELL KNOWN,
CONSUMER ORGANISATIONS WOULD NOT CONSIDER SUCH TESTS AS
DEFINITIVE. THE LABORATORIES AND AGENCIES IN THE COMMONWEALTH
WILL PROCEED WITH A REVIEW OF TESTS CONDUCTED IN THE RECENT
PAST THAT MAY BE OF CONSUMER RELEVANCE AND APPROPRIATE
FOR PUBLIC RELEASE.
THE COMMONWEALTH PAINT COMMITTEE, WHICH IS SERVICED
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF SUPPLY, WAS ORIGINALLY ESTABLISHED BY
THE COMMONWEALTH IN THE LATE 1940' s, FOR THE PURPOSE OF
ENSURING THAT THE PAINTS BOUGHT BY THE COMMONWEALTH FOR ALL
PURPOSES, GAVE A SATISFACTORY SERVICE. IN TIME A NUMBER OF
OTHEF, COMMONWEALTH BODIES, INCLUDING HOUSING, AND
D, CA,, A. AND A NUMBER OF DEPARTMENTS AND AUTHORITIES OF 11111,,, 
THE STATE OF VICTORIA, JOINED THE SCHEME IN A COLLABORATIVE WAY.
IN THE EARLY YEARS OF THE SCHEME THE C. P. C. ISSUED
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PAINTS, TESTED MANUFACTURERS' PRODUCTS
OFFERED AS CONFORMING TO THOSE SPECIFICATIONS, AND
CIRCULATED AMONGST ITS MEMBERS LISTS OF THOSE " APPROVED"
PRODUCTS THAT TESTS SHOWED DID CONFORM. EACH PARTICIPANT,
WHEN HE BOUGHT A BATCH OF " APPROVED" PAINT, CHECKED IT
FOR CONFORMITY WITH THE SPECIFICATION, ALL OF THIS TESTING
WORK WAS SHARED BETWEEN THE MEMBERS ACCORDING TO THEIR INTERESTS,
TESTING FACILITIES, AND PAINT USE; ALL RESULTS AND EXPERIENCE
WERE SHARED. IN RECENT YEARS THERE HAS BEEN AN EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE
IN THE SCHEME AS THE CAPABILITIES AND FACILITIES OF THE
MANUFACTURERS HAS INCREASED. NOW THE EMPHASIS IS ON
REQUIRING MANUFACTURERS TO PRODUCE A CERTIFICATE OF TEST,
FROM A LABORATORY CERTIFIED AS COMPETENT BY THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF TESTING AUTHORITIES, DEMONSTRATING
THAT THE PAINT CONFORMS TO SPECIFICATIONS.
THE DEPARTMENT OF SUPPLY RECENTLY WROTE TO AUTHORITIES
IN THOSE STATES THAT ARE NOT AT PRESENT PARTICIPATING IN THE
C. P. C. SCHEME, INFORMING THEM OF THESE DEVELOPMENTS, AND
INVITING THEM TO RECONSIDER, IF THEY WISH, THEIR PARTICIPATION
IN THE REVISED ARRANGEMENTS, a to/ 6 
6.
IN CONSULTATION WITH ALL RELEVANT AUTHORITIES
WE WILL INVESTIGATE THE APPLICABILITY OF THE C. P. C. SCHEME
FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION PURPOSES. THE TESTING PRACTICES
OF THE VARIOUS LABORATORIES AND AGENCIES WILL BE REVIEWED
FROM THE SAME PERSPECTIVE. THEIR WORK WILL MAKE A
CONTRIBUTION IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL CONSUMER
STANDARDS SCHEME, I HAVE ASKED THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE
TO CONTINUE HIS INVESTIGATION OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF
CONSUMER STANDARDS AND THE TESTING OF CONSUMER PRODUCTS,
IN CONJUNCTION WITH RELEVANT STATE AUTHORITIES, THE
RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
BE APPLIED TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONSUMER INFORMATION
WHICH WILL SERVE AS AN IMPORTANT RESTRAINT ON UNJUSTIFIED
PRICE INCREASES,
O O 



tA Af
W1I Ik
NQ DATE 10 May. 1973
AUSTRALIAN APPLICATION TO INTRNATIONAL COURT
OF JUSTICE
Australia has filed an application in the International
Court of Justice at The Hague requesting interim measures to
restrain France from further atmospheric nuclear tests in the
. Pacific. This was confirmed today by the Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr Wbitlam.
The application was lodged with the Registrar of the
Court late yesterday by the Australian Ambassador to the
Netherlands, Dr Thomson, and the Australian agent for the Court
proceedings, Mr Brazil.
Shortly before the documents were filed the Australian
Ambassador to France, Mr Renouf, had delivered to the French
Foreign Ministry a letter from Mr Whitlam to the French Foreign
Minister, Mr Jobert, informing him of Australia's decision to
resort to the Court.
Mr Whitlam also announced that the Chief Justice of the
High Court of Austrrlia, Sir Garfield Barwick, had been appointed a &amp;/ 2 
-2-
as an ad hoc judge for the hearing of the case. This has been
done in consultation with the Government of New Zealand. An
applicant party to proceedings was entitled to nominate a judge
additional to the 15 elected judges of the Court.
Sir Garfield planned to leave Sydney or Saturday,
12 May for The Hague, Mr Whitlam added.
Mr Whitlam said that the talks which concluded last
night in Canberra between French and Australian scientists had
not changed the Australian Government's views regarding the
hazards to health created by the French tests in the Pacific.
The talks, held at the Australian Academy of Science,
ended with the Australian and French teams of scientists agreeing
to report separately to their respective governments. Mr Whitlam
expressed his thanks to Sir Rutherford Robertson and to
Professor Gauvenet, the respective leaders of the scientific
teams, for the scientists' joint study of the radiation hazard
Droblem. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE ON PRICES AND
INCOMES MATTERS AM) ALL OTHER ASPECTS
01? INFLATION
OPENING STATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER
There can be today no more important reason for the
Australian Government and the State Governments to come together
than for the purpose of addressing ourselves jointly to action
against inflation. The ready response of all Premiers to the proposal
for this meeting is a measure of your concern about the prob~ lem
of inflation. That concern is fully shared by the Australian
Government and I am convinced by the Australian people.
It is, I may say, a concern which is not peculiar to
Australia. In all the advanced economics of the world, people
are expressing similar concern. Our own position is no worse
than many and a good deal better than some. But that.. as I
shall have reason to point out, is in itself cold comfort.
As you all know, the initiative for this meeting came
from the Premier of Victoria. Mr. Hlamer wrote to me on 9 April
suggesting that what was necessary to achieve effective action
against inflation was the development and implementation of a
comprehensive national prices and incomes policy. He pointed
to the division of relevant constitutional powers between the
Australian Government and the State Governments and. suggested
that a Premiers' conference should be convened in an effort to
achieve close understanding and co-operation between all of us
in this matter. We moved quickly to welcome thait initiative;
and you have responded promptly to my invitation to meet here
today " tto discuss prices and income matters and all other aspects
of inflation" 
I 2.
Let there be no doubt as to the seriousness with which
the Australian government views inflation. We have been elected
on a platform of social change. We have promised the Australian
people a program of wide-ranging and overdue reforms in the
social structure of this country. To carry out that program
is the primary objective of this government.
But we now find the possibilities for desirable social
change threatened by a potential resurgence of inflationary
pressures. We are fully alert to the distortions inflation
wreaks on the distribution of incomes; its insidious effect in
reducing the real value of savings; its unfair impact upon those
in greatest need; its adverse longer-term consequences for
growth; and, above all, the danger that if no action is taken
inflation will develop into accelerating inflation.
To the extent that inflationary pressures re-emerged it
would reduce our capacity, both in the Budget and more generally,
to bring about the social changes which are our foremost aim.
Because we have a responsibility to pursue our program to carry
out our mandate we must find effective means of tackling
inflation. We are determined that the realisation of our program
will not be thwarted by any lack of resolution in coping with
inflation, I fully recognize that political views around this table
differ. But in this matter all of us have a common interest.
Inflation adds to the problems of us all. Most certainly,
inflation runs counter to all that my Government stands for and
seeks to achieve. Now that the worst manifestations of last year's 
3.
unemployment situation are behind us, we rank inflation as the
number one economic problem. We will do all we can to bring
rising prices under control.
But inflation is an evil which permeates the economy and,
more, the society. It is widely recognised that there is no
simple solution to it-it has to be tackled across a broad front,
and by every means at the command of governments. I hardly need
to add that, in the Australian context, that means that the State
governments have a vital role to play. Mr Iamer's message and the
presence of every Premier acknowledges this fact.
I turn now to the measures which the Australian Government
has already taken, and the further measures which we propose, to
bear down against rising prices:-
SRevaluation: On 23 December within three weeks of taking
office the Australian Government revalued the Australian
dollar. The primary purpose of that measure was not to
curb rising prices but to correct a fundamental disequilibrium
in Australia's balance of payments. But a secondary purpose
was to exert a downward influence on our domestic price level.
In this respect our decision to revalue is having, and for
some time ahead, will continue to have beneficial effects on
prices in wide areas of the economy.
SReaction to Devaluation of the U. S. Dollar: It was with
these same joint considerations in mind that we determined
what reaction should be given to the announcement on
12 February that the United States dollar was to be
devalued. Our decision to sit pat and thereby
appreciate further against the U. S. dollar and any 
other currencies which followed it, wholly or in part
was in line with our decision of 23 December. As a result
of these twin decisions, import prices are now stable they
may even be falling moderately. That in itself is testimony
to the beneficial effects of the decisions in providing a
countervailing influence against rising prices. Similarly,
those firms which had previously undertaken borrowings in
foreign currency should now be enjoying actual or prospective
windfall gains as a result of the recent changes in relative
exchange rates. It is our feeling that the sense of
corporate well-being that must bring should also find some
reflection in the market-place for prices.
Inquiry into Proposed B. H. P. Price Rises: At the request
of the nation's largest industrial enterprise we set up an
inquiry into steel price rises proposed by the company. In
the result rises averaging 3 per cent occurred instead of the
rises of 7 per cent proposed. Steel prices have wide
repercussions throughout the economy. There can be no doubt
that, had steel prices risen by 7 per cent, prices generally
would be rising even faster than they now are.
Joint Parliamentary Committee on Prices: Other things being
equal, importers should now be seeing reductions in the landed
prices of their goods. We are concerned to ensure that such
reductions are passed on. They were intended to accrue, and
should accrue, not to a particular group but to the Australian
people as a whole. We look for appropriate action in that
field from the price-setters involved. And to encourage them
in that action we have referred the question to the Joint
Parliamentary Committee on Prices, as one of its first major
areas of investigation.
We have, similarly, referred to that Committee fr investigation
the question of meat prices the recent 
sharp rise in which has so greatly contributed to
the large rise in the Consumer Price Index recorded
in the March quarter.
Our attention has been drawn more recently to the
marked disparity which now exists between retail
prices of petrol in Sydney and Melbourne. My colleague,
the Minister for Minerals and Energy, has now received
a report on this matter which has been prepared for the
Australian Automobile Association. As he has said
yesterday in the House, this matter will be pursued
with vigour and to the full limit of the Government's
powers.
Liquidity Measures: As I said in my statement announcing
the revaluation of the Australian dollar, the flood
of foreign capital into Australia had resulted, by the
time we took office, in " a build-up of domestic liquidity
to a dangerously excessive level". With the economy
picking up pace there was here a tinder-box ready for
the match. It was, clearly, imperative that action be
taken to dampen any such prospective conflagration.
Simultaneously therefore with revaluation we moved to
check any further build-up of liquidity from this source
by imposing the 25 per cent deposit requirement scheme
on new borrowings abroad. Such borrowings have, to all
intents and purposes, largely ceased, 
Again, by way of follow-up to this the Treasurer
on 1 February last announced measures to broaden
the coverage of restrictions on overseas borrowing
and associated measures. The coverage of the controls
was extended to include not only formal contracts to
borrow but also indirect forms of borrowing and
transactions having a similar effect on capital inflow.
Monetary Policy: The measures I have just referred to
were of course taken within the context of our policies
towards the balance of payments and the inflow of
capital from abroad. But, as I have made clear, they
were also taken having in mind the contribution they
could make towards diminishing a major problem
the state of domestic liquidity. This brings me to
the subject of monetary policy generally.
It is I think agreed on all sides that, whatever other
steps may be necessary to check inflation, all are likely
to prove futile unless fiscal and monetary policies in
the broad are sensibly and responsibly geared to the
productive capacity of the economy. Such policies are
not, in themselves, enough: but we believe and we
are supported by all competent opinion both within
Australia and overseas that they are the essential
basis, the sine qua non, for an effective antiinflationary
strategy. 
On the monetary front, with economic activity
continuing to expand strongly, continuation of
the unduly easy stance of monetary policy would
have been fraught with dangers for the period ahead.
We have, accordingly, seen as appropriate the decision
by the Reserve Bank to make a call of one per cent to
the Statutory Reserve Deposits of the major trading
banks in April.
Similarly, in approaching the difficult decisions
involved in setting terms for the May loan recently
announced decisions in which of course you in your
capacities as members of the Loan Council have so
responsibly participated we have had to set aside
what we would have liked to do in favour of what it
was clearly necessary to do. We have, in short, met
the yields which, since the February loan, had emerged
in the market. To have attempted to maintain a lower
yield structure would have meant continuing large-scale
purchases of bonds by the Reserve Bank with consequent
expansionary effects upon the liquidity of the private
sector. In present and prospective circumstances we
were not prepared to countenance such an outcome.
In these connections I should also say that the Treasury
and the Reserve Bank have been asked to make a detailed
study of the various aspects of the regulation of the
financing activities of non-bank financial
intermediaries. 
STask Force to Review the Programs of the
Previous Government: The Government is, of
course, aware that in approaching questions of
overall economic management it will be necessary
for it to give considerable attention to fiscal
as well as to monetary policy. As a first step
in that regard I announced on 3 April last the
constitution of a special " task force", under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Coombs, to examine the programs
carried over from the previous government.
Its efforts should assist us in seeing what scope
there may be for pruning expenditures. Clearly,
it will be necessary in that or other ways to
" make room", within the totality of the public
and private demands upon the economy, for the
carrying through of our own priority programs.
SPrices Justification Machinery: My colleague the
Treasurer has, only yesterday, introduced into the
Parliament a Prices Justification Bill, I shall not
seek to detail its provisions here. However, companies
will be required to give prior indication of price
rises so that they can be examined, their effects
assessed and their justification determined by the
Tribunal set up for the purpose. The Tribunal may also
investigate cases where circumstances suggest price
reductions should have occurred, but have not, It
will also be able to inquire into and report on price
increases which companies made prior to the measures
coming into force in the hope of beating the gun, 
We shall be appointing to the Tribunal persons of the
standing and quality of those who have constituted the Trade
Practices Tribunal. In that case, of course, the members were
appointed by our predecessors. They have our respect and
confidence. Restrictive Trade Practices Legislation: As an important
aspect of its attitude towards competition policy with
the bearing that has upon the ability of price-setters to
push up prices the Government proposes to introduce
more effective legislation to deal with restrictive trade
practices. The proposed legislation will deal with contracts
in restraint of trade, monopolization, resale price
maintenance, price discrimination, anti-competitive mergers,
exclusive dealing that substantially lessens competition
or leads to a monopoly position and unfair and deceptive
practices affecting consumers. It will deal with these
provisions by directly prohibiting them instead of, as at
present, leaving them to be restrained separately after timeconsuming
enquiries. By this means the legislation will
have an early impact on the economy.
Protection Policy: Another aspect of what I have called
competition policy is to be found, of course, in the
area of protection against competition from overseas. The
Government has confirmed its support for the progressive
review of the tariff by the Tariff Board which is now
in progress. We will ensure that the further references
required to enable the Board to complete its review will go
forward. The Government proposes to establish a Protection Commission
to advise on assistance for both primary and secondary industry.
Some two months ago I asked Sir John Crawford to advise on the
functions, structure, 
membership and procedures of the proposed Commission.
Sir John's report will be available about the middle of the
year and the Government will act promptly when the report
has been received.
Action in the The Minister for the Capital Territory,
who is present with us here today, has approved the
preparation of legislation to set up a Business Leases
Review Board to examine harsh, unconscionable or unfair
rentals of commercial premises which are producing
unnecessary inflationary repercussions in the Territory.
The Minister has also approved the establishment of a
comprehensive AOC. T. Homes Insurance Scheme similar to the
successful low premium War Service Homes Insurance Scheme,
The Minister is examining proposals for a public conveyancing
service, controls over excessive advertising and similar ways
of reducing ultimate costs to the consumer. By way of
buttressing, within the Capital Territory, the actions
possible uinder the amb~ it of the Prices Justification Tribunal,
the Minister has also ap~ proved the re-activation of the Prices
Regulation Ordinance which was introduced by the Chifley
Government but which has lain dormant for some years.
* Consumer Protection: The Australian Government has been
concerned about the need for improved means of protecting
consumers against unfair trading practices. To that end
we are moving to exploit the capacities of our own
scientific and technical experts in thle formulation and
implementation of a framework of standards for consumer
products. 
11.
The Cities: We believe that inefficient cities are one
source of inflationary pressures. Present-day
inefficiencies in our major cities increase the costs
borne by city dwellers in their capacities as home-buyers,
as commuters, as rate-payers and as taxpayers more generally.
In the longer-term, the policies of the Australian
Government, designed as they will be progressively to
improve the efficiency of city living in Australia and the
welfare of our city dwellers, will contribute to
removing the inflationary pressures which these present
inefficiencies help to generate.
Proposed Establishment of Housing Standards Committee:
As a contribution to improving efficiency and reducing
costs in the housing construction industry, the
Australian Government is contemplating a forum
in which housing standards and guidelines based upon
proper technical analysis rather than upon traditional
notions will be worked out. It would involve an expert
technical unit in the Australian Department of Housing
to undertake the necessary research, development and
co-ordination, this work to be undertaken in close
association with all interested parties. We would
establish an " Australian Housing Standards Committee" for
this purpose. 
SConsultations with Management and Trade Unions:
Economic management is largely the responsibility of
the Australian Government. We accept that responsibility,
and our actions have already gone far to reflect that.
However, one group or one Government alone cannot grapple
fully with the problem. To do so requires a wider effort.
In a real sense, that is why we are here today.
I shall come shortly to the ways in which the States
can support our own efforts, But there is also the
private sector. We are planning this year to have
economic consultations, as our predecessors did, with
representatives of important areas of the economy
manufacturing, commerce, the trade unions and so on.
We will be putting it to them-to employers and
unionists alike that we look to them to support by
the exercise of restraint in their price and wage
proposals the policies which this government already has
initiated or has in hand.
Just as we will be seeking the support of the nongovernment
sector to these ends, we would hope that
you, the political leaders in your States, will take
opportunities to do the same.
What the Commonwealth Seeks of the States
I spoke earlier of Mr. Hamer's reference to the division
of relevant constitutional powers between the Australian
government and the State governments0 There is certainly scope
for complementary action by our several governments which will 
13.
bear on particular aspects of the inflationary problem. Five
months ago when we came into office we sought and obtained the
co-operation of the States in immediate measures to relieve the
unemployment situation that was concerning us all. I hope that
we can look to the State Governments for the same willing
co-operation as we address ourselves to the rather different
problems of today.
Specifically, I would now like to suggest the
following areas which appear to be promising in this respect.
Action to Complement the Australian Government's
Prices Justification Legislation. The legislation
introduced yesterday by my colleague the Treasurer
will apply only to companies whose receipts exceeded
million in the preceding financial year. That
limit has been struck to ensure that the scheme is
administratively manageable. The Australian Government's
legislation will bring under scrutiny prices charged by
the larger companies which are the " price leaders" in
respect of many products. But there are large areas
of economic activity which will not be brought under
scrutiny. That is to say, there is ample scope for
complementary action by the State Governments to
support and reinforce the impact of the Australian
Government's initiative,
Land Prices. The Australian and State Governments
need to consider, together, whether something can
be done about soaring land prices. In the longer-
14.
term, new cities will help to take pressure off
living space in and around our existing cities.
But action with a more immediate impact is also
needed. I wrote to all Premiers on 27 December 1972, seeking
co-operation on this important matter. My colleague,
the Minister for Urban and Regional Development, is
actively pursuing it. Your Governments have been
invited to introduce legislation to stabilise land
prices so that land needed later for growth and
development can be acquired at prices free from
speculation. The Australian Government is discussing
with your Governments the establishment of State Land
Commissions, to participate actively in the land
market and to increase the flow of residential land
at reasonable prices.
I know that some States are more advanced, and more
willing to advance, in these directions than are
other States. I know too that the problems vary in
intensity and nature as between States. We hope that
all States will be prepared to make their contribution
to the prime objective of giving Australian families
access to land at fair prices.
Building Costs. There are various possible ways in
which State Governments might act to check the serious
upward spiral in building costs and particularly,
of course, the costs of housing construction. 
As the Treasury said yesterday in its published
Round-up of Economic Statistics, the demands being
made upon the housing sector are now clearly
excessive. As a result, house-building is under
severe strain from lack of men and materials.
Office-building is also going on apace especially
in the central business districts of the big cities
and there is some evidence of a prospective glut in
this sector. Some reduction in activity in officebuilding
would of course release resources and this
could marginally ease the problems in the housing
sector. We recognise, of course, that the scope for
transferring the particular resources concerned is
limited and it would in any case no doubt take some
time before any significant relief could be hoped for.
But the Government believes that the State Governments
particularly those in whose States most of the large
office projects are going forward should at least
examine the possibilities. Is there a glut? Will
there be a glut? What could be gained for housing if
office building were restrained? And what means of
restraint are available? Surely these are matters which
are worthy of some examination by State Governments in
co-operation with us.
As a separate matter, I have been personally disappointed
in the slow and reluctant acceptance by some of the
States of the Australian Model Uniform Building Code
which you yourselves have worked out and I sincerely
hope that those States which have not so far adopted it
will do so. I would propose to invite each Premier to nominate 
a representative or representatives to engage in the
work of the contemplated Australian Housing Standards
Committee. We shall provide more details in direct
ministerial contacts.
Restrictive Trade Practices. I referred earlier to the
Australian Government's proposal to introduce more
effective legislation to deal with restrictive trade
practices. These practices are rife in Australia and
their very purpose is usually to keep prices up. They
serve to aggravate inflationary trends and the need for
effective legislation to control them is pressing.
The Australian Government recognizes that the existing
Restrictive Trade Practices Act is not effective for
this purpose. More effective legislation is being
prepared and it will be introduced into the Australian
Parliament as soon as possible, But there will not be
sufficient constitutional power to permit the legislation
to cover the whole field of restrictive trade practices.
The legislation will depend, in the main, on the
corporations power as that power was construed by the
High Court in the Concrete Pipes case. There are still
many uncertainties as to the scope of this power and
it is plainly limited in a number of respects. For
example, many trade practices, particularly those
relating to services, do not involve corporations.
This is, I believe, an area where a co-operative
effect by the Australian and the State Governments can
and should be made. Some states have already indicated 
17.
a willingness to co-operate by enacting legislation
referring to the Australian Parliament the necessary
power to deal with those trade practices that are at
present beyond its reach. We are grateful for their
indications of willingness to co-operate and propose
to take the matter up with them very soon now that
the nature of our own proposed legislation is almost
settled. I hope th. at other States will f6llow suit
and make it possible for the Australian Parliament
to deal effectively with the whole range of these
undesirable practices. The best method of co-operation
in regard to this matter would be a reference of power
similar to the one that was effected by Tasmania in
1966. A State that was not prepared to refer power
could assist by enacting legislation complementing
that of the Australian Parliament. I would hope that
this course would also be seriously considered.
Consumer Protection. I have already referred to our
own intentions in this field. But if effective action
is to be taken Australia-wide it will need the active
support and co-operation of the States. In that
context, I suggest that the Premiers might ask their
appropriate Ministers to meet with the Australian
Minister of Science to discuss ways of arriving at
uniform standards for consumer products and ensuring
that those standards are observed.
Measures of this kind make a direct contribution to
community welfare; but in the present context we
also see them as assisting competitive market forces
B P 
18.
to reduce the scope for irresponsible pricing.
0 a 0 0 a 0
Finally, a word on incomes. Some take the position
that the be-all and end-all of anti-inflationary policies is
to fulminate against wage rises. That is not our position.
On the contrary, we have moved to correct, in the areas under
our own control, some evident anomalies and injustices. We
have acted to increase social service payments to those who
have been most cruelly harmed by inflation. We make no apology
for acting quickly to honour our election pledges in these
fields. We are happy that in Tuesday's decision the
Arbitration Commission has recognized the particular needs of
low wage earners in giving them a substantial rise from the
unrealistically low levels of the recent past. The Government
does not take any rigid and doctrinaire position on these matters
and our attitude to future wage claims, in National Wage Cases
and elsewhere, will pay full regard to all of the circumstances,
social and economic, which prevail at the time.
Tuesday's award was, of course, a large one, and it
will add substantially to costs. With productivity rising as
the output of the economy picks up, the greater part of industry
should be well-placed at present largely to absorb these
increased costs. I now invite the Premiers, in turn, to put forward
their own proposals and their views on the suggestions I have
made. We will not solve everything in one day. But we can
make progress in identifying areas where the national and State
Governments can act together against a problem which, as I began
by saying, confronts us all. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM
TO THE FIRST COMMIONWEALTH CONFERENCE
OF THE AMALGAMATED METALWORKERS?
UNION MUSICIANS' CLUB, 94 CHALMERS
STREET, SYDNEY, ' 11 MAY 1973
UNIONS AN]) THE GOVERNMENT
This conference is the culmination of an historic process of
change within the metal trades unions. It is alsot I hope, the forerunner
of a similar process of change throughout the whole trade union
movement. The purpose of this change is to produce unions that are
more effective, more efficient and more democratic. What you have
achieved will have a far-reaching impact on the well-being of every
Australian worker and his family. Its importance cannot be overestimated.
The Amalgamated Metalworkerst Union is indeed ahead of its
time. It has put into effect, or is actively pursuing, many of the aims
and reforms embodied in the industrial legislation passed by the House
of Representatives this week. Your union has set the pace, and set an
example, for the rest of Australia. You are not only the biggest union
in Australia as a result of your recent amalgamation: you are among the
most democratic in your internal administration. It is a remarkable fact
that of the 144 delegates to your first Commonwealth conference this
week, 85% have come direct from the work-bench. You have demonstrated
that the amalgamation of unions, and the concentration of industrial
strength in larger organisations, can be achieved without creating an
unwieldy bureaucracy or diminishing the rights of individual members.
The emphasis you have always placed on participatory democracy, on
industrial safety, on the importance of industrial agreements, on trade
union education, is reflected in the legislation introduced in the
national Parliament by my colleague, the Minister for Labour, and passed
this week. The success with which you have tackled these matters augurs
well for the success of our bill. In the face of much-sitfident clamour
from our opponents, you have shown what can be done.
Today I want to announce some further plans of the Government
to improve the rights and conditions of trade unionists and promote
better industrial relations in Australia. But first let me deal with
some of the broad principles underlying our approach to industrial
matters, This year has been on the whole a harmonious one in industrial
relations. There has been no major or prolonged industrial stoppage,
and the general morale within the trade union movement is high.
I do not, of course, want to downgrade your legitimate
grievances or fears. Many of them are shared by the Government, and
I shall have more to say about that later0 But you will all remember
what our opponents were saying before the last election. There were
all sorts of calamity-howlers predicting strife and dissention, union
blackmail9 industrial chaos and the breakdown of law and order if Labor
achieved power0 I hardly need to tell you how baseless and puerile these
statements look now0 Today we have a new understanding and a new trust
between the Government and the unions. We want to ensure that the same
understanding and trust prevail between unions and employersw 
-2-
That indeed is the purpose of our recent conciliation and
arbitration legislation. There can be no trust or understanding in
industry if one side feels itself to be aggrieved or the victim of
discrimination,. There can be no trust or goodwill if union officials
are open to civil prosecution for upholding their members' interests.
There can be no trust or goodwill if the law makes a criminal of the
working man who chooses to withdraw his labour,. There can be no trust
or goodwill if compulsory arbitration takes precedence over direct and
amicable conciliation and discussion between the parties to a dispute.
All these aspects of the old law are being removed. There is no need
for me to rehearse the provisions of our legislation, which must be
famil~ iar to you all. I shall, however, mention our proposals on union
amalgamation, since they are closely relevant to what your own union has
been doing. We give a high priority to efforts to encourage amalIgamations.
Even the Opposition supports amalgamation in principle, though they
capitulated last year to the DLP's opposition to amalgamations when
industrial legislation was before the Parliament. The Opposition had
a chance to demonstrate this week that it was free of the shackles of
the DLP by supporting our amalgamation proposal. They failed to do so,
Yet we all know the benefits that amalgamations can bring. They can
strengthen the negotiating power of unions and equip them for conditions
of modern industrial bargaining between ever-growing corporations and
large Government employers. It is absurd that we should have mor+! than
305 separate trade unions in Australia with half of them having fi. wer
than * 1,000 members and only 14 with a membership of more than 50,000.
In West Germany, with a much larger population, and with one of the
lowest rates of industrial stoppages in Europe, there are only 16
unions. Their Metal Workerst Union has more than 2 million members.
It, is just as important that unions should be strong enough to withstand
the power of big corporations as it is that Governments should be strong
enough to withstand the same pressures
The benefits of amalgamation have been demonstrated by your own
union, We are determined that the opportunity for amalgamation should be
cast as widely as possible so that smaller unions, in particular, will
be able to avail themselves of this reform if they want it. In this way
they can enjoy savings in administrative costs and the elimination of
waste and duplicated work. They can afford higher salaries for their
officials, and draw their officials from a greater poo. of talent that
a small union can offer.. They would be able to afford libraries,, research
staff and independent economic and legal advice which may now be beyond
their resources,* Let me quote what Mr. Lynch, the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition, said about anion amalgamations in Melbourne on 2 March 1972:
" It is fair to say that provided the membership of industrial organisations
does not lose effective control as a result of amalgamations, there are
many advantages which can accrue from amalgamation. For instance, there
are some 300 unions in Australia. Most of them are very small,. It could
facilitate the functioning of the arbitration system and relations
generally between employers and unions if this number of unions decreased'.
I know of situations in which employers have sat across the table with no
fewer than 15 unions in relation to one issue. Government departments
have had this experiencelw" 0 .0 
-3-
It is good to know there is on Opposition member on our side,
who supports what your union has been doing.. From what I heart they are
even talking now of amalgamations among the numerous Opposition parties.
That applies to the DLP and the Country Party. The Country Party and the
Liberal Party have not yet decided whether to amalgamate or not.. They
have only just settled the question of who is the second most important
person in the Opposition,~ The example of the Metal Workorst Union should
commend itself to them. I suppose there is always a risk in the eyes of
the DLP that an amalgamated Opposition would fall under Communist control.
The other thing I should like to stress about our industrial
legislation is that we have a clear public mandate for it. Our proposals
were fiibmly stated in my policy speech for -the House of Representatives
election. They were publicly determined by the Federal Conference of
the Australian Labor Party in Launceston in 1971. They have been given
wide publicity. Mr. Cameron, the Minister for Labour, has expounded
and explained them fully in speeches throughout Australia, In these
circumstances we cannot and will not tolerate interference with our
proposals from the Senate. In my press conference this week I made it
clear and I state it again that the rejection of these proposals
would have to be studied in the context of the provisions of the
Constitution for a double dissolutioi. On a bill of substance such as
this, we would not brook interference with our publicly-en~ lorsed program
to promote industrial harmony and to remove injustices against the
working people who comprise the majority of our population.
There is another important area in which the national Government
can protect the interests of the working man. That is in the control
of prices and inflation. I spoke earlier of what I know to be your
legitimate grievances and fears and the fear of unjustified price
rises is the foremost of these fears. Yesterday I attended a conference
of the Premiers in Canberrat a conference called on the initiative of
the Victorian Premier, at which I put forward a series of proposals
designed to combat inflation in co-operation with the States. The
Australian Government has already taken a number of measures, including
revaluation of the dollar and the introduction of prices justification
machinery, in a determined program to keep prices down,. But direct
control of prices can, if necessary, only be taken as part of a national
plan in which the State Governments co-operate fully. They alone have
the powers. There is a powerful body of opinion which believes that
inflationary tendencies can be checked only be restraint on incomes, or
at least by means of a combined prices and incomes policy,. That view
was put to yesterdayfs conference by three conservative State Governments.
On the question of incomes I had this to say to Premiers in my opening
statement, and I quote:
" Some take the position that the be-all and end-all of antiinflationary
policies is to fulminate against wage rises. That is not
our position. On the contrary, we have moved to correct, in the areas
under our own control, some evident anomalies and injustices. We have
acted to increase social service payments to those-who have been most
cruelly harmed by inflation. We make no apology for acting quickly to
honour our election pledges in these fields&gt;. 0 
-4-
We are happy that in Tuesday's aecision the Arbitration
Commission has recognised the particular needs of low wage earners in
giving them a substantial rise from the unrealistically low levels of
the recent past. The Government does not take a rigid and doctrinaire
position on the-se matters and our attitude to future wage claims, in
National Wage Cases and elsewhere, will pay full regard to all of the
circumstances, social and economict which prevail at the time."
Let me tell you of some of the measures we contemplate to
encourage a more informed and more efficient trade union movement and to
improve working conditions in industry..
First, accidents. We are determined to reduce the incidence
of industrial accidents and occupational disease. We have announced
new plans for compensation but our prime concern is to prevent
accidents rather than alleviate their effects. The Government will draw
up a new uniform industrial safety code to apply throughout Government
departments and instrumentalities and in all establishments in the A. C. T.
With proper precautions accidents can be prevented. This has been clearly
demonstrated by BHP, where there has been a 93 percent reduction in
accidents in the past 15 years and this in an industry, iron and steel,
which must be ranked among the most dangerous.
Second, supervision. We are anxious that safety conditions
and all the provisions of industrial awards should be more effectively
supervised. We propose * to appoint another 100 arbitration inspectors
to police awards and safety standards,. One-third of them will be tradeunionists
with a working knowledge of their industries.
Third, trade union education. A well-educated and efficient
trade union leadership is crucial to good industrial relations. Your
union has taken the lead in this field by setting up its own training
schools. Unions should have have to dissipate their resources in this
way,. Such training should be a Government responsibility like all other
forms of education. My Government will finance a national training
college with a centre in each capital city to train unionists and offer
overseas study scholarships to those with special talents.
Fourth, apprenticeship. The Government is concerned at the
failure of some employers to engage sufficient apprentices to meet their
needs. This was possible because, under old immigration laws, employers
were content to bring in tradesmen from overseas while neglecting the
training of our own workmen. The Department of Labour is studying the
possibility of introducing one year's " block training" of apprentices,
instead of obliging them to spread their technical education
intermittently over four years. The year of " block training" wouldt if
implemented, be followed by three years' apprenticeship on the job,
making a total of four years altogether,.
We believe these measures will contribute further to the wellbeing
of workers and to enlightened and harmonious industrial relations.
No Government has a greater interest than mine in preserving and strengthening
the foundations of industrial peace in this country. No union
has a greater interest than yours in ensuring the success of these
endeavours. I am confident that Government and unions can work
together as they have in the past for a more just and prosperous
society. 



', AUSTRAI&amp; 1AL. Press Statement No. -89'
14 May, 1973
ACCOMMODATION FOR SPECIAL MIGRANT CLASSES IN SCHOOLS
The Australian Government will provide funds under
the Child Migrant Education Program to help State and
independent schools provide emergency accommodation where
this is necessary to allow adequate special migrant instruction
to take place. This reverses a decision of the previous Government
to exclude the provision of accommodation from the Commonwealth
program. Cabinet today approved a submission from the Minister
for Education, Mr Beasley, and the Minister for Immigration,
Mr Grassby. These funds will be additional to those already being
provided to pay the salaries of the necessary additional
teachers and to purchase special language teaching equipment
for this program.
A recent survey in schools of high migrant density in
Melbourne revealed serious inadequacies in the conditions under
which some migrant children are receiving special English
instruction and which are precluding a substantial proportion
from receiving any special instruction at: all. Only 20 per cent
of migrant children who needed special language instruction
were getting it. Lack of suitable accommodation was identified
as a major deficiency.
The additional funds for accommodation purposes will be
provided over the two year period 1973/ 74 and 1974/ 75. The
Government will then review the position.
Consultations will be arranged without delay with State
and independent school authorities to define their needs in detail. 



PACIFIC BASIN ECONOMIC COUN~ hCILKEY-
NOTE ADDRESS BY THE PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, HON. E. G.
WHITLAM CHEVRON HOTEL, SYDNEY
14 M4AY, 1973
Since taking office just over five months ago the new
Australian Government has acted over a wide range of matters firmly
directed -towards the new realities, new prospects and new hopes for
this vast Pacific region.
My first visit overseas, as Prime Minister was to New
Zealand, in January. In February I visited Papua New Guinea and
Indonesia. Last month I led the Australian delegation to the South
Pacific Forum in Apia, Western Samoa. On my way to London after the
Forum I had a very long and, as you would expect, stimulating discussion
with the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Trudeau, I9 shall be in North
America again in August for the Commonwealth Heads of Government
meeting and in Japan for the Annual Ministerial' meeting in October.
We moved immediately to normalise relations with the most populous
Pacific power the People's Republic of China. We have been acting
in very close co-operation with our South Pacific partners, particularly
New Zealand, in opposition to French nuclear testing in the Pacific.
President Nixon said last year that 1973 would be the year
of Europe. For us, however, it is very much the year of the Pacific.
This is inevitably and'naturally so. It is the reflection not only
of geographical realities but of the political, diplomatic and economic
realities in the region.
Much has been said and wvritten about the Government's style
and approach. ' It is true that, in many matters, we hive moved with
a speed which was not, one might say, altogether characteristic of
Governments in Australia over the last few years. Nothing we have
done, however, in these matters was not absolutely and precisely
predictable by anybody who had taken the trouble to look at the
considered and consistent policies of the Party which now forms the
Australian Government. Interestingly enough, the very decision which
is held in some quarters to represent the sharpest departure the
recognition of the People's Republic is the very one on which failure
to move rapidly would have put us most obviously out of step with the
other nations represented in the Pacific Basin Economic Council. All
of ust with the exception of the United States, now recognise China
on very much the same terms; and the United States is moving as
rapidly towards normalisation as the extraordinary complexity of power
relations alow. I wish that Australia could have shown the leadership
and foresight of Canada and thereby been entitled to the lasting
gratitude of nations, not least the United States herself, in helping
to restore reason and reality to the Westts relations with China0 In
the event we did nothing at all radical; we merely ratified reality.
The essence of that realiity in our region is that the
conflict of ideologies must now give way to the rational development,
use and conservation-of the region's human and physical resources.
The intractable nature of the war in Indochina sprang partly from the
fact that as far as the foreign belligerents were concerned it had no
identifiable goals in terms of the possession of resources, or the 
-2-
expansion of trade, or the protection of lines of communication.
It was just precisely that consciousness of unselfishness misplaced
an4 misjudged as we now see that idealism to have been which drew
the United States deeper and deeper into a conflict from which she
could draw no material advantage. We need in this region an ideological
holiday as far as our trade and diplomatic relations are concerned. This
does not mean that we are ideologically indifferent or that there are
no differences. The nations represented on this Council are not only
all democracies but form one of the world's few significant democratic
groupings. Democracy is no longer automatically taken as the only
acceptable form of government. If, however, it is no longer appropriate
to be crusaders it is absurd to believe the democracies are under seige0
In all the time that we have been agonising over the political
future of Indochina; in all the time that we have been pre-. occupied with
the mistaken idea that Indochina was the appropriate ideological
battleground between East and West, between China and the United States;
in all the time that we have been wasting human and natural resources in
pursuit of an ideological pre-occupation, we have ignored the -real
nature of the growing challenge to civilisation. It is a challenge
which knows no ideological bias. The basic question now facing mankind
is not whether communism or democracy will prevail but whether
civilisation as now constituted can long endure the pressure and demands
of population upon resources. We have created for ourselves in less
than a century a civilisation of unparalleled complexi ty, unparalleled
splendour yet unparalleled wastefulness. We make in a . year greater
demands upon this earthi's resources than any entire generation ever
did before. We are the first civilisation in human history whose day
to dlay existence depends on the consumption of resources which can
never be replaced. In war, in any given day in Indochina we would
consume more of the world's irreplaceable material than all the battles
from Rameses to Napoleon combined. In peace, in day to day livin. S the
-handful of nations represented on this Council would use more fuel
and energy in a year than the whole of Europe required to carry through
the industrial revolution in the century after Napoleon.
It is true that countries like ours which have all experienced
and contributed to the growing wonders of modern technology tend to
be supremely optimistic; technology always finds the answer we hope.
Yet we are sporting with fate if we allow sheer optimism to overcome
reason in the face of one most palpable fact and that is, the world's
resources of fuel and energy are finite and irreplaceable. A
civilisation, and the nations composing that civillisation, which will
not face that simple fact and combine to plan modifications i~ n its
life-style to allow for this fact will not long endure.
Nations have traditionally met their need for resources by
national expansion, usually by war. In the case of the United States,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand, we expanded by dispossessing the
indigenous peoples. These methods are no longer available, even if
they were remotely acceptable. 
-3-
Our great danger now is that in the competition for access
to the worldts resources we could stumble into the supreme folly of
war for the possession of resources. I say " the supreme folly" because
the plain fact is that any war for resources would use more resources
in the prosecution of that war than could ever have conceiLvably been
obtained by the victorious power in such a war. I want to emphasise
this point because our pre-occupation with ideological conflicts
particularly in South East Asia, and our determination to avoi~ d
nuclear war have tended to obscure the equal folly and equal dangers
to the survival of civilisation posed by traditional wars over resourcest
even if they were waged by so-called conventional means. I might
illustrate this point by reference to Japan and I had the honour * to
make this observation to the Crown Prince of Japan when he was with
us in Canberra last week. The really important and enduring thing
about the " economic miracle" of modern Japan is the hope it contains
for'-the peace of the region and the world. Japan, unique in so many
ways in world history, unique in so many things in world civilisation,
is unique in nothing so great and momentous as this: That she intends
to be the worldts first great economic power to base her claim to
fair and adequate * access to the raw materials and oierseas markets her
industry requires without military threats or force. This is the
" 1new course". o I believe that Japan, her people and her leaders, will
hold to the " new course".* I have stated that belief not only here,
not only in Tokyo but indeed in Peking.
We take reassurance from the fact that Japan has renounced
nuclear weapons. The " new course" ls however, I believe rests not only
upon Japan's recognition of the supreme and final folly of a nuclear
war; it is not just based on her own terrible and unique o rdeal; nor
does the renunciation of war only rest upon a recognition that Japan
is physically and economically so utterly vulnerable to nuclear war.*
Even if it could be limited to non-nuclear weapons, a so-called conventional.
war for the control. of resources would be the ultimate act of
human folly and unreason. Great industrial societies, of which Japan
is already the third, are facing crises in the availability of traditional
fuels and many forms of raw material; yet a war over resources,
particularly fuels, involving any of the great powers would itself
entirely consume the very resources being fought over. These
considerations reinforce the need for a " new course" not just by Japan
but by all the powers.
The great relevance of these matters to the nations represented
in this Council is that we are all great users of resources and great
producers of resourcest living in a region of tremendous inequalities
in both the use and possession of resources.
We depend very much on each other as developed countries and
the developing countries in our region depend very much upon us. This
Council is necessarily and properly mainly concerned with commercial
and investment problems, and opportunities between the member countries
and other countries in the region. At any time since the formation of
this Council in 1967 the emphasis in its deliberations would properly
have been on. the expansion of trade between our-member nations. This
is still your principal concern as businessmen and investors. But may 
-4-
I suggest that for the remainder of this centure no international
forum, whether at the governmental, official, entrepeneurial or
scientific level, can ignore this basic problem of world resources.
It is particularly appropriate that I raise this matter with you.
Some of you come from tlhse two great nations of the United States and
Japan to provide us with our most important markets and we are, of
course, one of the worldts great possessors of so many of the resources
for which demand threatens to outpace supply. Increasingly, the
relations between Australia and Japan, Australia and the United States,
and the relations between Canada and the United States will turn on
the question of the use and share of resources. My own Government has
already made a number of decisions about the future use and ownership
and development of Australian mineral and energy resources. These
primarily are decisions related to national considerations to
Australian aspirations about her own future and her own rights in the
use of her own resources. We do, however, recognise our wider
responsibilities to our region and to civilisation. As the fortunate
possessor of very great resources we want to play our part in
contributing to the prosperity of the region and of the civilisation.
It can't be done if the nations indulge in a catch-as-catch-can race
for resources; it can't be done if corporations conduct their business
operations with an eye only to the balance sheet; it can't be done if
governments are not prepared to co-operate with each other and with
business to develop rational and internationally responsible policies
on the future use of resources. We have to make a start now on
developing such policies for if we do not it's quite plain that the
future of the technological civilisation we here represent, for all
its splendours, for all its miraculous achievements, is likely to be
nasty, brutish and short. 0 0
fte 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 15 MAY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: ( Answer to a commnent). There is no
Government which has made so many announcements in the
Parliament. Not only what it was doing in the Parliament but
what it was doing in collaboration with the States or with
other countries. As you know we table promptly the minutes
of all Commonwealth/ State conferences and so on. The last such
one was with the Premiers last Thursday, and I thought I would
bring together what's happened since then.
The following day the Secretary to the Australian Treasury
met with the Under-Treasurers from each of the States and they
recommended as follows: there should be a main committee of
Commonwealth/ State Treasury officials at Secretary/ Under-Secretary
level. Secondly there should be four Commonwealth/ State working
groups. one on prices justification which the Australian Treasury
would convene, another on restrictive trade practices which the
Australian Attorney-General's Department would convene, a third
on land prices which the Departments of Urban and Regional
Development and Housing would convene, and the fourth on building
costs which the same Departments would convene. Then there's a
fifth working group on consumer protection under the control
of the Minister for Science, Mr Morrison, as you heard the
Premiers and me agree on Thursday afternoon. The working groups
are to be convened as soon as possible this week. The main
committee is to meet in Melbourne on Saturday 26 May.
Because the Cabinet met yesterday you've already been given
information of the decisions that were made then.
Are there any questions?
Q: Sir, on this question of Cabinet decisions, you explained
to the House this morning that you found it difficult to follow
the line that you'd put while in Opposition about Cabinet
decisions Government decisions being made to the House before
they were made public. I was wondering, in view of what's
happened over the last few days, could you explain to us why,
if the Cabinet sits on Sunday you are unable to announce to the
House any decisions that Cabinet has made before you hold this
Press Conference? If the Cabinet sits on Tuesday morning and
the House sits at 2 o'clock on Tuesday you are unable to announce
to the House any Cabinet decisions before you hold this Press
Conference on Friday. Would it not be easier for both the Houses
of Parliament and certainly for us if the basis of these decisions
were announced perhaps after Question Time two hours before you
hold this Press Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: PTRIhMeErMIeN'IsT ERb: e en one Cabinet meeting on Sunday. 
The decisions were given to the Press that afternoon.
There's been some on Monday, the latest yesterday, and the
decisions were given to the Press that afternoon. I suppose
it would be possible to announce the decisions of Cabinet on
a Tuesday morning after Question Time on Tuesday afternoon.
This would have to be done in the form of ministerial
statements I suppose. But nevertheless there is no regular
procedure for that to be done. I suppose one could always
promote a question on the subject and give the information
that way. But I thought there'd been no demur by any of the
Press or any of the public to our announcing Cabinet decisions
on the day they were made. Also announcing Caucus decisions
on the day they are made. That was always what we did in
Opposition. I would expect that you would expect and that
everyone in Australia would expect we would do the same now
that we are in Government.
Q: Prime Minister, following a statement made by Mr Snedden
today, that he is quite happy to have a double dissolution
over the issue of amendments to the Arbitration Act, and similar
statements made by the D. L. P. and the Country Party can you say
today whether you're quite happy to have a double dissolution
on those amendments and if such an event will occur?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what the Senate's conduct will
be in regard to any of the Government's Bills. I doubt if
many of the Senators have made up their minds yet either.
The fact is that there will have to be an election for half
the Senate at some time between the first Saturday next July
and the last Saturday in June next year. The whole question
is whether, if the Senate makes the Government's business
unworkable, there should be an election for the whole of the
Senate and for the House of Representatives some time in that
period. It would be many months before there can be such an
election for the two Houses. As you know, there has to be
the rejection by the Senate of a Bill from the House of
Representatives or the undue delay of the Bill or the unacceptable
amendment of the Bill. Then, after a lapse of three months,
the same fate must befall the same Bill again. Quite obviously
this would take some months. If the Senate takes the same
attitude towards two of the Bills which have gone through the
House of Representatives the Electoral Bill and the Arbitration
Bill then that would be the first rejection of Bills of
substance, and then those Bills, if they're put up again in
three months time and rejected again, there would be the basis
for a double dissolution, then, as you know if, after an
election, there is a majority for the Government in the House
of Representatives but not for the Senate there can be a joint
sitting of the two Houses and they debate and decide the Bills
which were the cause of the double dissolution. Now there are
other Bills, of course, of substance such as the Sea and
Submerged Lands Bill or the Pipeline Authority Bill or the
Prices Justification Bill. I don't know what the attitude of
the Opposition Parties will be to such Bills as that.
Q: Prime Minister, do you consider that the Government Party
acted correctly in the Senate last Thursday in calling off for
pairs in the Thursday evening debate? 
PRIME MINISTER: This matter has been raised at Question Time
in both Houses. I will say nothing about it now.
Q: Why not?
PRIME MINISTER: Because one of the protagonists is out of
the country.
Q: Prime Minister, you've received a reply from the Government
of Yugoslavia. Would you say if you are satisfied with that
reply and if not why not?
PRIME MINISTER: I can say this: the Yugoslavian Ambassador
handed over a note last Saturday in reply to the Australian
note which was passed to the Yugoslavian Government on the 14th
of last month. The Yugoslavian note doesn't provide all the
information we were seeking. It reiterated however a willingness
to provide details of the trials of the three Australians
executed following their participation in an illegal incursion
into Bosnia as well as further information about this incursion.
Our Ambassador in Belgrade is pursuing this matter with the
Yugoslavian authorities. He is also discussing the cases of
other Australians about whom we have had representations or
reports that they have been detained. Although the Yugoslavian
Government insists that under the terms of The Hague Convention
it is not obliged to give Australian Government access to dual
nationals arrested and detained in Yugoslavia. The Australian
Government believed that we had a right to this access on
humanitarian grounds. I think I mentioned to you a week ago
that I am referring to the Joint Select Committee on Foreign
Affairs and Defence this question of dual nationality which
affects scores of thousands of migrants, not only from
Yugoslavia, but from many other countries, I suppose most of the
countries which have the Roman Law the Napoleonic Code.
Q: Sir, could you tell us whether you oppose or favour the
construction of the proposed tower on Black Mountain and whether
the Government is likely to make a decision on it soon?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the Government will decide this next
week, at last, I think.
Q: Sir, the Treasury said in its paper on the economy last
July that demand pressures of any sort must be removed before
anti-inflationary measures can be successful. The Treasury
now says there's a state of clearly excessive demand in the
housing sector. Do you expect that the Commonwealth/ State
talks can achieve much in reducing housing costs while the
Federal Government allows a state of excessive demand to exist?
PRIME MINISTER: The Australian Government has no legislation
no statutory authority at this stage to quell the excessive
flow of funds into the housing sector. I think in the last year
the amount of money made available to purchase or build houses
has been 80 per cent greater than the amount available in the
previous year. I don't doubt that the Australian Parliament
can pass laws concerning financial corporations other than banks.
It hasn't done so up till now. The great increase in funds
has not come from banks over which the Australian Government
already has statutory authority. The State Governments could 
introduce in their Parliaments legislation to regulate the
flow of funds from financial institutions other than banks.
The Australian Parliament has already covered the banking
field. Until it covers other fields, the States could certainly
cover them. The answer is I think that any of the Parliaments
in Australia could pass laws regulating the flow of funds
into housing which has been responsible for the excessive
pressure in housing in the last three or so quarters.
Q: Prime Minister, you mentioned that the Yugoslav Government
hadn't given you all the information that you'd asked for in
your note. I wonder if you could tell us what information they
failed to supply?
PRIME MINISTER: I listed before Easter twelve names about
whom we were seeking information. On the same day it transpired that
one of them had been found and a couple of days later that
another one had been found. We have no further information
about the other ten, and that's the information which is being
sought. There is a question on notice in the House of
Representatives in fact about one of the three who were executed
and about whom information was given by the Yugoslavian Government
newsagency in the middle of last month, but we have no further
information about that man yet.
Q: Prime Minister, Dr Cairns had talks today in Peking with
the so-called Prime Minister Prince Sihanouk's Government in
exile. Can you say if those were official talks and if they
had your blessing, and what was the nature of them and can you
say what is the official status of Prince Sihanouk with the
Australian Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Prince Sihanouk has no official status with
the Australian Government. He does usually reside in Peking
and it is quite often that visitors to Peking encounter His
Royal Highness.
Q: Prime Minister, Mr Hawke has announced today that the
A. C. T. U. Executive has decided to go ahead with its total ban
on French shipping, communications and manufactured goods from
midnight tomorrow. He has announced the ban will stay in force
until the French testing program is abandoned. He has also
announced that the A. C. T. U. Executive will call on the Federal
Government for maximum diplomatic and economic sanctions.
Can you tell us firstly do you think this ban will achieve
anything or will it hamper our Court case and secondly what is
your attitude from a call from the A. C. T. U. for maximum
diplomatic and economic sanctions?
PRIME MINISTER: The maximum diplomatic action has been in
train for some months. If a ban on communications extends to
mail and postal and telegraphic services it will harm Australia's
case before the International Court of Justice. You've just
mentioned the word ' communications' I trust that postal and
telegraphic communications are not covered by any such ban.
Perhaps I should read you the telegram that I sent to all
members of the A. C. T. U. Executive yesterday. It explains the
overall position: 
" Australia has claimed in the proceedings which have
been brought against France in the International Court of
Justice that the conducting by France of atmospheric nuclear
tests in the Pacific is contrary to international law.
Especially as a country that has invoked international law
against France, Australia must at all times in her relations
with France act in accordance with international law.
" This does not mean that there is no scope at all
for union action against French nuclear tests. But when both
Australia and France are parties to particular international agreements
we must avoid placing France in a position to bring
proceedings before an international tribunal against Australia
alleging breach of an obligation that Australia has accepted
in relation to France. We must also avoid the possibility
that France, in the current proceedings in the could
allege that we are acting in contravention of international
law in other respects and are therefore not appearing before
the Court with clean hands.
" I am especially concerned about the following
conventions: 1. Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations
2. Vienna Convention on Consular Relations
3. Universal Postal Convention 1964.
" Both Australia and France are parties to and are
bound by these conventions.
" We must under the Vienna Conventions avoid doing
anything which would prevent or hinder the proper normal
functioning of the French Embassy or the French Consulates in
the States. This would include the protection of personnel and
property as well as the facilitation of official communications.
" The Universal Postal Convention imposes on Australia
an obligation to forward mails passed to it by the French
postal authorities. " As I have said, these are the international conventions
that concern us most. I urge you most strongly to assist in
ensuring that no action is taken which would involve Australia
being in breach of her obligations under international law.
( Signed) E. G. WHITLAM
Q: Sir, has the Vatican refused to accept the nominated
Australian Ambassador and what reason does the Vatican give
and what will you do now as Prime Minister about this?
PRIME MINISTER: You would not expect me to make any comments
on such matters even if they're true.
Q: Prime Minister, has Cabinet considered the Wheat
Stabilisation Bill and if it has are you in favour ( inaudible)? 
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, we've considered it and we have a
recommendation on this matter for the Party tomorrow.
Q: Sir, do you believe that the Labor Premiers of
Western Australia, South Australia and Tasmania are in breach
of either Labor policy or the spirit of Labor policy in joining
their Liberal colleagues in appealing to the Privy Council
against your new Territorial and Sea Bill Seas and Submerged
Lands Bill?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Both.
Q: You believe they are in breach of both?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q: Do you intend to raise this in the Councils of the A. L. P.
such as the Federal Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q: Have you pointed it out to them, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: They know it. They were at the Launceston
Conference which resolved that the Commonwealth should legislate
for regulation and exploitation of the Continental Shelf and
offshore resources. An amendment was moved that the Commonwealth
and the States should legislate. . The words and the States the
amendment to that effect was defeated so there's no question what
the Party has said about this matter. As you know the Seas and
Submerged Lands Bill and the Seas and Submerged Lands Royalty
on Minerals Bill which Mr Connor introduced last week incorporate
the Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill which Mr Swartz
introduced on behalf of Mr McMahon when he was Foreign Minister
under Mr Gorton in April 1970 and the companion Minerals Bill
which was promised at the same time. You'll also remember
that in the speech the Governor-General made opening the last
Parliament reference was made to both these Bills. The
Governor-General in opening this Parliament repeated the same
words so this is legislation which has been before the Parliament,
which has been supported by the Liberal/ Country Party Government
over three years ago and now by my Government. It is a subject
matter which was considered less than two years ago by the
Federal Conference of the Australian Labor Party. There is no
question as to the attitude of the Labor Party on this matter.
Whatever the attitude of the Labor Premiers may be the fact is
that the Country Party Premier of Queensland and the Liberal
Premier of New South Wales would challenge the legislation anyhow.
Q: Sir, following from that, what is your reaction to the
Premiers' decision to try to stop your moves to abolish the
States' appeals to the Privy Council and your reaction to the
Queensland Premier's so-called secession statement, as the time
could be fast approaching when the links between the
Commonwealth and the States would have to be reviewed? 
PRIME MINISTER: I always knew there were terrific
similiarities between Mr Bjelke-Petersen and Mr Ian Smith.
I think Mr Smith would represent about one-twentieth of the
population of his State. Mr Bjelke-Petersen at least represents
one-fifth of the population of his. This idea of secession,
I must confess, staggered me. I hadn't heard of the idea since
the early 1930' s. It was suggested in Western Australia in the
1930' s the early 1930' s and Mr Bjelke-Petersen with his
fine sense of history is reviving the idea. I've no doubt what
the people of Queensland would say if they had a referendum on
the question because in a referendum every vote would be of
equal value and I've no doubt that the great majority of the
people of Queensland want to remain part of Australia.
You asked me about the Privy Council: the whole situation
is of course that Australia is one of the very, very few
countries in the world which allows legal disputes between its
citizens to be determined in the courts of another country.
The Privy Council sits in England. It's composed of judges
who are appointed by the British Government. Its judgments take
the form of advice to the Queen of England not the Queen of
Australia. The Australian States are still British colonies in
this respect. Appeals can go from their Supreme Courts either
directly or via the High Court to the Privy Council and this
means that you can have three forms of appeal. You can appeal
from a single judge of the Supreme Court judge and jury
to the Full Court or the Court of Appeal of the State. You can
then appeal to the High Court. You can then appeal to the
Privy Council. This is the most ample, dilatory, extravagant
form of appeal in the world. The Australian Labor Party has
said for decades that appeals to the Privy Council should be
abolished. Now what we are doing is under the Statute of
Westminster passing a Bill in this Parliament requesting and
consenting to a Bill in the British Parliament abolishing
those appeals. It's the British Parliament which provides
this method of appeal and the Australian Parliament is being
asked to request and consent to the British Parliament giving
up this form of appeal. This is something which the Australian
National Government is entitled to bring up in the Australian
National Parliament and to forward to the British Government
so that it can bring in companion legislation in the British
Parliament.
Q: Sir, what action do you propose to take if the unions do
go ahead with the ban on French mail?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't assume that the relevant unions will
harm our country's interest.
Q: Prime Minister, regarding this Commonwealth/ State
Committee all the Liberal Premiers accepted the idea of
the Committee on the basis that one of the facets of the
economy we have would be wages and income, and I notice that
the five sub-committees don't mention either wages or income.
Are we to take that the main Committee will be looking at this? 
PRIME MINISTER: The four Sub-committees and the Consumer
Protection Committee that's the five Committees all told
are, you'll notice, dealing with the five matters where I
suggested State action could be taken. These were the
suggestions I made. They were accepted by the Premiers on
Thursday and the following day the Australian Treasury and
State Under-Secretaries all agreed to set up committees on
those subjects, so that's why there's no specific reference
to prices or incomes. As I said at the Conference, we are
anxious to do what is possible and to do it promptly and all
these matters are things which it is possible for the Governments
of Australia with their different political complexions to agree
to undertake and I'm very pleased that they acted as promptly as
they could on it. The biggest increase in prices is in the price
of land and this is something akn~ at which the Australian
Parliament can do nothing except in-the Federal territories.
It is something about which all the States can act without
any limitation whatever. Section 92 doesn't impede State
legislation in this respect because you can't take a block of
land across a State border. Now all the States can do something
about the price of land. The Commonwealth can do nothing.
We are in fact inviting the States to co-operate with us in
acquiring tracts of rural land which are due for conversion
to residential land to acquire them and to develop them.
We've already got the agreement of the New South Wales and
Victorian Governments to do this in the designated area around
Albury-Wodonga. Western Australia agreed to do this last Friday.
Mr Tonkin and Mr Uren announced it then. The other States have
not yet agreed to do it but that is the most that the Australian
Government can do. It can help. It can provide the finance
for the State Governments to acquire land on just terms and to
develop it at cost but there is no way of land price fixation
or freezing which is available to the Australian Government
within the borders of the States. That's the serious thing
that has to be done and it's the thing which now is being
tackled I trust. But prices have gone up for land by a greater
percentage than wages or interest rates or services have gone up.
Q: . Mr Whitlam, will the Premiers get their way and will
wages and prices be considered by the major Committee?
PRIME MINISTER: They may be. But as you know there's very
little chance of getting price control introduced by the
New South Wales Government or getting it through the Victorian
Legislative Council. Income freezes similarly can't be brought
about because as regards wages and salaries as determined by
arbitration or by a Wages Board, if the States try to do that
then they produce a flight to the Federal jurisdiction, and
the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission can
make awards in those matters over which the Australian
Parliament can exercise no jurisdiction and of course the
State Parliaments can't either. So it's being quite unrealistic
to suggest that you can get a freeze on wages and salaries
although there is a form of justification through arbitration
There. It would be very difficult also to persuade the State
Parliaments Federal Parliament couldn't do it to freeze
charges for services or incomes from investments and in the
material areas the principal areas of Sydney and Melbourne
the big manufacturing centres there is no chance of getting
prices legislation through the State Parliaments. 
Q: Mr Whitlam, are you prepared to hold a referendum to get
the price control power through the Commonwealth?
PRIME MINISTER: See how we go with these things first.
You wouldn't hold a referendum by itself. You might hold it in
connection with a Senate election or a double dissolution,
but price control in that sense, even if one got the power in
this Parliament, would take a long time to set up the machinery.
Q: Sir, your northern friend, Mr Bjelke-Petersen, this
afternoon at his own press conference declared that you were
about to withdraw all Australian postage stamps with the Queen's
head PRIME MINISTER: I didn't have the advantage of hearing
Mr Bjelke-Petersen's press conference. I don't really see why
you should publicise his press conference at mine. There is
no proposal to take the Queen's photo off any of the Australian
postage stamps. I notice that our republican predecessors
put a great number of past Prime Ministers and artists and
explorers on the postage stamps. Next century mine may be in
some commemorative issue but no Labor Government has taken
Her Majesty's photographs off the stamps.
Q: Sir, you've spoken today about main with France. You've
made a more or less kind reference to Mr Smith. I had a cable
today from Johannesburg saying that there have been a lot of
complaints in Salisbury that mail from Australia has been
tampered and interfered with. As you know there is an
injunction at present before the High Court, but pending that,
can you say that you would frown upon any interference, no
matter which way that decision goes, with private mail between
two countries whether we recognise them or not?
PRIME MINISTER: The position of Rhodesia is covered by
Security Council resolutions. I can't remember what they say
about mail, but communications of other sorts such as airlines
are certainly covered by Security Council resolutions. The
present Australian Government will loyally support those
resolutions. There are no Security Council or General Assembly
or related bodies which have passed resolutions limiting mail or
telegraphic services with France. There can be no question
of the Australian Government's obligations to protect French
missions and to provide postal facilities for France.
The other matter that you mention about the proceedings in the
High Court that concerns the extent to which the Australian
Post Office must provide services for the so-called Rhodesia
Information Office at Crows Nest near Sydney. You'll understand
I can't comment on that because it's before the Court.
Q: Private mail wouldn't be in that category surely between
Rhodesia and France?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't know that mail was not being
delivered from or to Rhodesia, but I don't know what our
obligations are under this. There can be no question of our
obligations in regard to France. Our obligations in regard
to Rhodesia are set out in the Security Council resolutions.
I forget the details on that point.
Q: Sir, on the question of appeals to the Privy Council 
one of the main complaints of the States is that you didn't
consult them first. Can you say why you didn't do so?
PRIME MINISTER: The proper means of communication with
Britain is through the Australian Government. It's a method
which the Statute of Westminster envisages. Now if one were
to ask the States one would get different answers and surely
we aren't to contemplate the absurd situation where there can
be appeals to the Privy Council from the Supreme Courts of some
States and not from the Supreme Courts of other States. It is
a humiliating and archaic process. It is insulting to our Judges
that we still allow the States to be regarded as British colonies
in respect of their Courts. The State Supreme Courts are well
able to cope with all matters at that level of appeal and the
High Court of Australia is as distinguished a Court as there is
in the English-speaking world.
Q: Prime Minister, my question is about a number of points
you made about inflation here today. Fortunately you had the
Conference open last Thursday and I'm left with the impression
especially after speaking to your officials that wages and
incomes would be studied by the Committees. Do you think
Mr Hamer might have left with the same impression or do you
think that your eloquence persuaded him that it is unrealistic
to pursue this?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q: Secondly, on the question of housing, Sir, you said that
the Australian Government has no legislative authority to
quell excessive flow of funds into the housing sector beyond
the banking powers...?
PRIME MINISTER: I did say legislative and then I saind
statutory. I meant there is no Act of this Parliament dealing
with that at this stage but I think I also said I trust there
was the power to pass such acts but we haven't done them
hitherto. Q: The works and housing program, Sir the housing agreement
is due for negotiation and this is one of the areas where you
intend to lift public spending. Am I right?
PRIME MINISTER: Not necessarily. The inflationary aspects
in housing the pressure on goods and services in housing has
come from the increased funds being made available not under
the Housing Agreement but principally by the Permanent
Building Societies or by some of the Terminating Building
Societies or to a certain extent by the Savings Banks themselves,
but the public funds for building under the Housing Agreement
Housing Commissions and the War Service Homes have not been
responsible for any increased demand on housing. I would guess
that the number of houses being built by Housing Commissions
in the last twelve months is considerably fewer than the number
built in the preceeding twelve months. Now our whole effort
in regard to public housing Housing Commission houses will
be to see that they are made available principally to those who
need them most, and I forget the exact figures there is a
very rapidly increasing waiting list for Housing Commission 
houses in Sydney and Melbourne in particular and, unless
money is made available under much more direct conditions
for those who need the housing most then there is no prospect
of these families getting housing for a long time and there
are tests in some of the States they vary in intensity between
the States but there are tests in some of the States on
economic and accommodation grounds. We want to see that those
who need the accommodation most are first served.
Q: I just wanted to clear that point, Sir, because housing
demands... ( inaudible) between public and private.
It's just an aggregate figure. What you're saying is that
this Government has no intention of doing what the previous
Government did when excessive housing occurred. They would
cut back on their own housing program...?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q: Do you intend to keep that...?
PRIME MINISTER: It is most unlikely that we would reduce
the number of Housing Commission houses or War Service Homes.
Q: and the particular influence you see where pressure
could be brought to bear is the Permanent and Terminating
Building Society people?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. That is where the distortion has occurred
in the last twelve months or a little less than that. I certainly
don't subscribe to the idea that if more money is coming from
private financial institutions for housing that you then cut
back on Housing Commission houses. That just puts the people
that can get housing from no other source further back.
That is not responsibility of Government. 



-AUSlI( ALIA
Press Statement No. 92
16 May, 1973
TASK FORCE ON THE NATIONAL ESTATE
Mr Justice Hope, of the Court of Appeal division
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, has agreed to act as
Chairman of the Government's proposed Task Force on the
National Estate.
I am grateful to Mr Justice Hope for his ready
agreement to chair this important inquiry and to the Premier
and Government of New South Wales for releasing him for this work.
I pay tribute to the Government of New South Wales for
its ready co-operation in projects of this kind. They have
made available the services of five Justices of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales to participate in commissions of
inquiry initiated by the Australian Government.
It is anticipated that the work of the Task Force
will be conducted by a Committee of seven with a permanent
secretariat supplied by the Departments of Urban and Regional
Development and of the Environment and Conservation. The Committee
will advertise for submissions and hold public hearings in the
States. The work of the Committee is expected to take several
months. In Mr Justice Hope we will have a-Chairman of great
capacity and experience, with a sympathetic understanding of
the problems which the Task Force will face.
The Task Force is needed because increasing numbers of
Australians are concerned to preserve for the enjoyment of
future generations the best buildings of our past and the best
features of our natural environment. This concern is shared
by Governments. The Australian Government is committed to the preservation
and enhancement of the National Estate. The concept of the
National Estate embraces such things as historic buildings and
towns, buildings of architectural merit, major parks, nature
reserves, urban parks, scenic reserves, areas along the coastline
and so on. 2/ 
2.
The Task Force will be asked to advise the
Australian Government on any additional measures and policies
which should be applied to preserve and enhance the National
Estate and the role the Australian Government can play in
assisting the implementation of these measures and policies. 



SPEECH BY THE BRINE MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM, AT A VICTORIAN
STATE ELECTION MEETING ST. KILDA
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, 16 MAY 1973
When I asked the people of Australia to elect a Labor
Government on 2 December I said that we would need the help of all
Australians the best Australians in carrying out our mandate.
I still need that help. A vote for Labor a vote for
Clyde Holding on Saturday is one way of giving that help, that
support, We need that support.
We have to realise that we can never take anything for
granted: we have to realise that our opponents are bitterly
resentful about what happened last December0
The Liberal Party today is just the party of revenge0
They will miss no opportunity to take that revenge to take it
on the Labor Party, to take it on the Australian people0
It's incredible but true that this rabble, this mish-mash
of vested interests, factions, bitter old men and frustrated young
ones, this motley crew of incompetents still believe themselves to
be our natural heaven-born rulers0
They regard the verdict of 2 December as an aberration0 They
like to think that the Labor Government is only an interregnum.
Because of this attitude they will use every available
source of power to break the will of the Government and frustrate
the will of the people, to dilute the mandate you gave us0 They
must not succeed0 They hold power in the Senate and in the three
eastern States. The reactionary majority in the Senate will be looking to
Victoria next Saturday for encouragement for their disruption and
obstruction0 The Senate reflects the state of public opinion of three
and six years ago but that means nothing to these arrogant, fearful
men, It does not matter to them that they are flying in the face
of the clear and fresh expression of the will of the people: their
Withers are unrung.
The Senate is not being asked to ratify anything that was
not clearly spelled out in the Policy Speech. It was a clear precise
document0 We received a clear, precise mandate.
The House of Representatives this session will be putting
through 120 Bills all of them the legislative expression of the
Policy Speech0 
-2-
Unless our opponents in the Senate come to their senses,
unless they recognise what democracy is all about they will reduce
our legislative program to ruins.
Who will suffer thereby? It won't just be me, it won't just
be the Labor Partyø The main victims will be the people of Australia,
the parliamentary system.
Not the least important aspect of our victory was to restore
faith in the parliamentary system to restore faith in the possibility
of change through Parliament.
Are those hopes, the hopes particularly of the new generation,
to be shattered on the rock of the wilfulness and bitterness of a
handful of Senators? We won't have a bar of it. The business of
Government can go on.
A great number of things can be done outside Parliament.
Indeed we showed that, in the early days of our Government. But we
were scrupulous to do nothing by extra parliamentary means for which
we did not have a clear and commanding instruction from the people.
But when a Government is forced, deeply against its own will
and inclination, to carry on the people's business by by-passing
Parliament, it's unhealthy for the Government, for the Parliament and
for the nation. We are not going to be forced into that position.
This country is still paying a heavy price for the opportunism
of Sir Robert Menzies in throwing the two Houses of Parliament out of
kilter in 1962.
As a result, since I became Deputy Leader just 13 years ago
I have had-to fight 8 national campaigns. But I don't suppose we can
blame Sir Robert Menzies for taking his chance when he saw it in 1963.
Nothing would give me greater pleasure personally and politically
to end this situation where the Government of Australia is to be
conducted in an atmosphere of perpetual electioneering.
I hope on Saturday the people of Australia will recall
recalcitrant, reacitionary Senators to their duty and call them to their
senses, I hope they will say on Saturday that they were deadly
serious about what they did last December and that they will insist
that the program of which we were elected is pushed through.
And it is not only the Senators: every vested interest who
feels in some way endangered or disadvantaged by our drive towards a
decent Australia is sweating on these elections. o / 3 
3-
I won't say anything here about the strutting, stunting
Premier of Queensland Mr. 19%. ( 1 am referring to his electoral
support, not any other condition, not his dividends,,) All I can say
is I wish he would give Queensland and Australia a chance.
These are the people who rant and posture about our
electoral reforms0 Yet the Country Party Premier of Queensland has the
nerve to claim a popular mandate with 19% of the vote in that State.
The parties that tolerate that sort of electoral monstrosity
have the gall to preach to the Australian people about electoral
gerrymanders. The only electoral gerrymanders that survive in this country
were engineered by Labor's opponents.
They kept Labor out of office in South Australia for years
despite the will of the people. They still keep Labor out of office
in Queensland. They won't be allowed to deny Labor voters a fair and equal
chance in the national elections0
Our electoral reforms will ensure that no one group of the
population has an electoral advantage over any other. We dont believe
that country votes should be worth more than city votes or vice versa.
We are not going to allow privilege and social discrimination
to be permanently enshrined on our electoral laws.
Our electoral bill goes to the root of our parliamentary
democracy. Our electoral bill will bring nearer the only fair and
just basis for a voting system the principle of one vote, one value0
Who can trust the Liberals and their friends when it comes to
electoral reforms? They talked for years about votes for 18 year olds.
Mr. Gorton promised votes for 18 year olds at the last elections.
The Liberals broke that promise0 They were frightened of the
young people's vote.
Labor has legislated to give 18 year olds the vote. It was
left to my Government to carry through the reform promised by our
predecessors. 0
Our opponents are frightened of what' Labor can do with the
people's support. We have this extraordinary spectacle of the A. M. A. so-called
" fighting fund" a million and a half dollars to fight against our
health program0 A million and a half dollars five or six times the amount
spent by any of the parties in the last campaign. And for what?
V c*/ 
-4-
To propagandise against a program which was at the very
heart of our policy in three national elections.
If any one issue was responsible for the tremendous gains
we made in 1969 the election which laid the foundations for victory
in 1972 it was our health program.
Nor all the misrepresentation of the not all their
millions, not all their false and misleading propaganda is going to
prevent us implementing our pledge to the people and is going to
prevent the Australian people from having a decent, efficient, just
health scheme. These are principally Federal issues but politics in
Australia is indivisible, certainly as far as the Australian Labor
Party is concerned. This is the third great meeting I have addressed in this
campaign in Victoria.
I know Mr. Snedden is much too busy to campaign in his home
State. But I have been glad to support Clyde Holding. I have b Tf
glad to indicate by my presence and by my wife's presence here
tonight the indivisibility of the Labor Party and the Labor program.
This is the first State election in this State since the
Victorian branch of our party was reconstructed and reformed in 1970.
Great progress has been made by our party in Victoria and
Clyde Holding has been in the forefront of that progress.
Victoria needs a young, contemporary and progressive leader.
Clyde Holding is such a leader.
Clyde Holding's actions in 1970 were as significant as those
of anyone in making Victoria the most successful branch of the Labor
Party in this country.
You have seen what our reforms achieved last December. The
biggest improvement in Laborts vote in any State occurred in Victoria.
The same progress can be achieved in the elections next Saturday..
I ask your support for Clyde Holding and the Labor Party
on Saturday, not just because they offer a better way for Victoria
but because I want a demonstration here in Victoria that the
irresponsibility and selfishness of our opponents in Canberra will
not go unheeded or unpunished.
A strong Labor showing on Saturday will give them the
warning they need. 0 0 000 0O * 0 a 0 0 0 e 0 0a 0 



A7A
-w'w NMD EPRT END AT17My, 17
AUSRAIA ASITNE OZMI
Th P i e i is e a d Mi is e f r Fo e gn A fa r
today announced that Australia would contribute $ 250,000 to
assist Zambia in its efforts to develop import-export routes
alternative to those formerly operating through Rhodesia.
Mr Whitlam said that in making a contribution,
Australia was joining Britain, Canada, New Zealand and other
0 countries who are assisting Zambia in its urgent need for
transport facilities. Mr Whitlam said the Commonwealth Sanctions Committee
meeting in London today was being informed of the Australian
contribution. Two special assistants of President Kaunda visited
Canberra in April to give first hand details of Zambia's
position and its requirements for a variety of transport,
communication and other equipment.
Mr Whitlam said details of the form of the
contribution will be determined in consultation with the
Zambian authorities and other members of the Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee. 



A A I k-RA
No DATE
D/ 31 18 May 1973
REPORT ( F AUSTRALIAN SCIENTISTS
Attached is a cony of the Rlnort of the Australian
scientists who attended the meeting with Frcach scientists in
Canberra from 7 9 May 1973o Agreement between the two
delegations was reached on a number of ooints, and these are
set out in Section A of the attached Rsnort. This section
also annears in the Report of the French delegation.
Both Renorts were tabled in the House of Renresentatives
by the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, on 17 May 1973. 
MEETING BETWEEN AUSTRALIAN AND FRENCH SCIENTISTS
MAY 7-9, 1973
AT THE AUSTRALIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCE, CANBERRA
REPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN SCIENTISTS
Present: Australian Side
Sir Rutherford Robertson
Professor S. T. Butler
Dr D. Metcalf
Professor M. J. D. White
Dr C. H. B. Priestley ( present for two sessions to
Sdiscuss meteorological questions)
French Side
M. le Professeur A. Gauvenet
Dr D. Mechali
SM. J. M. Lavie
M. A. P. Chaussard SECTION A
This section is identical in the two reports.
1. Dose Commitments
There was general agreement that the technical methods
used by the Australian authorities for measuring quantities of
Sradiation fall-out are satisfactory and are in accordance with
Sinternational pr:. ctice. A large degree of agreement was reached
regarding the levels of dose commitment in Australia due to past
French tests. The estimates of those dose commitments in millirads
are as follows ( for strontium-90 and caesium-137, the low figures
are preferred by the French scientists according to their method
of estimation; the Australian scientists' estimates are the
higher figures): 
Tyod Thyroid Blood Bn
Element ( young ( odr frigBnWhl
children) children formin cells bd
adults) clsbd
iodine-131 97 9 0 0 0
short-lived 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5
0 0 4.0-6.2 5.6-8.5 0
caesium-137
( external) 2.0-3.0 2.0-3.0 2.0-3.0 2.0-3.0 2.0-3.0
caesium-137
( internal) 0.9-1.3 0.9-1.3 0.9-1.3 0.9-1.3 0.9-1.3
carbon-14 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2
TOTAL ( in round
figures) 102-103 14-15 9-12 10-15 5-6
The estimates of the dose commitments due to all tests
are as follows ( the figures were provided for the meeting by an
Australian government scientist; the values for the French tests
are the higher values from the preceding table):
Thyroid Thyroid Blood
Element ( young ( older frigBone Whole
children) children formin cells bd
adults) clsbd
French tests 103 15 12 15 6
Tests by other
nations 74 54 83 96 52
TOTAL for all
tests 177 69 95 111 58
Both delegations agree with the method which has been used
to obtain these figures.
2. Biological Effects
There was general agreement between both groups that for
certain dose levels, radiation is known to cause damage in humans. 
However, there may be a threshold below which lower levels of
radiation have no effect, the action on human beings of low doses
and very low doses such as result from the tests never having been
observed. Current work, for example on the phenomenon of repair by
living cells of damage they have suffered at high doses of radia tion,
suggests that low doses may not cause cancer or genetic defects at
a rate proportional to dose. Novertheless the international
authorities have prudently accepted the hypothesis of direct
C proportionality in order to establish accepted dose limits. Certain
additional factors may operate to reduce significantly the risks
Sbelow those predicted from a simple estimation based on proportionality.
These include the lesser effects of certain types of radiation,
radiation received at low dose rates, or over extended rather than
brief time periods. 
4.
SECTION B
The following part of this report is the
sole responsibility of the Australian
scientists.
The Australian scientists stressed that, despite the
uncertainties outlined in the above discussion of biological effects,
the only prudent course in attempting to assess the overall risk to
the Australian population was to assume direct proportionality of all
biological effects to radiation dosage. This is the public health
position taken by the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation and by other recognised authorities.
The Australian population is large enough that even very small linear
estimates of risk, in the region of the radiation doses due to the
French tests, yield finite estimates of deaths due to cancer and
genetic abnormalities. The Australian scientistps believe that it
is necessary to accept such estimrates as realistic and not to take
into account notions of a hypothetical threshold dose below which
damage would rot accur. Assuming a linear relationship between
dose received and using maximum published figures for radiation
risks, it has been calculated that, as a result of past French
atomic tests, a final total of 26 cases of thyroid cancer and
14 cases of leuLkaemia and other cancers could result in the
Australian population. The Australian scientists present believe
that, as a result of the French tests that have already occurred,
there could be a-oproximately one death or serious disability in
Australia from genetic causes during the first generation and 18
deaths in all subsequent generations; these are minimum estimates, 
and maximum estimates based on present information ( see the Report
of the Advisory Committee on the biological effects of ionizing
radiation, U. S. National Academy of Sciences, November 1972) would
be approximately 15 times these figures.
The above figures are based on the dose commitment
estimates from the French tests given in the tables in Section A.-
It should be noted that the report of the Academy of Science Committee
estimated the steady radiation effects to Australia from French tests
in the Pacific, assuming continued testing at the French site on a
pattern similar to that of the past seven years, and the harm commitments
given in the report must be interpreted in this light. The
dose commitments for the seven years of French testing in the
Pacific are included in the report. Together with the risk factors
used in the report, these commitments permit a direct computation of
the harm commitments to the Australian population from the past tests.
The Australian scientists drew attention to the additional
harmful effects which would accrue to the Australian population as
a result of the improbable event in which the explosion of a highpowered
bomb was combined with quite exceptional meteorological
conditions giving a high fallout over Australia ( Appendix Academy
Report). Although the levels of radiation due to the French tests
are unlikely to cause a statistically detectable increase in the
frequency of cancer or genetic abnormalities in Australia, it is
emphasised that there should be no unwarranted exposure to radiation.
Further, with the long-lived isotopes produced as the result of nuclear
explosions, the genetic effects on the Australian population, though
small, are cumulative. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM
AT THE OPENING OF A NATIONAL SEMINAR ON ABORIGINAL ARTS AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
21 MAY 1973
ABORIGINAL ARTS
There could be no more appropriate meeting place for this
seminar than the Coombs Lecture Theatre of this university. I do not
need to tell you of the dedicated and untiring service Dr. Coombs has
given to both the arts and the Aboriginal people of this country.
This seminar brings together two o~ f the great causes to which he has
devoted much of his distinguished career as an Australian public
servant. I pay tribute to his energy, his zeal and his humanity.
There can be no qualification about my Government's
commitment to the cause of the Aboriginal people. We are determined
that the long record of injustice, repression, neglect, the record
that has marked our treatment of the Aboriginal people for two
centuries of white civilisation on this continent, will be brought
to an end. Let there be no mistaking our sincerity. Above ally let
there be no mistaking our motives. Our commitment to the Aboriginal
people is no token gesture to modish theories, no easy device to
improve the " image" of white Australia overseas, no comfortable sop
to world opinion. We regard the Aboriginals' rights and dignity as
more important than the white mants reputation. I repeat what I said
in my policy speech last Nov-ember: " The Aborigines are a responsibility
we cannot escape, cannot share, cannot shuffle off." In 1967 the
Australian people, by an overw~ 1elming majority at a referendum,
gave the national Government an overriding responsibility for the
welfare of the Aboriginal people. Nothing was done to implement
that responsibility in any way that would not have been possible
before that referendum was passed. We will accept that responsibility;
we regard it as a sacred trust.
The Labor Government has many plans and many ambitions for
the Australian people. But if there is one ambition-we place above all
others, if there is one achievement for which I hope we will be remembered,
if there is one cause for which I hope future historians will salute
us, it is this: That the Government I lead removed a stain from our
national honour and gave justice and equality to the Aboriginal people.
My Government intends to restore to the Aboriginal people
of Australia the power to make their own decisions about their way of
life within the Australian community. We know that most Aboriginal
Australians are proud of their heritage, of their long history and
of the traditions and culture which have been handed down to them.
We know that most of them, in all parts of Australia, want to preserve
their identity as distinctive groups within an Australian society which
respe-cts and honours that identity. 
-2-
Accordingly we see this seminar as an important expression
of the Government's intention. It has been arranged by the newlyestablished
Board for Aboriginal Arts within the Australian Council
for the Arts. This Board is composed exclusively of Aborigines and
is presided over by your chairman, Mr. Dick Roughsey. That board has
decided who was to be invited to participate in the seminar. That board
will determine the conduct of the seminarts proceedings. I am glad to
see that the majority of those present are themselves Aborigines and
that those who are not, are men and women of goodwill whose knowledge
and experience will be of value in your deliberations0 Important among
these are distinguished repres-entatives of ethnic groups from New
Zealand, the United State-s and Africa, to whom I extend a special welcome.
We expect that the work of the seminar will guide the Aboriginal.
Arts Board in tbe policies it will develop. My Government intends that
the Board will receive greatly increased financial resources so that it
can do its work effectively.
The Board will be concerned to support and stimulate the
traditional arts of the Aboriginal people. Gradually, white Australians
have become aware of the richness'-and diversity of these arts of the
bark paintings, the rock carvings and paintings, of the mimey the dancing
and the music of the dramatic presentation of traditional myths and
stories, of the great song cycles which celebrate the -adventures of
totemic ancestors in the dream-time. What has tended to be forgotten
is that these examples of the cultural heritage of the Aboriginal
people have their source in, and derive their inspiration from, the
deeply spiritual ceremonial which is of the essence of the Aboriginal
way. I hope your seminar will explore this relationship so that the
Boardts support may be given in ways which respect and enrich the
ceremonial foundations as well as the works of the artists which spring
from it. It has been fashionable to regard Aboriginal arts as a
rigidly unchanging repetition of forms laid down in times immemorial.
I believe this is a mistake. There is ample evidence of the influence
of change in subject matter, in materials, in style and purpose0
Truly it is an ordered change within a stable but developing tradition.
I do not think we should regard Aboriginal arts as a museum piece, but
rather as a vigorous, expression of the vitality of the Aboriginal way,
changing as it will from the effects of outside influences and from its
own internal vitality. Authenticity depends upon the arts still being
rooted in2 and enlivened by, the true spirit of the Aborigipal people
rather than by adherence to unchanging forms.
There are many Aboriginal Australians whose links with the
traditions of their ancestors have been broken or become tenuous. Many
live in tow ns and cities, facing the problems of isolation, of prejudice,
and a multitude of social and economic handicaps. For them, the arts
will take much from white society, and from other racial groups in style
and technique. They will be seen in part as a means whereby urban
Aborigines are frequently an expression of protest and that they learn
much from protest in s'imilar forms from minorities the world over. Such 
-3-
social protest is a proper purpose of the arts and I hope that the
Aboriginal Arts Board will strengthen the capacity of urban communities
to make their voices heard. Artists are not only those who see and
feel most intensely the agonies, the sorrows and the hopes of their own
people: They are those who can bring to others the willingness and
capacity to comprehend and share these emotions. I have been struck
by the distinctively Aboriginal style which is emerging in the writing,
the theatre, the visual arts of urban Aboriginal artists. I hope this
style will be brought to full flower in the coming years.
Mr. Roughsey, you and your fellows here in this seminar have
before you an exciting task and as historic opportunity. I wish Syou
well in your deliberations. I pledge the support of the Australian
Government for the plans which I am sure will emerge from them.
I have much pleasure in declaring open this National Seminar
on Aboriginal Arts. 0 0 0 @ e.. aee a 



I'b
Press Statement No. 93
21 May 1973
VICTORIAN ELECTIONS
Clyde Holding fought a good clean campaign
and increased Labor's share of the vote since the
1970 election. Labor's candidates polled more votes than
the Liberals, but the boundaries in Victoria have ensured
that the Liberals have won more than-twjice the ' nuiTbbir o6f
seats as the Labor Party.
The real losers in this election have been
the DLP and the Country Party. The DLP vote has fallen
catastrophically. The public have shown what they think
of the reactionary and obstructionist policies of these
parties particularly their efforts to frustrate the
proceedings of the Senate.
Mr. Hamer is the only small Liberal leading
the Liberal Party in any house of parliament in Australia.
I congratulate him, and trust that his Government and mine
will work closely together to give the people of Victoria
a better deal.
CANBERRA A. C. T.
21 May 1973 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 22 MAY 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen: When nearly six months ago
I promised to have a press conference every Tuesday that
I was in Canberra, I had hoped that I would be able to
have them alternating between Tuesday morning and
Tuesday afternoon so that the afternoon papers and the
morning papers could share the benefits. As you know,
it has proved impossible to have any in the morning
because there has been no break between the Cabinet
meetings on Tuesday morning and then Question Time and
the necessary proceedural matters in the House. However,
last week and, of course, this week and next week there
will be Cabinet meetings on Monday. I had hoped that we
would be able to get through the Cabinet meeting yesterday
in time to have the Press Conference on Monday afternoon.
We weren't able to do so, so then I thought we would have
this one this morning after Question Time. We can't
have a Question Time until the Speaker lands, so I hope
it hasn't inconvenienced you we can have it now.
Now I have got no information to give you because the
decisions of the Cabinet were released to you yesterday.
You know my principle I don't release these until
after Question Time, and if people don't have the gumption
to ask questions at Question Time about Cabinet decisions
then you are the first recipients of them. But they have
been given to you.
Q. Could I ask you whether your Government
approached the States to try and settle areas of difference
on the Off-Shore Resources legislation. If not, why not,
and what have you to say about the South Australian Premier,
Mr. Don Dunstan's comments on Sunday night that the new
Federal Labor Government should have held such talks with
the States?
PRIME MINISTER: Any such talks would have been futile.
Mr. Gorton found that. We decided to go ahead. The States
are completely intransigent on this subject, and in my policy
speech well, I will go back further. The Labor Party
declared its attitude towards this legislation at its last
Federal Conference at Launceston in June 1971. I mentioned
that we were going to enact the legislation if the people
returned us. I said that in my Policy Speech in November.
The Governor-General's speech opening this Parliament undertook
that his Government would introduce the legislation. He used
the same words as he used in opening the previous Parliament in
February 1970. In the meantime, the Cabinet had made the
decision. I think it was in January it was one of the very
early decisions that we made. / 2 
-2
PRIME MINISTER CONT... The decision was communicated to
all the Premiers. Without conferring with the Australian
Government, one of the State Government's did in fact seek
to approach the British Government about this I think
in February. But in all events gentlemen, the Labor
Party's attitude on this has been known ever since the
legislation was first introduced over three years ago
by a Minister representing Mr. McMahon who was then the
Foreign Minister. It remained on the Notice Paper for the
whole of the rest of the last Parliament. Throughout
the three years of the last Parliament the Labor Party
supported the legislation. Everybody has known and expected
that we would enact it, and this is our intention. Any
consultations with the States on this subject would have
been as futile now as it proved in 1970, 1971 and 1972.
The whole reason for it is this: That Australia is
believed to have valuable resources under the Territorial
Sea and in it, on and under the Continental Shelf. We don't
want to have the situation which has applied to our on-shore
resources, particularly Mr. Court as he then was and
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen enabled overseas interests to get access
to Australian on-shore resources under terms which were to
the disadvantage to our country. We don't want the same
situation to arise if 7 Governments in Australia exercise
or purport to exercise Jurisdiction over our off-shore
resources. There ought to be one national Government
dealing with this. We shouldn't allow a Federal system
to distract us from that issue and to dissipate our
resources once again. You don't want this sort of break
of gauge position arising in respect to those resources
where this country is fortunate, particularly minerals and
fuels. Q. On the Victorian State elections, Mr. Whitlam.
There was an apparent drop of about 6 per cent in support
for the Labor Party since the Federal election. Were you
concerned about this, and do you attribute it to a lack
of confidence in either the State Labor Party or the
Federal Labor Party?
PRIME MINISTER: No I don't attribute it to either. Of
course I was disappointed in the Victorian result. We got
only a marginally improved percentage of the vote over the
last State elections, but I will certainly give, and we
should all give credit to Mr. Hamer for having the good
sense to pick the eyes out of Labor policy. He is a very
different man to Sir Henry Bolte. He sees a good idea,
he identifies it and he adopts it. In fact, on the
relevant issues as everybody was saying before the
election there was very little difference between
Mr. Hamer and Mr. Holding and for that matter, myself.
Q. I refer to reports in this morning's press
about the cost of Commonwealth cars for ministerial staffs
and staffs of Opposition leaders, and I ask you whether you
are concerned about this misuse of Commonwealth cars, has
Cabinet discussed the matter, and are any new controls on
the use of these cars by the staffs of ministers and Opposition
leaders being considered? 
-3
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no Cabinet discussion on this,
and I haven't seen the report on which the story is based.
I was naturally very interested in the report. I notice
that it was said that Mr. Lynch's staff has spent some
thousands of dollars on taxi orders. Yes, well I have
been unable to verify it I don't know what the strength
of this report is. I haven't seen it. I mean I've seen
no report upon which this story could be based.
Q. In view of the shortages of labour apparent
in the BHP and GMH factories, are you considering any
reassessment of the migrant intake, particularly
unskilled migrants?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter where really I think it would
be more helpful if you were to discuss the matter with
Mr. Grassby or Mr. Cameron. There has been difficulty in
recruiting unskilled labour for some of these remote or
unattractive jobs, and both ministers have made cormments on
this. I believe there are discussions taking place on it.
I have not been involved in them and the Cabinet hasn't
discussed them.
Q. I was told this morning that Cabinet decided
to support the Senate Inquiry into the Croation issue.
Does this recognise the right of the Opposition to determine
business of the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter which will come before the
Caucus tomorrow. It is not a matter which Cabinet decides by
itself, the Caucus decides whether it will participate in
Parliamentary committees which are proposed by any or several
of the Opposition parties, so that is something which I would
expect to be determined at Caucus tomorrow.
Q. Yesterday the retiring President of the Arbitration
Commission was asked about the penal sanctions, and he said that
they didn It really matter either one way or another and that it
was a matter of political ideology and not of reality. In the
context of the Victorian election results, would you be prepared
to hold a double dissolution on the issue of the penal clauses
being rejected by the Senate, and would you be prepared to have
the election campaign fought on that issue?
PRIME MINISTER: The crucial part of the Conciliation and
Arbitration Bill which has been passed by the House of
Representatives and is now awaiting the Senate doesn't turn
on the penal clauses. There have been penal clauses for many
years now, I think since 1951, and in recent years throughout
the history of the McMahon Government, and I think throughout the
greater part of the history of the Gorton Government, they were
never used, so they generate a very great deal of heat and
they have very little effect. What Sir Richard Kirby said was,
I think, as in most things he says, good sense. But the crucial
thing, the central thing which the Conciliation and Arbitration
Bill aims to do is to remove the barriers the union amalgamation
which were introduced in the Lynch law of last year and in fact
to facilitate union amalgamations. one of the very great
impediments to economic advance and industrial relations in
Australia is the fact that we have over 300 unions. If we only
had 30 unions we would be a much more orderly and prosperous
community. / 4 
-4
PRIME MINISTER CONT Inevitably jurisdictional disputes,
demarcation disputes arise when there are so many unions, and
European countries in particular, marvel at the archaism, the
anarchy, of the dispersion of our industrial organisations.
Now I believe that is something recognised by people in the
employers side and everybody interested in industrial relations,
that we would be very much better off if we had 30 unions in
Australia instead of 300. I think there are only about 14
unions in Australia which have more than 50,000 members.
That's/ far too attentuated form of industrial organisation.
There are, I think, a hundred or a couple of hundred unions which
have less than 1,000 members. I don't know the exact figures but
if you are interested I can get them for you, of course.
Now that is an absurd position. Now you mention the position
about a double dissolution. Everybody should know, and I do
believe that you gentlemen of the press should play your part
in letting people know if they don't know already, that the
circumstances for a double dissolution arise when the Senate
has twice rejected a bill from the House of Representatives
or twice made a unreasonable delay in dealing with a Bill
from the House of Representatives, or has twice unacceptedly amended
a Bill from the House of Representatives. Each of those actionsthe
rejection, the delay, the amendment having a clear three
months interval. No what's happened at this stage is that the
Senate has rejected one Bill, the Electoral Bill, and that will
be introduced as early as possible, probably the first day again
in the Budget session. Now is those circumstances, if it is
rejected again, there would be the circumstances for a double
dissolution. If a double dissolution takes place it will
obviously be in the context that there has to be an election
before the end of June next year for half the Senate anyhow.
Now let there be a bit of rationality about this. The
circumstances haven't yet arisen, they may not, but they can't
arise for a few months yet.
Q. In your foreign affairs role. Have you sought
any support from other countries for the Australian case to
the ICJ through diplomatic channels, and specifically, will you
be seeking the support of the Danes when you see the Danish
Foreign Minister, I think on Wednesday?
PRIME MINISTER: We have already, of course, sought the
participation and achieved the participation in the proceedings
by New Zealand and by Fiji. You will recall that I discussed
this matter with Mr. Kirk in Wellington last January and our
respective Attorneys General, Dr. Finley and Senator Murphy
have discussed it a few times in between and I've been on the
telephone to Mr. Kirk a few times and I also discussed it
with him in APIA at the meeting of the South Pacific Forum.
I also discussed the matter with Ratu Mara, the Prime Minister
of Fiji when he was in Sydney about three months ago, and also
in APIA and there haw~ been telegraphic communications with the
Fijians. So, in fact, the application is three-fold:
Australia, New Zealand and Fiji. When I see the Danish Foreign
minister this week I expect to raise it. As you will remember,
I did raise it with Mr. Trudeau in Vancouver on Holy Thursday,
with the Foreign Secretary of Britain on the Tuesday after
Easter, and with Mr. Colombo in Rome on the Thursday in Easter
week and with the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Mauritius over that following weekend. 
5
Q. Sir, when you say you raised it with them, did
you seek their diplomatic support in perhaps their moving
against France as well?
PRIME MINISTER: None of the States even in the Common
Market support France. They all think France ought to sign
the partial test ban treaty which was accepted by the United
States, Soviet Union and Britain ten years ago. Perhaps I
should add this here, that there is a very great deal of
confusion and deliberate obfuscation about the attitude of the
Australian Government to Chinese nuclear tests in the atmosphere.
I made it plain to Mr. Chi Peng-fei in July 1971, and
Dr. Cairns has done so to Mr. Chou En-lai last week, that we
believe that these tests are objectionable whoever carries
them out, but we are taking proceedings in the International
Court of Justice. We are doing so on the advice of some of
the leading practitioners before the Court, and leading
academic men in the field of international law. We are
doing so because there is a 1928 Agreement to which both
France and Australia are parties and New Zealand also, which
permits use by each of the parties to have their disputes
settled by the World Court. China is not a
party to that 1928 Agreement. Again, we are parties to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, so is New
Zealand, so is France, so is Fiji. China is not. So
the things that we are doing about the French nuclear
tests are not available against any Chinese nuclear tests
in the atmosphere.
Q. Sir, I realise the demand for funds from
various sources is a matter that has not probably been sorted
out by the Cabinet or the Government in its entirety, but
the go-ahead for the re-development of Brisbane airport appears
to have been delayed or deferred by the Cabinet. You may
have even heard of some of this concern during your visit
to Eagle Farm race course last Saturday. If there has been
a delay or deferral, when do you expect Cabinet to deal with
this long-standing matter and can you give any assurance
that this long delay delayed for many years by the previous
Government for the re-development of the Brisbane airport
to bring it to full international standard will not be affected
by any decision to have a second airport for Sydney?
PRIME MINISTER: The Cabinet has completed its deliberations
on this matter. There will be no further ones for some months.
At any rate, the decision, I think, was announced after the
meeting at which we considered it. That would have been three
or four months ago, I think. Now I don't want to be more
precise on this because I'm not sure if I haven't been in
correspondence with Mr. Bjelke-Petersen about this and after
the conference is over I will see if there is any more I can
tell you about this including the question of correspondence.
You will realise that I don't want to say anything on this
subject which would produce any inflation of land prices in
any relevant area. In answer to a previous question, I was
referring to this 1928 treaty, to which Australia, New Zealand,
France are parties. The precise title is the 1928 General Act
for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes. / 6 
-6
Q. Have you received any indication yet whether
President Nixon will invite you to the White House when
you are on your way to Ottawa in August. How do you see
the present state of Australian-American relations?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no communication either way
on this subject. I will be in North America between the
engagements I have accepted in Mexico and those, of course,
which I have undertaken as a Commonwealth Head of
Government in Ottawa.
Q. Does your answer to the double dissolution
question mean that you won't now go ahead with your threat
to recall Parliament during the winter recess, to consider
any Bills that may have been thrown out by the Senate between
now and the end of the sitting?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, let me clarify that one. If the
Senate rejects a Bill from the House of Representatives,
the Representatives knows that fact, it is informed of that
fact, no action is required by the House of Representatives.
It can, after a lapse of three months, following the rejection,
introduce the Bill again. That is what we will be doing in
respect of the Electoral Bill which the Senate rejected last
week. The only circumstances in which the House of Representatives
will be recalled before the Budget Sittings are if the Senate
makes amendments to any Bill from the House of Representatives
and then the Cabinet believes that those amendments are
unacceptable in those circumstances to save time we could recall
the Caucus and then we could recall the House of Representatives
and we would reject the amendment which the Senate had made.
In those circumstances we could three months later introduce
the Bill in its original form or with any amendments which
commended themselves to us. But you don't recall you don't
have to recall it would be completely superfluous,
irrelevant to recall the House of Representatives if a Bill from
the House of Representatives was rejected outright by the Senate.
The three months. dates in the case of rejection from the date
of the rejection. The three months date in the case of an
unacceptable amendment from the date when the House of
Representatives refuses to accept the Amendment.
Q. You told last week's Caucus you would recall,
now you say " could". Which is it?
PRIME MINISTER: That will depend on the actions, the
nature of the amendment.
d1k 6 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON ZI
MAY, 1973, IN PRESENTING THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS
Mr. Speaker, For the information of Honourable Members, I present the
interim report which I have received from the Australian Council
for the Arts. I ask leave of the House to make a brief statement on this
matter. Sir, in my Policy Speech I indicated that a Labor Party
Government would provide substantially increased support for the
arts. This support would relate to a two-fold objective the
pursuit of excellence and the spread of participation in the arts.
We also proposed to extend the range and effectiveness of that
support by setting up a new and independent Council based on a
series of specialist Boards dealing with different art forms.
When my Government took office, action was taken immediately
to give effect to these policies. At the same time it was important
to honour commitments already entered into by the previous Government
so that there would be no interruption to work already in progress
and planned. Furthermore, it was necessary to get responsible
estimates for the increased activities envisaged and to prepare
legislation for the new Council structure. I therefore decided to
appoint the new Council ( and its constituent Boards) to undertake
these tasks. On 26th January a Council of 24 was appointed, including the
Chairmen of the constituent Boards and others capable of providing
special knowledge of the arts and of the needs of the community
in this field. On 16th February, after receiving advice from the
Chairmen based on consultations in their respective fields, 
-2-
I appointed the members of Boards dealing with Theatre, Music,
Visual Arts, Crafts, Literature, and Film and Television. The
Aboriginal Arts Board was appointed later.
I asked the Council to see that existing support for
the arts was not disrupted; to prepare for me a charter for the
new organization and an outline of its operations which would serve
as a basis for legislation; and to let me have urgently budgetary
estimates for the coming year.
These initial arrangements were very flexible. Appointments
to the Council and Boards were for terms of no more than one
or two years to allow for change and development ard to ensure that
the membership could quickly be adapted to any changes in the
structure which might arise from the report of the Council.
The Boards have met a number of times. Some, in defining
the scope of their work, have already proposbd to move into new areas,
to plan further ahead, arid to tackle long-standing issues of importance
to Australian artists such as the Public Lending Right
and copyright. Proposals to extend public enjoyment of and participation
in the arts, to raise the status of artists in the
community and to explore means of opening doorways to the arts for
young people have also received prompt attention.
The Council has now put together this preliminary report
outlining how, in its view, it and the Boards might operate. The
report is based upon the broad objectives of Government policy and
defines the purposes of the Council and its powers and responsibilities
as a statutory corporation. In accordance with the
Government's policies, it provides that the powers of the Council 
should be used in ways which will " respect, uphold and promote
the rights of artists to untrammelled freedom in the practice of
their arts". In defining the structure of the Council and Boards
and their inter-related procedures, the report aims to ensure
that artists and others active in the arts are predominant in the
proposed membership, while ensuring adequate consideration of the
interests of the public generally.
The report is not final. The Council has asked me to
authorise its release along with notes on some of the main areas
of differing opinion to organizations and persons interested.
I have told the Council that I am happy to invite organizations
and persons with a special interest in the arts freely to express
their views on the proposals.
Mr Speaker, I welcome the opportunity which this preliminary
report presents to reaffirm the importance which my
Government attaches to the arts. The legislation which will follow
the Council's final report will be designed n'ot merely to improve
the material conditions of those engaged in them and to widen the
range of those who participate but to guarantee to the arts the
independence without which they cannot flourish. Around the world
there are great writers whose works never see the light of day in
their own countries, painters obliged to bend their talents to
political dictation, creative talent. crippled by censorship and
control. The legislation will, we hope, be seen as a charter to
safeguard the integrity of our artists and their works. 
-4-
I hope, therefore, that honourable members, as individuals
and as members of appropriate committees of this Parliament, will
study this interim report that we mayhave the benefit of their
wisdom as well as that of all those Australians who value the
arts and see in them, as does my Government, a means to the
enrichment of life for all Australians. Nlt, 



NQ DATE
M/ 87 25 May 1973
SOLTDARITY ' IT T-HE COLONIAL PEOPLE' OF AFRICA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, said today that t}' e Australian neople and Government
supnorted the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of the peoples of Namibia, Zimbabwe and Portuguese
territories in Africa.
In a statement on the occasion of Africa Liberation
Day ( today, 25 May), Mr Whitlam said that this support was
clearly manifested in the actions of the present Government.
Africa Liberation Day marks the beginning of the inaugural
Week of Solidarity with the Colonial Peoples of South Africa and
Guinea ( BISSAU) Fighting for Freedom, Independence and Equal
Rights. The United Nations General Assembly, at its 27th
session in 1972, instituted the Week of Solidarity which will
be held annually. Mr Whitlam said that the present Government's actions
of supnort had included changes in Australia's voting on African
issues at the 27th session of the United Nations General Assembly,
financial 3Unnort of the United Nations funds established to / 2 
-2-
further the educational and other aspirations of the peoples of
Southern Africa, wholehearted co-operation with the efforts of
the international community to bring to an end the illegal Smith
regime in Zimbabwe through sanctions and other measures, and the
exclusion from Australia of South African sporting teams selected
on a racial basis.
The Prime Minister recalled that Africa Liberation Day
this year marked the tenth anniversary of the signing in Addis
Ababa of the Charter of the Organisation of African Unity. The
O. A. U. had resolved on 25 May 1963 that that day would be observe*
as Africa Liberation Day.
Mr Whitlam said he had already conveyed to the Organisation
the congratulations and good wishes of the Government and people
of Australia on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the O. A. U
L 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 94
May 1973
ABORIGINAL EMPLOYMENT
The Australian Government will take steps to recruit
Aborigines into the Australian Public Service.
A team of senior officers from the Public Service Board
and the Department of Aboriginal Affairs will leave on Sunday for
several weeks of field investigations on employment opportunities for
Aboriginals in the Public Service.
The Board has already established an inter-divisional
committee to co-ordinate activities on the recruitment of Aborigines.
It is also holding discussions with the Departments of Labour and
Aboriginal Affairs on details of training and placement of Aborigines
in the Public Service. A recruitment booklet for distribution among
Aborigines has been prepared by the Board and regular surveys of the
numbers of Aboriginals in the Public Service will be carried out.
The two-man team which will leave to study recruitment will
comprise an officer of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and an
officer of the Public Service Board's Organisation Division. It will
conduct joint inspections of jobs performed by Aboriginals on Aboriginal
reserve communities near Alice Springs, Katherine and Darwin to determine
their stability for incorporation into the Public Service.
The inspection will be followed by detailed discussions
with senior officers from Public Service departments located in Darwin.
In their visits to Aboriginal reserve communities near
Katherine and Darwin, the team will be accompanied by another officer
of the Public Service Board who will be consulting with Aboriginal
community spokesmen and departmental officers on difficulties faced
by Aboriginals in seeking Public Service employment.
Consultations will also be held with departmental officers
in Darwin, Brisbane and Sydney, on the placement and training of
Aboriginals and on proposals for regular surveys of the numbers of
Aboriginals employed in the Public Service.
CANBERRA. AOC. T. 



THE PRIME~ MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT IARjIA~ qENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 29 MAY. 1973
PRIME MINISTER: I thought it might suit you to-have
another conference in the morning. The Cabinet met yesterday
morning and afternoon and most of the Ministers concerned
issued statements to you. There was one which wasn't issued
so perhaps I can give you the gist of it now. Cabinet
approved the establishment of a task force to draw up uniform
national housing standards in co-operation with the States.
You remember this was forecast at the Premiers' Conference
about three w.-eeks ago.
An expert technical unit will be established in the
Departmeiat of Housing and we have invited the States and local
Government authorities to co-operate with the Australian
Government in establishing a national Housing Standards
Committee. h-1r Johnson is releasing a statement to you on it
and my Press Office will release the text of my letter to the
Premiers later in the day, that is after they have all got
the letter themselves. Are there any questions?
Q: Do you oppose the U~ nited States bombing in Cambodia?
Do you intend writing to President Nixon protesting against
this bombing in similar vein to the protest over LJ. 0
bombing of North Vietnam, and if not, why not?
PRIMECC MINISTER: My general attitude about the withdrawal
of American bombers from Thailand where this operation is baoned
is well known. It's knowin to all the relevant authorities.
Q: Do you plan to go to Washington later thais year? If so
will your visit be official or unofficial? -Do you intend to
go to W ashington even if you are not invited there by
President Nixon?
PRIH/ E MINISTER: Yes, I'll be going through the United i. tates
As you know there is a meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of
Government in Ottawa early in August. As you also know,
I was able to accept one of the invitations from Latin American
countries to make official visits to them. I accepted the one
to ": exico that will be late in July. Clearly, going from
Mexico to Canada, I will go through, or across the United
States. I have many invitations to address " bodies in New York
and Washington. Now, I think, if I may say so, it's about
time people took these things a little more rationally. The
relationship between Australia and the United States or the
relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom are so
long-standing and so intimate that a Head of Government does
not wait for an official invitation. That may be the case,
for instance in some of the other visits that T am making
this year, such as Indonesia or India, where I am going next
week, or Japan, or China later in the year. Visits by
Australian Prime Ministers to the United Kingdom and the
United States are common place. 
Q: Has Cabinet reached a decision on the size of the Army
and will 1, lr Barnard be making a statement to Parliament
this week?
PRIME INTISTER: I expect Mr Barnard will be making a
statement to Parliament on this subject this week. The Cabinet
is making the following recommendations to the Caucus so that
the plarnned growth of the regular Army that is the volunteer
regular army should be increased from 31,000 to 34,000
over the course of the next three years. The field force
should be organised on a divisional basis of six regular
battalions, in three task forces of two battalions each, with
combat and logistic support. These task forces should be
Townsville, Ennogera and Holdsworthy. There should be a
further major review of ground force capability in 1976.
Q: How important is it to you to be invited to see -' resident
Nixon when you are in Washington. Do you have specific matters
you wish to discuss with him and if so could you tell us what
they are? Are you concerned with the appearances as far as
the Australian electorate is concerned if you don't get an
invitation?
PRI= LfINISTER: I would be very happy to discuss with President
Nixon anything that he would like to raise and I imagine he would
be happy to discuss with me anything that I would lihe to raise.
But I repeat official invitations are not necessary in these
circumstances. I would hope that when the Australian Prime
Iinister was visiting Washington it would be as natural for him
to discuss matters with the Tresident as it used to be in
Sir Robert Menzies' time. All this hoohah that has accompanied
visits by Sir Robert fenzies' successors is psychophantic.
Q: You said that you would hope that it would be natural
for the Australian Prime '. inister to discuss things with the
President while he was in Jashington. There has been speculation
from Washington that you won't be getting an invitation because
the President is still angry with the Australian Government over
protests by Australian Miinisters on the bombing of Vietnam.
Do you think there is any basis for that speculation and
certainly do you think it would look that way if you don't get
an invitation while you are there?
PRIM LINISTLR: Speculation is the operative part of your
question. There is no change in any of these circumstances
I have not said anything on any of these subjects for a very
long time. Now President Nixon doesn't hold press conferences.
He doesn't answer to Parliament. I can't be expected to be
any more forthcoming in these matters than he is in these
circumstances. ' I give him credit for being mature and courteous.
Q: In the discussions on the size of the Army was there any
proposal that a task force base or some Army base be established
in Perth or Western Australia.
' RI. E , INIlTLR: No.
Q: Senator Murphy said some time ago that he intended to
introduce the trade practices legislation this Session. When
in fact will it be introduced?
PRIM M. INISTER: Next Session. Gentlemen, there have been 
more Bills introduced and in fact more Bills passed in this
Session than in any autumn session in the Parliament's history.
It's just not possible to introduce and I don't think undertakings
were given to introduce all the Bills to which the Government
is committed in this first Session.
Q: As your Office was involved were you consulted on the
Everingham expulsion, and further, as the man's livelihood
is involved and also the prospect of future employment, would
you consider asking Mr President or Mr Speaker to re-examine the
situation so that he can if he so desires bring any evidence that
he may have to ( inaudible)? Would you also consider if that
course is not followed would you consider asking h ir Speaker
to reconsider the severity of the penalty as it could involve
the man in possible employment for a very long time?
PRIIUv NINISTER: Both the President and the Speaker consulted
with me I suppose it was some six weeks ago at any rate on this
matter. It happens that Tdr Everingham was found in my office
I think it was the VWednesday it might have been the Tuesday
before the last polling day. At any rate it was the day after
I'd spoken at the National Press Club and no member of my staff
was in imiy office when he was there. The only member of my staff
who: had been in the office had left shortly before he was found.
He was found there when she came back. The fact that it was my
office is immaterial. M embers of the Iress Gallery are given the
freedom of this building more than any other of their citizens.
If a member of the Gallery is found in a room where he is not
prima facie entitled to be found I believe it is incumbent upon
him to give an explanation. He has not given me an explanation.
The explanation that he has given the presiding officers I would
not regard as satisfactory. But it's immaterial that it is my
office. Every member of Parliament could be equally concerned.
Q: ir Connor, the Minister for Minerals and Energy, announced
I think it was last week that there would be a national pipeline
grid and he said that it would extend virtually right across the
country to Port Hedland and across to Sydney and down to LIelbourne
and up to the Queensland coastal towns. Is this plan subject to
some sort of feasibility study of the economics of it his only
justification amounted to about eight or 15 paragraphs in the
Second Reading Speech.
PRI,-iE MINISTER: Yes, anything that the Government does is
done on the basis of proper investigations which are made
public. Kr Connor I am certain would be very happy to dilate
further to you on this matter.
Q: Supplementary to Mr Thomas's question, has a feasibility
study been made or will it be made before the Government acts
to go ahead with The scheme.
PRIE INISTER: You had better ask Mr Connor. I don't think
one has been made but I think one will be made. I would be certain
that one would be made. The Pipeline Authority Bill as you know
is the necessary legal basis for these things but the Government
has taken the quite clear attitude that in respect to all
public investments for which it. is responsible wholly or in part
that there must be a proper economic and environmental study
and that that study should be published. Nobody doubts the
economic aspects of the pipeline from South Australia to
New South Wales which will be the first enterprise undertaken 
by the Authority. The environmental aspect is still under study
by the appropriate New South Wales authority and the relevant
Australian Ministers had evidence or submissions nade to that
New South W/ ales authority. It's decision I believe has not yet
been delivered.
Q: Have you made any representations to the British Government
about their treatment of the State Premiers or their
representatives in London? Have you reminded the British
Government that there is only one Australian Government
and that it resides in Canberra?
PRIL!' E I: NISTER: I hope you'll forgive me if I don't want uo
say what representations pass or in what form representations
pass between me and other Heads of Government. I believe that
the British Government takes the attitude today that it has for
a long time past that there is one Australian Government.
It becomes farcical if the British Government were to deal
individually with such members of the Commonwealth as are
federal nations such as Canada, Australia, India and i1alaysia.
International business becomes anarchic if national Governments
don't deal :. ith each other.
Q: Just to revert back to resources policy, yesterday in
Sydney the Chairman of Queensland Uranium told his annual
general meeting the '! hitlam Government had written after
December 2 assuring his Company that all the agreements in
respect of Iarbolic entered into by the previous Government
would be honoured by this Government. Now this seens to cut
across your policies expressed at the election in respect of
the environment I understand there is something about
national parks up there and also in respect of Aborigines
I just wondered what the position is in respect of Queensland
Uranium. Is it correct that your Government will honour these
agreements? PRI?'. E 1VINISTLR: I didn't see the statement. I don't remember
writing to them. I don't remember having any conversation
with any of their representatives. But as a general proposition
naturally the incoming Australian Government honours obligations
which its predecessors entered into. There are some cases,
and Mr Connor is the proper one to give you the details, ; here
there were arrangements between the preceeding Australian
Government and some of the State Governments with various
companies. And as I understand the position those companies
haven't honoured their part of those arrangements. They have
failed, or in fact refused, to give the information to the
State and Australian Government, which they undertook ; c provide.
Mr Connor very properly is requiring that information tc be
given. I don't remember the Naborlic instance.
Q: In view of your statement last week that the Federal
Liberal Party had to get on the wave length for the future....?
PRILE MINISTER: I was quoting I think what -Ir Snedden
said the first time he contested the leadershic of the Liberal
Party. Isn't that right? I think Mr Chipp was his public
relations man at the time and devised that memorable phrase...
Q: Do you think that Mr Fraser would be a disaster as leader of
the Federal Liberal ] arty? 
PRIIJ[ MIlISTER: I don't think one ought to engage into
speculation or at least it must be relevant speculation.
As I understand it Mr Fraser's nose is at present out of joint
because a romance has developed between the old prostitute of
the Country Party and the D. L. P. He was aiming to be the head
of a great conservative coalition in Australia. 14ow frankly
gentlemen, I don't want to speculate as to who is going to be
head of the household when the old harlot is churched.
Q: ( Overseas Press Fingleton)
Q: Overseas Press?
Q: ? Iell in this case with your indulgence.., his Lordship
as it were, the Baron of Fleet. You have just mentioned
prostitutes and harlots Sir. You've disowned the state Premiers.
PRI11L 1MINISTER: No, wait a bit, I'm not saying any of them
have fallen into that category. It was a memorable Premier of
Victoria, Sir Henry Lolte, who described the Country 1Party
as a prostitute. Not only in that, but an old one.
Q: cir, have you seen fit to warn the Premiers at present in
London of the inherent dangers that lurk there?
PRI11I iINISTER: I think the only Premiers there are conservative
ones and it's the Tories who seem to fall for the threats in
London. Q: They've found out-let's put it that way. Sir, that's not
my question. The British Prime Minister, Mir Heath visited " aris
last week. Did you get the impression during your talks with
Mr Heath in London that he would strongly support the Australian-
New Zealand protest against the French nuclear tests. The
London Daily Times which is owned. by his Lordship says editorially
that it doubts whether he did convey to the French any serious
criticism of the tests. It says further, the British cultivation
of good terms with France combined with British sensitivity to
the charge of hypocrisy since Britain already possesses nuclear
weapons. Did 1r Heath give you any encouragement? Did be,
to use a word of Mr Chifley, duchess you? And finally Sir, the
last question the ban on French trade. Does this mean the end
of the Concorde as far as Qantas is concerned?
PRIIE I. MINISTER: On the Concorde: that's an English as much
as a French aircraft. I don't want to express a view of the
Concorde. It's a matter which I presume the Government will
consider in due course. Now lir Heath did entertain me very well.
lie's a good host. He's been cordial to me when he was Leader of
the Opposition w; hen I was. And he is now, and this has been so
when he's visited this bountry as Leader of the Opposition.
Now that we are both Prime MIinisters we get on civily,
courteously, cordially. But I didn't make more than passing
reference to the French nuclear tests in our atmosphere.
In my conversations with 1r Heath I was more concerned there
with the matters of the abolition of appeals to the Privy Council,
Britain no longer making her courts available for tice
determination of disputes between Australian litigants.
I discussed the matter of Britain's responsibility in
this region with Sir Alec Douglas Home and HIr Anthony Royal.
the men from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. There were 
officials around and so on. I didn't put the point of view
on behalf of the Commonwealth countries in the South ' acific
in the South Pacific Forum Australia, New Zealand, Fiji,
Samoa, Tonga, Nauru, the Cook Islands who'. d asked me to
take it up. I didn't put it on the basis that Britain has to
argue our case. After all we are independent States. ' Je are
able to do this and we should do it ourselves. The argument
that I did put on behalf of the South Pacific Forum to
Sir Alec Douglas Home and Mr Royal was that Britain had
responsibilities in respect of non-self-governing territories
in the region. Pitcairn Island, insignificant I suppose i*
terms of population, but to the east of Mururoa Atoll, and
also the Gilbert and Ellis Islands colony, the British Solomon
Islands Protectorate and the Anglo-French Condominium of the
New Hebrides. Now, I put on behalf of the Forum that Britain
internationally had to speak for her wards in those territories.
And I stressed that in our view she should do so. There may
be another form of embarassment of course that Britain carried
out these tests without any great Australian sensitivity twenty
years ago in the ' ontebellos
Q: Was there any harm?
PRIM IEINISTER: Yes, there was. As you know it has only just
been possible in the last year or so for people to land on the
Hontebellos and then they also did so at Maralinga, and they
also did so at the Christmas Islands in the Pacific not the
Christmas Islands in the Indian Ocean. So I think Britain
has a certain sensitivity on this because she was doing earlier,
without complaint, as America did earlier again in the
and so on, what France is now doing to the dismay of everybody
in the world, not just in the South Pacific.
Q: Last week Prime Minister, you stated that you believed in
a career public service. Could you explain to me then why
the job of scientific adviser in your own Department is not
being advertised?
PRIIE MINISTER: I thought it was being filled from the
Public Service. I don't know. Thank you, I'll ask about this
straight afterwards. Frankly I don't know the details of
individual positions like this.
Q: ir Prime Minister, on May 18 br Enderby said he would try
to increase the margarine quota for the A. C. T. and continue to
work for the abolition of the quota system. What is your
Government's attitude to the margarine quota system. Are
Mr Enderby's moves an attempt by your Government to break down
the margarine quota system considering Marrickville Holdings
can export margarine to other States?
PRIME . INISTER: Mr Enderby and I think Senator ' Vriedt
have alao been asked questions on this subject over the last
fortnight. These matters have not been discussed in Cabinet
so I can't express a collective view on it and I'm not
ministerially responsible for it, but perhaps you vwould appreciate
my expressing a personal view: I think it's quite absurd that a
wholesome product in popular demand should be artificially
denied to Australian consumers. As I understand it it's quite
possible to make margarine in Australia from Australian products. 
There can be no question that it is a healthful food, that it's
not deleterious. I have no patience with those who want to
restrict the production of proper foods from Australian products.
Australia is way behind the times in this. There are a
great number of other dairying countries where the : percentage of
consumption of margarine vis a vis butter is, as I understand,
much higher than in Australia. Now if a product's good it doesn't
need rival products to be suppressed. N'ow that of course is a
perfectly personal view.
Q: What will happen at budget time to the present unique system
of 7cinisters being required to virtually submit their Cabinet
submissions to Caucus committees before these submissions go to
Cabinet? RII.. 1-. INISTLR: It is impossible to summarise the procedure
as briefly as you've done. Obviously there are practical factors
which modify the summary that you've used.
Q: senator Townley remarked yesterday or he was quoted as
saying that he would be calling on 11ir Barbour from ASIC to
appear before this Senate Select Committee. Has Cabinet
considered the question of calling public servants, not only
this Coimmittee, but any other subsequent committee, has it
reached an attitude have you reached an attitude yourself
on this. I believe there's been some approach in the past
about this?
T'RIIR* LINISTER: The Cabinet hasn't discussed this matter.
If any Parliamentary Committee seeks the attendance of public
servants then the-relevant M. inister would consider the position,
if he wvas in doubt he would, I expect, consult his colleagues
in the Cabinet. Now whether the Committee of which the ; enator
you mentioned is Chairman he is not the Committee whether it
seeks the attendance of the distinguished public employee whom
you mention still has to be determined.
Q: The Premiers in London are seeking an advisory opinion
from the Privy Council on the legality of the Federal Government's
offshore legislation...?
PRI -L TINI STKR: Have they? They haven't told us.
Q: this is what they've said their aim is. If they
do that, will the Federal Governiment ; ut a case to the Privy
Council, and, secondly a related matter, the Opposition has
decided to delay this legislation for three months in the Senate.
Would you regard such a delay as very important and, if so,
what.. . how serious?
ii-l' MINISTER: Do you mean to say the Opposition or some
portions of it have resolved not to pass this legislation?
That is, there will be another failure to pass... Which part of
the Opposition has decided this?
Q: The Liberal Party with the agreement of the others I
understand. 
PRI1i! 1 1. INISTER: The Senate Liberal Party or the whole
Liberal Party. Gentlemen, these are so speculative, some
fascinating possibilities arise and I certainly will watch them.
Q: M-ay I ask you a personal question that's not serious...?
PRIILa laINISTER: All the previous subjects that you've raised
I hope they're not taken too seriously on this occasion...
Q: You're putting me off a little when you become .1rime
Minister of this great country, you also became ex officio
a member of the Royal Canberra Golf Club...
PRITEE MINISTER: Did I?
Q: Indeed you did. It's the most picturesque course in
Australia. Its woods abound with galaxies of glamorous and
glorious birds this sort not that sort
PRIME 1/ IIISTER: So my wife's told me. She plays there.
Q: They keep on asking up there Sir, when is he coming.
Will you Give thought in the recess to making your first
appearance at this royal course and I hope the term royal
doesn't put you off
PRIME MINISTER: This is the first invitation I think I've
had. Jack, take me there. 



-~ AUS IHAI IA,, LLPRESS STATEMENT NO.
May 1973
PORTRAITS OF SENATOR SIR MAGNUS CORMACK AND MR. WILLIAM McMAHON
The Historic Memorials Committee has decided to
accept commissioned portraits of the President of the Senate,
Senator Sir Magnus Corinack, by Mr. Bryan Westwood of Sydney,
and of Mr. William McMahon by Mr. Ivor Hele, of Aldinga,
South Australia. It is expected that the portraits will be
hung shortly in King's Hall, Parliament House.
The Historic Memorials Committee, consisting of
the Prime Minister, the President of the Senate, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Vice-President
of the Executive Council, the Leader of the opposition in
the House of Representatives and the Leader of the Opposition
in the Senate, is the body charged with acquiring official
portraits of Governors-General, Prime Ministers, Presidents
of the Senate and Speakers of the House of Representatives.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



6000M
WB _ 0IlII NQ DATE
M/ 88 30 May 1973
OVERSEAS VISIT BY SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE
The Special Minister of State, Senator Willesee, will
leave Australia early next month to visit a number of African
Scountries. Announcing this today, the Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, said that Senator Willesee would
be travelling as his nersonal emissary and would be making the
first contact by a Minister of the new Australian Government with
political leaders in those countries.
Senator Willesee will arrive in Ghana on 13 June and then
visit Nigeria, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia and Mauritius. He
will travel to Africa via Brussels, where be will preside at a
meeting of Australian Ambassadors to member countries of the EEC.
He will also pay brief private visits to Rome, London and Dublin.
Mr V hitlm said he hoped that Senator Willesee's visit
would help consolidate the improvement in Australia's standing
with African countries resulting from the Government's new policies
against racism and colonialism.
This is the first time in ten years that an Australian
Minister has undertaken a tour of East and West Africa.
Mr Whitlam said: " The Australian Government believes
that Australian Ministers have in the past paid insufficient
attention to the more than 200 million black Africans on the
continent of Africa. / 2 
-2-
" The 35 black African countries comprise more than one
quarter of the membership of the United Nations and twelve of them
are members of the Commonwealth. They will continue to constitute
an important and at times vocal influence in world affairs."
The Prime Minister said that the Government believed it
was time to show a more positive interest in African affairs. By
its voting on various resolutions in the UN, the Government had
already shown its sympathy with and understanding for the aspirations
of all black Africans for racial equality, majority rule and
indenendence. By its program of self-government and independence for S
Papua New Guinea, its determination to improve the welfare of its
own Aborigines, and its signature and forthcoming ratification of
various UN conventions on human rights and the elimination of
racial discrimination, Australia was showing her adherence to these
orinciples. Equally Australia gave her ready support to countries
sharing these views.
Mr Whitlam said that during his visit Senator Willesee
would also seek views on questions likely to arise at the
Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Ottawa in August.
Senator Willesee will be accomnanied by Mrs Willesee, as 0
well as by Dr J. W. C. Cumes, of the Department of Foreign Affairs,
and his Private Secretary, Mr G. Briot. 



31 May 1973
SECOND READING SPEECH BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, THE HONOURABLE E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
PRIVY COUNCIL APPEALS ABOLITION BILL 1973
PRIVY COUNCIL ( APPEALS FROM THE HIGH COURT) BILL 1973
Mr Speaker, I informed the House on 1 May of my talks
in London, just after Easter, with the British Prime Minister,
Foreign Secretary, Lord Chancellor and Attorney-General regarding
the abolition of appeals from Australia to the Privy Council.
I gave the House the reason for the Government's policy
on this question. The reason is obvious and sound. It is that
the High Court of Australia must become the highest court of the
land in all matters pertaining to Australia and to the legal
rights and obligations, in Australia, of its citizens. That
state of affairs should long since have been attained. The present
position is utterly anomalous.
Recent reports have come to my notice that the States
are proposing to petition the Queen to refer certain seabed
questions to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council under
an Imperial statute of 1833. ThAt such action can be contemplated
serves only to underline what I am saying. It is no longer
appropriate that any possibility should still remain of any
government in Australia taking legal questions to, or of
Australian citizens litigating their differences before, the
courts of another country.
The course embarked upon in 1968 by the Government of that
time, with the support of the Australian Labor Party, when the
Government introduced the legislation contained in the Privy
Council ( Limitation of Appeals) Act 1968 for the 
2
purpose of limiting appeals from the High Court to the Privy
Council, should now be brought to its logical conclusion,
a conclusion which we at that time advocated in supporting the
Bill. The introduction of the Bills that the House is now
asked to consider takes the next and final step in that
direction. Mr. Speaker, when I spoke in the House on 1 May
I foreshadowed that the Government would follow the course
of introducing legislation requesting and consenting to the
enactment of British legislation abolishing appeals to the
Privy Council from State Supreme Courts in State matters.
I said that the enactment of such legislation by the
Australian Parliament would provide the opportunity, if so
desired, for a challenge to be made to the validity of the
legislation. If there were to be no challenge within a
reasonable period, or if the validity of the legislation is
upheld under challenge, the Australian Government would
expect that fte British Government would introduce into the
British Parliament the legislation requested and consented
to by the Australian Government and Parliament.
The first of the Bills that I now present and
describe to the House is the Privy Council Appeals Abolition
Bill. The Bill is based both upon the Australian Constitution
and the Statute of Westminster. 
3
The Bill has a two-fold operation. First, clauses
4 to 7 are what I may call self-operating provisions. That is
to say, they will operate of their own force by virtue of the
powers vested in the Australian Parliament. Secondly,
clause 8 requests the United Kingdom Parliament to enact
legislation in the terms of the Bill scheduled to the Act.
Both sets of provisions are directed to the same end, namely,
to bar appeals to the Privy Council from Australian courts
other than the High Court and to bar the reference to the
Privy Council of matters not being appeals from courts, that
arise in or in relation to Australia.
The provisions which I have described as self-operating
have been included in the Bill on the basis that the Australian
Parliament, as well as requesting and consenting to the United
Kingdom legislation on this matter, should assert all powers
open to it to achieve the same result.
Clauses 4 and 6( 1) of the Bill are directed to the
abolition of appeals from Australian courts other than the
High Court. Clauses 5 and 6( 2) are directed to ensuring that
Australian matters that are not appeals from courts shall not be
referred to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. These
clauses are intended to exclude resort to the Privy Council in
cases of the kind that the States, according to reports,
presently have under consideration.
The schedule to the Bill contains the terms of
the legislation which we would expect the British Government
to introduce in the British Parliament. Clauses 2, 3 and 4 
4-
are to the same effect as the clauses in our own Bill that I have
just described to the House.
In connection with the petition on seabed matters
which the States are reported to be contemplating, I should
inform the House that I have sent a message to the British Prime
Minister. The substance of that message is that the Australian
Government considers it would not be appropriate for Her
Majesty to refer any such petition to the Judicial Committee.
I made the point to the British Prime Minister that
the provisions of section 4 of the Judicial Committee Act 1833,
under which the States apparently propose to petition Her
Majesty, will be included among the provisions that will be
repealed when the British Parliament enacts its legislation on
the request and consent of this Parliament. I added that this
Parliament already has under consideration the Seas and
Submerged Lands Bill which, when passed, will provide opportunity,
if it is desired, for all relevant seabed questions to be
determined by the High Court. The possibility of there being
two streams of authority must be avoided. The proper forum for
the determination of these important questions of Australian
constitutional law is the High Court of Australia.
Mr Sppaker, the second Bill is the Privy Council
( Appeals from the High Court) Bill. This Bill completes, so
far as the High Court is concerned, what the Privy Council
( Limitation of Appeals) Act 1968 commenced. 
5
The Act of 1968 abolished appeals to the Privy Council
from the High Court in all matters except purely State matters and
the so-called inter se questions.
The Constitution itself excludes appeals in respect
of inter se questions excepting upon the grant of a certificate
by the High Court. The High Court has granted only one
certificate and that in 1912. For all practical purposes
there is no appeal to the Privy Council from the High Court
in respect of inter se questions.
As to appeals to the Privy Council from the High
Court in State matters, the Australian Labor Party moved an
amendment to the Bill of 1968 to remove altogether the right
of appeal to the Privy Council from the High Court. The
amendment was not accepted. What I have referred to as the
second Bill completes the process that the Australian Labor
Party would have liked to have seen completed when legislation
was before the Parliament five years ago.
Mr Speaker, I believe that by passing this Bill
the Australian Parliament will demonstrate its view that
the Australian courts can and should exercise the final
judicial authority in this land. We all know that in the
High Court we have a Bench whose learning and authority is
respected wherever English law runs.
I commend the two Bills to the House. 



FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL BILL 1973
SECOND READING SPEECH , s 7
BY
THE HONOURABLE EG, WHITLAM, M, P,,
PRIME MINISTER,
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BILL IS TO ESTABLISH THE FILM
AND TELEVISION SCHOOL AS A STATUTORY BODY WITH THE STATUS
OF A COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION, IT MARKS THE CULMINATION
OF THREE YEARS' EXTENSIVE PLANNING FOR A SCHOOL WHICH HAS
FOUND GENERAL SUPPORT IN THE PARLIAMENT AND FROM ALL SECTORS
OF FILM AND TELEVISION IN AUSTRALIA,
HONOURABLE MEMBERS WILL RECALL THAT AN INTERIM
COUNCIL FOR A NATIONAL FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL WAS
APPOINTED AT THE END OF 1969 TO ADVISE THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
STEPS NECESSARY TO BRING THE SCHOOL INTO OPERATION, IT
CARRIED OUT WIDE-RANGING INVESTIGATIONS AND PRODUCED THREE
REPORTS WHICH DOCUMENTED FIRM SUPPORT FOR THE SCHdOL FROM
COMMERCIAL FILM PRODUCERS, THE FEDERATION OF COMMERCIAL
TELEVISION STATIONS, THE AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION,
THE COMMONWEALTH FILM UNIT, GUILDS AND UNIONS, AND EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS, THE SCHOOL WAS OFFICIALLY INITIATED IN APRIL 1972.
NEGOTIATIONS HAVE TAKEN PLACE WITH THE COUNCIL OF
MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY FOR THE SCHOOL TO HAVE A SITE OF FIVE
ACRES ON THE UNIVERSITY CAMPUS, BUT THERE WILL BE NO FORMAL
LINKS WITH THAT INSTITUTION, PROFESSOR JERZY TOE PLITZ,
CURRENTLY VISITING PROFESSOR OF FILM AT LA TROBE UNIVERSITY 
-2-
AND FORMER RECTOR OF THE RENOWNED POLISH FILM SCHOOL, HAS
BEEN APPOINTED FOUNDATION DIRECTOR OF THE SCHOOL, HE WILL
TAKE UP FULL-TIME DUTY AT THE SCHOOL IN AUGUST THIS YEAR.
THE INTENTION IS THAT THE SCHOOL WILL PROVIDE, AT
THE HIGHEST LEVELS, A WIDE RANGE OF TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE
FOR PROSPECTIVE CREATIVE WORKERS IN FILM AND TELEVISION, IT
WILL CONDUCT FULL-TIME COURSES IN FILM AND TELEVISION
PRODUCTION, AND IT IS HOPED THAT IT WILL BECOME A CENTRE FOR
OPEN SCHOOL ACTIVITIES, WHICH WILL INCLUDE REFRESHER COURSES,
SEMINARS AND WORKSHOPS FOR PEOPLE INVOLVED IN THE FILM AND
TELEVISION INDUSTRY, IN EDUCATION, AND FOR ALL FILM-MAKERS
AND VIDEO SPECIALISTS IN THE DEVELOPING AREAS OF AUDIO-VISUAL
COMMUNICATIONS, THE SCHOOL WILL AIM TO MEET THE GROWING AND CHANGING
NEEDS OF FILM AND TELEVISION IN AUSTRALIA AND ALSO TO HELP
OUR NEIGHBOURS, FOR AS THE SCHOOL BECOMES ESTABLISHED WE MAY
EXPECT IT TO OFFER TRAINING FOR OVERSEAS STUDENTS PARTICULARLY
FROM NEW ZEALAND AND THE PACIFIC AREA.
GRADUATES OF THE SCHOOL MAY EXPECT TO FIND EMPLOYMENT
IN PRIVATE FILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION, IN GOVERNMENT
PRODUCTION AGENCIES AND IN OTHER AREAS CONNECTED WITH THE
COMMUNICATIONS MEDIA, I MENTION ONLY UNIVERSITIES, COLLEGES
OF ADVANCED EDUCATION, TEACHERS AND TECHNICAL COLLEGES AS
INSTITUTIONS WHICH ARE INCREASINGLY SEEKING PEOPLE QUALIFIED
IN AREAS OF FILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION AND EDUCATION, 
-3-
To ENSURE THAT THE SCHOOL GETS THE BEST INSTRUCTORS
THE PROFESSIONALS WHOSE LIVELIHOOD IS IN FILM OR TELEVISION
MANY OF THE SENIOR INSTRUCTING STAFF WILL BE EMPLOYED UNDER
SHORT-TERM CONTRACTS SO THAT THEIR SERVICES MAY BE GAINED BETWEEN
OTHER PROFESSIONAL ENGAGEMENTS.
INITIALLY, THE SCHOOL WILL OFFER COURSES IN THE KEY
AREAS OF FILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION FOR DIRECTORS, PRODUCERS,
WRITERS, EDITORS, AND CAMERAMEN. AS IT DEVELOPS, COURS S
MAY BE OFFERED FOR UNIT MANAGERS, DESIGNERS, MEDIA
ECONOMISTS, WRITERS ON GENERAL FILM SUBJECTS, AND COMMUNICATION
THEORISTS AND TECHNOLOGISTS. THE SCHOOL SHOULD EVENTUALLY
DEVELOP FACILITIES FOR POST-GRADUATE STUDY AND OTHER ADVANCED
RESEARCH. TRAINING WILL EMPHASIZE DIRECT PRODUCTION
EXPERIENCE WITH ALL THE PROBLEMS AND DEMANDS THAT ACCOMPANY
PROFESSIONAL PRODUCTIONS.
CENTRAL TO THE SCHOOL WILL BE MODEL FILM AND TELEVISION
STUDIOS, AND THERE WILL BE FULL OPPORTUNITY FOR ON-THE-JOB
TRAINING IN PROFESSIONAL SITUATIONS. MANY SECTORS OF THE
FILM AND TELEVISION INDUSTRY, BOTH GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE, HAVE
INDICATED ALREADY THAT THEY WILL MAKE AVAILABLE FACILITIES FOR
SUCH TRAINING, SUBJECT TO EQUITABLE ARRANGEMENTS BEING WORKED
OUT WITH MANAGEMENTS AND UNIONS.
CLOSE COLLABORATION WILL BE SOUGHT WITH THE INDUSTRY,
AND THE LOCATION OF THE SCHOOL ON SYDNEY'S NORTH SIDE RELATES
TO THE PRESENCE THERE OF A VERY LARGE CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION
HOUSES, TELEVISION STATIONS AND LABORATORIES WITH WHICH
THE SCHOOL EXPECTS TO BE IN CONSTANT TOUCH. 
THE SCHOOL WILL WORK CLOSELY WITH EDUCATIONAL
AUTHORITIES, THE FILM AND TELEVISION BOARD OF THE AUSTRALIAN
COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE MEDIA AND
RELATED AGENCIES, AND WITH THE MANY BODIES REPRESENTING
PROFESSIONAL AND COMMUNITY INTERESTS IN FILM AND TELEVISION,
IT WILL ALSO SEEK CLOSE ASSOCIATION WITH THE OTHER
ARTS, AND BODIES SUCH AS THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DRAMATIC ART,
AND SCHOOLS OF MUSIC, ART AND DESIGN, I BELIEVE THAT,
IN THIS WAY, THE SCHOOL WILL NOT ONLY TURN OUT COMPETENT
GRADUATES IN THE TECHNIQUES OF FILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION,
BUT ARTISTIC AND IMAGINATIVE PEOPLE WITH A VIGOROUS
APPRECIATION OF THE ARTS AND HUMANITIES,
THE SCHOOL WILL CO-ORDINATE THE GRANTING OF FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE TO ORGANISATIONS AND INSTITUTIONS CONCERNED WITH
FILM AND TELEVISION TRAINING AND EDUCATION IN AUSTRALIA,
PARTICULAR ENCOURAGEMENT MAY BE GIVEN TO ORGANISATIONS AND
INSTITUTIONS WISHING TO TRY OUT PILOT TRAINING SCHEMES,
WORKSHOPS, AND ACTIVITIES LIKELY TO LEAD TO THE DEVELOPMENT
OF OTHER SPECIALIST FACILITIES AND THE OPPORTUNITY FOR
COMMUNITY GROUPS TO GAIN EXPERIENCE IN USING THE MEDIA,
AS WELL, THE SCHOOL WILL CONTINUE TO PROVIDE GRANTS-IN-AID TO
PEOPLE WHO MAY BENEFIT THROUGH OVERSEAS EXPERIENCE, STUDY,
OR TRAINING WHICH IS NOT AVAILABLE IN THIS COUNTRY,
IT WILL PROVIDE A RESOURCE CENTRE FOR DEVELOPING NEW
IDEAS, TECHNIQUES AND METHODS AND WILL BE READY TO MAKE ITS
STUDIOS AVAILABLE TO PRODUCERS FOR TRAINING, RESEARCH AND 
I SPECIAL PRODUCTIONS. IT WILL ALSO COLLABORATE IN COLLATING,
DISSEMINATING AND PUBLISHING DATA LIKELY TO ASSIST THE
DEVELOPMENT OF FILM AND TELEVISION IN AUSTRALIA.
I HOPE TO ANNOUNCE SHORTLY THE NAMES OF THOSE WHO
WILL FORM THE FIRST PERMANENT COUNCIL OF THE FILM AND
TELEVISION SCHOOL. THE-MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL WILL BE
DRAWN FROM ACROSS THE WHOLE SPECTRUM OF FILM AND TELEVISION.
THE BILL PROVIDES THAT WHEN THE SCHOOL IS FULLY OPERATIONAL THE
COUNCIL WILL CONSIST OF FIVE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE
GOVERNOR-GENERAL, THE DIRECTOR OF THE SCHOOL, TWO MEMBERS
ELECTED BY THE STAFF FROM AMONG THEIR NUMBER, TWO STUDENTS
ELECTED BY THE STUDENT BODY, AND FIVE MEMBERS ELECTED BY
CONVOCATION OF THE SCHOOL, THE CONVOCATION WILL CONSIST OF
GRADUATES OF THE SCHOOL, ALL MEMBERS AND PAST MEMBERS OF THE
STAFF OF THE SCHOOL, ALL PERSONS WHO WERE MEMBERS OF THE
INTERIM COUNCIL, ALL MEMBERS AND PAST MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL,
AND REPRESENTATIVES OF ALL SECTORS OF AUSTRALIAN FILM AND
TELEVISION. I BELIEVE THAT THE SCHOOL WILL PROVIDE AN IMPORTANT
STIMULUS TO FILM AND TELEVISION IN AUSTRALIA AND I COMMEND
THE BILL TO THE HOUSE. 



NO DATE
M/ 89 31 May 1973
RELATIONS WITH VENEZUELA
SThe Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, announced today that Australia and the Republic of
Venezuela had agreed to establish diplomatic relations at the
S level of Ambassador. Mr Whitlam said that this would be made formal by an
exchange of notes between the Australian Ambassador to the
United States, Sir James Plimsoll, and his Venezuelan
counterpart. Mr Whitlam said that the establishment of diplomatic
V relations would lead to closer co-operation between the two
countries in accordance with the spirit and principles of the
United Nations. 



NO DATE 1 June 1973
MES; SAGE OF CONDOIIENCE T O THE PRIMr'E M. INISTER
OF ITDIA
The following is the text of a message sent by the
O Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr . Uhitlam,
to the Prime Minister of India, Mrs Gandhi, today.
O " I was shocked and distressed to read reports of the
tragic air accident in New Delhi last night. The Government and
people of Australia join me in expressing their profound regret
and deep sympathy for all those families who have been bereaved.
O I understand that your Ministerial colleague, Shri Nohan
Kumaramangalam, was among the unfortunate victims and I know this
must be to you and your colleagues a particular personal loss.
0 The new High Commissioner to Australia, His Excellency
Sardar Gurnam Singh Grewal, had only just taken up his nost but
during that short time his wisdom, courtesy and dedication to his
mission made a nrofound impression on my colleagues and myself.
, e in Australia were honoured to have had such a distinguished
Indian with us even for this short time. Please accept my
personal condolences over his untimely death." 



NQ DATE
M/ 91 4 June 1973
WORLD ENVIRONT-11ENT DAY
The following is the text of a statement to mark the
first World Environment Day ( tomorrow, 5 June 1973) by the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, and sent
to the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Program:-
" The annual celebration of a World Environment Day is an
occasion to take stock of the effectiveness of the policies and
programs instituted by the United N-ations and governments for the
protection and improvement of the human environment.
In associating Australia with the celebration of the first
World Environment Day, one year after the Stockholm Conference on the
Human Environment, I conf* my Government's support for the
principles and declarafion of Stockholm and Australia's intention
to " oursue international and dome-tic nolicies which are in full
harmony with the results and achievements of the Stockholm Conference.
My Government, conscious of the need for the Australian
people to be protected against major hazards to the environment,
has created three new Departments Environment and Conservation,
Tourism and Recreation, and Urban and Regional Development, which, ./ 2 
in co-operation with other Australian Government agencies and the
authorities in the Australian States, are working towards ensuring
that Australians will continue to enjoy the nation's natural and
cultural heritage. We have established a Task Force on the National Estate.
The Task Force will advise the Australian Government on additional
measures and policies for the preservation and enhancement of
features such as historic buildings and towns, urban parks and
scenic reserves and areas along the coastline. The Australian
Parliament has established a Committee on the Environment and
Conservation. We are developing an environmental impact statement
procedure, the objective of which is to ensure that full account
is taken of the environmental impact of all proposed devc-onrments.
We expect that the implementation of this policy will be a most
significant innovation in the orocess of government in Australia.
The peoule of Australia and the Pacific area are currently
faced by a serious threat to their environment from nuclear weaoons
testing in the atmosohere. Principle 26 of the Stockholm Conference
declared that ' man and his environment must be spared the effects
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction'.
The Australian Government strongly endorses this princinle and our
policy is directed towards ensuring th&amp; t present and succeeding
generations will be spared the harmful consequences of contamination
of the environment resulting from nuclar weapons testing. o../ 3 
Australia intends to play a positive and constructive role
in the work of the Governing Council for Environmental Programs in
keeping with the Council's responsibility as the major forum for
continuing international discussion of environmental problems.
It is of particular importance that priority attention be
given to the conservation of wildlife which is so essential inter
alia for the preservation of the ecological balance.
Australia welcomes the drawing up of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna
and we have also recently announced that we intend to join the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources. On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia,
I wish the United Nations every succeeds in its efforts to develop
effective practical measures of international co-operation for the
preservation and enhancement of the environment." 



EMBARGO: 7.30 p. m.
Monday 4 June 1973
INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL WILLESEE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR E. G. WHITLAM, CANBERRA
MONDAY 4 JUNE 1973
WILLESEE: This would seem to be an interview which doesn't
require a great introduction. The Prime Minister, Mr Gough
Whitlam, is the first Labor Prime Minister in 23 years and he
has now been at it for six months. Mr Whitlam; Do you think
that the worst thing that has happened to you so far might
be the Victorian State elections?
PRIME MINISTER: No. That's only an episode.
WILLESEE: Have you had a worse episode in six months?
PhIME MINISTER: No. Of course I was disappointed at: how badly
we did our Party did in Victoria. But I think the clear
thing was this. That a good progressive Liberal can still do
well and keep the middle ground. We won it in Victoria six
months ago; Mr Hamer was able to keep it at the present time.
WILLESEE: Sir Henry Bolte said-, " Thank God for Gough Whitlam!"
PRIME MINISTER: But if Sir Henry Bolte had been there, there
would have been a very different result. Mr Hamer is different
from Sir Henry Bolte and the people of Victoria knew it.
WILLESEE: Do you think yoi~ lre wise to say to the people of
Victoria: Make this a test vote; show me what you think of
the Opposition's actions in the Senate.
PRIME MINISTER: No I wasn't. They took no notice of me.
WILLESEE: Are you sure they took no notice.
PRIME MINISTER: They took no notice.
WILLESEE: Do you ever think that you can do it that way, say
make this a test vote?
PRIME MINISTER: I thought
WILLESEE: If you had won you would have claimed a success,
wouldn't you?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, of course. I suppose this is always the
difficulty. If a Federal Leader is asked to take part in a
State Election, what is he to talk about? All the interests
I have in politics are Federal, not State. So I made a speech
and I put this in, Mr Hamer is a good politician; he didn't
pick up the dead cat. It got no publicity; it had no effect.
WILLESEE: As you have been the front runner in Australian
politics for six months, very clearly. You have been talked
about most. The political atmosphere has been one of discussion
about Gough Whitlam, and one State had an election, and you
didn't do very well. 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: If you want to go on that basis we did very
well in the Brisbane City Council elections. We did very well
in the South Australian elections. I don't take the credit for
either. I am not going to take the blame for the Victorian.
The fact is that on all the issues of significance Mr Hamer
was not at odds with me. Mr Hamer and Mr Holding were putting
substantially the same program as I would put in the position
of either of them.
WILLESEE: What do you think about the Catholic Bishop coming in
and saying '-Don't vote Labor because of abortionP'.
PRIME MINISTER: Well let's be specific. it was one wicked old
man; he is contemptible. I will waste no time on him. He was
a liar and I am not going to enter into controversy with him
WILLESEE: What do you think oE the Church for allowing one of
its Bishops to interfere in politics in that manner?
PRXME MINISTER: I think that the Church would do well to be
tougher and to insist on the retiring age for some of its wicked
old men. But the Church has made terrific changes in the last
couple of decades and there are changes which some Bishops
don't like.
WILLESEE: Did you ask anybody in the Church to try and counteract
what that Bishop said?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no,
WILLESEE: Why not?
PRIME MINISTER: it is not my business; the Church can deal
with these things very well.
WILLESEE: Let's move from one State to the States. One
overriding problem that you appear to be having is one of State
rights, dismissal of the Privy Council, the last court of appeal
and also ownership of Australian minerals offshore. How was it
that you and Don Dunstan can differ so markedly over this?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a difference between all the States
on this issue and the Commonwealth has been ever since
John Gorton first brought it up. There is a difference these
days between the Liberals in the Federal Parliament as there
has been for the last three years. Now the whole point about
it is this. We can't as a nation a llow our offshore resources
to be dissipated in the way our onshore resources were. Look
what would happen if you had six States making different
arrangements as you had, say, Sir Charles Court and Mr BjelkePetersen
doing with onshore resources. We have to deal as a nation or
we fail and Mr Connor has shown how successfully we can deal as
a nation. Look at the deal he got from the Japanese mineral
importers this last week.
WILLESEE: Three of your Labor Premiers disagree with you.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Does that alarm you. 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: No. They are wrong. They are playing the
role of Canute. There is no question that Australians don't
believe that British courts are better than the High Court
of Australia. Why should we still have appeals to the Privy
Council in England? Also I don't believe that Australians
believe the States can look after offshore resources better
than the Commonwealth.
WILLESEE: Would you agree that in most senses you and
Don Dunstan think in a very similar manner?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, we do. We always have; we have been
closely associated for twenty years.
WILLESEE: Then why do you differ so markedly on this one?
PRIME MINISTER: We don't discuss it, we just differ on it.
WILLESEE: Could it be that your respective positions influence
your thinking?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose.
WILLESEE: Well could it be then that Gough Whitlam would like
more power?
PRIME MINISTER: On things like this I am certain that the
Australian Government, whether it was under Mr Gorton or under
Gough Whitlam, needs to carry this responsibility. I am quite
convinced of this and I believe that my predecessors as
Prime Minister would really have been of the same view.
WILLESEE: Do you think Don Dunstan would change his mind if
he were in charge in Canberra?
PRIME MINISTER: No, but he won't prevail on this issue. In
Canberra, yes he probably would.
WILLESEE: You say he won't prevail.
PRIME MINISTER: Of course not.
WILLESEE: In the Federal Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course not.
WILLESEE: Your quite sure on that:?
PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely. Do you really think that the
Federal Conference of the Labor Party would do anything to
down-grade the first Federal Government we have had in a
quarter of a century?
WILLESEE: Could I put that question to you? Do you think they
would? PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: The Labor Party has a rather nasty history of toppling
tall poppies from time to time, 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but not when they are carrying out party
policy. This was settled at our last Conference, and that they
will not be deterred by the obstruction of the Privy Council
or the offshore resources.
PRIME MINISTER: Don't mind me putting this in. The differences
of significance on this matter are within the Liberal Party.
The Labor Party in the Federal Parliament is absolutely united
on this. The Liberals have differed between the House of
Representatives and the Senate.
WILLESEE: I just suggested perhaps unfairly that you may be
motiviated in these actions for a desire for more power. You
have had power for six months now. Do you enjoy that?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, sure. Very much.
WILLESEE: How different does it feel to have power?
PRIME MINISTER: All the frustrations of twenty years preparation
in opposition are no longer there.
WILLESEE: Are there different frustrations now?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose so, but they haven't yet emerged.
WILLESEE: What about Caucus, that body of all the Federal Labor
Parliamentarians who can override you and your Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. They haven't. They are fully involved
in the whole process and they get the same satisfaction.
WILLESEE: What would you do if they did?
PRIME MINISTER: Well of course I would accept it. But is it
Slikely? It hasn't happened. Do not let us be hypothetical
about these things.
WILLESEE: Well politics is almost the art of hypothis isn't it?
PRIME MINISTER: No. it is the art of the possible. And is
Caucus going to embarrass a successful, positive, Government?
They are proud of it. They are part of it.
WILLESEE: In personal terms, while we are talking about,
your attitude to power and so on, you still come under
some criticism for your personality, Strangely you win the
popularity polls that are taken by the survey people. The
last one I recall you were clearly ahead of Mr Snedden and
Mr Anthony in most factors except arrogance. They were rated
to be more humble than you.
PRIME MINISTER: I thought that we were all pretty close. I
suppose they have more to be humble about. Is that what you
expect me to say?
WILLESEE: I don't expect any answer. Does that concern you?
PRIME MINISTER: Not terribly. I expect, you know, it is
inevitable in a Parliamentary system where people are asked 
questions and give answers and so on that whoever has the
numbers, whoever is the Prime Minister or the Premier will
appear or be called arrogant. It goes with the job.
WILLESEE: It is not a peculiarly personal weakness perhaps?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I can't tell. You ask me to be too
subjective.
WILLESEE: The other point, that is raised against you is
that you are sometimes
PRIME MINISTER: Is the Federal Conference tossing me? Are the
State Premiers tossing me, the Caucus tossing me, the
personality faults? What's next?
WILLESEE: We have twenty minutes to go. To be impetuous
appears to be a Whitlam trait? Is it?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't think so. The things which I
do are usually the result of years of consideration. I mean
you have been talking about some of these matters of policy
on which there would be, say, a difference in the Party.
These are deep seated views of mine, you can go back for twenty
years...... WILLESEE: I don't think I can accept that fully, I am not
talking about policy
PRIME MINITSTER: There has been a very consistent or you might
say stubbon adherence to those principles.
WILLESEE: I think I am talking about Whitlam on his feet.
What about the outburst about President Nixon a couple of days
ago. PRIME MINISTER: No outburtt. No outburst.
WILLESEE: Really?
PRIME MINISTER: No. No outburst. You are going on the headlines.
WILLESEE: No, I am going on whht you said. I read it, I
interpret it as a criticism of both President Nixon and the
United States political system.
PRIME MINISTER: I believe Australia has a better political
system than the United States, Don't you?
WILLESEE: It doesn't matter.
PRIME MINISTER: No? Well I think it does matter, and I don't
believe that we gain anything by suggesting that the Australian
political system is inferior to the American political system.
America is a very great democracy but she has run into some
very bad shoals, because of deficiences in the syst%-em.
WILLESEE: You talked about the parlous position that President
Nixon finds himself in because of his personal behaviour. 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: No. I respond to a smart question by my
predecessor saying that I am breaking-in in a Watergate fashion.
Now is the reference to Watergate meant to be insulting to
President Nixon or to me?
WILLESEE: But it doesn't matter. He is not the Prime Minister,
you are.
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Nixon wouldn't take it as flattering.
I didn't take it as flattering either. Watergate has been a
disaster. I didn't mention it, it was mentioned in a question
to me.
WILLESEE: You must accept that what you said could only harm
personal relations.
PRIME MINISTER: No, not at all. Where President Nixon has been
right I have been unstinting in my acknowledgement and praise
of the fact that he was right. He is the first American
President who has faced up, in twenty years and more, to
the existence of China. He is the first one who has faced up
to the necessity of having reasonable relations with the Soviet
Union. He is the first American President for twelve years who
faced up to the necessity of getting out of Vietnam and I
praised him for those three positive achievements.
WILLESEE: Are you the first Australian Prime Minister to face
up to an Axneican President?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, where he has been wrong as I thought he
was and every other leader in the world is of the same view.
He was wrong on the bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong.
WILLESEE: Does it help for you to draw his-* attention to his
embarrassement over the Watergate?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't. The Watergate was raised by my
predecessor.
WILLESEE: And you answered?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. What am I to say? He is in a parlous
position and so is the Presidency because of deficiencies which
have now been shown in the American system compared with ours.
Now look, let's face it. Mr Heath or I, we face a Parliament
every day it is sitting. If president Nixon had had to be in
touch with public opinion every day the Congress was sitting,
things wouldn't have been allowed to drag on till they became
so critical
WILLESEE: Alright, you support
PRIME MINISTER: And I do prefer, and there are many forms of
democracy in the world, I must say I prefer the system where the
Executive is responsible to the legislature.
WILLESEE: Now you stand by your actions and your words about
President Nixon, but you must accept that a lot of people think... 
PRIME MINISTER: That is, I praise him where he is right.
I have done so publicly. I have explained to him privately
where I have thought he was wrong.
WILLESEE: Well, let's accept that there are some people, it
doesn't matter how many, in Australia who are most concerned
about what you said. What are you going to do to allay their
fears? Will you meet President Nixon?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect so. No arrangements have been
made yet. But I am glad you ra * ised this, because the last three
Prime Ministers of Australia has sought an official
invitation to visit the United States, as if it were a test
of legitimacy. They had to go to a coronation. Sir Robert
Menzies, Mr Menzies, he didn't wait for official invitations;
if he was going to Britain or the United States he would expect
to see the Prime Minister, the President. They don't wait
for an official invitation. I expect to see Mr Heath,
I expect to see Mr Nixon.
WILLESEE: It is a fair sort of gamble if it doesn't pay off
in Washington, isn't it?
PRIME MINISTER: On whose side?
WILLESEE: On your side.
PRIME MINISTER: Well let's face it. I am going. It has been
known for months that I am going to the Commonwealth Heads
of Government Conference in Ottawa early in August. Among the
many invitations that I have received to make official visits to
countries where Australian Prime Ministers have never previously
made a visit is Mexico and I said, right, I will go there on
the way to Ottawa. I will obviously go through or across the
United States, and in those circumstances I. would expect to see
Mr Nixon. After all, Australia and the United States are more
closely associated than most of the Commonwealth countries are
associated with the United States. What would be said if I went
straight to Ottawa and didn't visit the United States?
WILLESEE: What would be said if you went straight to Washington
and didn't see Nixon?
PRIME MINISTER: Wait until that happens. You know very well
that anything we say on this program will continue all the
speculation on this matter. Now I believe that President Nixon
is a mature, courteous head of government.
WILLESEE: A lot of Australians see a great need for a big
powerful friend in defence terms. They want some sort of
umbrella and they still see America as being No. 1.
PRIME MINISTER: In the case of a world war, that is so, I
agree. WILLESEE: You would not jeopardise that position?
PRIME MINISTER: Not at all. Don't forget, America needs us
in the case of a world war, just as much as we need America.
WILLIESEE: Do you accept that 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: There is a mutuality of benefit here.
WILLESEE: Some Australian voters think that you are jeopardising
that umbrella?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course some of them think that; they brought
that at the last elections. But the majority of the Australian
people no longer want to touch the forelock to any great
power. They think Australia ought to make some decisions
herself. WILLESEE: Are you happy about the performance of your Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: In most cases I am delighted.
WILLESEE: Does Senator Murphy ernbarass you?
PRIME MINISTER: In some respects, yes; in other respects,
I am delighted with him.
WILLESEE: Where does he embarrass you?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't go over that. But let me bring in
where I am delighted. Nobody could have done more...
WILLESEE: I am sure people are more interested in
PRIME MINISTER: I am not. But I want the public to realise
that Senator Murphy has done a magnificent job, not just for
the Government, but for the Australian nation. In Britain
on the Privy Council issue. In The Hague, before the world
court, on the French Test Issue, and he will do so in modernising,
humanising, our laws. There is no man better equipped to do
these jobs, no man more dedicated in doing them, than
Senator Murphy.
WILLESEE: What about the Croatian controversy?
PRIME MINISTER: I will no re-hash that, at this notice.
Senator Murphy has my complete confidence in doing these things
I have mentioned.
WILLESEE: Do you think a Prime Minister should be able to say a
Cabinet Minister embarrasses me in some respects and let it go
at that? Shouldn't you do something about it?
PRIME MINISTER: I keep a sense of proportion. The important
things have been done splendidly.
WILLESEE: Does Dr Cairns embarrass you?
PRIME MINISTER: No. When he is doing his job as minister for
Overseas Trade he has been the most successful we have had in
our country's history. This visit he has just made to China
will be as significant as the relations which John McEwen was
able to establish with Japan in the middle fifties. This has
been a landmark in our overseas trade.
WILLESEE: You said when he is doing his job. What about when
he steps outside that job? 
-9-
PRIME MINISTER: Well, he doesn't. And I am not going into
various headlines there.
WILLESEE: Do you show unqualified support for Dr Cairns?
PRIME MINISTER: As Minister for Overseas Trade he is the best
Australia's ever had. This has been a landmark.
WILLESEE: You keep qualifying your support to that job.
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to be distracted from the
essential things. I chose Dr Cairns in that portfolio and
I am delighted with his performance of it. And every Australian
ought to be proud of it. This was the biggest overseas trade
mission we've ever had. And it has been very successful.
WILLESEE: Would you like a Cabinet reshuffle?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: You are quite happy the way it is?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. That is the people that Caucus chose for
me I think were good choices. I mean I might have made a few
different choices, but they have been good choices. The
allocation of portfolios I would not change.
WILLESEE: Are you suprised by the performances of some of
your Ministers?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Who?
PRIME MINISTER: That is, I am still more pleased than I expected
to be with many of them, yes.
WILLESEE: Disappointed with some?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: What can you do about that?
PRIME MINISTER: They are learning.
WILLESEE: If you are disappointed with some why don't you
want a Cabinet reshuffle?
PRIME MINISTER: Because they are learning.
WILLESEE: Is it because you can't?
PRIME MINISTER: I could reshuffle the Cabinet, that is, I can
reallocate the portfolios whenever I want to. I don't want to.
They are doing very well.
WILLESEE: Would you like to have the right to choose your
Ministers? 
PRIME MINISTER: No. Certainly not. A lot of people suggest
that somehow this is an embarrassment; it's not in the least.
And the most successful, the only successful Liberal leader in
Australia, Mr Hamer has the same sort of Cabinet, one elected
by his Caucus. That is the effective and democratic way
of going about it. I have alway5 supported it, not least now
that I have such a Cabinet.*
WILLESEE: In very general terms, how is the man in the street
affected by this Labor Government? What is different in his
country for him?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, there are some external things that
we have mentioned already; for instance, what Connor has
done with the export of minerals to Japan, what Cairns has done
WILLESEE: Can I chip in, because that is almost not what I
ami talking about?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, OK then, you mean internally?
WILLESEE: Yes, Foreign Affairs, switch in emphasis and all that.
It takes a long time to get through to the man in the street.
How does he know he is in a different Australia? Or is he in
a different Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Well there are very great number of people
who are already benefittingfrom the things which can be done
swiftly internally, such as welfare matters. There has been
the biggest improvement in welfare payments, repatriation,
social services, that there has ever been, and there is the
guarantee to maintain those benefits in the future. People
in the Armed Forces, certainly, and to a fairer extent the
Public Service, realise that they now have a Federal Government
which will look after them properly. The other things are
emerging; for instance this week we got what I think is
probably the most substantial achievement we have had so far.
We had the report of the Interim Schools Committee. I ordered
it before Christmas, it came in last Wednesday. A couple of
weeks before there was the one on the Insurance, the Health
Funds, and also this week there was the one on the Hospitals.
Now it is on this basis of expert reports which are now available
for everybody to read.
WILLESEE: Are things going fast enough for you?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I mean of course I would like to do some
things more quickly, but it is not possible to deal with, say,
hospitals and schools any faster than what we have. We have
acted on these very quickly. We were in six months last
Saturday and we have got the basic reports in already. Now
that is pretty fast work. The experts have collaborated with
us amazingly, and the State Government, I want to acknowledge
that too. N. S. W. has made available five of their Supreme
Court Judges. New Zealand has made one of their Judges of
Appeal available. And there are several Federal Judges and many
other top business people and academics are happy to work for 
-11-
us, because they know that what they say won't be suppressed,
the public will know what their recommendations are. We are
seeking advice, we are publicising it and w will try to carry
it out.
WILLESEE: Your programs are costing you more than you anticipated,
aren't they?
PRIME MINISTER: In some respects, yes.
WILLESEE: Does that alarm you?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. But at the same time we have a task
force under Dr Coombs, that will cut back on a lot of the
freakless expenditures which we inherited.
WILLESEE: Will this money problem stop you from doing some
things that you want to do?
PRIME MINISTER: It will stop us doing as many things as we want
or doing them as quickly as we wanted. That is true, but we
will be committing ourselves to the programs unquestioningly.
Let me give you an instance: I suppose we will not be able to
carry out the sewerage schemes in all our big cities as quickly
as we wanted to.
WILLESEE: Is your overall job much more difficult than you
thought it would be?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Is it easy?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it is not easy. It is satisfying. There
are some things which obviously I would be able to do better
and my colleagues would be able to do better, if, for instance
the States, were to hand over their railways, and their
hospitals to the Australian Government. The railways and the
hospitals in Australia would be very much better. This will
take longer. I am not surprised at their acting so slowly or
reluctantly, I accept that that is in the game.
WILLESEE: Are you a confident Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I suppose so.
WILLESEE: Are you confident enought to really have a double
dissolution and take both houses back to the electors.
PRIME MINISTER: If the Senate makes it clear, in a few months,
because there can't be a double dissolution for a few months,
the situation has not arisen yet, but if by the end of the
year or early next year it's plain that the Senate will not let
basic legislation through, then we will have a double
dissolution. WILLESEE: You are quite firm on that?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE; You are not prepared to concede any of your
substantive legislation? 
-12-
PRIME MINISTER: The important things are to get th ' e structure
transformed. To get basic legislation through, and if the
Senate prevents that then the people will have to decide.
WILLESEE: Will you let the doctors beat you?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Not just beating us, beat the public.
WILLESEE: How can you stop them?
PRIME MINISTER: The doctors depend for half their incomes on
the taxpayer. The doctors, specialists and surgeons, depend
on the public to provide them with their equipment, their
laboratories their operating theatres, and so on. There is no
calling in Australia which depends so much on public
expenditure taxation as the doctors.
WILLESEE: But precisely how do you make them compromise?
How do you make them see reason, see what you would see as
reason?
PRIME MINISTER: The conditions on which doctors use public
facilities, the conditions on which the public underwrites
doctors incomes, is determined by elected people, by Government.
WILLESEE: But if you take action in those areas you risk
hurting the people again, the patients.
PRIME MINISTER: No we won't.
WILLESEE: Are you satisfied you will win?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Public opinion is behind us. Because
doctors will do very well out of our programs. We want the
public to have as good a health service as possible. Now don't
forget that the doctors are very much divided on this. There
are only, in simple terms, some of the general practitioners,
who are obstructing. The research people, the specialists,
the surgeons, the young ones, they are in general much in
favour of what we want to achieve on behalf of the Australian
public. WILLESEE: Mr Whitlam, we are now out of time now. You have been
Prime minister for six months, how long do you think you will
be Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I am determined to give up the job before I
am sixty-five. So what is that, another three Parliaments?
WILLESEE: Mr Whitlam thanks very much for talking with us. 



Press Conference given by the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr
E. G. Whitlan, at Vigyan Bhavan, New D-lhi, at 3.15 6 June
1973 Prime Minister: Mr, D'Penha and ladies and sentleen: You alreatr
have a copy of the conmunique that your Prime inister and I have
issued, so I think I'll just invite you to ask questions of me forthwith.
When I give my weekly press conference in Canberra, I start off with
the decisions that the Cabinet has made that day. Then I have questions.
Well, of course, I can't announce any Cabinet decisions, so we'll
just have the questions.
Mr. Virendra Mohan, Sir, you have been talkimn about creating
a peace zone in the Indian Ocean and you want in play a leading part
in that. Since Australia has so many militarj alliances with the
Western countries, could you please explain how would the countries
in this region establish the bona fides of Australia
Prime Minister: The proposal for a zone of peace in the Indian
Ocean came from Sri Lanka at the General Assembly of the United Nations
in 1971. At that time, India supported the proposal. . IMy memory
is that the then Australian Goverrment, our predecessors, did not.
When the sane proposal cane up six months ago, ry Goverrment supported
the proposal and, in particular, the new aspect-of it that there
should be an ad hoc conmittee to examine and develop proposals for
this zone of peace. And Australia, like India, was elected to
that committee, that ad hoc conmittee. Accordingly, this was one
of the things that your Prime Minister and Foreign Minister and I
discussed because we not only belog to this ad hoc committee, but
this year we both belong to the Security Council of the United
Nations. Now, it's true that there are some military installations
in Australia under agreements with the United States. There is
one particular one at North West Cape in Australia, whose title
describes where it is. Eut these at this stage are purely that
the ad hoc committee is exanining, purely exploratory discussions
and it wi? ; ake zome time, presumably, before a zone of peace can
be achieved. But we want to play our part. I don't think I should
accept your description we want to play a leading part. We want
to play our part, full part, in seeing that any disarmament proposal
which is available for support or ratification by the littoral
and insular States in the Indian Ocean is supported or ratified. 
-2-
My Government has already ratified all such proposals and which
are available up to this stage.
Suresh, of Reuters: Are you comparing the situation why Australia
would ask for the scrapping of installations in Australia
Prime Mnister: The installation at North lVest Cape operates under
an agreement which v,, as made 10 years ago for a space of 25 years
if there is a treoat that extends until 1988. Our Minister for
Defence is proposirg later this year to go to ; hc United States
to seek modifications of that treaty, both as to the duration of
it, and also as to the scope available to Australia under the treaty,
to ascertain and ejprove the use of it.
Chakravarty, from " The Iindustan Times": Would you, Sir, kindly
explain really what this peace zone implies. Ebr one thing the
assumption is that the big powers really are the naughty boys who
come and create tension. As far as I know, none of the littoral
States, including Australia, has really any naval force worth the
task it will undertake, even for surveillance, much less to prevent
the big powers from coming in. Now, how do you go about it
Is it merely a wish depending upon the goodwill of the big powers,
or just a self-satisfaction, or what is it really
Prime Minister: Obviously, one can't have a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean unless the great powers, particularly those powers
which have great raval forces, agree. Nevertheless, there can
be quite a deal of suasion exercise on the great naval powers, none
of which, of course, abut on the Indian Ocean. If all those nations
who do abut on the Indian Ocean concert measures to dissuade them.
This will take some time, but I am prepared to let bygones be bygones.
Well, I don't think anybody should dispute the great power rivalry
has been a cause of major tension and violence in the area between
India and Australia, particularly in South-East Asia.
Question: Mr. Sabarwal: Can there be a zone of peace in the
Indian Ocean while the United States has military bases all over
the region The seventh fleet is roaning about. It is being
followed by the Soviet fleet. China is augmenting its naval
power, so is Japan. So, it is just a wishful thinking
don't you think so 3 
Prime Minister: There are fewer naval ships in the Indian Ocean
thau in the Atlantic or Pacific Ocean, as I understand it. We
certainly can agree not to promote naval rivalry in the Indian Ocean.
I don't think one should exaggerate the size of the Soviet or the
American fleets which roan the Indian Ocean.
Swaninathan, " Deccan Herald": In the joint ccmmnaique it is stated
that the Australian Prime Minister state d that ms Government
not only intends to expand the present progranme of assistance
engaged here, but has also given consideration to further changes
in Australia's preferential trade with developing countries.
Could you expand on this please
PRIME MINISTE: I couldn't list any specific proposals at this
stage. We were discussing many of these matters, the fields in which
there can be co-operation between India and Australia. Iuich of
the Australian interest in India, I gather, has been particularly
effective and welcome because it is appropriate to the climate, to
the pastoral, t) e agricultural situation of India. Australisns
have developed, as you expect, skills in respect of dry land agriculture.
They have participated in several stations with cattle and with
sheep, I think to a certain extent with grains. We have also shared
in the development of better varieties, more palatable, more nutritious
varieties of bread and these are not inmense schemes they are not
dramatic schemes, but they have gone on for quite some years and
I have been gratified on this visit to hear the extent to which these
schemes between Australia and India are appreciated by Indian inisters
and officials. I have brought with me on this occasion Sir John
Craford, who has had a long record in administrative and academic
circles. He would, I suppose, have visited India more often than
any top officialand he has had discussions with your Ministers and
officials and I have also brought Mr McKay, who is the Permanent
Head and Secretary of our Department of Overseas rade. So, while
I would claim no great expertise in in these matters nmself, you
will see that Sir John Crawford and Mr M( Kay's presence indicate
that I want to involve the top experts available to my Government
in arrangements ,' ith the Government of India. in these respects.
NowasI can't list further schemes, I suppose that if you want to
know more later, I can get some addresses or nases from the High
Commissioner or his staff. But, nevertheless, the general scheme
we want to develop is that Australians as individuals, coming 
-4-
from a country which has had may of these problems, a country
which I think can be said is not so overbearirg economically, that
it doesn't unders land the problems of India.
Question: This momirg the Minister for Agriculture met you Sir.
Did he discuss with you the food position in India and did he ask
for anr assistance f= m your country
Prime Minister: He discussed the food position in India, but he
didn't ask for food assistance because as our : spresentatives in
Delhi have made knovm, this last season has been a very bad one for
Australia. We have no spare wheat, for instance, ourselves, nor
I think ay spare rice. And we, in fact, wcre not able to fulfil
some orders which were offered to us for wheat and rice. There are
limitations in Australia on the number of acres, I think you call
them hectates, which can be planted with such crops. But those
limitations have been virtually lifted for this coming season.
That means that we would expect, unless there is some weather reverse,
to produce much more grain in the next season. That doesn't mean,
however, that there can be ay wheat available before next Ibbruary,
nor rice, I think, before next May.
Bill Mann, Associated Press: You mentioned the possibility of
renegotiatirg with the United States about the-communications station
at North West Cape. Are these negotiations alreay in progress,
or does your Goverment want to start such negotiations now
Prime Minister: They have been initiated tmrough America's and
Australia's diplomatr c representatives in their respective capitals,
but there will be no negotiations until later in the year. I
think I should say that the agreement which was made in 1963
was one which America would not expect any coun-ry now to undertake
and which, I an certain, no country now would undertake. But
it is there until 1988. Its conditions are not satisfactory
in the present clikate of international opinion. I don't want
to pursue matters concernirg the United States and Australia when
I an outside my own country. I don't want to go into any further
detail on this subject. 
Vinod Gupta. 3Samachar Bharati: Mr Prime inister, you had a
discussion with our Lrime Minister on the situation in the sub-continent.
What do you thil are the prospects of peace here and would you like
to make an observation about the Pakistan move in the World Court
or certain othor matters taken by Pakistan in the international
conmunity to
Prime Minister: I don't want to accept many invitations/ conment
on relations betecen India and other countries because I've been at
many places over the years where I know that relations between India
and Pakistan have dominated discussions to the exclusion of most
other matters. I an optimistic that the de facto situation of
Bangla IDsh and Pakistan will now be accepted by Pakistan and by
China. I would not only be naturally distressed, but I would be
very much surprised if there was an outbreak of war again.
Mukheree, The Times of India: Question not clear.
Prime Minister: We have taken no steps to seek an invitation to
attend the non-aligned conference at Algiers. If we are asked to
attend, we shall accept that invitation. We would do so as an
observer, because it can't be said that Australia is a non-aligned
nation. To give you an exanple, however, of a cocntry which is
very similar to Australia in most aspects which you like to contemplate,
S Canada. Canada is not a non-aligned country, but it has, on occasion,
accepted an invitation to attend the non-aligned conference as an
observer. The idea about this cane two or three months ago when
the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia after visiting India cane on to
visit AusoTalia. Yugoslavia, India, Egypt, I think, were the
original sponsors of the non-aligned conferences, the first beirg
held in Belgrade back in the 1950s, and he mentioned this subject.
We didn't seek an invitation, but we said tc him, as we have said
when this matter has arisen since then, that if we receive an
invitation, we shall accept it.
Question: Sir, did you discuss this matter in your discussions
here with Mrs Gmandhi
Prime Minister: I forget whether it. I think that just about
one sentence, I think it didn't occupy about as much time as I have 
Uta1en
in nsxerirg the question. Th . e fact is that wie are not a
non-aligned country, but if we receive an invitationt to attend the
conference as an observer, wie would accept it. But it cane up
in the general context of the arrangemernts that each of our-countries
has or is to have with other countries.
Juestion: 0. idea of forming an -josociation of -Azian
and Pacific countries &amp;, nd 1he general discussion here with the Prime
Minister
Prime Minister,. Not withttbe Prime Minister. ThLe Foreign Minister
asked me wha L had iii mind in this regard and I told him that the
matter proceeded no further than that. You will understand that
while I was having direct discuissions with your 11inisters, and their
advisers and my advisers were docidcd that we each sought the views
of the other on matters which concerned either of us. It was an
excellent opportunity to deal directly and, if niecessary, intensively
with arW of thesq matters. Now you will appreciate that historically
Australia has belonged to certain organisations they aren't correctly
described as regional but, nevertheless, we have during the 1950s
and 1960Is joined certain organisations. Perheps to heRlp you while
we are all here tog, : tltlr, I were to go tln'ouglh-the. i The first was
in 1951 when AustrnaJ a, New Zealand and the United Sitates formned
the . ANZIJS treaty. Thbis was a week before there was the -peace treaty
signed with Japan in-San P~ rancisco as part of the deal. And this
* is a-treaty which a23-tl= Ie of us regard. as still relevant and
valuable. After theP Gorzva Conference in 194 11cLanila. pact was
drevim up and SEATOII vas formed as its instrument in aibout 1955.
Eig6t nations belonged to i# not all of them, of courase, in th-e
region. a-io df them have now withdrawn from the orgaisation
Pdistan and Rc-ance.. Its objective was to contain China. That,
of course, iu' d now 41&amp;' vto be a futile objective. I have said
that the SEATO treaty is moribund. We haven't dom anything so
dramatic as to withdraw frm it. But, io will rot tolerate anyw
anti-Chinese aspe cts of it., It's already pulled its head
The 1Manila. Pact may still1 have some residual virtues. . We are prepared
to give it achano but not if it involves any -nti--Chinese containin~
n. fli~ h~ w&amp;~ N ext th~ r6 w~ o 1966 W~ hen President
Lyndon Johnson was. sceir support. to. legitmate or -dresu Anerica' s
intervention in Vietra... Jn Manla&amp; aain ASPAC was fon~ ied,
11 1I
-AbR t. r..~~ il 
It's entirely a repgion&amp; i 6: rgarasatioñ. It is th-. e only regional
organisation of a. political character to whrich. Japan belongs or
Australia belong., s, w~ hich haP the vice, however, of having, amnrg its
mEmbers Taiwan. Half the mEmbers no ' longer reccgise the, Govermn~ t
in Taipeh as the Gov= Laent of the whole of Cina. TLhey now
recognise the' fact th at the Goverment in PekingT is . the, Governnment
of the whole of China kind that TaJiwan-is a province of~ China,
as, of course Ch1.1iacg Kai She* says just as nu-1h Vs 1ap M e Twi
says.;, kist ralia,' YNm eVelad apan nokv accit the In these
circumstances tlab uitility, of-A2PAC is' ' greatly7 reducdd. ' It is now
* ana obstx~ ctiofrL to, regiunal aragerhents. TinW y' there are the
ave Power Arraxjements under w-hich Britain, -Australia and , New
Zeala. nd have made defence a-Tgements in case of contirfngencies
* with Malaysia and Singapore.. 1r Goverrment supports the 1ave
Power Arraxgrnents bec= e the reasons they p.~' vide for btqilaing
Malaysia and Singapore' a defence capacity,. enabling them to stand
on their feet and providing for consultation in the case of attacs
fmm outside u-pon'then.. We dont't support the feature of stationiig
a battalion or battoxy in Singapore. Singapore h ad never asked
for then the. presence of the battery or battalion are not
necessary under the -Five Power Arrarpganent. -The Fi. ve Power
Arrngements are transitionial arrarfemetts and a.' e accept , them.-
We ane quite happy in Austraia to cons ilt wi-th other countries
in any respects -which will make them better able to stad on their
fedt in defence ma1ters. Now. those are the three regional argarge-
* ments to whiich Australia is a party."' You will 6.0e thaI they are
even moribund, objectiona-ble or transitional. Wie don' want to be
entirely negative. We just don't denounceO p ullbu of such
arran~ gements. It-is better to give some other arrawements if
one can. They are dealing, I should imragine, to have lsomethifng,
like the Crgani~ ation of American States or the Orgai9ation of
Afia Unity/ To give the situation which Alustralia. find~ s,
South Australia and N~ w Zealand both have ver grat links -with'
Japan. but there is joorg . nisation to which-they belong oth= r.
thantheAsii ] velowxenl Bank or the . ECAV. E' o we would envisagc
the creation o C some, arangerient under which -the nati6ns bdt-veen
I.', us should consult regularly. I hasten to aqsure you there is
( fsuggestion t~ iat li: is shsould be, a military, pact.. There wold1
Ynev~ r be', T would gu ss he litary pact dran isaxywer
q n the Wworr'r 17 pol Dne in gny,'
j. U AI J 
8-
military sense. There is at this stage only one regional
organisation which has coherence and a fatare. That is ASI'AN,
the Association of South East Asian Nations in-donesia. Singpore,
Mlaysia, Thailand and the Philippines. "' PAN -wants to consolidate
itself for exadn. It gives prort tonw mianbership by
Bunna and the f'ou. r Indo-China States.
Question: Question not clear.
Prim Minister. I don' t subscribe to the idea.. The general
principle is, of course, that the ships of any nation, whether they
are merchant marine or Navy, can sail aihrwhere on the high seaw.
Question: Rred iBridgeland, Reuters: Clearly as a result of your
visit here, ti-ere has been intensification of finendship between
India and Au. stralia. Bat what I a wondering at is has there
F1or0 exmrple, India is vey keen on exporting its manzfactured
prodd clts to other counries and I don't see in your commtunique
that you speak of the desirabillity of secuxing greater diversifation
of economic relat-ions. Have you made aTV ccxriutment to import,
for example, Irhdian made engineerirg goods
Prime Minister, I an not in a position to makce commitments in
such particularitics. It is tnie, and I ' ielcome the op~ ortunity
to say, that iThc-a is ixv a great industrial iation. India's
ergineerirg is first class. I hope that othcr nations will realise
how skilled and dependabl e India' s f actories .11, d wcikshops are in
this regard. Aastral-ia, however, even more than. India has a mixed
ecoom... There are a great number of activities in Australia
industries wjhere the decisions to purcha~ se must be made by directors
of companies. I would hope that this visit will alert people in
Australia and in India to the fact that thore are more goods which
we Can buy frm each other. Bat there is not a specific proposal
in this regard. I think that somewhere else in the
cormniqual~ h~ se about extending the axmE. anents which our
predecesso~ rs initiated of giving, tariff preference for goods from
developing countries. Yes, in paragraph 15 of t ' he conmunique you
will see something that was deliberately put in ahd I thinkc it
ywas an initiative by Australia and a tribute to our prededossors
in office for havi t initiative..., and xv-, e would be happy to
' I 0 9 
9-
extend it. We have discussed questions today th-ere was a reference
in one of-L the earlier quest1-ions for extension of agricultural
co-operation and th-1-en there were discussions between me aid-the
ricultu-re and Coiicrce M. iister on., say, the wool industry and
the iron ore industryw, particularly the exports. These are matters
which ve di~ lnlt conclude today. I arn not t~ he relevant Minister
in. these matters, -: a. ft1-ough it was verv us L or metU eryu
Ministers on tlizse subjects. Rat mxy princip,, l public service
advisers, as I : u, 7e ared, who axe here, w-id I thiik there is a
chance of flo r t . esc thirgs up. I take the general view
that any Govermen~ t, any enterprise should bear in ind that
0India is not onlay the second lai-best nat~ i. on in the world in terms
of population, but has, by comparative standards, a very stable and
dia'ble set of inistitutions.
Mrh. Suni: Mr Prime Minister, I'Im contin~ ing the smne question
asked by ni -predoc -ssor. There has been a talkc of joint ventures
between the two countries. -So far Australia's trade with India
been of very small ard meagre...
Cannot it be possible for us to get together also...
Prime Minister. ' here is no plan at this stige, but I think you
can be assured that there wjill be a consultation between India
and Australia and some other inon ore cxportiJrg countries of these
matters. Now, i don' t wiant to be tILI r ot suggesting
for instaxme, the
OPEC to the price and quantities at whi~ ch we will sell petrleun
products to thirsty industrial counatries on either side of the
North Atlantic. . qvn ot sugestirg that. 1hv-oi rrient is very
mucL mare of * thce need to develop s~ mc resources policy. We
rave a federali system in Australia as you do in India. . And,
unifortunately, fCrLM the point of view of " w Govermnent, the
arrargements which hazve been madc for the e~ c loitation, transportation
and processing and sale of our minerals have beer. nmade
by multi-national corporations under the anLspices of our State
Goverrrents. The State Governments have f allon.
My Govermnent ha,-been in just for six months and I would imagine
.6 
10
that in the sense o~ f resources, our greatest achievement has
been to transform the practices with respect to these very valuable
natural resources. We are now settin~ g up a Federal ' Pipeline
Authority for the natural gas in Australia. W,' e have applied to
all minerals what hidtherto had been applied to some minerals only
mainliy an export -programe, sc that the contracts which are made
from now on for the export of our minerals w,. 1 lbe
a1pproved on a nati-onal basis. ile have renegotiated the agreements
for the sale of Australian iron ore to Japan, wh ich had been made
in U. S. dollar These required renegotiation since just befone
Christmas we , z~ valucd the kust -ii an dollar aEgainst the U. S. dollar
a-d then, four months ago, the U. S. dollIar was devalued by its
Government. So, we have renegotiated those ogain and then, lastly,
we have made arements to assert the national juuisdiction
over the continental shelf and the seabed aTO he resources of
them below and beyond the low-water mrk~. Our States have found
this far too revolutionary an idea. They are going of f to London
at the moment asking the British Govermnent to save them from the
Australian national Goverrment.
aiestion: Question not clear. WhyV is the comnunique shy
o f nanixg
Prime Minister: T-rmce is not the only country. which carrim* es out
nuclear tests in -the atmospht-ere. China a-so ccarries them out.
* Australia has tdcon proceedings againrst Rraico and not aigainst China
in the International Curt of Justice becauSe Prance is China is
not a party to the statute of t.. e Iternational Court of justice
and because France is Chiina is not a p,-xty to the 1928
for the peaceful settlement of internatiornal dis putes. Australia
has, thereforep asked the Court to rule that this international
dispute between. signatories to the 1928 Genox'al Act falls within.
the jurisdiction of the World Court. We can't ta-ke those proceedings
against China because it is not a party to . Act.
Qaestion: Mr li'ine Minister, I'm told that your Govermient is
reviewing your relations with U. K. Am-you adopting a more radical
Spolicy. Had you any discussions with India haiving joint moves
. in-the Conronwealth? 
Prime linister: No, No, there have been no suggestions, no discussion
on this aspect. I'm not quite sure that I get the intention behind
your question, the drift of it. As for the Comornmealth, myr Goverrment
lays great stress upon it because more than half the members of
the Comonorelth are around or in the Indian Ocean and the South
Pacific Ocean, the two Oceans which wash Australia's-shores. The
Comnmormealth thus provides a natural forum witiin which Australia
and all these oti,, er countries can discuss ary matters at all. You
scarcely would find such a diverse set of natioris economically and
politically as there are in the Ccmmoraealth, but the discussions
which takce place between them in in that frnework are much moie
tolerant, patient, than take place between such diverse nations in
any other circumstances. Now that being between
SAustralia and Britain. There are two particular matters where
we want to make a change. We still have God Save the Queen as
our National Anthem and, particularly, among younger people who are
interested in sporting events and so on, they find this is a matter
of shame or at least ridicule that if any of our people win an
international event, the British National Anthem is played to
conmmemorate the occasion. And we are holdirg a competition to
devise a National Anthem of our own. Now this is scarcely a
revolutionary idea. It should have happened ages ago. Australia
really is one of the oldest States in the world. Now, we have
had independence throughout this century. Ve still kept on this
relic. There is another thirng that we want to charge. I told
you that we are a federal system and it is still possible for litigants
to take their disputes in appeal from the Supreme Courts of our
States to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London.
It is, of course, absurd that citizens of axy country can litigate
their differences before a court sitting in another country,
composed of Judges appointed by the Goverment of that other
country and giving judgements in the for of advice to the head
of State of that other country. The Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council delivers judgements which are advice to the Queen
of the United Kingdom, not to the Queen of Australia. ell, this
is a matter which we are aiming to alter. I an embarrassed and also
I an ashaned because it find it more ludicrous than anything else,
but the Australian States are now asking the British Goverrment
to keep thie Privy Council to save them from Australia's own courts. I have
ro doubt Australia's Judges are not amused.. You must bear with
it these colonial hangovers. Now, inidentally, the title
.12 
of -the Queern in Australia has been for the last 20 years, Elizabeth
II, by the grace of God, of the United Kingdom, Autralia and her
ortehlem s nd errtories Queen, head ofO the Corrmomealth, Defender
of the Faith. Now. over Easter it was arranged betwveen us that
the title should now be and there is an Act before our Parliament
to ratify this, Elizabeth II, by the Grace of God, Queen of Australia
and other rea1xns a~ nd territories, head of -the Corrmomealth. The
Queen positively vielcomes being described as 4. ieen of Australia,
instead of Queen of the United Kingdom, Australia, Ctc. She
positively welcomes t'hat and there is no Oisagrecnent about dropping
the title Defender the Faith, which has no histrnica. or
constitutional validity, in Australia. We are a separate country
from Britain. ' We cire an entirely independent country. Vie have
. the same head of State, but the head of State f-unctions are carried
out by the Governor-Gcneral, who is nominated by the Queen on the
advice of the Auntraliaxi Governuent and now it will aways be an
Australian citizenw; ho is the Govenro-General.
Q2estion: Ame you convinced that Britain is interested in the
Conioiveth
Prim Minister: Britain is no longer obsessed o~ ith the Cormon--
wealh. tplrce much emphasis on it.. 4k
but that doesn't moa , the other members: of the iCbnmealth shouldn't
place emphasis on tvit. There would be relations betw4een Australia
and Britain whether there was still a CoiMovelth or not, or whether
Britain and Australia v-, ere both or either in the Commrorealth or
mot. I value the Conhiomealth particularly because as I say it is
verywid-) read and a tolert'nt oiiganisation to vh]~ i: 1ch so ma. V
States within Austr-alia's general environnent belong. I believe
there is value for us in this connection.
Mr Raghavan, P. T. AMr Prime Mfiister, what is the position
of the Asian-Pacific Association..... . Is it correct to assume that
you am' not having in mind any security arrangements as such or wV
security ideas and if it is an organisation that you are envisaging
like the Organisation of Africani Unity or the Oiganisation of
American States In the United Nations itself Australia is
clubbed together with the West European countries, or you plan
to have some changes in this direction
( I 3 
Prime Minister: I certainly wouldn't envisage that any arrangements
which are made in the Western Pacific or South-East Asia
would have any military connotations. I wouldn't wish it. I
would think it quite unrealistic to expect them even if I did wish
thm. Australia; Canada and Iew Zealand, I thirk, are grouped
with the Western XEropean nations for the purpose of filling the
vacancies on the Security Council and on the verious organs of the
United Nations. It's purely a voting pattern, purely for electoral
purposes. There is no ideological.......
It's just for electoral purposes. And
in that group don't get together, as I understand it, to have
political discussions cr to caucus on decisions they will take.
I take this opportunity of saying that I have made it plain to our
0 representatives in the United Nations that from now on they are not
only to ascertain what the intentions on any resolution are by
Britain and America. I also want to be inforned what compary we
will be in in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. To give examples,
I don't say that this is exhaustive. I want my officers to advise
me always what they believe the coting intentions will be of
Canada, Japan, Indonesia, India and some of the African countries,
for example Tanzania. I find it quite objectionable that so often
in the past Australia found herself voting on the other side to
all her neighbours, including all the Commonvealth countries in the
Indian Ocean. I thirk this is irrational. I , think it is counterproductive.
It doesn't mean that one disregards on how Britain
and America are going to vote, but they are not the only people to
whose vote one will pay regard. There can be instances where
the interests of 3ritain or America may diverge from those of
Australia. And, of course, there can be instances where the
interests of India and Australia can diverge. The main thing
is, however, that we should at least understand what each of
us has in mind, wihat wve regard as our interests.
Question: Question not clear relates to the massive anns
deal concluded with KLuwait, Saudi Arabia, Iran. oIn't you think
redkless and irresponsible
Prime Ministor: I have really only discussed these matters
in any degree...... this week and I wouldn't like to express a
view on the short and shallow opportunity I have so far had
i 14 
14
to discuss the matter. The Persian Gulf is very obviously now
in every sense the Persian Gulf and these sJa 1 States around the
Gulf with a total population of, I think, only 200,000, have very
great oil reveues and they are able to establish very considerable
air forces. I thirk they are only 1fighter crcraft, but I really
should look in to this more before expressing a view upon it. Iran
is a nation of considerable opulation and, in some respects, of
very great resoirccU: s a. nd it also has as i ts head of State an experienced
and determined man. WAe,/. one looks at any strategic
situation, one obviously has to have regard to the cohesion of the
nations concerned. But tire fact that Iran, one of the oldest nations
in the world, is now developirg a degree of cohesion in international
significance is a matter which doesn't worrj me. I would expect
that a nation o: f that location, of that history, of that population,
would develop significance.
i: 



NO DATE
M/ 92 6 June 1973
PRII7, MI". ISTR'S VISIT TO I1IDIA
Following is the text of a speech given by the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, at a dinner
given in his honour by the Prime Minister of India in New Delhi on
Monday, 4 June, 1973.
" It is a moving occasion indeed for me to be here on your
invitation as Prime Minister of Australia, in your canital in
this ancient seat of kings, emperors, viceroys and now the centre
of the world's largest democracy.
Your gracious invitation came very soon after the change
of Government in Australia. Nothing could have been more gratifying
0 to me, nothing could be more attuned to my own desires than that I
should return to India as soon as nossible in the life of my new
Government. The honour you have done me, and through me, Australia,
is deeply anureciated and will not easily or quickly be forgotten.
In the countries I have so far visited an Prime Minister,
in New Zealand, in Indonesia, in Canada, in Britain, I have been
at some nains to emphasize the continuity of Australian policy
desnite the change of Government. / 2 
-2-
I do so again here in India. There was, for example, no
disagreement between the two sides in the Australian Parliament
about the support given by the previous Government to the_ emergence
of Bangladesh as an independent nation.
The previous Government's prompt recognition of Bangladesh
was warmly sup-norted by the whole Australian people. Nevertheless
I cannot help but feel that there has been something missing in
recent years in the relationship between our two countries.
There has been perhaps too much of the feeling that we can
take each other for granted. It is, for instance, just not good
enough that I should be the first Australian Prime Minister to visit
Delhi for fourteen years. It may be that because of our recent
preoccunation with Indo-China and the fascinating possibilities
Australia has before her in developing new-relations with China
and Japan, our relations with India have not been given the
attention they should have. If this has been so I intend to amend
it and amend it thoroughly.
I particularly look forward to closer co-operation with
India in the United Nations. We are now both members of the
Security Council. When my Government took office I gave a number
of new instructions on the way our votes would be cast in the
Security Council and the General A: asembly.
It is significant I think that all the departures from
the orevious pattern of voting have brought us in line with India.
It has not been, of course, a question of our just following / 13 
-3-
India: but it is an indication of the closeness of our views on a
great range of issues facing the world on race discrimination, on
de-colonisation, on Southern Africa, on human rights, on the need
to keep this region free of great power rivalries.
We gratefully acknowledge the moral leadership India has
so often given in the cause of world neace. In that continuing
quest we can never forget or overestimate the pioneer role played
by your father. Perhaps never in human history and certainly not in the
history of the democracies has so great a man had his works so
faithfully and splendidly carried forewsrd by his daughter.
The generation in which India achieved indenendence was one
not lacking in great world leaders. None lives so brightly in the
memory, not only of the millions of his fellow countrymen but all
mankind, as Jawaharlal Nehru.
I find it fascinating to read in his great work, " The
Discovery of India", his observations about Australia fascinating
and moving at the same time, because this profound book was written
in a British nrison when his work and the work of his own father
for independence seemed smashed beyond hope. And I find that in a
book in which he has drawn deep lessons from the history of India
covering 5,000 years, he drew an example from an event then occurring
in my own country a referendum whether to give greater social
powers to the Central Government of Australia. / 4 
He speaks of the continuing difficulty confronting
Central Governments in Federal systems in persua~ ding the States
to abjure any morsel of t'leir powers, even in war.
The defeat of that referendum in 1944 happened to be a
crucial event in the development of my own political thinking. I
find it profoundly moving that such an event in siuch a far off
country provided a lesson for so great a man at such a crisis in
his own life. The lesson, I'm afraid, is still to be learnt in
my own country. It was also in that work that Nehru said that the measure
of Indian progress would be the role India would give to her women.
Your premiership, Madam Prime Minister, is certainly a striking
symbol of that nrogresrs. Never in history has a woman faced so
formidable a task and met that task with such skill and devotion.
With the change of Government in Australia, my country
loolks for a fresh apnroach and we hope, a more fruitful approach
towards all our neighbours. I have indicated that we are seeking
no sharp break with our past role but we are certainly not
satisfied by all the aspects of the role Australia has played in
the past. My Government could not, for instance, be content to
maintain the old course of a generation of unthinking hostility
towards China. Yet our policy is not by any means to place China at the
centre of our afflairs: rather we seek to ratify the reality of 
China as a significant member of the world community.
We do not propose any radical change from our traditional
close friendship with the United States: but wve now look for a
more matiure, a give-and-take relationship. Again, w-. e will continue
our very close friendship -with Britain: but we want a relationship
based less on kin and more on kind namely on th-e basis tho, t we
are tl.. o indep-endent nations of a kind, with common interests as
well as common institutions.
So I would want our developing policies to be seen more
as an effort to remove anomalies rather than as a complete breaking
with the past. This is particularly so in the case of India. The anomaly
I find is this:-here are two great democracies bordering the
Indian Ocean, both members of the Commonwealth, both deeply
dedicated to world peace, both with Federal systems, both holding
great institutions in common: and yet we haven't forged the very
close relations I believe we should have.
I profoundly believe that Australia has everything to
gain by the closest possible co-operation with India. W4ith all
that we hold in common there is no need for formal or written
arrangements: our friendship need be no less enduring and.
fruitful for that.
Madam Prime Minister: Australia is proud to be as
closely related with so great a nation, so remarkable a
civilization, as India. Of course, our views sometimes 
-6-
perhaps our interests will not always coincide. I believe what
both our countries seek is a relationship mature enough to
acknowledge such differences and to discuss them freely whenever
they arise. It is a deep honour you have done me, and my country, in
inviting me to your country to help further, as assuredly we shall,
that relationship." 



NQ DATE
M/ 93 7 June 1973
PRIME MINIST71l'S VISIT TO INDIA: JOINT COMMTUNIQUE
The following is the text of the joint communioue issued
in New Delhi yesterday at the conclusion of the visit to India by
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam:-
" At the invitation of Shrimati Indira Gandhi, Prime
Minister of India, His Excellency Mr Edward Gough Whitlam, Q. C.,
Prime Minister of Australia, visited India from 3 to 6 June,
1973. He was accompanied by Mrs h,.! itlam and senior officials of the
Government of Australia.
During his stay in Delhi, the Prime Minister of Australia
was received by the President of India.
The Prime Minister of Australia had extensive discussions
with the Prime Minister of India. The Minister of External Affairs,
the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister
of Planning and the Minister of Commerce called on the Prime
Minister of Australia and discussed matters of mutual interest.
The talks were held in an PtmosDhere of friendship and mutual
understanding and covered a wide range of subjects dealing with
important international questions and bilateral relations. These
discussions revealed a close similarity of views and anDroach
between the Governments of Australia and India. / 2 
-2-
The Prime Ministers of India and Australia welcomed the
general relaxation of tension in the international situation. They
felt that this detente presents opportunities for consolidating
peace and freedom and for taking constructive steps towards social
and economic n~ rogress in a climate of international co-operation.
They expreFssed the hope that all remaining differences, particularly
in the areas of conflict, would be resolved peacefully and in
accordance with the principles of national sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of states,
thereby ensuring harmony among nations and a stable pattern of
international relations.
The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their faith in the
purposes and nrincioles of the United Nations Charter. They
declared their intention to maintain active cooperation in the
United Nations, particularly in the Security Council of which
both countries are currently members.
The two Prime Ministers exchanged views on regional
cooperation. They reaffirmed the importance attached by their
respective Governments to increasing regional cooperation and the
contribution that such cooperation can make to easing international
tensions, to broadening understanding among nations and to the
economic and social advancement of countries in the region. In this
context, the Prime Ministers noted the important contribution made
to objectives by such organisations as the Colombo Plan, the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East and the Asian
Development Bank. The support of both India and Australia for the
Kuala L~ umpur Declaration of 27 November, 1971, calling for a zone / 13 
-3-
of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia was reaffirmed.
Both the Prime Ministers welcomed the Paris Agreement of
27 January, 1973, on ending the War and Restoring Peace in Viet-Nam
and the Agreement on Restoring Peace and Achieving National Concord
in Laos signed in Vientiane on 21 February, 1973. The Prime
Ministers underlined the need for strict observance of these
agreements so as to opnen the way to peace in all the countries of
Indo-China and. to enable the -neon~ les of those countries to settle
their affairs thiemselves without outside interference. Both Prime
Ministers reaffirmed their w. illingness to contribute to the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of this region.
The Prime Minister of India outlined the recent developments
in the sub-continent since the conclusion of the Simla Agreement,
including the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Declaration of 17 April, 1973,
as well as India's efforts for achieving . just and durable peace
leading to good neighbourly relations and cooperation among all the
states in the sub-continent. The Australian Prime Minister welcomed
the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Declaration as a n~ ositive initiative and,
while recognising the complexity of the issues involved, expressed
the hope that further progress would soon be made which would lead
to the normalisation of relations and the establishment of a durable
poeace in the sub-continent.
The two Prime Ministers expressed concern at the grave
situation in the Middle-East and reaffirmed their belief that the
United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 of 22 November,
1967 nrovided the basis for a just and durable settlement of this
serious and long outstanding problem. / 14 
-4-
The Prime Ministers discussed the current situation in the
Indian Ocean area. They hoth agreed that the area should be free
from international tensions, great nower rivalry and military
escalation. In this connection, the two Prime Ministers reaffirmed
their su-oport for the concept of the Indian Ocean as a zone of
coeace. They noted with satisfaction the establishment of the
United Nations Ad Hoc Comimittee on the Indian Ocean and the growing
supr~ ort for the inroposal by an increasing number of countries.
The Prime Ministers of Australia and India agreed that
the creation of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean would be a
positive step towards the reduction of tensions and rivalries in
this region and agreed to cooperate bilaterally and with all states
concerned towards this end.
The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their belief in the
equality of mankind irrespective of race or colour. They expressed
their abhorrence of policies of racial discrimination, such as
anartheid, which flagrantly violate the United Nations Charter.
The Prime Minister of India noted with appreciation that Australia
', ad resumed rnembersbin of the UN Decolonization. Committee and that
Australia had signed and was now taking steps towards ratifying
t', e International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination. The Prime Minister of Australia informed the Indian
Prime Minister of the strong opposition of the countries of the
South Pacific to the current and pro-nosed program of atmospheric
tests of niuclear weapons in the area. 
Both Prime Ministers, mindful of United Nations endorsement
of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the Resolution of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment held in Stockholm in
June 1972 and the Resolutions of the United Nations General
. A-sembly, and of the World Health Assembly in May 1973 on the
harmful effects of ionizing atomic radiation, reiterated their
oposition to the testing of nuiclear weapons in all environments
and in particular to atmospheric testing by whatever nation.
Views were exchanged on matters concerning the law of
the sea, and it was agreed that officials of the two countries
would maintain close contact with a view to identifying their
common interests before the 1974 Law of the Sea Conference.
The two Prime Ministers expressed concern at the
increasing gulf between the developing and the developed countries
of the world. They were of the view that the gap must be reduced
and eventually bridged in the interest of peace and harmony among
all nations. They also emphasised that the launching of the
International Development Strategy of the United Nations Second
Development Decade, enjoining the developed countries to help
reduce the growing economic disparity between developed and
developing countries, was a significant landmark in international
economic cooperation. They expressed the hope that the developed countries would
fulfil their obligations under the International Development
Strategy. The Australian Prime Minister stated that his Government
not only intends to expand the present programs of assistance in
/ 6 
-6-
Asia, to the Pacific and Africa but is also giving consideration
to further changes in Australia's nreferential trade with developing
countries. The Prime Ministers welcomed the enlargement of the
European communities and hoped that the communities would adopt
a liberal and outward-looking approach which would contribute to
international development and world peace. They noted that
Australia and India would be looking to the communities to play
a positive part in the forthcoming GATT Multilateral Trade
negotiations and recorded the importance which they attach to the
need for these negotiations to deal with the problems facing world
trade in agricultural commodities in a satisfactory and equitable
manner. The two Prime Ministers expressed their satisfaction with
the continuing warm and friendly relations between Australia and
India and reaffirmed their desire to intensify cooperation in all
fields. Both Prime Ministers welcomed the opportunity for
consultations and exchange of views afforded by the annual
Australia/ India officials' talks. It was decided that the next
session would take place in Canberra towards the end of the year.
The two Prime Ministers agreed on the benefits of expanding
contacts between representatives of Australia and India in all
regional and international forums. -/ 7 
/) 2
The Prime Ministers welcomed the development of cultural
exchanges between India and Australia since the signing of the
India-Australia Cultural Agreement in 1971. They expressed their
desire to see a further extension in the number and variety of
these exchanges at all levels. In noarticular they looked forward
to the further development. of links between universities in the
two countries, both in the scientific area, where there was much
common experience to be shared, and in the field of the humanities
as a contribution to a better knowledge of each other's history
and culture. The two Prime Ministers emphasised the importance of
greater collaboration in economic, technical and scientific fields,
the desirability of securing greater diversification of economic
relations and t'he possibility of joint ventures. The Prime
Minister of India expressed the Government of India's appreciation
of Australian assistance to economic development in. India
, articularly Australian involvemnent in long-range agricultural
development programs.
The Austr,,: lian Prime Minister stated his Government's
intention to maintain and if possible to expand its participation
in India's economic development.
The two Prime Ministers expressed their complete
satisfaction with the results of their discussions.
The Prime Minister of Australia expressed his warm
appreciation of the hospitality shown to him and the members of
/ a 
-8-
his party during his visit. He extended an invitation to the
Prime Minister of India to visit Australia again. The invitation
was accepted with pleasure. The dates of the visit would be
settled by mutual consultation." 



NQ DATE
M/ 94 8 June 1973
APTIOTNTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR TO THE
POLISH PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that Mr Francis Stuart had been appointed Australian
Ambassador to the Polish People's Republic. Mr Stuart will be
the first resident Australian Ambassador and will succeed
Mr L. J. Iawrey who has been dually accredited from Moscow.
Mr Whitlam said that the decision to accredit a resident
Ambassador in Poland and to establish an Australian diplomatic
mission in Warsaw reflected the Government's wish to develop
closer relations with the Polish People's Republic as part of
Australia's efforts to strengthen its diplomatic representation
in Eastern Europe.
Mr Stuart was born in 1912 and was educated at Geelong
Church of England Grammar School and the University of Oxford.
He joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1945 and served in
Paris, Jakarta, Singapore and New Delhi before becoming Head of
Mission. From 1957 to 1961 Mr Stuart was Minister and later
Ambassador to Cambodia. From 1962 to 1966 he was Ambassador in
Cairo and from 1966 to 1970 in Manila. He has recently completed
an appointment as Ambassador to Pakista~ n with concurrent
accreditation as Ambassador to Afghanistan.
Mr Stuart, who is married, is expected to take up his
appointment in September. 



NQ DATE
12 June 1973
AP OINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN ACEOWN SUL-GENERAL YORK
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlan,
announced today that General Sir John Wilton, C. B.,
iD. S. O., had been appointed Australian Consul-General in
New York. Sir John Wilton will succeed Sir John Bates, C. B. E.,
Swho will complete a three year term in August of this year.
Mr Whitlam said that Sir John Wilton had had a
distinguished military career, having risen to become Chairman
of the Chiefs of Staff Committee from 1966-1970. Mr Whitlam
said that he believed that Sir John would bring distinction
to the position of Consul-General in New York at a time when
Australia was developing its contacts with the United States
Sin commercial and in other fields. He would thus be carrying
on t" o'e valuable work which Sir John Bates had been doing for
tbe past three years.
Sir John Wilton was born in 1910 and was educated
at Grafton High School and at the Royal Military College,
Duntroon, from which he graduated in 1930. From 1930-1939
Sir John served with the British Army in India and in Burma.
During World War II he served in the Middle East and in the / 2 
-2-
South Pacific Area. In 1944 Sir John was appointed General Staff
Officer with the Military Mission in Washington. Later he served
as Commander of the 28th Commonwealth Brigade in Korea where he
was awarded the United States Legion of Merit.
Sir John Wilton was Commandant of the Royal Military
College, Duntroon, from 1957 to 1960 and for three years from
1960 was Chief of the S. E. A. T. O. Military Planning Office. In
1963 he was appointed Chief of the Australian General Staff.
From 1966 to 1970 he served as Chairman of the Chiefs of
Staff Committee and was Dromoted to the rank of General in 1968.
It is expected that Sir John and Lady Wilton will
arrive in New York early in September. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 12 JUNE, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks for waiting ladies and gentlemen.
As you know, we have had a particularly long day of Cabinet
committees and Cabinet meetings today and we weren't able to
get through as early as usual. But, after all, there usen't
to be press conferences after Cabinet meetings were there?
I can't give you all the decisions because some of them require
meetings, of the Executive Council or consultations with all the
Premiers or at least messages to some of the Premiers. But I
will give you the other matters. Now because I have come
straight from the meeting you will have to bear with me while
I look them up, and I mightn't be able to give you the full
background to all of the matters because I have just brought
the essential headings. We decided to develop the district
of Sanderson near Darwin by constructing the neighbourhood units
of Malak and Karama and associated works and to refer to the
Public Works Committee designs for the whole project. We
decided to amend the Lands Acquisition Act in certain respects.
Perhaps you would rather me give you the details there if you
want them. We made a decision about not proceeding with the
phase-one development of the proposed Australian Government
offices at Melbourne as proposed in the report of the Public
Works Committee and we made some other plans about the use of
the balance of the property there. We decided to enter into
negotiations with the Sydney Cove Re-development Authority
for the acquisition of a site on which to erect a new Customs
House and there were some associated matters concerning an
environmental impact statement. We decided to stabilise land
prices in the Northern Territory along the lines agreed between
the Premiers of New South Wales and me on 25 January last in
respect to Albury/ Wodonga. We are proposing to the Premiers
of Queensland and Western Australia that there should be a
Northern Development Council under the Chairmanship of the
Minister for Northern Development. The Council would be attended
by Australian Ministers whose particular responsibilities occurred
at any particular meeting. We have decided that three-quarters
of the amount of D. F. R. B. pensions should be adjusted by the
Superannuation Bill formula and that adjustments take effect
from the first pension payday in the new financial year. We
are referring to the Public Works Committee a proposal to
erect a Workshop, Stores and Plant Pool Complex for the
Department of Works at Kewdale, Western Australia. We will amend
the Wireless Telegraphy Act to exclude references to Papua New
Guinea. There are several other matters concerning Papua New
Guinea which I will be giving you in a moment. Revaluation
assistance for secondary industry will be made available to
applicants which will be defined as a company and all its
subsidiaries. There was a view that an applicant might be one
subsidiary company although the whole complex of companies of which
it was a part were not adversely affected at all by revaluation. 
-2-
We adopted the Report of the Tariff Board on Synthetic Rubber
Latex. We decided to extend the Cellulose Acetate Flake Bounty
Act until the end of June 1976. We decided to approve the
proposals for an international code to regulate Liner Shipping
Conferences at the International Conference which Mr Jones is
attending in that regard. our decisions on the Karmel Committee's
Report on Schools will be discussed with the Premiers at the
conference with them at the end of the month. But there are a
couple of decisions which I can give you arising out of the
Karmel Report at the moment. We have decided to establish as
a statutory body a Curriculum Development Centre. I can give
you or Mr Beazley can give you further details of that legislation
as we have decided so far. We have also decided to establish
an Education Research Institute to undertake an expanded program
of co-ordinated research such as hitherto has been carried out
by the Australian Advisory Committee on Research and Development
in Education. We have decided to amend the Papua New Guinea
Act to enable the appointment of a judge to their Supreme Court
whose qualifications and experience have been obtained outside
Australia and to permit the appointment of a judge under a
contract for a limited term. We approved, in principle, the
arrangements made by Mr Jones and Mr Morrison with Mr Somare
and Mr Jephcott about the Papua New Guinea national airline.
We have approved in principle, but without commitment to funds
at this stage, the establishment of an atmospheric baseline
monitoring station and the provision of a number of regional
atmospheric stations in Australia. We will make this decision
known to the first meeting of the U. N. Governing Council for
Environmental Programs which is meeting at the moment. We have
endorsed the continued production of the Nomad aircraft and
technical support for the project. Further details I can give
you or Senator Bishop, the acting Minister for Supply, can
give you. Finally, we have approved other amendments of the
Papua New Guinea Act to facilitate self-government by 1 December
or as soon thereafter as possible. This, as you know, has
already been the idea, the principle accepted by the
Papua New Guinea Government and House of Assembly as well as
by the Australian Government. Once Papua New Guinea has selfgovernment,
the Administrator. will be known as the High Commissioner.
When Papua New Guinea achieves independence he will be known as
or there will be an Australian High Commissioner there. There
has been some difficulty with title there, of course, because
the British precedence would have dictated that the official
should be known as Governor. That title would not be accepted
in Papua New Guinea now.
Are there any questions? 
-3-
Q. The West Australian Premier in London yesterday accused
the Federal Government of a breach of faith on States' rights
charging you with misinterpreting Labor Party policy. He
referred to a previous Labor Attorney-General, Dr Evatt,
assuring the States that the steps now taken would never be taken.
Could we have your reaction to that please?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't comment on a report at this distance.
There has been no breach of any undertaking given by any of my
predecessors. Q. What's your reaction to the 29 per cent fee rise announced
by the doctors, and also your reaction to their statement that
fee rises will not be negotiable?
PRIME MINISTER: I was away last week. I am not familiar with
the details here. Mr Hayden ought to comment on that.
Q. In recent weeks you have been highly critical of the States
on the question of off-shore rights and the action of the six
State Premiers in their petition to The Queen. The six State
Premiers have now declared their unanimous opposition to the
Commonwealth's off-shore legislation and to the aboliton of
appeals to the Privy Council. If in the attitude you have
adopted on this question you are expressing federal A. L. P. policy,
do you propose as a delegate to the Federal Executive or the
Federal Conference to move to discipline the three State Labor
Premiers concerned Messrs Dunstan, Reece and Tonkin. If not,
could you be accused of grandstanding?
PRIME MINISTER: That's a very sharp question coming from you
Sir. I will be taking no steps to discipline any of the
Labor Premiers. There is no question that the Australian Government
has followed to abolish appeals to the Privy Council and to assert
the Australian Government's jurisdiction over the territorial
sea and the seabed beyond low-water mark are the policy of the
Australian Labor Party. The Australian Labor Party's policy
is binding on its members of parliament in the State Parliament
no less than in the Australian Parliament. The principle of
abolishing appeals to the Privy Council has stood since the
Federal Conference of the party in 1908, when it was adopted
unanimously. Nobody since has ever quibbled at this policy.
And I wouldn't imagine that there are many people in public
life who would not think it proper that the legal disputes between
Australians should be settled within Australia by Australian
judges appointed by Australian governments. The policy as
regards off-shore resources was laid down at the party conference
in Launceston in June 1971.
Q. While you were away Sir you were bleeped by Sir Frank Packer
on Channel 9. I was wondering if you had any comment on that?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I did read something like that. But, I
mean, I am well content if Sir Frank Packer just bleeps me
instead of distorts me.
Q. Sir, can you tell us the words that were bleeped and who
was the Bishop you were referring to? 
PRIME MINISTER: Now the interviewer didn't mention any Bishop's
name, nor therefore did I. But if the mitre fits.
Q. Your on record in past as saying several times that you
approve the New South Wales method of pre-selection of candidates,
at least up till 1970, which was by branches rather than by
Federal Executive by State Executive, and you used this, I
think, against the Victorian method of pre-selection by State
Executive. Can you tell us now whether you approve of the new
method for Senate Upper House State Upper House candidates which
the New South Wales Conference has put through, or do you go along
with your Minister for Urban and Regional Development, Mr Uren,
who seems to think it is retrogressive move?
PRIME MINISTER: It's true that I preferred the method which has
been adopted to choose candidates for individual seats in New
South Wales over the method which used to be adopted for choosing
candidates for individual seats in Victoria. In my own view, and
I'm not a delegate to any State Conference and I haven't been
a delegate to any State conference since I have been a member of
parliament but to give my own view, I believe the method of
choosing candidates now adopted in Victoria is the best in
Australia. Q. Sir, do you support Mr Uren's stand against the way the
new system was adopted in New South Wales?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't comment on what my colleagues are
reported to have said. I didn't hear Mr Uren. I don't think
he was speaking from a text. I know, because he has shown me,
that he has written a letter to the Sydney Morning Herald
complaining of the misrepresentation and misquotations in the
editorial in their paper today. And, I trust, that the Sydney
Morning Herald will have the simple honesty and honour to
publish Mr Uren's letter.
Q. Could you tell us the circumstances in which Mr Uren showed
you this letter. Did you intervene in this dispute between
him and Mr Ducker, the New South Wales President?
PRIME MINISTER: Now, whatever way I answer that question, you
will expect me to endorse your assertion that there is a
dispute between Mr Uren and Mr Ducker. I have not spoken to
either concerning the newspaper reports. Mr Uren gave me,
this afternoon, a copy of the letter which he has sent to the
editor of the Sydney Morning Herald.
Q. On the Karmel committee report. Can you tell us if Cabinet
approved the financial recommendation for 1974 and 1975?
PRIME MINISTER: I have nothing to add to what I have already
said.
Q. While you were away last week, the Queensland Government
decided not to accede to the request from your Government to
take control of Aboriginal affairs. What if anything, is
your next move. 
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't had time to consider this. We won't
take as long to consider it as the Queensland Government did.
We will carry out the obligation which the Australian people
overwhelmingly imposed on the Australian Parliament and
Government at the referendum in 1966.
Q. Well how exactly will you go about this?
PRIME MINISTER: Well let's discuss it.
Q. The discussion on the code of conduct for Liner conferences
at the UNCTAD ME-eting came-up today. Was that decision consistent
with the announcement that Mr Jones made sometime ago that
per cent of Australian mineral exports would be carried in
Australian flag vessels.
PRIME MINISTER: Minerals are not carried in liners, even on the
Australian runs.
Q. At the National Press Club last week, Dr Cairns told us
that he had a conversation with the Prime Minister of
Prince Sinhanouk's in exile. The Prime Minister asked him
for Australia's moral influence to procure a halt to the bombing
of Cambodia by the Americans and to bring about discussions between
Prince Sinhanouk's government and the Lon Nol regime, and
Dr Cairns said he had brought this to the attention of the
Australian Government. Has anything been done about this yet?
PRIME MINISTER: Based on reports of what Dr Cairns had said
to the National Press Clb my Department of Foreign Affairs
did consult with him. There seemed to be some indication in the
report that Australia might be able, or expected, to take some
steps to bring together the disputants in Cambodia. An then
enquiries were made overseas from several quarters. There seems
to be some misunderstanding of reports of what was said, by
whom or to whom. We have studied the texts of statements made
by various parties including those of Prince Sinhanouk and
conclude that at this stage there is no role for Australia as
a mediator. If, however, we were to be asked by all parties to
the present conflict to mediate or play some role in bringing the
opposing sides together for talks, we would be prepared to
consider it. On present indications, however, such a request
seems unlikely.
Q. At the end of your discussions with Mr Marshall Green, the
new United States Ambassador, on Friday, you suggested that
you might have something to say about those discussions at your
press conference today.
PRIME MINISTER: Did I?
A. Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I never, and I don't think any of my
predecessors ever have, made any comment after discussions of
that character.
Q. Well you did suggest to us on the steps, Sir, that you might
have something to say at your press confereACe today about the
discussions, 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: Well we must have misunderstood each other
because.... Let's be quite plain about it. No parties to any
such discussion every give accounts afterwards. I never have.
Q. Can you say anything at all about your proposed trip to
Washington as a result of these discussions?
PRIME MINISTER: No. No. I said I would keep you fully informed.
I have no further information for you.
Q. My question relates to parliamentary privileges. If I may
background this question a little bit, as far as the right to
report proceedings is concerned, I understand that parliament
inherits the privileges of the House of Commons which date back
to the 18th century. This, in fact, does not provide a strict
right to report proceedings in federal parliament. Would you
agree that it is time that parliament legislated to define what
its privileges are, especially in relation to journalists?
PRIME MINISTER: I would like to see Parliament do this but
I know that predecessors of mine have all said the same thing
and we have never got round to doing it. I would hope that
the Privileges committees on the two Houses might do something
about it. I know that Mr Enderby, who is on the House of
Representatives Privileges committee, has this very much in mind.
But I must be quite frank with you, there's so much that has to
be done by way of legislation that I can't hold out any hope that
we will get around to it very quickly. It's something that
really parliamentary committees can deal with. It's not something
that the Government has to do alone. I am not saying Government
hasn't got some responsibility in this respect but really the
privileges committees of the two Houses of this parliament could
do it preferably jointly.
Q. Have you yet received the report from the Task Force headed
by Dr Coombs?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. The New South Wales Branch of the R. S. L. has suggested that you
swear allegiance to the Queen?
PRIME MINISTER: The New South Wales Branch has?
A. Sub-branch.
PRIME MINISTER: No, I am going by A. BC. reports which are
prima facie accurate. I think it was the Inverell sub-branch.
A. I apologise. Well, irrespective.... They require under
their rules that you swear allegiance to the Queen or relinquish
membership 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: Well, if they care to write to me I will give
them the addresses of the half dozen R. S. L. sub-branches of which
I am a member or an associate member. And they can move there
I don't think they will get any support for it.
Q. Did your comments in Adelaide on Sunday mean that the
Federal Government intends to withdraw its support for wheat
stabilization. And if so, when? If not, can you clarify those
remarks? PRIME MINISTER: No. It didn't mean any of those things. What
I was saying I mean I don't know how many of you were in
Adelaide but what I was pointing out to the convention of the
Labor Party in Adelaide on the weekend was that any Government
has to decide on priorities. It has to make choices between
different desirables and there are some things to which the
Labor Party is committed, which it has initiated, there are
others which its predecessors or opponents initiated or support
and we will obviously in the Budget context have to make choices
between such matters and I gave two illustrations. Of course
I made no commitment in these matters. Incidentally, this
becomes very difficult as you know, when I am asked at a
press conference to make comment on some newspaper report,
sometimes in another State. Well, communications should not be
so difficult in that respect, but I notice there was a terrific
to-do while I was in India about something I said it was on
a T. V. interview about Waltzing Matilda. Now I'm not
committing myself. I would hope that we would do something
better than Waltzing Matilda or better than God Save The Queen.
But what I said to this interviewer on Delhi T. V. was that
judging by the correspondence received by the committee on this
matter Waltzing Matilda is the favourite. I'm not committing
myself to it, but as I've said previously Waltzing Matilda
would scarcely be appropriate in my view at say a State Funeral.
I don't overlook the fact that the last couple of lines or so
are often rendered in rather a funeral way. It is very difficult
gentlemen, you know when you are asked at one press conference
something based on a report of an earlier one, sometimes
thousands of miles away.
Q. Have you given any consideration to the obstruction of
legislation by the Senate, and if so what action will you take?
Will you call the House of Representatives back?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't discussed this with my colleagues.
Perhaps I should say that I don't propose, as at present advised,
to call the Reps back. The reason why I should say this at
this stage is that when I made an earlier statement on this I
was going on the view that amendments which the Senate made and
which are unacceptable to the House of Representatives, should
be do declared unacceptable by the House of Representatives
promptly, so that the three months can commence from that
declaration by the House of Representatives. There has been a
legal view to this effect, but since then I have taken advice and
their seems to be another view and probably a wider view that
the three months dates from the time that the Senate made the
amendments and the fact that the House of Representatives later
refused to accept those amendments isn't a necessary starting
point for the three months. It is enough if, for instance, 
-8-
the House of Representatives says we won't accept these
amendments and forthwith sends the bill up again.
Q. It doesn't need to be knocked back a second time.
PRIME MINISTER: No. Well I'm not sure about the details there.
The point is, when I was speaking earlier I thought that the
three months could only date from the time the House of
Representatives rejected those amendments. Now once the three
months, in the prevalent view, dates from the time the Senate
made the amendments which the House of Representatives later
declares that it will not accept. So there will be no need to
call the House of Representatives together to declare them
unacceptable.
Q. Have you had legal advice on this?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Over the past few days, have you gained the impression
that the United States Administration would like the Australian
Government to modify or change the direction of its foreign
policy away from its independent stance?
PRIME MINISTER: No. This is a very well phrased question
but I have not got such an impression.
Q. Do you support the principle that Ministers in your
Government who receive substantial living-away-from-home
allowances when they are in Canberra should have the right to
have subsidised homes' provided for them by the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: The allowance is paid, as I understand it, in
respect of any period that a minister lives away from the place
which he designates as his home. Some ministers designate
Canberra as their home. I think, as Prime Minister, I designated
Canberra as my home although, so far, ( I've held the job for six
months) I have not put in for any travel or away-from-home
allowances. I don't know when I will get around to it. I'm
not quite sure what the situation is. But away-from-home
allowance is based on where you declare your home to be.
Q. What I am getting at Sir, should ministers who receive
substantial salaries be able to rent Government houses at $ 16
or $ 19 a week when the ordinary member of the public can't do so?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that ministers should be able to rent
houses in Canberra if that enables them to do their job better.
And I believe that they shouldn't get any advantage as regards
rent. There is no case, I am told, where they do. At the same
time I don't believe that they should pay any higher rent than
other people.
Q. Have you, Sir, got the impression over the past three or
four days that President Nixon will be in Washington when you
make your visit there at the end of July.
PRIME MINISTER: That question isn't so well phrased. I have
got nothing to add. 
-9-
Q. Have you got any further information on the Australian
Yugoslavs in jail in Yugoslavia?
PRIME MINISTER: No I have had no more information than that
which was given in the Senate last Thursday.
Q. On the question of ministerial housing again, Sir. Do
you believe that ministers should go to the top of the priority
list for housing or flats.
PRIME MINISTER: Close to it. A minister has an important job
to do and in many cases that job can be best done by him living
in Canberra.
Q. Why can't the ministers rent~ from private enterprise?
PRIME MINISTER: Many of them do. Most of them do.
Q. Sir, India belongs to the Commonwealth you would agree
with that?
PRIME MINISTER: My word and likes to remain in it.
Q. Well, this is a little out of your camp, but could you ask
your P. M. G. whey they refuse to give India the Commonwealth
press rate: five pence a word for the press rate against three
cents a word in the Commonwealth?
PRIME MINISTER: I will find out. One of the very great things
that Britain did for the world was the Penny Post and I believe
that there is within the Empire, wasn't it, I don't think it
was all over the world. And I believe there is very great
advantage in having as cheap communication rates as possible
between all members of the Commonwealth. And I regret to hear
that this is not the case with India. One reason, of course,
whey we get so much news out of Singapore is that the rate applies
there, whereas, of course it conspicuously doesn't apply to
Indonesia which isn't in the Commonwealth. I am surprised to
learn that it doesn't apply to India, and I will follow up
what you say.
Q. Has Cuba made an approach to the Australian Government to
open consular relations with your Government, and if so, what
would be your reply?
PRIME MINISTER: I see there has been something in the papers
while I have been away about this. Months ago, the question was
raised of Cuba having a Consulate or Consulate-General in
Australia. We took the attitude that the amount of business that
Australia had with Cuba didn't yet justify a consulate. These
are the countries in Latin America which do have consulates in
Australia. Some of these, incidentally, are only honorary consuls.
That is, certainly the case in Central America. There is
Bolivia, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Equador, Guatamala,
Haiti, Honduras, Panama and Venezuala. In embassies we have
representatives from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru
and Uraguay. So Cuba's trade with Australia doesn't justify
consular representation at this stage. 
Q. Would we do any more business with Haiti than we do with
Cuba? PRIME MINISTER: I think that is honorary.
Q. What reasons did Cuba advance to the Australian Government
or representatives for wanting a consulate in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I forget what the Really, it was quite
some months ago.
Q. You gave an interview to a Melboure newspaper, " The Age",
in which you referred
PRIME MINISTER: To the distinguished editor of " The Age", who
was fortunate enough to have it syndicated in many other papers.
Q. You said that since the Labor Government came to power
diplomatic relations have been established with every country
in Europe except Albania.
PRIME MINISTER: That's right.
Q. So, one was left wondering why Albania?
PRIME MINISTER: We feared the charge of cossetting communists
if we opened diplomatic relations with Albania. Let me hasten
to assure you: we recognise Albania. Even our predecessors
recognised Albania, but frankly we haven't got round to establishing
diplomatic representation with Albania. Perhaps to be complete,
we recognise but do not have diplomatic representation in Andorra,
Lichtenstein, San Marino and Monarco, although there is a
distinguished Australian resident in Monarco.
Q. Sir, was that a serious reply when you said you feared
the charge that we were cossetting communists?
PRIME MINISTER: No, of course if wasn't a serious reply. No,
the fact is that there is not, at this stage, a sufficient amount
of business to justify having diplomatic representation even
on a multiple basis with Albania. I dare say that we shall,
but the representation we have established in Europe has been
with countries which have considerably more sometimes quite
substantial relations, with Australia, namely, Poland, I beg your
pardon, East Germany, Cyprus and the Vatican.
Q. On the question of Cuba, Sir, did you seek the opinion of the
Australian Ambassador in Washington as to the likely American
view if we did exchange or have some
PRIME MINISTER: I forget, but I doubt it.
Q. We have not taken any cognisance of the likely American
reaction? PRIME MINISTER: I suppose we did. Of course one takes this into
account. But the point is, there are quite a number of Latin
American countries which would have an equal claim to consular
representation as has Cuba. Where we have concentrated on
diplomatic representations is in Europe and in East Asia, and in 
-11-
Southern Asia. And in those cases our representation is almost
complete. But, for instance, there are many Commonwealth
countries in the Caribbean with which we have no diplomatic or
consular representation.
Q. What I'm getting at, sir, is: Were we influenced in not
having diplomatic relations with Cuba because we feared that this
might offend the United States Government?
PRIME MINISTER: It would have been one factor. But not the sole
factornor necessarily the predominent factor. You look at the
Commonwealth countries in the Caribbean with which, at this stage,
we don't have diplomatic representation. The fact is that there
is a limit to the number of people that we can have representing
us overseas even, as is so often the case now, on a multiple
basis. We can't over-stretch our resources.
Q. Isn't it very rare to reject an application to set up a
consular office here? Is is absolutely necessary that you
reciprocate it?
PRIME MINISTER: Etiquette would require it, yet. But don't put
it on the basis of rejection.
Q. My understanding is that they asked.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I suppose our answer was " Not at this stage".
Don't get the impression that there is a rejection in the sense
of never or we won't.
Q. It was the way you phrased your answers, that it was
necessary we reciprocate.
PRIME MINISTER: It would be the usual thing. And there was a
case, as you know, quite recently, within the last two years,
where another country withdrew its ambassador, closed its embassy,
because after many many years we had never established an embassy
in that country. And there was another a few years ago where
the same thing happened. The fact is that if you accept an
ambassador or consul from another country the normal thing is the
proper thing is to reciprocate. And at this stage in our
resources, Cuba can't be justified. 



NQ DATE
M/ 96 14 June 1973
AUSTRALIA TRANSFERS LAND TO PEOPLE
OF THE NEW HEBRIDES
The Australian Government has agreed to relinquish
Australian land holdings in the New Hebrides to enable them to
be used by the people of the New Hebrides.
Announcing this today, the Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, released the following agreed
joint communique by the Australian and British Governments:
" The Australian and British Governments have agreed in
principle that Australian lands in the New Hebrides known as the
' Commonwealth Lands' should be transferred to a Land Trust Board
to be set up by the British Resident Commissioner in the New Hebrides
under Queen's Regulations.
As part of a contract made in 1902 between the Australian
Government and Burns Philp and Co Ltd, Burns Philp transferred
the right of disposal of approximately 25,000 acres of land in
the New Hebrides, to which it held claims, to the Australian
Minister for External ( now Foreign) Affairs, in return for an
increase in shipping subsidy. ./ 2 
-2-
Mcst of the land is registered in Burns Philp's name
and the company has continued to act as agents for the
Australian Government in dealing with the land.
It will be the duty of the Land Trust Board to further
the use of the land vested in it from time to time for the
benefit of the neople of the New Hebrides.
The ' Commonwealth Lands, with some possible exceptions O
to be agreed between the British Resident Commissioner and the
Australian authorities, will be vested in the Board.
In reaching this agreement the Australian and British
Governments have had very much in mind the interests of the
New Hebrideans. Detailed discussions and negotiations consequential
upon the agreement will be held as soon as possible between the
British Residency in Vila and the Australian authorities." Ah 



NQ DATE
M/ 97 14 June 1973
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY TTHE SPECIAL RAPPORTEUR
Mv/ 97 14 June 1973
VISIT TO AUSTRALjIA BY THE SPECIAL RAPPOPTEUR
OF THTTE UNiTTED NATIONS' STTDY ON DISCRIIIINATION
AGAINST INDIGENOUS POPULIATIONTS, MR MARTINEZ COBO
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
O today that Mr Jose R. Martinez Cobo, Special Rapporteur for the
United Nations' Study on Discrimination Against Indigenous
Populations, would visit Australia from 16 23 June, to obtain
information about Australian Aborigines.
Mr Martinez Cobo, currently the Ambassador of Ecuador
O to Mexico, is a member of the Sub-Commission on Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities of the United Nations' Commission
oof Human Rights. He is also visiting Malaysia and New Zealand as part of
the study he has been appointed to undertake by the Sub-Commission.
While in Australia, Mr Martinez Cobo will visit Aborigines
in Sydney, Townsville, Cairns and Darwin.,
He will also hold talks in Canberra with the Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs, members of the Council for Aboriginal Affairs
and with officers of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. 



11li T j, 11,1! -O EiVf0I . tt 1, P R71Er SS STTA ATLTEE MMENETNl 1. LK0 0
PRESS STATEMENT NO. i00
18 June 1973
VISIT BY THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH OCTOBER 1973
On 2 March 1973 the Prime Minister's Press Statement No.
59 stated that after The Queen's departure for London following
the opening of the Sydney Opera House, The Duke of Edinburgh
will visit each of the Australian States to make contact with
local organisers of The Duke of Edinburgh's Award in Australia,
to present Gold Awards and to see Award work in action.
The itinerary which has received The Duke of Edinburgh's
approval, has been worked out with His Honour Sir Adrian Curlewis,
National Co-ordinator of The Duke of Edinburgh's Award in
Australia, and the Chairman of each State Council of the Award
Scheme in conjunction with the State Authorities. It is as
follows Tue. Wed. 23 October
24 October
Thu. 25 October
Fri. 26 October
Sat. 27 October
Sun. 28 October
Mon. 29 October
Tue. 30 October
Wed. 31 October
Thu. 1 November
Fri. 2 November
Sat. 3 November
Sun. 4 November
Mon. 5 November
Tue. 6 November
Wed. 7 November Sydney, Townsville
Townsville, Rockhampton, Maryborough,
Brisbane
Brisbane, Toowoomba, Lismore
Lismore, Williamtown, Bathurst
Bathurst, Dubbo
No official engagements
No official engagements
Wagga, Sale
Sale, Melbourne, Hobart
Hobart, Launceston, Mt. Gambier
Mt. Gambier, Adelaide
Adelaide No official engagements
No official engagements
Perth Departure from Perth
A program of engagements in draft form is now being
prepared for The Duke of Edinburgh's consideration. An
announcement of those details will be made by the respectie
State Authorities after the proposals have been submitted and
accepted. 



18 June 1973
PRE-BUDGET DISCUSSIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today begins
a three-day series of pre-Budget consultations with
representatives of industry, commerce, unions and
consumer groups. At each session several other Ministers will
join Mr Whitlam. The groups he will meet are:
Monday 18 June: Primary industry; Manufacturing
industry.
Tuesday 19 June: Export Development Council;
Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council; Australian Mining Industry
Council.
Wednesday 20 June: Commerce group;
Consumer group.
( NOTE: Mr Whitlam is not expected to issue any statements
as a result of the talks. But presumably the
groups attending the consultations will release
information on their submissions.) 



NQ DATE
M/ 99 19 June 1973
APPOINTIeNT OF AMBA3SADOR TO VENEZUELA
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr" 1hitlam, announced
today the appointment of Mr F. T. Homer as Austral ' s first
Ambassador to Venezuela. Mr Homer, who is at present Australia's
Ambassador to Brazil, will be resident in Brasilia and make
periodic visits to Venezuela.
Mr Homer was born in 1917 and was educated
at Christian Brothers High School and University of Sydney. He
has served in Singapore, The Hague, Ottawa and Rangoon and as
Consul-General in San Francisco from 1963 to 1965. He has been
O Australian Ambassador to Brazil since March 1971.
~ The nomination of Mr Homer follows the establishment
of diplomatic relations between Australia and Venezuela on 31
May this year. Mr Whitlam said the early appointment was further
evidence of the Australian Government's wish to develop its ties
with Venezuela and to expand its representation in Latin Americao 



THE PRIM4E MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 19 JUNE 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: There has been no
Cabinet committee meetings this week. Yesterday, today and
tomorrow we are holding these economic consultations with industry.
I thought it might suit you if I were to have this press conference
at noon, well before lunch, so that the afternoon papers could
get their turn. I have no announcements to give you. Last week
Mr. Jack Fingleton asked me about the cost of cable communications
between India and Australia and I said I would find out what was
the basis for it. I haven't yet got the information I want.
Are there any questions?
Q. Now that you have finally got the invitation to Washington,
can you tell us just what you hope to raise in your talks with
Mr. Nixon and what you hope to achieve while you are over there?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no further information to give you on
thismatter.
Q. Two of your most senior ministers, over the last couple of
days, have had differing views on tax increases. Dr. Cairns
says he will press in the Cabinet Budget talks for tax increases
to correct any inequality in education and health. Yesterday
Mr. Crean said that Labor's major electoral promises will be
honoured and he would not increase taxes to pay for the promises.
Will you give unequivocal support to Mr. Crean's declaration about
tax increases?
PRIME MINISTER: What I said in the policy speech stands.
Q. I would like to bring up the question of Cuba which we
discussed at the press conference last week. I questioned
Marshall Green about this the new United States Ambassador
at the National Press Club and he said: " We and others should
expand dialogue and negotiations with other powers". And then
specifically on Cuba he said: " I don't see from my remarks
that I have just made now that there would be any intimation
that we are protesting against any other country opening dialogue
with each other; on the contrary it seems to me that was the
very point I was making". In view of these remarks might
deference to America still be a factor in our relations with Cuba
or absence of relations with Cuba or diplomatic or consular
representation? PRIME MINISTER: Australia and Cuba have always recognised each
other. There is no diplomatic or consular representations
by either country in the other country. But it is all a question
of priorities and the Caribbean has not hitherto been an area
of great diplomatic or consular priorities as far as Australia
is concerned. We will be getting some representations there.
All the countries in the Caribbean belong either to the
Commonwealth or the organisation of American States and I would
expect that in my visits to Mexico and the United States and
Canada, I might discuss the augmentation of our diplomatic or
consular representations in the Caribbean. That is the context
in which you have to regard Cuba. 
-2-
Q. Did you think that Mr. Hamer and Sir Robert Askin are
justified in claiming a victory in London? Do you feel that a
referendum may be necessary to solve this question?
PRIME MINISTER: You are referring to the abolition of appeals
to the PrivyCouncil? Well, I would be happy to know what their
attitudes are to this question of abolishing appeals to the
Privy Council. I don't believe that any contemporary political
leader in Australia would resist the abolition of appeals to the
Privy Council. How it is done is not so important, as the fact
that it be done.
Q. When you say " how it is done is not as important as it be
done". Well they don't like the way that you are doing it.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, what do they suggest?
Q. Well, do you have any alternatives?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I would be happy to consider any alternative
that they propose. The fact is that the Labor Party has been
committed to the abolition of appeals to the Privy Council since
1908. This is a very long-standing political commitment, and I
suppose the Liberals might claim one of their paragons as Prime
Minister was Alfred Deakin. Alfred Deakin was against continuing
appeals to the Privy Council back at the end of last century.
You remember the discussions that he and other Australian
leaders had with Joe Chamberlain the one of two generations ago,
not the present one on this very question. That is, I would
imagine that since before the first World War every significant
political leader in Australia has been in favour of abolishing
appeals to the Privy Council. Now I am quite happy to discuss
any alternatives that Mr. Hamer and Sir Robert Askin suggest.
Q. When would you do this?
PRIME MINISTER: Whenever they like. Whenever they suggest.
Q. Next week, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: If they like to suggest to discuss it at the
Premiers' Conference, I would be very happy to do it. It is
really an absurd anomalv that we should still have the possibility
of appeals or petitions to the British Privy Council and this has
been a matter of great diversion over the last couple of weeks
here and over in Britain.
Q. Can I take it from that that you are quite prepared to
reconsider the approach which you outlined to us in London?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, let us see what suggestions they make
about it. A lot of suggestions are made about referendums on
this question. I would have thought anybody following British
politics in the last couple of years would have noticed that Mr.
Heat1N in particular, asserts the responsibility of Government to
make up their minds in these matters not to seek the referendum
to decide issues. That was the whole issue on which he was so
resolute, you remember, on Britain's joining the Common Market.
Governments ought to make decisions on this matter. 
-3-Association
Q. Sir, the Associated Chambers of Manufacturers/ yesterday
made some very dire forecaslt about the expected rate of inflation.
Have you any comments on their forecasts and have you had any
alternatives on forecasts from the Treasury of the rate of increase
of the consumer index maybe?
PRIME MINISTER: No, and no.
Q. I understand that you recently had a letter from the acting
Queensland Premier, Mr. Gordon Chalk, asking in effect how
Aboriginals will be better off under federal control than State
control. Could you say what is the core of the disagreement
between the federal and State Governments on this matter?
If the Queensland Government won't co-operate with the federal
Government, are you going to need enabling legislation?
PRIME MINISTER: The Queensland Government takes a paternal
attitude. The Australian Government takes a fraternal attitude
on this matter. Six years ago, overwhelmingly the Australian
people at a referendum gave the Australian Parliament the
authority to pass laws concerning the Aboriginal people, the
people of the Aboriginal race. My Government proposes to introduce
appropriate legislation in the Australian Parliament to promote
the welfare of people of the Aboriginal race. There is one matter
on which neither Mr. Bjelke Petersen or Mr. Gordon Chalk have yet
replied to in correspondence. It is now over six months old.
It concerns the repeal of the discriminatory provisions of the
Aboriginal and island affairs legislation of the Queensland
parliament. The view is, and it is a view expressed by our
predecessors as well as by us, that this legislation is in
conflict with the 1965 international convention for the
elimination of racial discrimination. We propose,-. in the
Budget session, to bring in legislation to implement that
convention and this will enable us to override the Queensland
legislation. In other words, we will be carrying out another
undertaking Mr. Gorton made over three years ago.
Q. In answer to an earlier question, I understood you to say
there would be no increase in taxation in the next Budget.
In reply to a question from Tony Thomas, you said'no" in both
cases. The second part of his question, as I understood it,
was about....
PRIME MINISTER: Whether there was a Treasury estimate as to the
rate of increase in the consumer price index? And, I said " no" to
that question.
Q. Well, I was just wondering in this context if you haven't
got any forecasts of the economy, how can you at this stage make a
promise about no increase in taxatio n? Does this mean that
irrespective of the rate of inflation or rate of inflation
forecast, that there will not be any increase in taxation?
PRIME MINISTER: Will I read what I said in my policy speech?
I said it stands.
Q. Given that there may be high levels of economic inefficiency
in the expansion of Australian defence industries, will you see that
any proposals to expand Australian defence industries are first
referred to the Protection Commission? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: No. You've asked questions and I have given
you an answer.
Q. I am asking you a second question. Why not?
PRIME MINISTER: I gave an undertaking that we will develop
certain basic industries in Australia and among those I think
mentic ned was light aricraft, fighter aircraft, rolling stock,
pipelines and so on. These are commitments we want to establishbasic
industries in Australia for which we know there will always
be a demand by Australian Governments or Australian companies.
Q. Sir, Why is it
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to assume that Australian
defence industries are inefficient.
Q. Why not look at it and see if they are?
PRIME MINISTER: Well they have not, in general, been given a
ch~ ance. I don't think for instance, one could say that the
Mirage program was inefficient.
Q. Why is the additional production of Nomad been limited to
aircraft when as Dr. Cairns said yesterday
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no decision on the Nomad aircraft.
Q. So it may not be 50 aircraft?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no decision on the Nomad aircraft.
Q. Mr. Ducker, the New South Wales President of the branch of
your party has some rather strongly worded remarks today to make
about a group within your branch. Do you agree with his statement?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't comment on organisational matters.
Q. Do you have a particular view on this matter a personal view
on this matter?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Could you tell us why not, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I will deal with this within the organs of the
party if it arises.
Q. Do you have any comment on the current dispute in the motor
industry, and do you see a role for the Commonwealth Government
in bringing the dispute to an end?
PRIME MINISTER: I am considering this just at the moment. It is
a bit premature for me to say anything about this.
Q. Will you be recalling Mr. Cameron from overseas?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly not.
Q. In the context of your proposed visit to America, are you
embarrassed at all about the remarks made by Senator Wheeldon
belittling the ANZUB pact? 
PRIME MINISTER: I don't comment gentlemen on reports or
interviews that my colleagues give or opponents give. You
know this.
Q. What action could the Federal Government give if any
in the Ford dispute?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not sure.
Q. At the special Premiers' Conference last month, you sent
a joint Commonwealth/ State committee to investigate ways to
solve the problem of inflation. Could you tell us whether
that committee would be in a position to present a final
report to the Premiers Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: I expect so.
Q. Two issues. When could you expect an announcement by the
Federal Government on the future of the export incentives
scheme?
PRIME MINISTER: In about 9 months.
Q. This would be about three months before it expires?
PRIME MINISTER: The decision has been made and announced.
Q. Yes, to continue to June 1974.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes that is right. To continue the present
one until -theen d of next financial year.
Q. Yes, I was talking about...
PRIME MINISTER: No. I am only guessing when we will make a
statement, but I would not imagine we would resolve this matter
before the end of 1973.
Q. The other one. Have you seen the report of Sir John Crawford?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. When do you expect to do so?
PRIME MINISTER: I think next week.
Q. How soon after will it be published?
PRIME MINISTER: All reports in the normal course are released
very promptly.
Q. Will the Coombs Task Force...
PRIME MINISTER: No, that's in a Budget context. I hope that that
will be published with the Budget papers. No, but you can understand
you don't expect us to...
0. You answered it. If ever it was going to be published and
you've said you hoped it will be published.. 
-6
PRIME MINISTER: My present inclination would be to table
the Task Force report with the Budget papers on the 21st
of August. But we wouldn't publish that before the Budget.
Q. On the question of the export incentives which Mr.
Hawke raised. Have you changed the position you adopted in
Cabinet when this matter was discussed earlier this year?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. That the export incentives should be phased out?
PRIME MINISTER: Phased out?
A. Phased out.
PRIME MINISTER: I thought that they should have been ended.
Tha-t is the present scheme. I mean I am not committed against
forms of export incentives. What I don't like is the present
one which is the atrociously expensive one. An export incentive
scheme shouldn't be a perennial. Certainly we ought to encourage
Australians to export their resources, their skills, or to establish
a foothold for them overseas, particularly in our region. There
is a very good case to establish export links but there can be
very little case for keeping on a scheme for ever. The present
one is too unimaginative, too rigid, no longer relevant. But the
situation we inherited, as you realise, was that the scheme was
expiring at the end of this month and while the Australian Labor
Party had never committed itself to continue the scheme, by the
time we got around to considering it that's about three months
ago it would have been rather short notice to let it expire
at the end of June. I wouldn't have minded it going to the end
of December. In fact it has been extended until the end of June
next year. There was a proposal, which our predecessors made at
the 11th hour, that it should be extended for another five years.
That didn't get much shrift. We will hope to review this matter
but you can't really review it until the Budget has been, brought
in.
Q. When you spoke in Adelaide the other day you said that,
quite rightly, we were subsidising motor vehicle exports to
South Africa. Do you have any figure to the extent to which
we are subsidising exports to South Africa under the incentive
scheme?
PRIME MINISTER: No I haven't. There is difficulty. I think
the law in fact prevents the publication of taxation figures such
as this.
Q. But that would only be for individuals. You can aggregate.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but a company is an individual.
Q. Yes, but I mean aggregate of exports to South Africa.
PRIME MINISTER: You are asking me to ascertain and to state how
much the Australian taxpayer subsidises the export of Holdens
and Fords and Chryslers and Leylands to South Africa. I suppose
you are right there. You could if there were several makes being
exported to South Africa. I suppose one could ascertain the sum
total of the subsidies the taxpayer makes on thoseexports. 
-7-
One could not of course, under the law, disclose what the
subsidies by the taxpayer are for any individual motor company.
I don't know how many motor car companies do export to South Africa.
But as it is we pay the taxpayer pays about $ 100,000,000
a year for various forms of export incentives, market development
overseas and there are very great competing claims on the taxpayer
and the present scheme, in my view, my strong view, does not
deserve $ 100,000,000 a year at the expense of competing claims
on the taxpayer.
Q. Have you any clear agenda items for the Premiers' Conference
at the end of next week. Apart from the important financial
dispersement and Loan Council matters. For example, is it clear
yet whether, apart from the question of the Privy Council raised
earlier and perhaps inflation, would city transport, railways,
off-shore resources constitute any...
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think off-shore I don't think
off-shore resources is listed. I haven't got the list in front
of me. Nobody has so far asked for abolition of Privy Council
appeals or off-shore resources legislation to be listed. I think
I'm right in saying that. And the other matters you mentioned:
they're listed if my memory is but in particular we will be
wanting to discuss welfare, housing and education.
Q. The Torres Strait islanders who were down here last week
are very concerned that there should be no drilling for oil in
the Torres Strait...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Have you a view on this and have you a view on their other
concern about no movement of the border?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that drilling in the Torres
Strait shouldc be permitted until it is quite established that it
can be done with safety that there can be no harm to the
environment. I was able to remind the visitors from the Torres
Strait islands that it w-4s the Queensland Government that was
in favour of drilling in Torres Strait and the vicinity of the
Great Barrier Reef. It was the Australian Government that
successfully resisted and frustrated those proposals. It was
the Gorton Government which prevailed on the Queensland Government
to establish Royal Commissions, which are still sitting, into
this matter. It was the Australian Government which safeguarded
the Torres Strait and the Great Barrier Reef environments. The
Queensland Government would have run the risk of spoiling the
environment. The question of the border is a matter which I hope
the Torres Strait islanders will discuss with the Papua New Guineans.
I am not too sure to what extent I should say what we discussed
because I believe it was a private gathering. I am quite hopeful
that there will now at last be discussions. I pointed out
that the Australian Government could only help to bring such
discussions about until the end of November, because after that
Papua New Guinea will be self-governing. 
-8-
Q. Is the Government still happy with the rigid nexus between
the Australian and American dollars? It seems to be producing
some arbitrary result if the American dollar...
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to speculate on the currency.
When we change the parity it will come as a great surprise, and
it will be a very well kept secret until we change it.
Q. Is breaking the link....
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to speculate on things like that,
pl-ease.
Q. The General Motors Holden appointment of an American to
run their Australian operations. Do you have any views on this?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. What are they?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the appointment was very ill-timed.
And I have no doubt that their sales will suffer as a consequence.
Q. It seems that the first French explosion is immenent. Is
there any decision on when the Australian ship may leave for that
area? PRIME MINISTER: No. There has been no change in the decision
which was already announced on that matter.
Q. You must wait for the New Zealand move first?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, there is no change in what~ we announced.
Q. Will the Commonwealth Government see that G. M. H. does suffer
through this appointment?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The Australian public will draw their own
conclusions about this.
Q. But in the purchase of cars for the Australian Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No, will we buy I should imagine the present
rules apply. We'll buy the car on which we get the best deal.
Q. On this question of the dispute in New South Wales, you
said... PRIME MINISTER: No, well I'm not going to comment at this
press conference on this. I'm not going to promote....
Q. Unclear.
PRIME MINISTER: Well if you don't mind, I'm not going to
pursue it.
Q. After we have gained control of North West Cape, should
the United States seek permission to send a signal to fire
nuclear weapons. Will you always say no?
PRIME MINISTER: This is hypothetical, isn't it? 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P..
AT THE M. T. I. A. SEMINAR HELD IN MELBOURNE ON
THURSDAY, 21 JUNE. 1973
In accepting your invitation, I must say I had some
reservations about your promotional brochure.
It says: " If you open this folder, you are in for
a shock." Well, nobody resists that sort of come-on; so I did
open it. And what do I find?
A splendid likeness and the words " Keynote E. G. Whitlam,
Prime Minister of Australia."
And indeed, it is not made quite clear in your promotion
whether the Seminar is to discuss future shock according to
Professor Toffler or under the Whitlam Government.
I know that my colleagues and I have, from time to time,
been reported as saying or doing things which may have surprised
you or even shocked you. I think it was inevitable, after 23
years, that this would be so; and, of course we Labor men crude,
rough, unpolished as we are do not have that finesse and elegance
and suavity that you natural~ ly came to expect from our predecessors,
the men born to rule. So you will have to bear with us if at times
we seem to fall short of those sophisticated standards of former
days. You will pardon me, however, if I say that I find it just
a little frustrating to discover that plain speaking from an
Australian Prime Minister is so often resented. Is there a
country in the world where straightforward statements are so
often regarded as arrogant or indiscreet or even, as I find in
the Age this week, egocentric? I would have thought it just a
matter of stating the truth when asked. Indeed, I think our
problem in Australia is not so much one of future shock, but
recovering from past bromides.
So I do see it as part of my duties to administer from
time to time a little shock treatment; of course I shall be
careful to see it doesn't become aversion therapy.
Today, however, I am going to do the responsible, the
discreet, the Prime Ministerial thing: I am going to give
reassurance; and I give it on three counts.
I see Professor Toffler outlines his thesis in these
words: 
-2-
" When diversity converges with transience and
novelty, we rocket the society towards an
historical crisis of adaptation. We create an
environment so ephemeral, unfamiliar and complex
as to threaten millions with adaptive breakdown.
This breakdown is future shock."
I suppose some of you might think that that is a description
of the Australian Government. I concede the " diversity" and the
" novelty". I concede that some people in Australia some of
them not a million miles from the Opposition benches are being
" rocketed into a crisis of adaptation" and I concede the " unfamiliar"
and the " complex" aspects of our Government. You will not be so
very surprised if I do not concede " transience" or " ephemerality".
And quite seriously, it is folly for business or for any section
of our Australian community, or for that matter, anybody abroad,
to regard the decision of the people on 2 December as some sort
of aberration, a temporary departure from the normalcy of stodgy
conservatism. To do so is to ignore some of the very great and
deep forces which have been at work in our society, not just for
the last six months, not just for the six weeks or the six months
before the elections, but for years and years.
The collapse of the Liberal Australian Government was
fundamentally a result of its failure over a very long period,
to respond to, or even to perceive, those changes at work.
The result of 2 December was not merely a change in Government,
but a real change in the direction of will and purpose in the
Australian community. Whatever the electoral fortunes of the
Labor Government may be, there is nothing transient, nothng
ephemeral in the forces which brought it to power. This is
something we all have to live with. A wise businessman, a prudent
investor, a competent manager, will recognise this as a fact of
life for many years to come and will plan accordingly. Paradoxically,
the forces and pressure for change will be the most stable, certain
element in Australian political and economic life in the foreseeable
future. I hope you are stably reassured.
Secondly, I want to reassure you that ours is a highly
predictable Government. I confess it makes me quite impatient
when I hear that business is uneasy or uncertain about our
intentions. I venture to say, in all seriousness, that no
administration in modern democratic history has entered office
with its intentions so precisely and specifically spelt out
and spelt out over so long a period. Let me illustrate: When I
had to conduct campaigns as Leader of the Opposition, in 1967,
Senate, in 1969, House of Representatives, in 1970, Senate,
and in 1972, House of Representativest I gave short shrift to
candidates or campaign officials or even advertising agencies
who complained that they did not know the policy until the night
of the policy speech. It was all there well before. It was in
the platform of the party. The priorities to be given to the
platform and the fleshing out of the bare bones of the platform
were contained in speech after speech my principal colleagues
and I had made in Parliament and around this country for months
and years before any of those elections* In the whole of that
period when I led the Opposition it was well known who were the
men who would hold the chief ministries. 
-3-
Any competent person could have written the essentials of the
1972 program upon which we were elected anybody who had read
what we had been saying for the last six years; and anybody who
can read that policy speech knows what this Government has been
about, throughout the last six months. If anyone has been
surprised, I can only take it that there is still an element
of surprise in the fact that an elected Government will actually
do what it said it would do.
We shall continue until the next elections, the steady,
progressive implementation of that program; after the next
elections, we shall proceed with the same deliberate speed
to implement the program for which we shall seek a mandate at
those elections. But in the broad and in the detail of those
160 specific undertakings which were deemed to be so excessive
and extravagant at the time if you want to know what the
Government is doing and what it will do read the policy speech.
It is true, we have just begun the process of framing
the Budget and there must necessarily be an area of doubt about
the provisions of this Budget as with any Budget. Has there
ever been a time when this has not been so? Speculation upon
the Budget surely did not begin with the election of a Labor
Government! It is in the nature of the system whereby the annual
Budget is regarded as the Goenmn' key economic and social
document. We are moving to change that. The Treasurer and I have
long put the view that the system of annual budgets worked against
effective long term planning and efficient short term economic
manipulation. The Budget has to bear an impossible burden if it
is made to perform a myriad of functions including the setting
out of national econo'mic and social goals. Accordingly, very
soon after achieving office, we decided to quicken the development
of a fully pledged program of forward estimates of Australian
expenditures. This decision is designed to affect significantly
in the future, the efficient allocation of resoures in the public
sector, The preparation of the forward estimates will mean that
the implications of Government programs can be examined over a
much longer time-span than the traditbnal annual budgetary period
permitted in the past. Further, we haveestablished a committee
of ministers to examine and analyse the information ofl expenditure
trends revealed in the estimates. The work of this committee
will considerably enhance our ability to guide expenditures towards
the areas of highest priority and will assist the Government in
more clearly defining our objectives and national goals. We shall
have a better idea of what we are about; so will everybody.
Nevertheless, we have a Budget to produce in August.
This week we have had some of the traditional pre-Budget talks
with industry. Whatever the Budget contains and it appears
that even the most rudimentary reference or common sense statement
by any of my ministers about the inevitable difficulties in
framing Labor's first Budget for 24 years will be deemed to indicate
a split or a crisis the Budget will be a fundamental financial
expression of the goals we set out in our program last year for
the elections. The Budget is not the be-all and end-all of that
program; it is a crucial element in achieving it. 
-4-
It is true that the economy is in a very different phase
from that existing at the time of the elections. The pattern
of the Budget must be determined in the light of the state of
the economy at the time of its preparation and must be based on
reasonable expectations of the way in which the economy will develop.
The remarkable fact about the present economic situation
is the dramatic and healthy change which has taken place in it
over the last six months. In the months before the election even
the previous Government was so concerned about the continued
slackness in the economy that it introduced special expansionist
measures despite the fact that its own budget had only just been
approved by Parliament. As late as December an independent professional
economic institute within the University of Melbourne was
reporting that the economy was still operating substantially below
capacity and seemed likely to continue to do so for months ahead.
There can be no doubt that the major task of economic
management facing the Government and the community generally is
to restrain the rising pressure of expenditure on resources and
to prevent inflationary rises in prices and in costs.
The task which faces the Cabinet is to produce a Budget
which will finance the Government's own essential programs and
also provide for the necessary restraint on rising levels of
private as well as public expenditure. The Government accepts
this responsibility and will come to the task of its preparation
ready to consider any form of fiscal action likely to contribute
to an effective performance of the task. But the great thrust
of the Budget must be to implement our clearly stated program
and goals. So the second reassurance I give you is about the basic
predictability of this Government.
The third reassurance I give you is that we fully
recognise the interdependence of a Labor Government and private
business. I acknowledgedin my policy speech that we could not
expect that our social program could be financed without a
significantly increased growth rate. Australia had been stumbling
along with a paltry growth rate of 3 per cent or so. I said
then that we would need to achieve a growth rate of 6 to 7 per
cent if our program were to be implemented without vastly increased
taxation. We shall probably achieve a rate higher than 7 per cent
this year. We can only achieve such a rate if all sectors of the
community, not least the private sector, is prosperous, efficient
and fully employed. You need a prosperous economy. So does
the Government. I know very well I cannot achieve a moiety of
what I want to achieve for the people of this country decent
schools, decent hospitals, decent cities, decent provision for
the sick, the aged and the handicapped without your prosperity
if you like, without your taxes. 
I said in the policy speech and the Governor-General
himself was gracious enough to repeat it in the speech from
the throne that We would establish consultative planning
machinery by which all sectors of industry, employers and
employees, would co-operate with us in the planning of the
economy and the promotion of the great goals of our society.
We shall faithfully abide by that undertaking. I understand
there are complaints in the business community about difficulties
in communication with the new ministers. I acknowledge things
have changed a little since December. No longer the midnight
telephone call from the influential address in Canberra or
even more influential address at Surfers Paradise. ( The Postmaster-
General is distinctly irked at the loss in his revenues.
Frank Crean is delighted at the savings. You see the difficulty
I have in getting unity in my Cabinet.) I know that over the
years, certain convenient and immediate lines of communication
did develop between leaders of industry and leading ministers.
I understand and I don't quibble at it, but you cannot really
be surprised that there has been some slight change. Let. me,
however, put this to you: were you really on such a good thing?
Did this allegedly comfortable relationship ever really help
you in the long term planning of your industry or your company?
Is it not a fact that, towards the end, our predecessors had
such a lack of any coherent or comprehensive policy that aJll
the consultation, all the private dinners and all the telephone
calls, left you none the wiser and certainly none -the richer?
Ido want communication with industry. I want it and
so do my ministers, every bit as much with private industry
as with the trade union movement. We want it on an open, regular,
constructive and in significant areas, institutionalised
basis. It is in this context that I wish to speak to you about
some of the basic structural reforms which we have implemented
or are about to create. Fundamental to the future of the
Australian economy is the question of national industrial policy.
This is not simply a matter of deciding that it is desirable
to have economic growth or economic development. It is worth
emphasising that the two are not necessarily the same. We know
it well in Australia. During the last generation we have
experienced a remarkable phase of economic development, yet it
has not been accompanied by a particularly creditable economic
growth. So when I speak of industrial policy, I am referring
to the problems of the relative rates of growth of all industry
primary, secondary and tertiary industry and to the various
industries within those sectors.
The disparity between our rate of development and our
rate of growth makes it quite clear that very serious distortions
in the productive capacity of Australian industry have arisen and
it is equally clear that the tariff system is centrally relevant
to this distortion. You know that quite early in the life of the
Government we asked Sir John Crawford to report on the establishment
of a Commission to replace the Tariff Board. His report is now
at hand this week. I should now say that he suggests a name
other than that of the " Protection Commission" which was the
term used in the policy speech and the Governor-General's speech. 
-6-
The M. T. I. A's own submission for which I thank and compliment
you suggested a similar change. If I refer here to the
Protection Commission, you will understand that it is without
prejudice to any decision of Cabinet on Sir John Crawford's
recommendation. The essential elements of my request to Sir
John were to make recommendations on a Commission which would be
able to conduct examinations independent of the pressures of day
to day politics and, above all, open to public scrutiny.
This kind of approach has, of course, typified the
work of the Tariff Board in recent years. Subject to the
limitations of staff and the restrictions of policy imposed
upon it by the form of some of the references to it, the Tariff
Board has had to deal with many of the problems of an industrial
policy. Unfortunately, it has suffered from two major inadequacies;
and it is these inadequacies that we hope the Protection Commission
will overcome. The first of them has been the limitation of scope.
We believe it is essential that any decision, whether of
commission or omission, should take full notice of its
implications for employment and existing investments, and that
when major adjustment is necessary as a consequence of such
decisions, the employment and other adjustments involved in
other words, the reallocation of labour and capital should
take place in such a way as to avoid the traumas and hardships
which structural adjustments have involved in the past,
The second major limitation of the Tariff Board has been
the blinkers which have been foisted upon it in the past. With
few exceptions, only the problems of manufacturing industry have
been referred to the Board. We intend to change that and have
levels of protection of both agriculture and secondary industry
decided by the same body. Again non-tariff forms of assistance
have been generally decided in widely different ways ways
which often have been unco-ordinated and at variance with one
another. We have set up with a Secretariat in my Department
a standing inter-departmental committee responsible for
advising on all assistance to industries. This will make for
more coherent and consistent decision making.
Again, one might point out that never has the Tariff
Board, or any other independent statutory authority, been asked
to report upon the prospects for a new industry or the question
of which of Australia's existing or embryonic industries offer
prospects of viability without assistance of an open-ended kind
from the taxpayer. 
-7-
In this context, it might be worth emphasising that
in pointing out this deficiency I am not proposing that any
body or any Governmental authority in Australia should set
itself up to select which industries should be allowed to exist
and which should be put out of business.
But it is the responsibility of the Government to decide
what is the national advantage in terms of particular industries,
when any kind of official patronage, that is, the taxpayers'
money is involved.
Now there are some implications of this that I am sure
will be music to your ears. I know how dedicated you all are,
how determined you all are, to uphold the principle of free
enterprise and open competition. I know how much you will
welcome every decision which will promote competition. The
Protection Commission should help to this end.
In expanding and building upon the role of the Tariff
Board through the new Commission, whatever the final form of
it may be, the Government intends to lay the basis for an
industrial policy for Australia, in which the emphasis will be
upon change and dynamic adjustment.
It is not a pretty sight in a country like Australia,
so rich in natural resources and with such a potentiality for
growth, to see the instant ossification which sets in in so
many enterprises and indeed whole industries. As soon as an
industry has come into existence, too often it considers that
its very existence entitles it to a certificate of immortality
and changelessness, to be guaranteed a safe and easy life by
way of Government subsidy and protection through tariffs or,
even worse, permanent quantitive controls on imports.
When the Great Depression struck the world, the retreat
behind tariff barriers on a worldwide scale was understandable,
even if not always wise. Jobs and livelihoods for millions of
people were at stake, and the threat of economic warfare by
dumping led to the practice of economic warfare by tariffs.
Nevertheless, it cannot be repeated too often that at
a time of full employment and labour shortages, as will be the
case soon, no serious threat to jobs is involved in prodding
industry into greater resilience and adaptability to change by
exposing it to a more competitive climate. It becomes for
Government much more a social problem than an employment problem.
When in some cases, in the interests of economic growth,
it becomes necessary to encourage job changes, the duty of the
Government is to act on the side of the change, not resist it,
and to facilitate the transfer of employees into expanding
industries and out of uneconomic and contracting industries. 
-8-
The Government is studying the problems of adjustment
assistance for structural change, in its industrial, manpower
retraining and social security aspects. We shall never allow
change to be bought at the cost of human hardship. Neither shall
we build unnecessary rigidities into the Australian economy
merely in order to enable people, whether they be employers or
employees, to continue in a particular industry just because
they are used to it and don't want to learn anything new. This
can only lead to stagnation and the sacrifice of economic growth,
not in the name of something rational like preservation of the
environment but in the name of sluggishness and conservatism.
Australia should be able to pride herself upon a vigorous
and independent approach to her role in the international economic
community. She will be able to do so only if we develop an
industrial policy which is directed towards adaptation, and strive
to overcome the inbuilt resistance of vested interests to any
structural changes in the domestic economy.
Like most countries of the world today, Australia has
encountered serious inflationary problems. There can be no doubt
that inflation is a disruptive influence on the economy and
society, and it is in the interests of all that it should be
held in check. If prices continue to rise sharply in the erratic
and unpredictable ways that have characterised recent experience,
no-one in Government, in business, or in private life can plan
confidently for the future. This problem has led to extreme
measures being taken in some countries, in particdlar the United
Kingdom and the United States.
The Australian Government is determined to contain
inflationary pressures. It will not be easy. We are aware
of the need to manage economic affairs prudently to avoid too
great a strain on Australia's resources. We intend to do so
with the co-operation of business and the public at large.
For this reason, we have established a Prices Justification
Tribunal which will have the task of enquiring into and reporting
upon the prices charged and any price rises proposed by large
companies. Its reports will state whether, in the opinion of
the Tribunal, this or that price or price rise is justified.
We confidently expect that the companies concerned will abide
by the Tribunal's judgements in these matters and, as the Tribunal
will provide a forum for discussion of these matters in public
hearings, we believe that its operations will have the force of
public opinion behind them. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that business should recognise its own best interests
and the best interests of Australia in co-operating with the
Tribunal in all respects.
Further, we are determined to step up the long term
growth of productivity in Australia by a variety of measures. 
-9-
First, we intend to stimulate both internal and external
competition and at the same time to improve the competitiveness
of Australian industry. Existing Australian legislation in the
restrictive trade practices field is of limited effectiveness.
Even our predecessois recognised that. We propose to deal with
restrictive trade practices by directly prohibiting them instead
of leaving them to be restrained separately after time-consuming
enquiries, as is the case with most practices at present.
The Government has done a great deal of preparatory
work in formulating new and stronger legislation along these
lines. I do not see stronger restrictive trade practices
legislation as something for industry to fear. Obviously,
there will be adjustments to be made. But as the influence
of this legislation spreads we can expect a sharper, more
competitive spirit to emerge in the economy, with industry
quicker to respond to changes in the market and in the available
techniques of production and distribution, and quicker to respond
to new opportunities in general. This must be to the benefit
of everyone. Secondly, we hope to move towards more outward looking
trade and development strategies adopted by such other small
rich industrial economies as Sweden, Denmark and Norway, economies
which have increased the real average living standards of
their population considerably faster than we have, and at the
same time, looked after their sick and poor much better than we
have. There is need to recognise that increasingly our
manufacturing industries should become more oriented to
international markets. However, no wholesale upheaval of the
Australian industrial structure will result from our policies.
Rather any alterations to existing policies, or the introduction
of new ones, will be gradual. The Government is aware that its
policies will involve some changes ofemphasis and of direction.
It recognises the need to ease the transition by providing as
much notice to industry as possible to plan for changes of
direction and where possible to give industry time to adjust
to new circumstances. Thirdly, we aim to increase the adaptability of the
Australian economy to changing technology and to changing
economic conditions both at home and abroad. Action has
already been set in train by the ministers for Secondary Industry,
Labour and Social Security and to develop a comprehensive and
co-ordinated set of policy measures on
Labour training and re-training;
Relocation of industries and workforces;
Adjustment assistance to industries affected;
Effective social security and welfare measures to
protect individuals and their families involved. 
Currently a high level governmental mission is overseas
studying relevant experience in other countries. Such a program
will enable the Government, in co-operation with industry and
the trade unions, to accelerate the movement towards a more
viable and profitable industrial structure.
The long term structural changes which need to be made
to achieve a lift in the real income growth of the community
may require Government assistance in many areas to ensure that
the associated human and economic problems of change are at
least minimised and, where possible, avoided.
Finally, it is particularly appropriate that I should
mention at a seminar under the auspices of the the
question of industrial relations. The great breakthrough
towards industrial sanity in Australia came when the M. T. I. A.
recognised that the prosperity of both employers and employees
rested upon industrial co-operation, not industrial confrontation.
Your members know full well the futility of the provocation of
the penal clauses. Your members will know the advantages to
yourselves of union amalgamation. You must find it as ludicrous as
I do that a majority in the Senate should seek to thwart our
mandate on two such matters one of them, at least, " inoperative"
if no-one finds it offensive or interfering for me to use that
word. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to commend the efforts
your Association has made in recent years to bring about a better
industrial climate by replacing the idea of confrontation in
industrial relations with co-operation. In future years, I
believe that the writers on industrial relations will regard the
1971 metal trades negotiations and agreement as a major initiative
in the development of a more satisfactory system of industrial
relations. I congratulate the M. T. I. A. on the initiatives it took
to reach agreement with the metal trades unions for an agreement
covering this important industry, an example of bargaining with
the assistance of the Commission without any industrial stoppages.
I believe that this will be regarded as an outstanding
example of the way industrial relations in Australia can and should
be conducted. In all these matters in economic management, in tariff
policy, in industrial relations, in social engineering we are
seeking new machinery, better structures, mom public processes,
to achieve our program for change. 
-11
Returning to the brochure promoting this seminar,
reference is made to the " sickness that comes from too much
change in too short a time". I cannot accept the proposition
that it is the change which causes the sickness. It is the
failure to prepare for change and to plan for change. Change
itself is inevitable. I do not fear it. Where we have failed
so often in the past is in failing to anticipate it, and failing
to develop modern and contemporary institutions to deal with it.
It is the duty of a Government devoted to change in an era of
change to develop those structures and institutions. This is
what we are doing. We know our creations can only be truly
effective if they are based on co-operation and open dealings
with the public. Co-operation, open dealing, contemporary
institutions for planning and achieving clearly stated national
goals those, I believe, are the best antidotes against future
shock. 



p
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 101
22 June 1973
DECISION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE ON
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTS
If, as e.-pected, the International Court of
Justice announces its decision on the French nuclear
tests tonight ( Australian time), the Department of Foreign
Affairs will handle all. press enquiries.
Any comment made by the Prime Minister will be
released by the department, and all further en~ quiries
regarding the decision should be directed to Mr. Denni11s
Richardson on Canberra 613222 until 10.00 p. p.
After 10.00 p. m. Mr. Richardson can be contacted on
Canberra 485353.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



4JjAUSTRIIA Lg PRESS STATEMENT NO. 102
22 June 1973
FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced the
names of those invited to join the permanent Council of the Film
and Television School.
The Prime Minister said that the Interim Council of
the Film and Television School had been set up in 1969 to
advise the Government on the necessary steps to bring the
School into operation. This work had now been done and
Professor Jerzy Toeplitz had been appointed as the School's
foundation Director.
Legislation was introduced in Parliament on 31 May
to establish the School as an independent body. Mr. Whitlam
said that with. this step he envisaged a new kind of Councilone
in which the staff and students of the School would be
represented and which would have strong links to film-making
interests. It was intended that when the School was fully
operating the Council would have fifteen full members, five
to be appointed by the Governor-General, two elected from the
teachers of the School, two elected from the students, the
Director of the School, and five elected by a convocation of
the School. The convocation would consist of graduates of the
School, staff, past Council members and representatives of the
widest range of film and television interests including education,
industry and community groups.
The Prime Minister said " I hope that by the
appointment of a representative body of this kind it will be
possible to ensure that the School conducts its activities in
a way which will be most responsive to the needs of promising
young film-makers and of the community which will provide-a
public for their work." 
-2-
The Prime Minister said that the foundation Chairman
of the Council would be Mr. Barry Jones, who had been a member
of the Interim Council.
The names of the persons invited to join the Council
were decided following wide consultation with members of the
film and television industry.' They are:
Hector Crawford, O. B. E.
Mrs. Julia Bailey
John Flaus
Geoffrey Healy
Mrs. Joan Long
Richard Mason
James Oswin
Brian Robinson*
Peter Weir
Professor Jerzy
Toeplitz, Melbourne, Managing Director of
Crawford Productions Pty. Ltd.
Sydney, Education, Television and.
Film Producer and Writer.
Melbourne, Lecturer at the Media
Centre, School of Education,
La Trobe University.
Sydney, Manager of Group operations,
ATN Channel Seven.
Sydney, Film Writer and President
Australian Writers Guild.
Sydney, Film Producer and member of
the Film and Television Board of
the Australian Council for the
Arts.
Sydney, Secretary, Department of
the Media.
Melbourne, Lecturer-in-Charge,
Film and Television Production
Course at Swinburne College of
Technology, and member of the
Course Development Committee,
Film and Television Victoria
Institute of Colleges.
Sydney, Film Director
Ex officio member, foundation
Director of the Australian Film
and Television School.
Half of the members of the new Council would, on the
completion of their initial term, be replaced by persons elected
by convocation. They would, of course, be eligible for election.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 26 JUNE 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks gentlemen. The Cabinet sat in Sydney
yesterday morning and afternoon and here in Canberra this
morning. Most of the time yesterday was devoted to the
briefing for the Treasurer, Mr Crean, and myself at the Premiers'
Conference in Canberra next Thursday and Friday. Clearly,
I can't give you any information or answer any questions about
this because it is clearly portion of the general Budget
situation. I can, however, give you several other decisions.
I think I told you last week that I had just
received or was just about to receive Sir John Crawford's
report on what we tentatively called a " Protection Commission"
to succeed and incorporate the Tariff Board. We have decided
to call this new body the " Industries Assistance Commission".
There are copies available of Sir John Crawford's report from
Mr Walsh. We have asked the Parliamentary draftsman, the
Parliamentary counsel to draft a bill to incorporate the
recommendations. This doesn't mean that the Cabinet has accepted
all the matters in the report. We believe, however, that it
will make for speedier legislation if we get a draft as soon as
we can on the items which Sir John Crawford recommends. There
is an inter-departmental committee consisting of the Prime
Minister's Department, Treasury, Department of Secondary Industry,
Department of Primary Industry and Department Customs and
Excise which will be consulted by the Parliamentary draftsman
to draw up alternative provisions in the Bill. When, therefore,
Cabinet has before it the Bill and the various alternative
provisions, we can make decisions on those aspects. Nevertheless,
we did not want to delay public knowledge and discussion of the
report and the drafting of the basic legislation based upon it.
We also decided to make further advances to the States
under the Non-metropolitan Unemployment Relief Scheme to the
extent of $ 5 million for next month, $ 4 million for August and
$ 3 million for September. The grants are to be allocated among
the States on the existing proportionate basis. The matter can
be considered again before September.
Dr Cairns will be giving you a press statement on
multi-lateral trade negotiations to be held under GATT in Tokyo
on 12, 13 and 14th September. He will also give you a statement
on the additional items he will be giving this statement at
noon next Friday, because it has to coincide with a similar
statement from New Zealand about additional items to Schedule " A"
of the New Zealand/ Australia Free Trade Agreement. He will give
you today, a statement on the Australian trade display in Peking
in the latter part of next year, probably July. 
The Minister for the Environment and Conservation,
Dr Cass, will give you a statement on our decision to endorse
the International Convention on trade in endangered species.
Senator Wriedt, the minister for Primary Industry,
will give you details of the Wheat Industry Stabilisation
Scheme for the coming year.
The Acting Minister for Defence, Senator Bishop,
will give you a statement on the development of the Nomad
aircraft, and probably a statement on the G. M. H. dispute.
Are there any questions?
Q. Prime Minister: Are you concerned at the apparent delay
in getting the Prices Justification Tribunal operating. When
will the Government be appointing the other members of the
tribunal and when, in fact, do you expect it to be operating?
PRIME MINISTER: We expect the Tribunal to come into operation
on 1 August. We expect to make the appointment of the Deputy
Chairman and the other members after Cabinet next week. I was
discussing this matter with the Chairman, Mr Justice Williams,
in Melbourne last Thursday. We all want to have the tribunal
operating as early as possible. It will not be possible to
get the staff together and to have the tribunal operating
effectively before August.
Q. In your remarks before Question Time, you mentioned the
G. M. H. dispute, did you mean the Ford dispute.
PRIME MINISTER: I did.
Q. Was the question of G. M. H. planning to close down its
Adelaide assembly line discussed at Cabinet.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Was the future of the Australian motor industry discussed
at Cabinet.
PRIME MINISTER: There was quite a discussion on this, yes.
Q. No resolution?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There will be discussions with the industry
over the next six weeks.
Q. Would you be able to state those more explicity?
PRIME MINISTER: No. No.
Q. Will they be with the Japanese companies?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, primarily, but with other companies as
necessary. 
-3-
Q. I understand you saw the French Ambassador this morning.
Did you discuss when the tests will begin, or get any indication
when the tests will begin. Also, will you recall Australia's
Ambassador in Paris when the tests begin?
PRIME MINISTER: I wasn't able to get any information whether
or if so when there will be any nuclear tests by the French
at Mururoa. However, as you quite well know, there is no
statements made after calls or discussions of this nature.
Q. What about Mr Renouf?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to speculate on these matters.
I hope, as I said last Friday night, that the French will abide
by the interim order of the International Court of Justice.
I will not speculate in any other sense.
Q. G. M. H. notified the Government on the 7th that they were
going to increase their prices. What action did the Government
take to try and prevent this increase coming into effect. If
no action was taken, why not? What action will be taken now,
and if no action is planned, why not?
PRIME MINISTER: The Tribunal will deal with this matter I
would expect.
Q. Sir, Mr Snedden, 18 months ago, was carved into little
pieces by you when he failed to take action over a steel
price increase of which he had advance notice. How does this
differ from that?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a tribunal which has been set up by
the Parliament and it will be authorised to deal with this rise
if it goes ahead.
Q. In your election campaign speech you said that a Labor
Government would not hesitate to use its powers as a customer
and through tariffs, subsidies and contracts to prevent
unjustified price rises. If the tribunal finds that the G. M. H.
rises are unjustified, will you then do as you said you would
in your policy speech?
PRIME MINISTER: We would consider all those matters, yes.
Q. Sir, can I assume from your answer to me that you made no
attempt to try and persuade G. M. H. to wait until the Tribunal
came into operation or
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't hear about this until yesterday, but
G. M. H. knows quite well that the Parliament has enacted this
legislation. I would have expected them to have waited. We
have acted as quickly as is possible, and, as I have told you
already, it is not possible to get the tribunal in operation
before August. And I had discussions with the Chairman on
this, to repeat, last Thursday in Melbourne. 
-4-
Q. On this question of motor car rises. I understand most
of the other motor car companies have, in fact, increased their
prices over the last couple of months. Will their price rises
also be referred to the Prices Justification Tribunal?
PRIME MINISTER: I forget the details there. I don't think there
have been any rises since the Parliament passed this bill.
Isn't that right?
A. I'm not sure.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't think there have been.
Q. Sir, if the Acting Treasurer was notified of the increase
on the 7th don't you feel that you a-.. Id/ or the Cabinet should
have been told, and have you conveyed this feeling if you
haven't to the Acting Treasurer, Mr Stewart?
PRIME MINISTER: I accept that the Government was told this,
but I would also expect that the company would have waited until
the Tribunal was in operation.
Q. In reply to an earlier question on G. M. H. prices, you said
" 3if it goes ahead". Do you have any reason to believe that they
won't go ahead with their prices?
PRIME MINISTER: I would hope they wouldn't.
Q. Do you have any reason to believe they won't?
PRIME MINISTER: I can only go on what I have read. The Tribunal
can deal with this matter.
Q. Sir, isn't there a similarity between a minister failing to
notify you of this and a minister failing to notify
PRIME MINISTER: No. Another question.
Q. Sir, you say the Tribunal can deal with this. How?
PRIME MINISTER: It can have a hearing to determine whether
the increase in prices is justified.
Q. But then what does it do, if it decides the increase is not
justified? You told Mr Barron that you would think about carrying
out what you said in your policy speech, the question of the
Government as a customer.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. In what sense is the Government a customer? Would you think
about subsidies....
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. All those matters which Mr Barron mentioned.
And there is also an impact on the public. The public is entitled
to know whether a competent tribunal regards an increase in
prices as justified. It may be the prices increase is justifiable. 
But the company, I would think, should have waited until the
proper body had had the opportunity to determine that matter.
Q. Was the company told that that tribunal would probably
look at any rise
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
Q. Can your words today be taken
PRIME MINISTER: I think we will have another one.
Q. Sir, why didn't the Acting Treasurer tell the Government
that this price rise was going to take place?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I would have thought that this
is quite immaterial. The answer would quite clearly be, in any
case, you should wait until the Tribunal has an opportunity
to hear this matter and give a ruling on it.
Q. You said you would have expected the company to wait until
the Tribunal was set up. The company says they waited as long
as was economically feasible and that they weren't told when the
tribunal would be operating. That seems like a reasonable
PRIME MINISTER: Well I didn't know until last Thursday when
the tribunal would be able to operate.
Q. Well, how do you expect them to wait for an indefinite
period PRIME MINISTER: Well, they now know.
Q. Have they since been asked officially by the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I haven't communicated with them, at
any rate.
Q. Prime Minister, does this apply to all other companies?
Is this in fact a price freeze that you are applying for all
other companies which might want to put up the price of their
products? Should they all now wait until the Prices Justification
Tribunal is established?
PRIME MINISTER: I would hope so, that is, the companies whose
operations would be a sufficient size to bring them within the
scope of the tribunal and, obviously, G. M. H. is a company of that
size.
Q. Other companies who now want to do it, if they do it, they
will be referred to that Prices Tribunal when it is established
in August?
PRIME MINISTER: It will be within its scope to deal with it. 
-6-
Q. Prime Minister, would you consider a special inquiry now
because of what's happened in
PRIME MINISTER: No. There is a tribunal to deal with this
matter, as far as the Parliament is concerned, and it will be
operating as early as possible.
Q. May I ask you Mr Prime Minister, what do you think of
the non-aligned movement specially in view with the forthcoming
summit in Algiers, and does your Government intend to be
present at this conference, either as an observer or as a guest.
And, if I may add another short question, what are the prospects
of improving the Australian/ Yugoslav relations? Do you think
that some problems which in the previous years have been obstacles
for better relations are now overcome?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, whether Australia is an observer or
a guest at the non-aligned conference in Algiers will depend
on the members of the conference. Australia can't be either an
observer or a guest unless she is asked. If she is asked,
then she would accept the invitation. Australia can't be a
member of the conference because Australia is not a non-aligned
country. Most of our neighbours, however, will be attending
this conference. Now you ask about relations between Australia
and Yugoslavia. I believe they are very greatly improved because
the Australian Government has now made it plain that it will
not alllow Australia to be any longer used as a base for operations
against the Government of Yugoslavia. There is one issue which
Australia and Yugoslavia are discussing and that is the issue
of dual nationality. The Yugoslav Government takes the attitude
which is, I think, the usual attitude taken by countries in
the Roman law tradition that a person doesn't of his own volition
give up the citizenship of his country; the country itself has
to agree to that.
There are a very great number, some tens of thousands
6f people who were born in Yugoslavia and whose citizenship has
not in the Government of Yugoslavia's view been ended but who
have become naturalised as Australians. Now, what Australia
asks is, that if any of those persons having dual nationality
are visiting Yugoslavia and would be in trouble with the law,
then the Australian representatives should be informed because,
in our view, they are also Australian citizens. This is a legal
question of some complexity and it concerns a great number of
countries, it is of interest to Australia because we have had
so many migrants who, as we like them to do, have become
naturalised. Now, this is a matter being considered, as you
know, by the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Australian Parliamentboth
Houses all parties are on that; this question of multiple
nationality. But a very great advance has been made already,
I am happy to acknowledge. We have been in the last month or
so, given much more information about dual nationals who have
been arrested or charged in Yugoslavia than had ever been the
case before. 
Q. Returning to this question of the G. M. H. price increase.
You said that you have accepted that the Government was notified
on June 7 that the increase was proposed. You said you know
of no request from the Government to G. M. H. to hold back on an
increase in price. You said that, yourself, you didn't know
until last Thursday when the Prices Justification Tribunal
would be operating and yet you have said that you would rather
hope that G. M. H. would hold back on the increase until the
tribunal was operating. In view of those dates being as they
are, and in view of the fact that G. M. H. has stated, and has not
been contradicted, that it has held back already on a price
increase, do you think it reasonable to expect G. M. H. to
have further held back on the increase in prices?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I do.
Q. Sir, now that G. M. H. knows the date of the tribunal, do
you expect them now to withdraw the amounts of their price rises?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope they will.
Q. Will the Government officially ask them to do so, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Any citizen knows the law.
Q. Will they be contravening the law if they go ahead with
the price rise before the matter is considered by the Tribunal.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. A tribunal will be available
from the beginning of August to deal with such matters and if they
put in an application now it would obviously be one of the
first to be heard.
Q. Sir, has the law come into operation already despite the
non-existence of the tribunal itself?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The act has been assented to but it comes
into operation on a date to be proclaimed, and that date will be
the 1st of August or the first week day in August.
Q. But surely that means that any price rises before the
1st of August are not subject to the tribunal?
PRIME MINISTER: We can look at the Act. I thought that it was
possible to look at these matters retrospectively.
Q. Behind a lot of the pressure on prices is the high state
of economic activity which seems to be approaching boom levels.
Is the Government intending soon to apply some sort of correction
to this rather head-strong momentum in the economy?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, obviously we will be wanting to restrain
expenditures which are in the Government's jurisdiction.
Conspicuously, of course, this will be the case in those matters
which are covered by Dr Coombs' Task Force.
Q. And, in the private sector, Sir? 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: There are very great limitations on what
the Australian Government can do in this field aren't there?
Q. Can I ask you whether the Government is still in favour
of the 10 year moratorium on whaling.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Is our delegation fully informed of this?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Was there any discussion in Cabinet about it this morning?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There is a conference at which the
Australian delegation will be voting in favour of a ten-year
moratorium. Q. Do you agree with the Victorian Housing Minister, Mr Dickie
that latest Commonwealth Housing Agreement is unenforceable?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I certainly don't. I expect that any
Government which signs an agreement will stick to the terms of
it.
Q. Well, what action will the Australian Government take
against Mr Dickie's statement?
PRIME MINISTER: I do not assume that the Victorian Government
will not abide by any agreement to which it becomes a party.
I'm certain that Mr Hamer would not sponsor or tolerate any such
action.
Q. Could you tell us how preparations are going to put into
effect the Government's promise to make interest on housing
loans tax deductible.
PRIME MINISTER: No, I can't mention9 I said right at the
outset there will be no statement and no answers on any matters
which might be in the Budget.
Q. But you are committed to have that in the Budget aren't you?
PRIME MINISTER: I can only repeat what I have just said to you.
I will not answer questions on matters which could be in the Budget.
Now, you all know that I must take that attitude.
Q. Sir, well this is a non-Budget one. Have you heard from
Sir John Crawford? If so, could you give us any outline at all
on his recommendations?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, that was the first thing that I gave
this afternoon.
Q. I was wondering if the Australian Government had decided
who is going to be the next Chairman of the A. B. C.?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. 
-9-
Q. Could you tell me his name please?
PRIME MINISTER: No. You will know the new boss once there
has been an Executive Council meeting. There were several
recommendations which the Government made yesterday for the
consideration of the next Executive Council, and this was one
of them. I think you will be very pleased with the man we
have given you.
Q. When will the Executive Council be meeting, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not sure, I don't often attend it as you
know. Q. Prime Minister, last Friday two of your ministers raised
the question of a capital gains tax. Mr Hayden said in Queensland
he thought it was a matter which would be considered in the
context of this year's Budget, Mr Crean thought it would not be
considered for two years. Will it be considered in the context
of this year's Budget.
PRIME MINISTER: I would love to oblige you, but I just have to
be consistent even with my favourites.
Q. Are your ministers not bound by the same situation, because
the public are quite confused by this?
PRIME MINISTER: They are now. I mean, you may find it more easy
to seduce them with questions like this than you will me, but you
won't seduce me with it.-
Q. You have suggested to them that they should not discuss the
contents of this year's Budget?
PRIME MINISTER: I've said that they should resist your enticement.
Q. They both made these in public speeches, Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you.
Q. Prime Minister, I have just one abbortive question. I don't
think this has been discussed.
PRIME MINISTER: Don't bring this up.
Q. Do you think that Ministers should speculate in Canberra land?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But, however, I don't know what you are
referring to.
Q. In view of your comments a month ago that these press
conferences were a protection against a Watergate type thing
in Australia, I feel justified in trying to seduce you further
on the issue I raised earlier. This G. M. H. thing is the second
occasion on which important advance information has not been
passed on to you or the Government. Do you plan any action
to try and make sure that a third such incident doesn't occur? 
PRIME MINISTER: You all seem particularly interested in this.
G. M. H. knows what the law is as much as anyone else in Australia,
and when Parliament has passed an Act then, I would think, that
companies as large and as prosperous as G. M. H. ought to give
a good example.
Q. Unclear.
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to persue this any further. It
is completely immaterial. General Motors knows what the law
is, Q. Well they have acted in accordance with the law, haven't
they Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't think so. They could wait until
the Tribunal can hear their case, and if it is a good case,
then they ought to be sure that it will succeed. But, at any
rate, as soon as they put in an application, the sooner it can
be determined. 



Premiers' Conference and Loan Council Meeti g,
28 a-id 2C J Y..
Press Statement_ bvthe 1? rimre Minister
The Australian Government and the State Premiers have
arrived at agreement on the following matters during the discussions
that have taken place;
Welfare Housing The States will enter into a Housing Agreement with the
Australian Government under which the following advances for welfare
housing will be made to the States in 1973-74 amounts allocated by
the States for housing in 1972-73 are shown for comparison:-
Allocations for Welfare Housing
H1ousinf. rby__ Sates 7-d-vance s Increase
1972-73 I9iL/ z-
Sm $ M
N. S. W. 65.7 86.0 30o9
Vic. 39.0 53.5 37.2
Qld. 14.6 17.4 19.2
S. A. 30.0 32.8 9.3
W. A. 15.4 13.0 -15.6
Tas. 8.8 16.0 81o8
Total 173.5 218.7 26.1
Advances for welfare housing will be made outside9 and
in addition to, the borrowing programs approved by the Loan Council
for the States.
Tertiary Education The States have accepted the Australian Government's
offer to take full financial responsibility for financing
tertiary education from 1 January 1974. It has been agreed that
amounts by which additional expenditure by the Australian Government 
relieve State Governments of expend( Iitutre th-ey would
otherwise have incurred. should be deducted from the general
purpose funds provided by the Australian Government to the
States. This will mean offsets to the financial assistance
grants for recurrent expenditure on tertiary education, and
offsets to the Loan Council. programmes for capital expenditure.
In 1973-74, only a half-year's expenditure will be
involved. The amount of' the offsets to the financial
assistance grants and the Loan Council programns
and 1974-75 are as follows:-
Offsets for Tertiary Education
S million
Financial Assistance Grants Loan Council Programs
1973-74 1974-75 1973-74 1974-75
N. S. W. 36.4 75.2 11.1 22.0
Vic. 34.8 70.8 10.2 20.3
Qi. 13.5 27.6 3.9 7.8
S. A. 12.0 24.-7 3.8 7.7
W. A. 11.6 24.2 2.7 5.4
Tas. 3.5 7.2 1.1 2.2
Total 111.8 229.7 32.8 65.4
Revenue Assistance for States
The Australian Government, in recognition of' the
States' budgetary problems in 1973-74, agreed to provide
special additional revenue assistance of' $ 25 million, to be
distributed between the States in proportion to the financial
assistance grants payabl~ e under existing legislation. 
T t : i ; red a iso tii: 1 t the al( 1i 1, iofll 1 inanc
; Is s i t1v c f II L b1l)\ . to w11este rn . i s ro I : i a in 197* 3 -7]
shiouil reln-ail alat; 56.5) mil i.] ion i u." teiid of bei nt. roduced to
3 nili 1 1 o n provid cd i n ix ist J. n ~ Ije i ii. o n. ' vcs orni
Au: stri.! ia i z to reco-). vc an add i. LI oznal. 1 f-1(, iaol. rrVv raiit ; 11
197* 3-71, the 11: 100111, o1f Wjj hi il 1. h1. c the : subject ofj IN -, tLher
1. 2( i o~ li he uWOi jJ7 A stt. l j: Ssnt r! All Z Ira~ l i o enn nI
TIhe FPl owin t ! A eo qtows est Iatfs o 1 reve I Ier fl'. 11t~ s
pavo~ ldo to the 3 atcas in 1 973-71 ltahiriir into accountf, ie a( dId i. I. 0onal
assisI rice now t; he prowv idfed, a mIld a loilry '[ or oiffset' Oil accountf.
of ter 1,13ry ed'u;, Lion.
P TI E. Li,&gt;' j21: 1i -PA v' 7m TO Q M; 1 973-741
F i 111' Cioa 1 P 1 is \ i( Id i t i. o na 1Le 3 s Lort i a rv, T o~ tal1
Under Kitfr rs' Of fst.!
6 ionh Confie c~ f
i. l o nilon nmillion S mill Io!
601 0 7 -9 3 6. 572.5
V i. 4 5 7. 0 6.0 31.8 12) 8 2
4l 13.-5 3 10.7
209 0 2.8 12.0 19(). 91
219.0 59 ( 1i 11.6 21.-3 .3 ( d)
i; 1S O' 1.0 .23.5 S'
To tal 1 1 ,70 11. 1,813 2 d'( i
The Granl s C. orriss ion h-not Yoet recommended the
amounts ofl t. he spca -r* rm1 raiis fo-r par mont to
rs~ l~ au lid, th AIStr7al I-ia. and Tas~ iin ia I n. 1 ( 17)-7-1
b ) Based on rie Ii iminarv e S LO5~' i 1,11 PCHer cn [. M
111Cr] ' liSo In! wia) e0rc~ In theo ' ear en'lj. TrC] h 11 7; j
~ Lrf) l(( orlc toe n( 000 fl0 0 il t4:~ 1i ts popn. I a t. LC'f
i~ n the rc r( li -' jr. lT D cihr I19O7 ')
c) C o m ri s i. n rP ; n i I1A . ion Lo o( div LIe d in pr).) ortion to
the Finattcial !-Ssi. stIuco ( I'n : 1iO 53 m. i . io n
f'or ' estern Qutn] I osu Liln, -f from retention the
rvid iti onal rant of* 5 il l ion najul in 1972-73.
To i ncrco-sod bY the a''! iou; nl 1, o he( deoter!:! i nd inl the isus a
en the Au stral ian a sto'ri.. \ i! traill i . t fo1! jc1 
4 Loan Counc i Programs
The program for the States and their larger
authorities agrced for 1973-74 and approved by the Loan Council
are as follows:-Loan Council Program! s 1973-74
State Governments " Larger"
Grants Borrow i nprs Toal Auth. ori ties( a
mmillion illion million million
86.6 183.1 269.7 199.9
70.8 149.7 220.5 182.7
37.0 78.2 115.2 104.6
37.6 79.6 117.2 27.1
25.8 54.6 80.4 33.2
20.5 43.5 64.0 16.5
278.3 588.7 867.0 564.0
Authorities borrowing over $ 400,000
individ. ually during the year. Total mill ion
469.6 403.2 219.8 144.3 113.6 80.5
1,431 .0
NOTE: The State Governmental programs, as explaine a, ove,
exclude welfare housing advances and are net of
offsets for tertiary education,
29 June 1973
N. S. W.
Vie. Qld. S. A.
V. A.
Tas To tal 
EX'PLAkNAVOIY NOTES PREMIERS' CONITF'ETRO MCE
2L, 2,9 June 1973
FUITDS AA~ r: TTLJA YdLE TO THlE STATS IN 1 973-74
The following ta. les supplement the information
pi-ovided in the Prime Minister's press statement. 
million 1 97 7-1
E; s t t~ i. atres
o f
V* c m i] !. s e0 r ce r) t
Inc reaE
1 * Finaoc lal ssi st', nce ( rm sUnder
. iXL~ 1T L e-ill. ;' i-LOr
inaki" off!-; ej.: on acecouni-t of'
tertj. cl. 11c~ rbion in 1c73-7.1( a)
2. S31)( ci.;-A Loan fo " ev S'oiit-. aiel s
3 ' Pin3 * AO d ti nuial " reed mt
I rem icr s : c) il ~ 11C 1,16-7.31 t 785 2Oh)
1 28.0
TOTATL ( 3) 1 ,562.3
~ aI'b~ cs ~ p. C n;~ ciiPro' rutli IOes 932.0 6 6( c)
7. hoi c : o.-row
r ro rtn! j
8. T ola1 5) 6) d ( 7)
9. GRANT) 10.1. a nil ( 8) 512.5
1 ,501 1
3,1163.4 1 ,813.2( 5)
867.0 7
56,1.0
1 ,19.7 ( Z
3,462.9
A~ ldTu'&gt; of' : finlsnci 0o f ertia ry
i~ dcitio fxpn'. 2treto the
Aus Lrali,). n i. Government as rom
1 / l1/ 1974 3,163.43, 607 .514.0
The 197'--74 estimates of the finiancial ass-* s5tance ~ r isare.
p I, c eLrnma ry onl1y. I n addition to the financial ssistpAce ; c-rnts
iuoens land. L ii.. 110 Tasriani a rec cived in 1 97:-73
w i 11 -cceivc , nn 1O~ 9; T-7 pel'' i. s on. the r~ comnenduw iion of
the Grants ' Joimiss i ol.
ftrnan offsets oE.-r.: cciint of tertiary, e l catij o n.
c) Advrnces for omor -% nc-v hni!, ing -,, reed. to byr thc fjcve-r)-mmnt 8.4
9.1
10.1 9.9
-1N 1 073_ 7.: ACm--) 21 1 2-73
NOT;-, 1Tli s t~ tblc C-oes not includ~ e -zpecilal 1' ratnts ~ oi~ on
aw~ u Dt~ s eIPo i c, t I r e f'or c r 0 1r soe: i t 1i
: 1 111d. s ' Go ' Oe ', dc t c to th e S L, 1 73-74
6. llmus:. ni, 
GENERAL, REV,. ENUE, PAYMENTS TO THE STATES EXCLUDING
SP. CIAL GIRAN'S ( a)
Note: For reasons set out in footnote the percentage
increase in " Total Payments" would not represent
the effective increase in general revenue
assistance available to the States in 1973-74.
This is represented by the percentage increase
after adding the additional assistance and
before deducting Uhe tertiary education offsets.
1972-73 1973-74 Porcentap
Actual. Estimates Increase
million S mil 1ion l
Financial Assistance Grants Under
Existing Legislation 1,647.3 1,897.0( b) 15.2
Special Loan to New South Wa. les 15.0
Plus Additional Assistance Agreed at
Premiers' Conference 28.0
1,662.3 1,925.0 15.8
Less Tertiary Education Offset 111.8
TOTAL PAYMENTS 1,662.3 1,813.2 ( c)
Special grants are supplemontary general revenue
assistance paid on the recommendation of the Grants
Commission. The Grants Commission has not yet
made its recommendation of amounts for payment in
1973-74.' For that reason, these payments are not
included in these tables.
Preliminary estimate.
The tertiary education offsets are equal to the estimated
savings to the States as a result of the Australian
Government's assumption of full responsibility for
financing tertiary education as from 1 January 1974.
That is to say, the arrangements will not result in a
rnet effective reduction in the funds available to the
States. For this reason the percentage increases in
" Total Pavyents" are . ot shown in these tables. The
effective increase in the general revenue payments is
represented by the . percentage increase after adding the
additional assistance and before deducting the tertiary
education offsets. 
LL.
Loan Council P'rorrammes State Governmients
N I'i: The following taile is designed to enable the 1973-74
state Government Ioan ' ouncil proorarme to be con. pared
with the 1972-73 iro , ramme, i. ning into e. ccoint the
changed . rrange; ents in respect of housing and tol-rtiary
education. 1972-73 1973-74 Perceintae Increase
3 million illion
Six States
Actual PIrogranmmos 982.0 867.0
Adjustments to make fif'ures
coimp; rable
Allocations for Veelfare
iiousint' from within
Pro! rammes 166.9
( ii) Tertiary .' ducation Offsets 32.8
" Adjusted P'rogramnmes" 815.1 899.8 10.4
In 1973-74 advances to the States for welfare housing
will be made outside the Loan Council programmes.
The 1973-74 Loan Council prograrmes have been reduced by
the estimated savings in State capital expenditures
resulting from the Australian Government's assumption of
full responsibility for financing tertiary education
from 1 January 1974.
The programmes approved for larger State authorities,
with comparisons with the 1972-73 programmes, are shown. in
the following table. 
,1972-73 Borrowings
Basic
Programmes( a)
$' 000 BORROWING PROGRALNES FOR LARGER AUTHORITIES
Temporary Allocations $ 1000
175,485( b)
168,776 93,822 25,065 25; 159
15,193
503,500 9,000 9,000 Total $ 1000
175,485 168,776 93,822 25,065 34,159 15,193
512,500 Basic
Pro ( dra) mme s
$' 000
189,949 182,687 101 ,555
27,131 27,233 16,445
545,000 1973-74 Proposed
Permanent Temporary
Addition Allocations
$ 1000
10,000 $ 1000
3,000( c)
6,000( e)
10,0009,000 Total $ 1000
199,949 182,687 104,555 27,131 33,233
-16,445 564,000 Percentage rcc-Tr ease
1973-74 Total
Over
1972-73 Total
13.9 8. 2
11.4 8.2
-2.7 8.2
10.1
Including additional programmes approved in March 1975.
Including permanent addition of $ 10 million.
At its June 1972 meeting the Loan Council approved a special allocation of $ 3 million
for Queensland in 1972-73, for the purpose of financing certain works associated with
beach erosion on the Gold Coast. The borrowing approval was not taken up by the State
in 1972-73 and has been deferred until 1973-74.
S&amp;
The distribution between the States is based on the distribution of the 1972-73 basic
programme. The temporary addition of $ 9 million for which Western Australia was " due" under
arrangements originally discussed at the June 1970 Premiers' Conference/ Loan Council
meeting and as since revised, has been reduced to $ 6. million under arrangements agreed
at this meeting, which also involve additions to the State * srevenu. gar ants.
N. S. W.
Vie. Qld. S. A.
WY. A.
Tas. TOTAL 



EMBARGO: 5. OOPM FRIDAY 29 JUNE 1973
A
FDR,~~ P Pq s r IMPLIA M
Press Statement No. 104
29 June 1973
ROYAL VISITS 1973 AND 1974:
APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN EQUERRY TO THE QUEEN
The Queen has approved the appointment
of Squadron Leader K. G. Smith, Royal Australian
Air Force, as Australian Equerry to The Queen
for her visits to Australia in October' 1973 and
February/ March 1974.
The appointment follows advice from
London that Her Majesty would be glad to have
an Australian Equerry appointed for these visits.
Squadron Leader Smith, aged 34, married,
was born in Parramatta, New South Wales.
In 1957 he joined the R. AoAoF. as. a cadet and in
December 1960 graduated as a Pilot. lie served
with No. 76 Fighter Squadron at Williamtotm, N. S. W.,
and No. 77 Fighter Squadron at Butterworth, Malaya.
He is a qualified Flying Instructor. In May 1967
he undertook exchange duties in the United States
with the U. S. A. F. Since November 1972 h6 has been
employed as Staff Officer ( Training) in the
Directorate of Support Requirements, Department
of Air, Canberra.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JhAU$ ' I'AI. IA t
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 104A
June 1973
AUSTRALIAN GOVERZThENT GAZETTE
The Prime Minister, Mr. E. G. Whitlam, 14. P.,
announced today that the Governor-General, Sir Paul Hasluck,
had on the recommendation of the Government issued a direction
for the Australian Government Gazette to be published in place
of the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette from 1 July 1973.
In making his announcement, the Prime Minister said that this
change had been foreshadowed in amendments to the Acts
Interpretation Act which were passed by the Parliament in the
Autumn session.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER
NUCLEAR FALL-OUT ON AUSTRALIA
The Acting Prime Minister Mr Barnard announced
today that the first fall-out in Australia from this year's
French nuclear testing programme had been detected at the
Laverton Air Filter Sampling Station near Melbourne. Mr
Barnard said that the detection of fall-out verified that recent
French nuclear testing was a clear breach of the ruling
of the world Court.
The fall-out is currently at low levels of concentration
detectable only by the more sensitive devices.
Samples from five other air sampling stations are now
being checked to see how widely the fall-out has been
distributed. The people of Australia could be assured that the
experts concerned with the Australian moni. toring programme
are watching fall-out 32vels closely and that the Government
would be kept fully informed.
Fall-out data as it becomes available is being passed
to the Australian Ionising Radiation Advisory Council, which
will advise the Government concerning the effects of fall-out
on the Australian population.
Mr Barnard said the Government would issue prompt advice
if it believed that any special dietary measures should be
taken against the effects of fall-out in milk.
Unless such advice is given, consumption of fresh milk
should not be discontinued. 



P, R LI: TPII qI,\ I 5,7M PRESS STATEMENT NO. 108
3rd July 1973
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister announced today that Cabinet
had agreed to recommend at the appropriate time to the
Executive Council that Mr G. A. Rattigan, C. B. E. be
appointed as Chairman of the Industries Assistance
Commission. The drafting of legislation to establish the
Commission is proceeding as a matter of urgency and will
be considered by Ministers as soon as possible.
Mr Rattigan will assist in the drafting of the legislation.
Mr Rattigan has been Chairman of the Australian
Tariff Board since 1963. Before that time he had been
Comptroller-General of the Department of Customs and Excise
and had held a number of senior positions in the
Department of Trade.
The Industries Assistance Commission stems from
the Labor Party platform and from the undertaking made by
the Government in the Governor--Genera]' s speech on
27 February 1973 to establish a Commission to advise on
assistance for both primary and secondary industries.
Sir John Crawford was asked by the Prime Minister on
1 March 1973 to report on the establishment of the
Commission and that report was received by the Government
on 19 June and made public on 26 June.
CANBERRA 



Press Statement No. 107
3rd July, 1973*
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
the further action which has been taken to bring the
Prices Justification Act into operation on 1 August 1973.
The following further appointments have been
made to the Tribunal: Mr J. K. Lawrence
Dr A. Fels
Mr R. N. R. Johnston
Mr Lawrence is at present First Assistant
Auditor-General and he will be a full-time member of the
Tribunal. Dr Fels is the Senior Lecturer in Economics at
Monash University with special qualifications in the
required field and Dir Johns-ton is a Melbourne chartered
accountant with wide experience. Dr Fels and Mr Johnston
wil~ l be part-time members of the Tribunal.
Mr Justice Williams of the Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission had been appointed Chairman of the
Tribunal on 1 Juner the day the act received the
Governor-General's assent.
For tile time being the head office of the
Tribunal will be located at 4 Treasury Place, East Melbourne.
The Chairman of the Tribunal proposes to issue
an announcement shortly regarding the functioning of the
Tribunal. Staff positions were advertised in the Gazette
and t'ae press on 21 June.
CANBERPA 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 109
3 JULY 1973
Federal Cabinet has approved amendments to the
Public Service Act to enable the Public Service Board
to grant permission to public servants to become directors
of companies and societies in certain prescribed
circumstances. At the present time, unless the company is a
co-operative society, there is a prohibition against public
servants holding directorships in companies and incorporated
societies, such as building societics formed for the
purpose of providing home finance for public servants.
The Government recognises that there are situations
where it is to the benefit of the community for a public
servant to accept a directorship. But it is essential
that there should be no conflict of interest between the
directorship and his public duties.
Accordingly the Government has approved the drafting
of amendments to the Public Service Act which will enable
the Public Service Board to grant permi ssion to public
servants to accept directorships only in such cases or
circumstances and subject to such conditions as are
prescribed by regulations.
CANBERRA 



A 1 1 PRESS STATEMENT NO, 111
4 July 1973
MOVEMENT OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT STAFF TO ALBURY-WODONGA
The Prime Minister announced today that the Public
Service Board would establish a Joint Consultative Committee
on the movement of Australian Public Service staff to Albury-
Wodonga. The Joint Consultative Committee would bring
together representatives of staff organisations, departments
and the Public Service Board to advise the Board on matters
such as the detailed arrangement of a transfer program of
Australian Public Service staff to Albury-Wodonga, conditions
of employment for staff affected by the transfers and the
sort of amenitites and community facilities that Australian
Public Service staff would like to see developed in Albury-
Wodonga. He said that the Chairman of the Public Service Board
had written to all Australian Public Service staff to inform
them of the consultative procedures that would be introduced
and of progress on the studies that were being made with
repsect to the movement of Australian Public Service staff
to Albury-Wodonga.
The acceptance by Australian Public Service staff of
Albury-Wodonga as an attractive place to live and work was
a key element in the success of Government plans for Albury-
Wodonga, he said. The Government believed that the adoption
of consultative procedures as outlined by the Public Service
Board would be the best way to achieve this acceptance.
The Joint Consultative Committee is to be established
once the Government has made the hroad policy decision on which
Australian Public Service departments are to be invo. lved in
transfers to Albu:,' y-Wodonga.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 11C
4 aljy97 3
NATIONAL ANTHEM
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, in Perth today
issued the following statement on the selected entries for
the National Anthiem. Quest:.
" With a National Anthem it is the music which
really matters. We are still waiting to hear from our
composers. " Composers are not obliged to use any of the six
sets of words chosen from those submitted by the public.
They can write their own words if they wish or collaborate
with any writer. " The Government is niot imposing any anthem on
the people. The public will be consulted in the final
choice. If they decide, for instance, they want Waltzing
Matilda or Advance Australia Fair, then of course we
shall have it.
" Opinion polls have shown clearly that the
Australian people want a true Australian anthem. our aim
has been to give all Australians whether they can compose
music or not a chance to participate in writing an
anthem. Thecir interest has been tremendous, and I thank
all those who have taken part so far."
Mr Whitlam recalled that when last in Perth on
26 January to open the Perthi Concert Hall, he announced the
national anthem quest. Today, on his~ return to Perth,
hle was happy to report on its progress.
CAN BE RRA 


AUSTRALIA Press Statement No. 112
13 July 1973

NATIONAL ABORIGINES DAY
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today issued the following statement to mark National Aborigines Day (Friday 13 July).
In my election policy speech I said that 'There is one great group of Australians who have&nbsp;been denied their basic rights to the pursuit of happiness, to liberty and indeed to life itself&nbsp;for 180 years...' I referred to the Aboriginal Australians whose ancestors settled this continent&nbsp;at least 30,000 years ago.
It is appropriate on National Aborigines Day that newer arrivals to this country recall that we&nbsp;have dispossessed the Aboriginal Australians, and in our settlement and development of this country have wrought&nbsp;&nbsp; great damage to Aboriginal society.
The Australian Government is undertaking programs which will be developed in consultation with them, to ensure that the Aboriginal people shall enjoy the rights and opportunities they are entitled to as Australian citizens and shall enjoy a full and free life in Australian society.
I hope that 1973 will come to be seen as a watershed in Aboriginal affairs. The Australian Government is assuming the responsibilities to Aboriginal people accorded to it by the Referendum of 1967. The Australian Government now accepts full responsibility for policy in Aboriginal affairs and is establishing a direct relationship with Aboriginal communities,&nbsp;and individuals throughout the nation. We will maintain this special responsibility to and relationship with Aboriginal people for as long as they themselves, desire it.
The Government's undertakings in Aboriginal affairs, as defined in the Labor Party's policy platforms are clear. We are carrying out these commitments.
The underlying principle of the Australian Government's approach in Aboriginal affairs may be briefly described as self-determination. We believe that Aboriginal communities and&nbsp;individuals must themselves decide the pace and nature of their future development. The situation where policies have been developed and special programs administered exclusively&nbsp;by whites must be changed. At the local and at the national level emphasis must shift towards Aboriginal control and responsibility. 
At the local level, to assist Aboriginal people to exercise autonomy in matters of interest to them, we will be introducing into the Parliament legislation to enable Aboriginal groups and communities to incorporate for the conduct of their own affairs. 
These incorporated societies will be set up for purposes chosen by their Aboriginal members and will return them their own decision-making processes. They will enable them to choose their own leaders and executives in ways they will themselves decide.
At the national level, Aborigines will be choosing the members of a national consultative body to advise the Government. Increasing numbers of Aborigines will also be recruited both into administrative positions connected with Aboriginal affairs and into other areas of the Australian Public Service.
Self-determination implies a degree of economic independence. Economic deprivation is one of the most crippling of Aboriginal handicaps. Programs to support and encourage Aboriginal&nbsp;enterprises and to enable Aboriginal people to continue their education and vocational training are vital.
There are many Aboriginal communities whose way of life depends on their land being secured to them. It is my Government's firm policy to vest such land in the Aboriginal&nbsp;communities concerned. We appointed an Aboriginal Land Rights Commissioner to investigate how this might best be done and expect to receive his preliminary report within a few weeks. In the meantime, we are helping Aboriginal communities to acquire land outside reserves, and are providing $5 million per year for the next ten years for this purpose.
We believe that Government services to Aboriginal communities should be of comparable standard to those enjoyed by the general population. Adequate services must be provided&nbsp;by the appropriate Government and local authorities in fields such as health, education, social welfare and communications.
The Government trusts that all Australians will support it in the pursuit of these objectives.”
CANBERRA.&nbsp;A. C. T.
&nbsp;



_-rATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, CQ. C., M. P.,
lDBY THE MINISTER FOR OVERSEAS TRADE A19D SECONiDARY INDUSTIRY,
* DR. J. F. CAIRNS, WEDNESDAY 18T-H JULY, 1973 AT 7. OOPM.
TARIFF REDUCTION
1. The Prime Minister and the Minister for Overseas
Trade and for Secondary Industry today announced a decision
taken by the Australian Government for a reduction of
in all tariffs each tariff will be reduced by 4 of what
it is now excluding revenue items and anti-dumping duties.
This reduction which will apply forthwith, is designed to
restrain price increases by increased competition and by
stimulating in the short run a sufficiently large inflow
of additional imports to help-~ meet pressing demand. Action
to combat price inflation through tariff action was clearly
forecast in the Prime Minister's policy speech and has
recently been urged upon the Government by Trade Union,
primary production 1) commercial and industrial groups. The
Government has also decided that in future by-law administration
will be more flexible. The reduction is to be
combined with an ambitious program of assistance to employees
and firms who may be adversely affected by the tariff
reduction. 2. The decision followed unanimous advice from a
Committee which was appointed on 27 June and reported on
July. It was chaired by Mr. G. A. Rattigan, Chairman of
the Tariff Board and comprised Professor F. H. Gruen,
Consultant to the Prime Minister; Mr. B. Brogan, Consultant
to the Minister f or Overseas lrrade arid for Secondary Industry;
Dr. S. F. Harris, Deputy Secretary, Departmewnt of Overseas 
-2-
Trade; Mr. J. C. Taylor, First Assistant SecretCary, Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and Mr. F. A. Bennett,
First Assistant Secretary, Department of Secondary Industry.
The Committee's report will not be released at present
because it also deals with matters affecting our trading
relations and makes some comments on budgetary strategy. It
will be released with the Budget papers.
3. The justification for the general reduction of
tariffs is the excessive rate of inflation which now prevails.
Inflation i s harmful to every Australian. Action must be
taken to reduce its harmful effects with the least delayl.
Inflation can be offset by an increase of supply of goods in
. Australia. The most readily available source . of supply of
goods is imports from overseas. Whilst it is 6xpected that
imports will increase in the next few months, because of the
high level of tariffs the increase would be insufficient to
help combat inflation. Consequently the Government has
decided to reduce tariffs so that imports may increase in
the short term to help meet inflationary pressures in Australia.
4. The tariff changes will have a direct impact-on
import prices of approximately the same order of magnitude as*
a revaluation of slightly less than Increased competition
in Australia will have a salutary effect upon those
who have taken advantage of shortages by unjustified price
increases which have exploited the public. The Joint Committee on
2 
Prices will be asked to ensure that consumers get the full
benefit of these reductions as it is already doing by its
present inquiry on import prices. The earlier reference
to the Committee related to the revaluation of the Australian
dollar in December, 1972 and other relevant currency changes
in 1973. The Government is similarly determined that import
prices respond to the tariff reduction.
The increased imports may affect production and
employment in Australia. A Tribunal is being established
to immediately hear appeals from any firm or company which
may be seriously affected by imports. The Tribunal will be
authorised to immediately recommend appropriatL-e assistance
either to bring about changes for a firm or company or to
restore the tariff level which previously protected it.
Any person who may lose his job as a result of these changes
will be entitled to receive, as special readjustment assistance,
a weekly amount equal to his average wage in the previous
six months until he obtains or is found~ suitable alternative
employment. Subh persons will be of fered retraining for new
and better occupations if they so desire. The Government
has provided $ 25m to cover assistance which may be necessary
as a result of the tariff changes. The procedure for providing
assistance required as a result of these changes are set
out in a separate statement which is attaolhed.
6. While these changes can be expected to require some
workers to move from one employment to another this must be
/ 4 
-4-
seen against the existing high level of unfilled vacancies
and rising employment opportunities. The Governmnent is
confident that most of the employees who may be affected
will gain from the assistance provided and from the new
opportunities which will be created. In making -this
decision the Government is conscious of the urgent need
for some major steps to deal with inflation. It has
adopted these changes as part of a complex of measures
some of which have already been taken and others will follow.
These tariff changes will assist in the fight against inflation
in the interest of the nation as a whole and at the
same time the Government is confident that losses which may
affect individuals will be adequately otfset . by readily
available assistance.
7. This decision represents a major step towards
implementing the Government's objcctive of support for
moves to liberalise international trade moves which in
the long term can only strengthen the economies of the
trading countries of the world. Consistent with these
objectives the Government intends to imqplement its international
commitments, which are of principle concern to
New Zealand and Canada, in the contexi. of the new tariff
structure. Furthermore, the scheme to aid developing
countries, announced by the Minister for Overseas Trade
and for Secondary Industry on 3 July, will be implemented
and existing and future preference margins will be lowered
from the new general tariff rate. 
p. C. ' Tl^ l T. ESS . LLHT, D I RV IJIG Yl.
SP-CIAL ASSI C iEUIRDl A: A RESULT C
THl-I. EAUIiES TAE. TOl IITCJ., 1IOA. E
On the recommendation of the Prime Minister
and Minister for Overseas Trade and for Secondary Industry,
the Government has established a Tribunal to examine and
report on requests for relief for the measures taken to
increase the demand for imports rwhere a domestic industry is
being seriously damaged by the tariff reduction. The
tribunal will be guided by two basic principles; its
recommendations should be compatible w. ith the long-term
objectives of assistance to industries, and it should not
provide relief as a matter of course that is, simply
because the question of relief hod been referred to it.
The Government has also decided that there should be
established an effective ranre of adjustment assistance
measures which would be available to assist in'those cases
where the Tribunal felt that some assistance was required
but that restoration of the duties in whole or in part
*' as not a suitable means of assistance.
If the Tribunal were to recommrend relief too
readily by raising, perhaps, to their former level.,
individual tariffs which have just been. reduced as part
of a general tariff cut, the purpose of the initial tariff
cut would be largely frustrated. The desired increase in
imports resulting fromthe tariff reduction would not occur,
and the desired increase in aggregate domestic supplies
would not be achieved. In other w. ords, the antiinflationary
impact of the original measure would be
seriously weakened. 
If. L the Tribulnal 7rere to provide relief ( paroticularly
in more highly protected iusre) not by raisingr tariff-: s
previously reduced, but by other measures such as;
comnensati on ipayments the -nrohlmcrsd-' r---. ribed above could
be partly avoided. ]' ut compensation paymiento or other
direct subsidies to aparticular industry could ha,, ve
uidecira'ole side effects, particularly if those payments
were not m-iade conditi onal on some adjustment by the industry
concerned to the new situation. For examiple, c ompersation
p ayments, if the--y are equivalent to the tariLff te ubsiAdy'
they replace, could continue to suqoport the use of
res-ources in activities which c Tc. hi. gh c ost; in these
circumstances the gain to consumilers of th-. e action proposed
w! ould be at the ex-, pense of taxpayerS. In cases: iw. here it is
evi-dent that the induS-try could, w--ith ass~ istance; adjust
to the changed circum-, nstances of import com'.--. etition ( and
of protection), it irould clearly b! e, in the in~ tcres'-ts of
-the cotinmunity as a whl) ole t'Uo pre-fer adjus1-tme. qntU assistance tLo
rctorinr: the hig~ h rates of duty.
In summary, therefore, if. 1-relief from 113 effcts
of the veneral tariff redu-ction is provided readily by
partially,, or -w. holly restoring7 the tari-Cfs previ. ously
reduced, part iculsarly w-here the previ-ous -Gari ff1-,-as hi-, h,
the ob; jcctives of the initial tariff reduction vill tend to
be frus2tr! Aed; and if the reief^ i, 17 readily provided in
ways w-. hich do not induce some adjustmen to the new situ., i. tion
hy hiehly protocted d~ omes L.-ic msuatrrthat relief wl
c-nd to heD incons: irtent wi-4th the-) le{ Itrmojcti-; res-of
protoctiou': policy. 
Adjustment -Assietance
. yven's sucib as a currency hino atrf
reduction can be to the overall Ibcnñ: flt of thic n) ation as a
whole by makinf-more goodo.,: cervices available to the
Australian people, by helping to restrain price incre! as.,., es
and by improving the allocation of our resources and
efficiency of our industries. These benlefits, however, ma~ y
involve sonme cost in the form of reduced business
opportunities for come firm-s and the need for changes in
employmecnt and phaslocation for some individuals,
V~ hlstthe benefits are enjoyed -enerally throug-hout the
economy, the costs may tend to fall on a small minority in
t'he cormmuity. In such circwmtan'cejcs, it is ineuitable toalo
the cost to fall on any liarticuLn. r group1 csy-: ccially hen
the chanYges r broughIt abkout by a conrscious-Governrncmnt
decision. iKore importantly, i. t1i socially undesirabe
for the cost to fall on g-roups in ther-cor.-unity iwhich are
likely to be les! s. Tpri. -ili71, ed thani' the majority or on to
indiiduls hich do not have the o nportvnity o r the
capability to adapt read. cily to the cha-n-e in ircitac
A. rositive aYMor1oachI, is needed for these hum_. an and
economic problemE of structural techanological chiang7e
uhich reflects a genuirie unosa wof the non-econcaic
as well as the economic cost-, to those affTected and ,., hich
in cons ecuenirce can. not be too f: lncly calculated. In th e
abs--ence o--r effe ctive action to coun;, ter tete i
contLinue -to reprceen-t a real iecnntto desira.) ble a-ridC
beneficial chang. r: O
\ ith . thes e poirlts in minrd, the !-in: Ltors for
SccLodiacru sty, P~ bor an 20ia1 Securitly established 
an inter-departmental committee t0o 7tndy moasures ncected
to facilitate desirable structur-al ch) anges in the
Australian economy. Thio ine-1pr1nn a omte ill
be recomnmending a long--term-approach to structuUra~ l cbhange0
This wvill incluide:
assistance to employceo;
' social seciirity Iacasurocs;
assistance to frs
The short-term tariff chiangos now taken will.
precipitate the need for immodiate adjustment assistance.
Because of the iranortanco, which this Government attaches
to the availability of adjuslment . s tac it has
anti cios2ted t-hose elements of the lonp-tc-rm program that
could be developed. cuickzly to assist in adjus tment to the
Prom~ sed tariff chang-ec.
Assistance to -!, npmlovrees
S3uch assistance will be given throughI the ex,-istijngservices
such as the Commjonealth PEmployr-ent 1' Iervice ith
ppropriate strengfthening and augmentation such as the
propos-als already outlined by tile IIinister for Labour in
his statement on manpower policy.
The measureS -, hich will-be applied include:
Grants-7 to indivicl 17 to mneet relocation exnoonm; es
iihere the is able to offer omploymont a
different location.. to t-hor-e sui-ted by age, health,
ecC., inludins ., guaranteed iim agsdrn
re-trainin-, payment of tr~ rigftes -L-d related
transport costs includinr: I\ Tlf-naw--ay from hiome
al3owa,, cne s where ncces cry 
Ince-itives to frirm, to tGra. Ln or re-trair st,' affL
rendered redundant by ta~ zriff-1 ch-ar. n; es.
The Government has decided that an initial
alloc.-Aion of million could properly be made for
theSc purposes.
.) ocial ISecurity I31eas--uros
Additional social security me,-asu1. res mafy also
be needed for several pi urposes. order to e-Lisure
adeouate incomes for those tenmorarifly displaced by the
tariff change, the Governm-ient has decided it uould be
desirable for them to be paid their averag,( e weekrly wage
over the precedin-z six miiontlis for a-p'eriod of tip to , Aix
months or until they reoffered suitable alternative
ernplovyt~ ent '. There special local unemploym,-ent problems are
caused by the tariff changces, specia. lI local uepomn
relief grants ,. ijll be given in a forma similar to the rural
and urban unemployment reliefC scheor~ ics now being phased out.
To provide adequate incomens for those membersof
the iork force ". ho becore-redund'ant in adv. a) nce of norm.-al
retiring a-e as a result of -the tariff change cvnd are
unlikelyr to find suitable emnploymj~ en_-t becauce( of aghealth
or physicali. harndicao., 1s, the Governn-ent wvill makec provision
for early retirement bene-fits as full1 cupera nnua." ti-on
entitlemcents, retirement 7, rants ard. early retirerrenl;
a]. lo'w-ance. To minimise socia-l pr-oblems for uorkers ,? nd
e -ififcesc ted byT the( taif Ia~ fam" ily eounsellimc-
Csccrv iceos 1.. ill be provided.
These meiasures' will be ' Ghyroelenn'Go il the
Department of 2" ocial. Seci. 1rity. The Governmirent' ha-; s 
decided that an initial ailocat'iop of
be made -for this,, pu-rposc.
1-fsircta. Ie. to Idrt~ sa2 im
Forms of adjust,: ent ,, ssistarce Iich sbudbe
considered by,, the TPribunal in relation Lonusre
af-foct ed, by theovo; c tlori ff redu. Lction I. cl-e
Ratons1iztio~ aistnceto encouror-e, w,. hen
arpronri tc:
chn. o-s in an industry's structure
numbers of ent--rprisies or
c s t 1i slM,! n; L s
chsar-,, es in -patterns of productionl-
( g. greate-r Product specializa'tion
or diversificat-ion into new, 7 areas of
production);-investient in neii cc u,_-ient;
cha-nges in the ec. tienxl strutctuGre Of
and industry3 ai-d clhanges in the
indu strial ' truicture of ani affectod.
reeion.
Such ass-susla nce mr-i7r be Drovided In -the form of
grant, lol oanloan ' uornr csa comiaion
of thes~ e. Onc e i. ts -new eistonhar. been..
l'assed, the Australimn InduS'Gry Developmen(-;, t
Corporation m-, ay be ,-blo to ass.-ist merge-, rs w ithin_
industries. Coi-ei-plzn-t-ion t,-o f-m; for closu,, re, give) he
part~ u ectablj-.: h'~ ts cantre!, mLn ln
productionl-thl-rough sne: Lom of rat ion! ali; a' tion
or other adjustme-nt'U. ' Vcn ioctoncannot be 
continued efficiently, the cc tablirchmets
concerned 2hould be cdoe d, or the inofCi cien~ t
procesaP2sShould cease,
Th e lon;-term ocheme under d evelopmcnt for
ad juatment assistance to inchuntrLes and firms w. ill be
administ cr&amp; c by an Ad justme~ nt~ Asrilstance Board empoowered
to Frant specified forms of nesctance from a pool of funds
2. pproprjited for the purpose. Applicationo for aszis tance
arising out of tariff chan~ es are expected to be an
important port of the Board's activits.
T'he Government ha2 ~ Ocicded that an effective
masof handling thsaspect, pjdirnr further eopon
of the loI1:' er term proposain, i0 for the Interdepartmental
Commi ttee on Structural Ad j ustment ( acting in concert vith
the Tribunal raecponsible for rcommendiny; Ph n Qdjus tment
assistance is appropriate) to administer assistance to
fcirms affected by the proposed tariff chang: es. It has
decided further that an initial allocation of 010 million
will be included in the 1970/ 714 budget for this purp~ ose.
A prima fscie case for : ceiere:' ie to the Tribunfal
could be cstab!. ihed if an industry claiming tu be affected
by the tariff change cnn ( denontrato:
that the fi rms compricing the industry were,
via~ ble prior to the effects or likely effects
of the tariff choivwe beir:; recommended; and
that tsriff ch~ nge iY cnusinq or has caused
serious injury affectin viablity of* th firms
or tha jobs of' thei~ r cmphywcEs in such a nay as
to cause hardtship or ' hiqh' social cost; 
the effects of the tariff chang-; e cannot be
avoided or offset by action wich the industry
itselff might reasonably be e:: nectcd to tae;
the affected firms within the induLtry ae
unable to obtain financinG needed to m-de
necessMary chai-nges on reasonazable termr, a-tnC.
conditions from commercial sources ; ithout,
Government bcing.
Procedures for R-viewinL; Reouests for A-istance
The following ( general procedures have been
etablished for reviewing rdeuests for a-. s istance from
indutries or persos employed in them:
Requests for assistance should be submitted
by organizations representative of the affected
employers and employees. It ; ould be
uirealiStic to allowv; for the submi; ssion of
requerst s from individul-s, or isinEle f irm~ s,
and at the carme ti-me to expect careful but
speedy revieu~ j of thiose resluests.
To ensure expedition an,: d consistency of approach
and result, * Lc e-istingi; iter-deparb Ucn
machinery for servicing-Cabinet's consideration
of assistance -to industres w-iill be the vehicle
for co-ordinatiing the ,, orkl of the relevant
departments on requests for referral to the
Tribunal. Requests for assistance sh1-ould be acompaniedci
by the data which would ' be required by the
Tribunal to asSecss damlagp, and by tht-ie Interdepartmental
Committe on 2t ruetural Ad ju; tme7nM t
to deal iw: ithi questi. onz of adjusti:: nI; asais r. ce. 
The data reanived uU. be spccificd., in a
ciuestionnai. re.
The Tribu-a! lcshould submit a report on a.
reference 1-ithin 60 cysof receivim.-g it.
This report cohou. 1d contai-n advice on:
whetlicr -dr-industry, or peroon eIipiye
in it hI'ave been, or are liklly to be,
seriously dam. na[ cd by the gcneral redluction
of tariiffo; and, if. s-, o,
* the form of azoi,, stance ( t'Uhat is, by
tari-ff action. or acdjue-tutcni,) t asist,---ance)
. ihich chould be given to the industrv or
emI ) 10r Ce.
on the evidence available, the Tribunal
cons iders that ad jus-t. ment assis-tance should
' be recornx-ended, the f~ encrri. I natu,,., re, extent and
lieycoSt (-Go public rcvenuea) oñ f tlm aedjus-tment
as: s tance will. be iden') tified ' by the Intexdempartmental
Commrittee on-, g tructura-l. Ad justment.
If tariff actio-n is recoruienrded, the Tribunal's
report wilrecomenIL it, form anrd lcve-. l.
The Tribunal il submit it,-rejports to the
i'rinc K~ inist or, and they will1 be published at
the s-a;-e tImcJre as2 the decisions are. an-, noun. ced on
thieir recor. unendati. is ii. udin,, t the gcneral
nature of t-he d ecisions on ad iusit;. ient ass , istanice,
if1 thA form-o-f' relief is.-roc1nlsedc,-iCcd.
It wilbe noted tbrnat tis7 time-wtab--le wli* ll recuirec thl-e
Tribuna-l t--o decide oia the c.: L; 1. on of' da wihin ab) Out
t'-hree-weeks of recoiving the ro-e. s; t fo-) r asitnsand, 
1..
Jn 1, uh IeeaCtom-: A ttC to iotCjit
f~ nea ) a'tiire nr-l c: te( nt 4-h1 ~ e et cecheo .
cc rrcc o i--1, e'o d -, oi il the lb c eae! rii -e Oi:
tie to Tecaton o? darrere-and thei altiereti-ve
cCow",;) ts, of 2e e.' ie. ane 0.! v n. tio C n hI
LVniz io rL I," Xh ; onv : to o onito
durin]: n thle inot ei.. , htee-. Ka-, of~ tho x-ity-da. y pcriod
Conprm: -ition, oT TribunalO
uO fci the( y nayi~ Oe a : ffctedt by te action t o comnremict
: Icaoyn mmi;; ad -to nrovidc an ad v: 0rV rYze
Co-ri" o. c fo coc rel sxm edeevn n t~ to:
C. 2 t1 ro h
f oC n o 0 i f t v T -br~ " 1
.4 ~ Oor.~ ib -,-vor
th~-~ trib;'. ne uo c; tcd above, ori. reso
zp~ cLtdco-eerice tTotith the pYrev-',: Lio.-tat
C ol tha-nr-m and ed on his
. J.
h Iteod L. 2~ eoi f1h ~ iuv
C C: r re o eye~ jer
1ic .2 I~ L: 0 i 2 1
' 1 tIa:: 1 *. i~ CL0' rt 
o a 0 tio0 11 oi 61ic -) ote:-DtiaI economic bo: ncfitc;)
( Co 9: tleu ntv r' hecaiDDcity t-o une t-he re.:, ourccos
o-r rclevmI't C 0vm-1Y11. mnt is itto to Sfervice the,-1C
Tr ibu n a'r adv i ce Uh thoseconioai; i
it ha-, decided t1. at ilcricde has the
rccu. VirCd b20-f Sjj e-por~ ience anJ~ ! uuld
r,-rovide C11 e-, U-. r: 2cstcCI rvdvice onl th'u tOt1-1 evLcv
is--r, ccmnfro I) t i t11 1-Im1 11le -ill tlhcrcoforo boe
av~ obtc' e~ the Tribun..
nmee . tioneId earlier, the Tribuinal. T'will report
e thcre i_, e atiny recd s~ ncc
cm~ cdoethat aiea~ c s eird t il recoiD !-. cd
either aro. etL-orr. i77' ut 0io 1or1 hol of theoiral
dutesor that relief shou-ld t: othe for:.. of' 



PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
The Prime Minister announced today that in.
keeping with the general policy on the title of Australian
Government bodies, the title of the nation's public service,
at present generarly referred to as the " Commonwealth
Public Service, is to be changed to " Australian Public
Service" Mr. Whitlam said, in making this announcement, that
amendments to the Public Service Act would be necessary to
formally change the title. He said that he expected that
these would be introduced in the Budget sittingsbut in the
meantime, rwherever possible, the term " Australian Public*
Service" would be used. July 1973 197J3uly 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
AT THE ALBURY TRADE FAIR SATURDAY 21 JULY, 1973
I am glad of the opportunity to visit the Albury Trade
Fair ( this year entitled " New Cities Expo ' 73" 1) and speak to you
tonight. The scope and quality of the Fair and certainly its
title are an encouraging symbol of what we hope to achieve in
this, our first growth centre4
I first spoke at Albury more than three years ago. At
the opening of the 38th Annual Conference of Rotary International
I suggested that Albury/ Wodonga would be a perfect place for a new
city. When we were elected we wasted no time in setting about to
fulfil that promise. It is just six months since I met with the
Premier of Victoria, Mr. Hamer, and the Premier of New South Wales,
Sir Robert Asking here, and we agreed on the proposal to create
a new Australian city.
There is, of course, no such thing as an " instant" city.
In sensitive planning areas pat solutions must be suspect. However,
although some of you may feel that there has been little tangible
evidence of the new project, if you examine what has been done over
this time, you will realise that w~ e have built a very sound base on
which the area will grow.
My colleague, the Australian Minister for Urban and
Regional Development, Tom Uren, outlined our achievements to you on
Thursday night. One of the most satisfying of these is the way in
which the three governments have worked in such harmony on the
project. He also explained the organisation which will be set up
to undertake the planning and development of the growth complex..
hope that this wil~ l have answered any questions or doubts you will
have had on this subject.
The Ministerial Council made up of Mr. Uren, the New
South Wales Minister for Decentralisation and Development, Mr.
Fuller, and the Victorian Minister for State Development and
Decentralisation and Development, Mr. Byrne, has agreed that the.
development organisation will be established before the end of this
year. I support this timetable and the Australian Government will
do everything within its power to see that enabling legislation
is passed in the forthcoming session of the Australian Parliament.
The Australian Government believes that the last election
was won largely because of the apalling lack of foresight which has
led to the congestion and strangling snarl of unplanned growth in
our cities, By the creation of Albury/ Wodonga; by the development
of other new cities and growth area, by concentrating on alleviating
the problems of people in the worst hit western areas of Sydney
and Melbourne; by the creation of land commissions and by making
federal money more immediately available to local, government, we
believe we will be able to bring order back into the lives of urban
dwelling Australians. 
-2-
The Australian Government cannot do the job on its own,
particularly in view of constitutional limitations on its power.
To carry out projects such as Albury/ Wodonga the Australian
Government has to work in close co-operation with the States and
local instrumentalities. The new Department of Urban and Regional Development will
have the responsibility for developing and implementing a national
urban and regional development strategy as a major policy area of
the Australian Government. It will also have the responsibility for
negotiating with, advising and helping state and local governments
in the preparation and implementation of urban and regional plans.
With the chief co-ordination and policy-making role in
the area of urban and regional development lying with the Department,
it will be the Cities Commission which will be chiefly responsible
for the physical development of Albury/ Wodonga. The Commission is
also under the control of the Minister for Urban and Regional
Development and is linked to the Department.
One of the main ways in which the Australian Government
will be helping the States in the development of Albury/ Wodonga
is with money. It will finance land acquisition and land
development by interest-bearing advances although in the long
term I believe that this growth complex will be self-supporting.,
At present we cannot expect New South Wales and Victoria
to switch resources quickly to Albury/ Wodonga in fields like
education and health while there are backlogs elsewhere in the
States. Certain existing municipal services will need to be
supplemented and in this respect special federal grants or longterm
loans will be made available in the early years. Nevertheless
in keeping with the tripartite nature of the enterprise, the
Victorian and New South Wales Governments will be providing services
to keep pace with the accelerated growth of Albury/ Wodonga beyond
this initial phase.:
The development of Albury/ Wodonga has been accorded high
priority by the Australian Government this year and this will be
reflected in the forthcoming budget.
We reali~ e, of course, that in the development of any new
area there are a multitude of problems to be overcome. With
planning and co-operation between the Australian Government, the
Governments of the two States of Victoria and New South Wales and
local government in the regions, we are confident we will overcome
them. One of the problems which has been aired frequently in
the press and by people in the area is the problem of the rising
price of land. To deal with one aspect of this, the Premiers of
Victoria and New South Wales and I agreed after a meeting at
Albury/ Wodonga on 25 January that the price of land to be acquired
for the purposes of the project would be based at the market level
of prices prevailing at 3 October last year. This means that the land
which the Governments will acquire is stabilised not frozen at
that price. Any necessary adjustments will be made for general
land price changes during the period up to the date of purchase,
caused by factors apart from the announcement of the development 
-3-
of the area. In this way we have ensured that no profit is made
merely because the area is to be developed, but that those whose
land is to be acquired will not suffer because of this. Legislation
to implement this decision was introduced into the Victorian
Parliament -in June and will be debated in the Upper House in the
spring session of Parliament. New South Wales expects to introduce
complementary legislation within the same session.
Officers from the Cities Commission have recently been
investigating the whole land question in Albury/ Wodonga. They have
been looking into land availability, the extent to which land is
changing hands : in Albury/ Wodonga and the pressures on existing land,
housing and social infrastructure. We must find out what the facts
are before we can contemplate what action is to be taken.
Today no-one debunks the idea of decentralisation.
However, some people are still dubious about the idea of the
development of inland cities. Australians, they say, want to live
on the coas-t, and they point to the growth in the coastal cities.
It has always been beyond me how people who have to travel for two
hours through weekend traffic to get to the crowded city beaches
can claim to be living on the coast. Whatever relaxation and
regeneration they can claim from this trip to the sea must be
dissipated in the tedious crawl through the traffic to get there
and back. Many Australians liv ng in large " coastal" cities
cannot truly be said to be living by the sea. It takes them as
long to reach the sea as it takes the citizens of that first
successful Australian inland growth centre Canberra. We expect
with the development of Albury/ Wodonga to dissipate this great
coastal cringe and return to something of the feeling of the early
settlers who set off to populate the inland of this vast tract of
earth they had come to occupy.
Much has been said of the advantages of choosing Albury/
Wodonga for our first designated growth centre; its positions on a
major inter-capital link; its present state of development; its
happy incorporation of two States. But I feel that few people yet
realise the advantages to its present and future residents in terms
of what is offering in the surrounding inland countryside. At the
risk of sounding like a tourist guide I suggest that those who might
flinch at the thought of leaving the recreational facilities of their
" 1coastal" cities might consider the enormous scope for activities
like fishing, climbing, walking, ski-ing, canoe-ing and sailing
offered by Albury/ Wodongals proximity to some splendid mountains,
rivers and Lake Hume. For those with an interest in Australian
history nearby towns like Beechworth in Victoria have preserved and
still have in use an almost overwhelming number of buildings
classified by the National Trust. Now that the Government has
established a committee of inquiry into the national estate chaired
by Mr. Justice Hope we would hope that the respect for history
prevailing in such towns will be given an opportunity to prevail
through the rest of Australia, And for those who like their
pleasures somewhat more full-bodied there are of course the
vinyards of the Rutherglen and Glenrowan areas* 
-4-
It is this accessibility to a variety of activities which
makes Albury/ Wodonga a satisfying place, in addition to the simple
advantage of living in a smaller and well-planned community.
Compare this with the isolation from most of the benefits of the
city suffered by people living in the sprawling outer suburbs of
Sydney and Melbourne suburbs which are increasingly the only
ones available to young couples who want to buy their own homes.
We spoke of quality of life in the last national
elections. We belieye that the creation of Albury/ Wodonga, along
with other growth centres, will prove a step which will vastly
improve the quality of life of thousands of Australians over the
next few decadeso 



EMBARGO: 7.15 P. M,
NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA,
MR. E. G. WHITLAM, SUND) AY 22 JULY 1973
On Tuesday I shall be flying to North America, primarily
to attend the meeting of the 32 Commonwealth Heads of Government in
Ottawa,. Before leaving I want to explain to you the reasons for the
Government's historic decision which I announced this week with my
colleague, Cairns to make an immediate reduction of 25 per cent
in all tariffs on goods imported into Australia. I want to tell you
also of the Government's policies on a matter that concerns us all
the world-wide problem of inflation.
First, our tariff cuts. Our purpose is simply to allow
imported goods to come into Australia more cheaply and in greater
quantities. This means that a whole range of imported products will
cost less to the Australian consumer. It means keener, healthier
competition for Australian industries producing similar goods.. This
in turn will encourage those industries to bring down their prices
as well. So that is our aim: cheaper imports, more goods for people
to buy, more competition, lower prices. There are five million
wage and salary earners in Australia. They, and their families, are
the people who have suffered most from rising prices. They are the
people who will benefit first, and most directly, from our decision.
When my Government came to office just over seven months ago,
inflation was runnin~ g at its highest level for 20 years. I mention
that, not in an attempt to shufL" fle off responsibility onto our
predecessors, but to remind you that inflation is, and always has
been, a problem for all political partiesw And$ as you know, it is
a problem for nearly all the major western industrial nations.
Including our friends in Britain, the United States and Japan They
knows as we do,, that there is no one quick or easy solution. For
example, it is not constitutionally possible for the Australian
Government to introduce a prices freeze in peacetime, although the
State governments could,. It is not constitutionally possible in
peacetime for the Australian and State governments, singly or
together, to freeze all wages.,
In other ways dontt forget our economy is in a sound
and remarkably robust condition,. We have, for a start, eliminated the
serious unemployment which faced us when we came to office. Demand
for labour is high. Business is booming. Consumer spending is
running at very high levels. Our overseas reserves are immensely
strong that indeed is one of the causes of our inflation problem,
although to our current advantage, the reserves make it possible for
us to pay easily for more imports., In most respectss, we have never
been more prosperous than we are now. 
-2-
None of us, however, can remain indifferent to the
inflationary pressures that are pushing up prices. Inflation is
harmful to every Australian. It is harmful to pensioners and those
on fixed incomes: it is harmful to those with savings. It is
harmful if I may take a selfish example to my own Government,
because it makes it more difficult for us to implement, as promptly
as we would wish, the great social reforms in housing, education,
health, transport and the cities, to which we are pledged. When
people talk glibly about cutting Government expenditure, they mean
that we should be content to do little or nothing about the very
things you elected us to do.
For all those reasons we have taken action without delay
to reduce inflationary pressures. I might say that my colleagues
and I have been deeply encouraged by the reception our measures
this week have met from most sections of the community. The
business community, the leaders of the trade union movement, have
both shown themselves sympathetic and understanding and where it
may create difficulties for them, forebearing in the face of the
difficult decision we have taken. We are confident that we can
count on their co-operation to implement our policies successfully.
Of course we are well aware that our tariff reforms can
entail hazards for some Australians. We know they are bound to
affect production and employment in certain industries. That is why
we have set up a tribunal which will be able to hear immediatelyappeals
from any organisation representative of employers and
employees who may be seriously affected. We are equally determined
to protect the jobs and livelihoods of Australian workers. My
Government did not restore full employment in this country merely
to take it away again even from a section of workers. Any person
who may lose his job as a result of our changes will be entitled to
receive, as special readjustment assistance, a weekly amount equal
to his average wage in the previous six months until he obtains
alternative employment. If necessary we will offer to retrain him
in a new, perhaps better, occupation. We have provided $ 25 million
to pay for the assistance which may be necessary as a result of our
tariff reforms. Above all, you may be sure that we shall remain
flexible and co-operate i~ n carrying out these reforms.
In our attack on inflation, success depends on the
co-operation of the whole community. One way we can all co-operate
is by being more vigilant about price movements. Here is a way
that every housewife, every consumer can help. If you know of
cases where tariff cuts are not passed on to the consumers tell
us about them, or tell your member of Parliament. The Government
will ensure that consumers get the benefit of our tariff reduction.
Remember, this is not the only measure we have taken to
attack inflation. The revaluation of the dollar last December was
a first step: the establishment of the Prices Justification Tribunal,
which will come into operation in 10 days time, was another. I am
confident that all these measures will allow us to keep inflationary
tendencies under control, to safeguard the prosperity which
Australians now enjoy, and to lay the foundations for the great
social reforms we are determined to carry out for the benefit of
all Australians. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 114
23 July 1973
THE QUEEN'S VISIT OCTOBER 1973
The Queen's visit to Australia for the opening of the
Sydney Opera House will begin with an arrival in Canberra on the
afternoon of Wednesday 17 October.
Her Majesty will be in Canberra for three days and will
leave by air for Sydney on Saturday 20 October, Her departure
from Australia will be from Sydney on Monday 22 October after
attending an evening function at the Opera House.
The Queenis program of engagements in Canberra is as
follows:
Wednesday 17 October 1973
Afternoon Ceremonial arrival at RAAF Bases Canberra
Presentation of Ministers, Presiding Officers of
Parliament9 Opposition Lpaders and wives at
Government House
Evening No official engagements
Thursday 18 October 1973
Morning No official engagements
Lunch At Parliament House with Senators and Members
( Wives included)
Afternoon No official engagements
Evening Dinner at Government House
Friday ' 19 October 1973
Morning No official engagements
Lunch At The Lodge
Afternoon Her Majesty receives the Prime Minister at
Government House
Meeting with Executive Council
Evening Attend Australian Ballet performance at Canberra
Theatre.
Saturday 20 October 1973
Morning Ceremonial departure from Canberra for Sydney,.
BACKGROUND NOTEt The Sydney program will be released separately
by the Premier of New South Wales,.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 113
23 JULY 1973.
EQUAL PAY AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE
The Prime Minister drew attention to the recent
decision of the Australian Labor Party which endorsed the
principle of equal pay to all eligible females employed by
the Australian Government Service without any phasing in of
the pay increases as is the case in private employment.
The Prime Minister said that the Government
supported the principle of implementing equal pay without
phasing in. In the Government's view, this principal should
also be applied generally throughout industry.
The Prime Minister said that the Government's
policy decision had been conveyed to the Public Service Board.
In the light of its responsibilities under the Public Service
Act, the Board has been requested to ensure that equal pay
without phasing in was applied to those categories of eligible
female staff affected by the December 1972 decision of the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The Prime Minister
also said that the Government's policy decision related only
to the method of implementing equal pay and not to the level
of pay itself, which was a matter for the Public Service Board. 



j1% A USTHI, -1Al'-PRESS STATEMENT NO. 115
24 July 1973
FLEXIBLE WORKING HOURPS IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE
In line with the Australian Government policy that
employees should have the right to work in conditions
conducive to the development of full human dignity, the
Public Service Board has issued an information paper to
all departments and staff associations drawing attention
to various experiments which are being conducted with
new patterns in working times. The aim of introducing
flexible working hours is to give staff the maximum
possible freedom to determine their own pattern of
working. I II
Trials of different flexible hours systems are
currently being conducted in areas of the Central Office
of thne Department of Labour in Melbourne, the Regional Office
of the Department of Supply in M~ elbourne and in the N. C. D. C.' s
office in Canberra. Thle Board, departments ' and staff
associations will be monitoring these and future trials
to determine the advantages and disadvantages of alternative
working arrangements before * deciding whether now working
arrangements should be introduced on a more permanent basis
in appropriate areas.
The introduction of flexible working hours i~ n the
Australian Public Service will have both social and efficiency
advantages and is a further step in the formulati -on of an
employment policy which would help people to re. concile
domestic and family responsibilities with a career.
CANB3ERRA. A. C. T.. 



Ar AKLNQ DATE
D/ 37 26 July 1973
EMlBARGO: Not to be used or
oublished in any form before
0030 hours Thursday, 26 July
1973o NUCLEAR T7STING: AUSTRALIAN LETTER TO
SECRETARY-ENERAL OF TI UNITED NATIONS
~ The following is the text of a letter presented in New
York early today to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Dr Waldheim, by the Australian Ambassador and Permanent
Renresentative to the UoN., Sir Laurence Mclntyre
O " On instructions from my Government I have the honour
to bring the following to Your Excellencyts attention.
0The recent actions of the Governments of France and China
in detonating nuclear devices in the atmosphere at Mururoa Atoll
in the South Pacific and the Sinkiang region of North West China
respectively have caused deep concern to the Government and people
of Australia. The Government of Australia is compelled to state
in addition that these actions reveal a regrettable disregard for
the clearly exoressed views of the United Nations and its institutions
The United Nations, through resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and the specialised agencies, has repeatedly
f. oA/ 
-2-
condemned nuclear weapons testing in the atmosphere. The radioactive
fallout from such tests creates hazards to the health of
present and future generations and to the environment. Moreover,
oppnosition to atmospheric testing by the preponderance of
international opinion has found expression in multilateral
instruments, including the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests
in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water of 1963.
Prohibition of atmospheric testing may fairly be claimed to have
become a rule of customary international law.
Australia has consistently advocated the negotiation
and achievement of effective measures of comnlete and general
disarmament and was one of the co-sonsors of a General Assembly
resolution 2934A ( XXVIT), adonted on 29 November 1972 by an
overwhelming majority, which called unon all nuclear weapons
states to suspend nuclear weapons tests in all environments and
called ucon the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to
give urgent consideration to the pressing need for the early
conclusion of a Treaty banning all nuclear weapons tests.
As recently as 23 May 1973, the World Health Assembly
meeting in Geneva adopted a resolution which recognised that the
fallout from nuclear weapons tests is an uncontrolled and
unjustified addition to the radiation hazards to which mankind
is excosed, condemned al? nuclear weanons testing which results
in an increase in the level of ionizing radiation in the
atmosohere and urged its immediate cessation. ./ 3 
-3-
In respect of the program of nuclear testing by the
Government of France it will be recalled that in 1963, following
the develonment of strong onnosition, esnecially in Northern
Africa, to the atmosnheric testing of nuclear weapons in the
desert region of Algeria, that Government decided to move its
nuclear weapons testing centre to the South Pacific Ocean.
Since then, the Australian Government and the Governments
of other countries in the South Pacific region and elsewhere have
repeatedly expressed their aDnrehension and concern at the conduct
of atmosnheric nuclear weapons tests in the region adjacent to them.
The people of Australia are entitled to the rotection
of Australia's territorial sovereignty, which they regard as
clearly infringed by the continued denosit unon Australian soil
without the consent of the Government of Australin, of radioactive
substances from French nuclear tests in the Pacific, and they
cannot be exnected to accent the nrogressive nollution of their
environment which these successive atmosnheric exnlosions have
been shown to cause,
By a Note of 3 January 1973, the Australian Government
sought an as-: urance from the French Government that no further
tests would take place in the Southern Pacific region. No such
assurance was given in the redly of the Government of France
dated 7 February 1973. The Australian Government subsequently
demonstrated its desire to resolve the situation amicably by
seeking the assurance in ouestion through direct and detailed S./ 4 
-4-
discussions with the Government of France. At the end of these
discussions, however, it was evident that the French Government
adhered to its firm intention to conduct further atmospheric
nuclear weapons tests in the South Pacific region.
It was against this background that the Australian
Government on 9 May 1973 instituted proceeding. s in the
International Court of Justice.
On 22 June 1973, the Court ruled in favour of an
Australian request for interim measures of protection pending
its final judgment on the merits of the case. It indicated that
the Governments of Australia and France should each of them ensure
that no action of any kind be taken which might aggravate or
extend the dispute submitL-ted to the Court or prejudice the rights
of the other Darty in respect of the carrying out of whatever
decision the Court may render in the case and, in particular, that
the French Government shou~ ld avoid nuclear tests causing the
deposit of radioactive fallout on Australian territory.
Ir detonating a nuclear device on 22 July ( Australian
time) the Government of France has openly disregarded the Court's
ruling. The nuclear explosion carried out on that date will cause
widesnread radioactive fallout. There is a virtual certainty that
this will cause the denoosit of such fallout on Australian territory.
On 22 July the Australian Embassy in Paris handed over a Note
of -protest at the action of the Government of France. 
The Government of the People's Republic of China has tested some
nuclear weapons devices in the atmosphere since 1969. These
tests are reported to have taken place at the Lop Nor test site
in the Sinkiang region in north-west China. The Australian
Government formally protested to the Government of China on
April 1973, expressing Australia's strong opposition to the
conduct of nuclear weapons tests, particularly in the atmospheie,
and reaffirming the Australian Government's view that atmospheric
nuclear weapons testing is contrary to international law.
The Government of China exploded a nuclear weapons
device in the atmosphere on 27 June 1973. The Australian
Ambassador in Peking handed over on 29 June 1973 a further Note
of protest, reiterating Australia's opposition to atmospheric
nuclear weapons testing, and expressing deep regret that China ' had
not taken full account of th-e views of the Australian Government
and the world community as a whole, as shown in repeated resolutions
of the United Nations General Assembly. The Note also drew to the
attention of tie Government of the People's Republic of China the
recent decision of the International Court of Justice in favour
of the Australian aDprlication for interim measures of protection
and stated that all governments, including the Government of the
People's Republic of China, have a clear international obligation
to -prevent the danger of environmental pollution. The Note ca~ lled
u-oon the Government of China to cease nuclear tests in the
atmosphere and to associate itself with the international community
in moves to bring about the ending of all nuclear w. eapons testing.
I have the honour to request that this letter be circulated as a
document of the General Assembly under the item ' Ur. 7ment need for
susnension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests'." 



NQ DATE
D/ 39 30 July 1973
PRIME MITISmTR'S VISIT TO MEXICO
The following is the text of the communique issued at
0 the conclusion of the visit to Mexico by the Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam:-
At the invitation of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr Luis Echevarria, the Prime Minister of Australia, the
Honourable Gough Whitlam, made an official visit to
Mexico from 24 to 28 July 1973. The visit was notable also as the
first by an Australian Prime Minister to a country of Latin America.
0 During the talks which took place between the two lenders,
SPrime Minister Whitlam and President Echevarria exchanged views on
matters of bilateral interest as well world problems. These exchanges
took nlace in an extremely cordial atmosphere reflecting the growing
community of interest between Australia and Mexico, as two Pacific countries
Of Darticular concern in their discussions were the
possibilities that exist of develoning and strengthening the
relations between Australia and Mexico, having regard to the new
nolicies of the Australian Government which are progressive like
those of the Mexican Government. / 2 
-2-
The Prime Minister and the President recognised that the
different characteristics of Australia and Mexico in no way limit
or exclude the possibility of close relations in the fields of
cultural, economic and social development, but that on the contrary
differences can complement each other, especially in the economic
field. In order to bring about such aspirations it was considered
anpropriate that the two Governments should study ways to overcome
the problems inherent in the relatively great distance separating
the two countries. In the light of the problems that face a very important
O sector of the nations of the world, the President and the Prime
Minister expressed their conviction that it is necessary to make
further efforts aimed at balancing economic relations between the
industrialised countries and the developing countries.
SBoth leaders declared their conviction that Mexico as
well as Australia can play a decisive role in the task of reconstructing
on a sound, realistic and eauitable basis both international
O trade and exchange of technology in order that the countries of the
Third World may obtain the just benefits which are their due.
Prime Minister Whitlam assured President Echevarria that his
Government would continue to approach the international meetings
concerned with the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
in a sympathetic and constructive manner. Both leaders were
hopeful that such discussions could lead to a wide agreement making
possible the adoption of such an instrument at an early session of
the United Nations General Assembly. ./ 3 
-3-
The Australian Prime Minister referred in terms of warm
praise to the Treaty of Tlatelolco. The Prime Minister and the
President recognised the benefits inherent in the establishment of
a nuclear free zone in Latin America. Both leaders reaffirmed their
strong opposition to the current and future testing of nuclear
weapons, particularly in the atmosphere. The two Governments agreed
to cooperate in all appropriate forums to bring all nuclear weapons
testing to an end.
In the course of their talks the President and the Prime
Minister had a detailed discussion on questions relating to the law
of the sea. The Prime Minister took notice with interest of Mexico's
position in favor of the patrimonial sea. In this regard they firmly
supported the aim of a considerable number of states to exercise
exclusive fishery rights in a zone adjacent to the territorial sea
up to a distance of 200 miles. They also supported the aim of these
states to sovereignty over seabed resources in a wide zone adj2cent
to their coasts. In analysing the commercial exchange between Australia
and Mexico they noted that this has been reduced and they decided
that their Governments should examine the best means of raising
trade relations to their existing potential and taking advantage
of the complementary character of their respective economies. As
an immediate possibility for the increase in trade between the
two countries and the benefits therein they agreed that it was
necessary to prevent the erection of barriers to trade.
The Prime Minister referred to the new measures S../ 4 
-4-
established by his Government to reduce import tariffs, including
new preferential arrangements for developing countries.
Mexico will be able to take advantage of these measures
to increase oprortunities for exports to Australia. Both leaders
exchanged points of view on the possibilities to effect co-investment
projects in Mexico. To this end the Government of Mexico invited an
Australian mission to study, on site, the possibilities that Mexico
offers in this area.
Both leaders referred with satisfaction to the close
collaboration that had existed between Australia and Mexico for
many years in a wide range of international organisations. They
decided that such coope-ration between the representatives of the
two countries should be further intensified. In particular, the
President ex-nressed Mexico's satisfaction for the new interest
displayed by the Government of Australia in sending representatives
to observe conferences concerned with ILatin America.
Both leaders considered that it is necessary to
encourage tourism between the twvo countries as well as an exchange
of students and young technicians. Their Governments would study
the most efficient methods to attain these ends.
The President and the Prime Minister agreed that their
Governments will proceed immediately to establish the basis for
the development of scientific and technical exchanges between
Australia and Mexico. The President of Mexico aelcomed the
suggestion by the Prime Minister of Australia that cooperation
between Australia and Mexico, for examTnle in the field of 
agricultural science, should be increased immediately. To that
end Mr Whitlam, as a first step, extended an invitation to the
Government of Mexico to send to Australia, during the period
1973-74, two Mexican graduates to pursue studies in Australia on
this field. The President invited the Prime Minister to send a grouD
of young technicians and professors to make studies at the Commission
for the Study of the National Territory ( C7T7NAL). The President
and the Prime Minister made reciprocal offers to create
scholarships for graduates of different disciplines.
The Prime Minister invited the President to visit Australia.
The President accepted the invitation and pending the setting of
a date, high level Mexican officials will go to Australia in the
near future. 



A NQ9 DATE
M/ 115 31 July 1973
PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, WASHINGTON
The following is the text of an address by the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, to the
National Press Club, Washington, at 1300 hours ( Washington time)
30 July, 1973: " It is an honor for me to be asked to address representatives
of the world's greatest and most free press in the capital of the
world's greatest and most free democracy.
The strength of each is the strength of both.
In accepting your invitation I pay tribute to the
manifest and enduring strength of both.
It's been suggested that your chief interest today is to
hear something about the changes in Australia's policies as a result
of the change in the Australian Government, changes affecting our
international relations and particularly the relations between
Australia and the United States.
True, there have been changes, important and, I naturally
enough believe, beneficial changes. o. ./ 2 
-2-
To put them in perspective, however, I should say three
things at the outset.
First, the changes the Australian Government has made are
only part of a profound change taking place in the whole pattern of
international relations, especially in the Western Pacific.
The initiative for these changes came not, of course, from
Australia, but from the United States.
These initiatives President Nixon's initiatives have
created a new reality for our region.
Part of Australia's task has been to ratify the new
reality. If in some specific matters such as recognition of the
People's Republic of China and the ending of the last vestiges of
Australia's military commitment in Indo-China Australia has been
able to move immediately, it is largely because of a difference in
obligations, not ultimate intentions.
Clearly, the United States has obligations, commitments
and burdens far more complex than those of Australia.
Secondly, the ability of an Australian government, if so
minded, to effect policy changes more rapidly than the United States,
partly reflects a difference in our systems of government. / 3 
For instance, while it's not true, as suggested at least
in sections of the Australian press, that the American Embassy in
Canberra or the State Department was caught by surprise by the election
results in my country, there may have been some surprise in some
quarters at the speed with which our machinery allowed us to move.
I did not have to wait three months for my inauguration.
Three days after election day, I was able to form a Government
with one other colleague. It was in fact the smallest administration
to have responsibility for Australia since the first Duke of Wellington
was last Prime Minister of England.
In two weeks we were able to clear off a whole range of
undertakings on which we have been campaigning.
As long as it doesn't go beyond these walls, I'll confide
in you that I found those two weeks quite exhilarating.
SBut I do emphasise that nothing we did then, or which the
rather larger Government has done since, was other than eminently
predictable to anybody anywhere with any grasp of our specific
policies or broader program.
Knd thirdly, there is an essential continuity underlying
the process of change a continuity in Australia's real national
interests, in Australia's international obligations, in Australia's
alliances and Australia's friendships.
We seek new relationships. / 4 
We do not seek them at the expense of old, firm ones,
I might bring these three points together the world
pattern of change within which the Australian Government is acting,
the predictability of the changes we are making. and the continuity
within change with a single illustration.
It is just two years since I went to Peking as Leader of
the Opposition. In the Australian political context of the time, this was
considered quite a risky business.
What nobody knew even the world's best-informed and most
alert and vigilant press was that Dr Kissinger was in Peking at
precisely the same time,
And when President Nixon made his historic announcement
a week or so later, a quite remarkable transformation took place,
I have to acknowledge I do so gladly that if it had not
been for President Nixon's initiative, my own Peking visit would,
given the Australian climate of the time, have been ' no political
advantage to me, even as late as last December.
Plainly, however, there could be no surprise that, within
three weeks of our election, we were able to establish diplomatic
relations with China on the exact terms we had for so long undertaken
by removing Australia's China Embassy from Taipei to Peking, the
capital of' China of which Taiwan is a province. 
We are now quickly and successfully developing our contacts
with China over the whole range of our mutual interests,
But in our efforts to redress the imbalance of a generation
of unthinking lostility towards China, we do not propose to introduce
a new imbalance by discarding or downgrading older relationships.
We do not intend to substitute a new distortion for old
distortions. Undoubtedly the most important of those relationships is
the American connection,
This is symbolised by the Anzus Treaty. But Anzus is not
the be-all and end-all of that relationship and never has been. P
Important as Anzus is, the relationship is many-sided,
and I am convinced deep and enduring, at all levels,
There are many misconceptions about Anzus.
It was originally designed as a reassurance to Australia
and New Zealand against the possibility of uapanese military
resurgence, Nobody would now view it in that light,
Only a person totally insensitive to Japanese post-war
asoirations would seek to encourage or anticipate such a resurgence. 
-6-
Further, we have tended to overlook in Australia that
Anzus invokes " the constitutional processes" of its Doartners,
We have tended to ignore the role of Congress in those
processes, Anzus happens to be one treaty which has not been seriously
questioned by any section of C ingress,
My government wants to move away from the narrow view that
the Anzus Treaty is the only significant factor in our relations with
the United States and the equally narrow view that our relations
with the United States are the only significant factor in Australia's
foreign relations. Anzus is important but it is only one anpect of the very
wide range of interests and obligations linking with the United
States, Our relations with the United States are very imnortant
but again only one aspect of our interests and obligations in our
region and around the world.
But I repeat that as we seek to widen and strengthen
those other relations, we do not do so at the expense of existing
ones. Naturally there will be differences in approach to
several. international questions between Australia and the United
States. T believe, however, we should explore constructively
the wide areas of agreement which unite us rather than 
seek to emphasise those few matters on which we are divided or take
a different approach towards the same basic end.
I believe that this alliance is old enough and strong
enough to stand a little frankness on both sides.
I believe that the friendship which we offer America now,
namely that of a robust middle power, making its own assessments and
its own decisions in consultation with other interested countries9
provides a better basis for a durable relationship of friendship
between Australia and the United States than existed in the past,.
We do not wish to grandstand or thumb our noses at the
United States. When our interests do not coincide and wh~ en we disagree with
the United States we snail, as a good friend shouid, say so firmly
and frankly, usually, and -Dreferaoly, in private.
But again. le' get this in perspective.,
The most important matters are not those on whia-n the
United States and Australia are likely to disagree, uinder this or any
American or Australian administration,,
What we wish to do, what we are doing, is to see that the
official United States view is not the only view ever considered by
an Australian Government, a. 78 
For example, in determining our position on any matter
before the United Nations, I wish to know the view of our neighbours
and our other friends just as 1 want to know the view of the United
States, Nothing could be further from the truth than the suggestion
that under the new Government Australia is going isolationist,,
That is just as absurd as the idea that we are mioving into
a different ideological orbit,
Precisely what we are trying to do is to break out of a
kind of ideological isolationism which has limited the conduct of
our affairs in the past,
I~ n our own region, in our dealings with all the countries
of that region we think it' -time for an ideological holiday.
That is why we have established diplomatic relations
with a range of Governments as diverse as North Viet-N~ am and the
Vatican,, It is, if you like, a policy of diplomatic even--handed. iess,
It does not mean that Australia is not aligned,,
We are by definition aligned, through Arizus.
it does mean, however, that we propose that our dealings
with all nations should be less ideologically orientated than
hitherto,/ 
-9-
For twenty years I have been appalled at the damage we
of the west have done to ourselves and to other peoples by our
Western ideological preoccupations, particularly in South-East Asia,,
We are not going to be readily forgiven for throwing away
the chance we had for a settlement in Indo-China in 1954, after
Korea, after Geneva,
And if I had to sum up my own determination and that of
my Government in a single sentence, I would state that I am
determined that nothing Australia does by action or inaction will
contribute to a second, final loss of opportunity,
We have all been given a second chance,
It must not be thrown away,
This would be the unforgivable crime agtainst humanity,
It may not be out of order for me to refer to something
a distinguished correspondent of the " New York Timres" said to a
senior Australian diplomat a coupl~ e of years ago about Australia.
He said that even to the best informed American, Australia
was merely a satellite of the United States; to the 20 million
non-white Americans, or those of them who knew anything of Australia,
it was a racist country; to the vast majority of Americans it was
~ just a large and empty space on the map,. 
~
This judgment of two years ago is a harsh one indeed,
As a description of Australia it is 90 per cent wrong, and
it was wrong even at the time it was made.
But it is just that 10 per cent of truth which can make
an Australian uneasy, and which it is the concern of my Government
to remove. We are not a satellite of any country.
We are a friend and a partner of the United States
particularly in the Pacific; but with independent interests of
our own. As a Government, we are determined that Australia shall
not be open to charges of racism.
We are not just a large and empty space on the map.
We are a middle power with substantial resources, with
a people of considerable skill and vigor.
Australia's past shortcomings, the mistakes in our international
dealings have sprung in large measure from a vague and
generalised fear of our own environment, the feeling of being
alien in our own continent and our own region. 
-11-
As a result, we have tended to swing between isolationism
and interventionism, between " fortress Australia" and over-dependence
on one great powerful protector; and, culturally, between slavish
imitation and brash self-assertion.
What is sometimes called a new nationalism, for which the
election of this Government is seen as a catalyst, is, I hope,
really the beginning of self-confidence, the realisation that we
are there to stay as a people whose possession of a vast rich
continent has endowed us with unique opportunities, yet very great
obligations. My great hope for my Government, however long it may endure
or as my opponents would say be endured, is that it will see the
end of the old inhibitions, the self-defeating fears about Australia's
place in the world, and the beginning of a creative maturity." 



FOR PRESS: COMMENCEMENT OF PRICES JUSTIFICATION ACT
( Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, The Hon. L. H.
Barnard, M. P.)
The Prices Justification Act, which comes into
operation tomorrow, Wednesday, 1 August, is a key element
in the Government's drive against inflation.
The Act covers a large number of major companies,
and these will now be required to notify the Prices
Justification Tribunal of any proposals to increase prices,
unless they have'received appropriate exemptions fr'om the
Tribunal. The Tribunal also has power at any time to~ look
into the actual prices charged by such companies.
The Tribunal's findings in those cases where it
decides to hold an enquiry will be reported to the Government
and will be of the greatest importance. The Act-requires
that they be made public by the Government.
Many companies have ,, already registered with the
Tribunal at the invitation of its Chairman, Mr Justice Williams.
Members and senior staff of the Tribunal have been
consulted by a number of companies regarding the procedures
to be followed. A memorandum describing those procedures
has also been distributed widely by the Chairman.
The Tribunal is making a good start, and I confidently
expect that it will be followed by further solid progress.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
31 July 1973 



Press Statement No. 116
31 July 1973
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
The Acting Prime Minister announced today the
, appointment of Mr. T. A. Pettigrew to the Prices Justification
Tribunal. Mr. Pettigrew, who has been appointed a full time
member of the Tribunal, has had extensive experience in
business and in retailing in particular.
The Office of the Tribunal has been opened at
4 Treasury Place, East Melbourne and the Chairman,
Members and staff of the Tribunal are attending to
enquiries from companies which will come under the Act
wnen it comes into force tomorrow.
BACKGROUND NOTE:
Mr. Pettigrew is a former Group Direct-or of the
Myer Emproium. He flas represented retailing interests
at the Government's consultations with industry and has
had active public interests. He lives in Victoria.
CANBERRA. AA. CCT. T. i 



NQ DATE
M/ 118 3 August 1973
COMMONWEAITH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING
The following is the text of a statement issued in
* Ottawa on 2 August ( Ottawa time) by the Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, at the opening of the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting:
" The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlamr, said in Ottawa this morning that he looked forward to
wide-ranging and substantial discussions about present political
trends in the world, economic issues including trade, monetary
* and development questions and also on intra-Commonwealth relations,
at the Commonwealth Meeting which starts in Ottawa today.
Mr Whitlam reiterated that the Australian Government
intended to adopt a more constructive and helpful approach towards
the Commonwealth in the future.
Although it was fashionable in some quarters to disparage
the Commonwealth, Mr Whitlam said, he hoped the Ottawa meeting
would give a new stimulus to constructive cooperation and
consultation between the diverse members of the Commonwealth. * 12 
-2-
More than half of these members were, he added, littoral
states of the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
Mr Whitlam said he saw in the Commonwealth a very valuable
forum for cooperation, contacts and exchanges of views at all levels.
He was, he added, looking forward to establishing personal
contact with a number of Heads of Government, especially from
African and Caribbean countries and to renewing personal contacts
with others, including the host Prime Minister, Mr Trudeau.
Senator Willesee's visit in June to a number of
Commonwealth countries in Africa, the first such visit by an
Australian Minister for many years, and his own visits to India,
New Zealand, Britain and Mauritius earlier in the year, as well as
his contacts with the Prime Minister of Fiji and his recent
correspondence with the Prime Minister of Malaysia and Singapore,
Tun Razak and Mr Lee Kuan Yew, had, Mr Whitlam said, been
valuable in paving the way for effective Australian participation
in the conference." 



NQ DATE 13 August 1973
COMMONEAITT1 HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING, OTTAWA
Attached is the text of the final communique issued
at the conclusion of the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting, Ottawa, 2 10 August, 1973. 
FINAL COMMUNIOUE Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Ottawa from
2 10 August. All Commonwealth countries were reoresented, five
by their Presidents or their Heads of State, eighteen by their
Prime Ministers, three by their Vice-Presidents and six by senior
Ministers. The Prime Minister of Canada was in the chair.
Heads of Government warmly welcomed the Prime Ministers
of Bangladesh and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas whose countries
have become members of the Commonwealth since the last meeting
in 1971. They expressed gratitude to the Prime Minister of
Canada for the hospitality provided by his Government.
Oh'n August 3rd the meeting was informed by the Prime
Minister of Malaysia of the sudden death of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Malaysia, Tun Dr Ismail Bin Dato Abdul Rahman,
suspended its proceedings in tribute, and conveyed sincere
condolences to the Government and people of Malaysia and to the
bereaved family. The meeting was positive in tone and constructive in
its approach. Having agreed to new procedures designed to ensure
informality and free discussion, the leaders put aside set-pieve
speeches and addressed themselves directly both to each other
and to the pressing questions before the meeting. When unanimous
agreement was not possible, mutual understanding of conflicting
viewpoints was achieved. It was agreed that in this regard the
meeting established a most useful precedent for future Commonwealth
consultations. The Commonwealth had been greatly strengthened / 2 
by the event and Heads of Government were heartened by this.
Heads of Government were convinced that the association
had once again demonstrated its vitality and flexibility. They
intend to make maximum use of the Commonwealth machinery to put
the principles of the Commonwealth Declaration into practice and
to accelerate the pace of social and economic development among
the less affluent members.
Statement on Nuclear Weapon Tests
Heads of Government issued a statement, on the occasion
of the tenth anniversary of the signing of the treaty banning
nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space, and under
water.
World and Commonwealth Trends
In a frank and informal review of world trends Heads of
Government examined changing power relationships and their political
and economic consequences with particular reference to Commonwealth
countries. Views were exchanged on: changing relationships among
the United States, the Soviet Union and China; problems of security
in various regions; the emergence of new centres of economic
power; the continued atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons,
and the need for a comprehensive test ban treaty and for general
and complete disarmament under effective international control;
the situation in the Middle East and South East Asia; the
establishment of a peace zone in the Indian Ocean; and the
situation in Southern Africa with particular reference to Rhodesia. / 3 
-3-
While welcoming the general relaxation in international
tension, they nevertheless noted those areas of tension which
continue to threaten international peace and security as well as
the widening gap between the rich and poor nations and recongised
the need for the spirit of detente in all international relations.
Acknowledging the potential for progressive change arising from
shifting power relations Heads of Government recognised that
economic and monetary instability continue to pose urgent problems
for the world's community. As the search for solutions to these
political and economic problems was pursued in the context of the
changing power relationships new opportunities arose for states
other than the major powers to influence world developments, to
contribute to the achievement of peace and security, to ensure the
avoidance of spheres of influence and to secure a regime of social
justice9 economic progress and racial harmony throughout an
increasingly interdeoendent world.
Consultation and co-operation in the Commonwealth, an
informal worldwide association, which included no super power,
could make a special contribution to greater international
understanding as well as to the search for solutions to economic
problems. Heads of Government, therefore, stressed the value of
strengthening practical co-operation between member countries,
both internationally and on a regional basis, and working within
other international organisations ardgroupings in order to give
the medium and small countries a more effective voice in internationa
relations to raise living standards and to improve the quality of
life for all their peoples. / 4 
-4-
Heads of Government noted the progress made with regard to
the proposal for a peace zone in the Indian Ocean since the last
conference in Singapore, where they agreed on the desirability of
ensuring that it remains an area of peace and stability. They noted
that the proposal was under study by an ad hoc committee which had
been established by the United Nations and they expressed the hope
that its deliberations would receive the support and co-operation
of all states concerned,
The Heads of Government were greatly concerned about the
deteriorating situation in the Middle East which now presents a
most serious threat to world peace. The deterioration was directly
attributable to the lack of progress in the implementation of the
Security Council Resolution 242 of 1967. They considered that ways
and means should now be urgently sought by all states to give
substance to the Security Council Resolution.
Heads of Government also noted that since the last
conference in Singapore, the Foreign Ministers of the countries
of the Association of South East Asian Nations ( ASEAN) have adopted
a declaration to make South East Asia a zone of peace, freedom and
neutrality. They regarded this initiative as a positive contribution
towards peace and stability in that region.
Trade Heads of Government had a wide-ranging and substantive
discussion on economic issues against the background of widespread
inflation, Particular attention was devoted to problems of
international trade. Heads of Government considered the prospects 
for the imnlementation of the generalised system of preferences by
all the developed countries, and for improvements where schemes had
already been introduced or were due to be harmonised. They hoped
that the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations under the
auspices of GATT would secure world-wide expansion of' trade and
take particular account of the needs of developing countries.
Heads of Government exchanged views on the orospects for
the forthcoming negotiations between the enlarged European Economic
Community and the developing countries of Africa, the Caribbean,
and the Pacific, and exnressed the hope that they would lead to
the conclusion of just, enlightened, and effective arrangements.
The developing Commonwealth countries reiterated their previously
expressed views that the notion of reciprocity could not be a basis
for equitable and enduring relations between them and the EEC, In
the case of the countries to which the joint declaration of intent
in the Tr'eaty of Eqlargement applies, it was urged that the community
should Gake a Dos-Ltive attitude to approaches that have already been
made or might be made, and work out suitable arrangements taking
their trade interests into account before the common external
tariff is applied to British imports from them in accordance with
that treaty. It was recognised that the system of Commonwealth
preferences has provided and continues to provide important
advantages for Commonwealth countries, and the hope was expressed
that the existing favourable arrangements for developing
Commonwealth countries in markets of developed Commonwealth
countries other than Britain should wherever possible be maintained, / 16 
-6-
Heads of Government considered the special problems of
countries highly dependent on cxports of agricultural products in
primary, semi-processed, and processed forms, and noted the
desirability of achieving substantial liberalization of trade in
these products in the course of the forthcoming GATT multilateral
negotiations. They underlined the urgent need for deliberate measure
to be taken by the international community to secure equitable and
remunerative returns for such products. To this end, they considered
it essential that new international commodity arrangements be
devised which would deal with this serious problem and Drotect the
foreign exchange earnings of developing countries against excessive
Drnce fluctuations and inroads from synthetics, thereby increasing
their capacity to buy needed imports. There was need also to
increase the export earnings of developing countries from Drimary
products, especially agricultural products, as prices of industrial
goods continue to rise; and to study methods to introduce a
realistic relationship between the Prices of the two categories of
goods. Commonwealth countries should play an active role in the
search for new international commodity arrangements. It was felt
that it was eaually necessary to explore measures to minimise
fluctuations in the prices of mineral products.
Monetary Issues Heads of Government reviewed the work of the Committee
of Twenty and recognized the urg , ent need to work towards the
achievement as quickly as possible of a new and stable international
monetary order, which would take into account the special concerns
of developing countries, particularly as regards the creation of
a link between special drawing rights and development finance. 
-7-
Development Assistance
The meeting examined various aspects of development
assistince, including the disadvantages of tied aid, the need for
a more flexible apnroach by aid donors and the importance of
achieving mutually satisfactory relationships between the donors
and recipients of aid, as well as measures for reducing the onerous
debt burdens of developing countries.
Private Foreign Investment
Heads of Government had a lively discussion of the problems
and opportunities involved in private foreign investment. Special
reference was made to the role of multi-national corporations in
a number of Commonwealth countries. Views were exchanged on possible
techniques for ensuring that the operations of investing companies
are compatible with the national goals of host countries, on the
possibility of promoting the exchange of information on this
subject among Commonwealth countries, and on the desirability of
drawing up a code of conduct for international corporations,
International Transport
Heads of Government exchanged views on a number of
important aspects of international transport problems and their
implications, including rising freight rates, dependence on
foreign-owned shipping, and conflicts of interest created by
differences in labour costs and trade union action among member
countries. 
-8-
Food Shortages Heads of Government expressed their concern at the growing
shortages and rising prices of food and their hope that these
problems might be considered without undue delay in appropriate
international forums such as the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
It was noted that the facilities of the Commonwealth
Secretariat were available to examine a number of subjects mentioned
in paragraphs 13 to 22. Such an examination might provide the basis
for further action by Commonwealth countries.
Southern Africa Heads of Government had a full and frank exchange of views
on changes and developments in Southern Africa. The meeting also
gave special consideration to the Droblems faced by countries in
Southern Africa which border on territories and countries still
under minority rule. While recognising that there were complex
and difficult problems involved, Heads of Government were agreed
in their opnosition to apartheid and minority rule in Southern
Africa, They therefore recognised the legitimacy of the struggle
to win full human rights and self-determination.
In discussing conditions in South Africa, Namibia and
the Portuguese colonies, it was agreed that Commonwealth members
in a position to do so should seek to use their influence to
persuade Portugal to grant a negotiated indenendence to its
African colonies. The advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and Security Council Resolutions on Namibia / 9 
-9-
were recalled and emnhasis placed on international responsibility
for that territory. There was discussion on how Commonwealth
countries, especially those with economic interests in South Africa
and Namibia, might best bring influence to bear to oromote change.
Heads of Government reviewed the efforts of the indigenous people
of the territories in Southern Africa to achieve self-determination
and independence and agreed on the need to give every humanitarian
assistance to all those engaged in such efforts. The British
Government reserved its position in relation to the last proposal
in circumstances in which assistance might be converted into
military purposes. Heads of Government expressed their intense concern for the
situation in Rhodesia and the damaging consequences of a continued
absence of a settlement. They appreciated the efforts made by the
British Government with whom the responsibility lay and were united
in their willingness to contribute towards a solution. All were
agreed on seeking a peaceful settlement and that the objective
was majority rule. They took note of the meeting between Ian Smith
and Bishop Muzorewa and associated themselves with the British
Government's wish for the discussions to be broadened and the
necessary steps taken to remove restrictions so as to enable all
groups representative of Hhodesian opinion to take part. The
British Prime Minister welcomed the constructive suggestions made
and undertook to take them into account as the situation developed.
Heads of Government considered the report of the
Commonwealth Sanctions Committee and authorised the Committee to
continue its work. It was agreed that in the light of the
recommendations contained in that renort further efforts should 
be made to render sanctions more effective pending an acceptable
settlement. Heads of Government also took note of the development
of the Special Commonwealth Programme for assisting the education
of Rhodesian Africans and supported its continuation. The Zambian
Foreign Minister expressed his Government's appreciation of
Commonwealth assistance to Zambia.
Heads of Government welcomed the opportunity to exchange
views on comparative techniques of Government. They had a lively
and useful discussion which included consideration of such subjects
as: the determination of national priorities; the problem of
ensuring effective implementation of Government decisions;
fostering communication between Government and people; the redress
of economic disparities; and the problem of correcting economic
imbalances as between urban and rural areas. Heads of Government
agreed that the question of comparative techniques of Government
should be the subject of further discussion at future Heads' of
Government meetings and that, in the interim the Commonwealth
Secretariat should undertake appropriate preliminary studies
to facilitate such discussion.
Commonwealth Functional Co-operation
Heads of Government agreed that functional co-operation
was an important and dynamic aspect of the Commonwealth. They
expressed warm appreciation of the way in which the Commonwealth
Fund for Technical Co-operation ( CFTC) was developing in meeting
the priority needs of member countries, and commented favourably
on its flexibility and speedy response. They agreed that activities
undertaken through the fund should be intensified and commended
for further study various pronosals for their extension. / 11 
-11-
Heads of Government noted with appreciation the generous
contributions being made by several governments, and especially
by Canada, and hoped that further contributions on a voluntary
basis would be provided by other participating countries.
Heads of Government noted the Secretary-General's
proposal for a target of between one per cent and two per cent
of total Commonwealth aid flows through Commonwealth multilateral
channels. They agreed that further consideration should
be given at the next Finance Ministers Meeting to the means by
which an increased flow could be brought about.
Heads of Government agreed to refer the proposal for
the establishment of a Commonwealth Development Bank and a report
on export credit financing in Commonwealth developing countries
to Commonwealth Finance Ministers for consideration.
Heads of Government gave preliminary consideration to
a proposal for a Commonwealth Centre for Applied Studies in
Government and agreed that the detailed requirements for such a
centre should be studied and a report prepared for consideration,
if possible, by senior Commonwealth officials in 1974.
Commonwealth Youth Programme
Heads of Government endorsed the Commonwealth Youth
Programme which was approved by Ministers concerned with youth
matters. They agreed that the scope of the programme should take
into account the particular needs of individual countries and / 12 
-12-
expressed warm anpreciation of the pledges which had been made
towards the agreed target of one million pounds over three years.
Heads of Government instructed the Secretary-General to proceed with
the immediate implementation of the agreed programme.
Commonwealth Foundation
Heads of Government agreed that the budget of the
Commonwealth Foundation be increased to C450,000 per annum for the
roeriod 1 July 1974 to 30 June 1976.
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
Heads of Government noted with appreciation the contribution
by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association in promoting contacts
between Members of Parliament of Commonwealth countries at annual
conferences, and providing a forum for them to exchange views and
discuss matters of common interest at regional and international
levels thereby furthering Commonwealth ideals and interests.
Report of the Commonwealth Secretary-General
Heads of Government took note of the fourth reoort of
the Commonwealth Secretary-General. 



A A a
NQ DATE
M/ 119 17 August 1973
FLOOD RELIEF FOR PAKISTAN
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, announced today that as an immediate measure, the
O Government had arranged for the despatch by air of over 60,000
doses of cholera vaccine and 12 tons of skim milk powder for
the relief of the flood victims in Pakistan,
" We have had reports", Mr Whitlam said, " of the
flooding in the sub-continent and an officer of our Embassy
in Pakistan has visited some of the affected areas." According
to reports the flooding in Pakistan was more severe than in
O India and Bangladesh where the waters had begun to recede.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government of Pakistan had
appealed for medicines and foodstuffs, and Australia was pleased
to be able to respond. The situation would be kept under review, 



NQ DATE
M/ 120 19 August 1973
FRENCH NUCTLEAR TESTS
In a statement today, the Prime Minister said:
0 " The Government has reason to believe that
the Government of France has exploded today another
nuclear device in the Pacific.
The previous French tests have attracted
world-wide opposition. I am sure that this latest
test will be equally condemned. The Australian
SGovernment will take all appropriate steps to bring
to a halt these dangerous experiments, which are
carried out in defiance of law and morality." 



4J ~ UST RALIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 118
21 August 1973
METROPOLITAN AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM WESTERN SECTORS OF SYDNEY
AND MELBOU1kNE
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
THE PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES, SIR ROBERT ASKIN AND THE PREMIER OF
VICTORIA, MR. R. HAMER
The Australian Government and the State Governments of
New South Wales and Victoria have agreed upon a program to improve
the standards of living and opportunities available to residents,
in the Western Sectors of Sydney and Melbourne.
This was announced in Canberra today in a joint statement
by the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, and the Premiers of New South
Wales and Victoria, Sir Robert Askin and Mr. R. Hamer.
They said that the scheme which will begin a five-year
" Metropolitan Area ' Improvement Program" will be aimed at bringing
the western sectors of each city up to a standard of services
comparable with that of the metropolitan area generally. Similar
programs may be considered in other sectors of these and other
Australian cities as part of a national program of urban area
improvement. Australian Government finance for the scheme will be
provided by an allocation in the Budget of the Department of
Urban and Regional Development which will be announced tomorrow
( 21 August). The Australian Government will co-operate with
State and local governments, together with local interest groups
in carrying out the program.
Vario us projects will be undertaken to improve physical'
and social resources and to increase the administrative and planning
skills available.., o both sectors. 
-2-
Mr. Whitlam said that it was generally recognised
that the Western sectors of Sydney and Melbourne had faced
rapid population growth in environmentally deprived areas:
" It is the policy of the Australian Government to try to
eliminate the inequalities existing in the cities and rural
regions throughout the nation; we also want to be involved
as the National Government in making our cities and towns more
stimulating and pleasant places in which to live", he said.
" We have chosen the Western sectors of Sydney and
Melbourne as the first in a series of urban projects because
it is in these areas that the problems of inequality and
deprivation are more obviously observed. Experience gained
will be useful in solving problems in other areas resulting
from similar processes of rapid urbanisation."
There are a number of reasons why the Western sectors
stand out as needing Government assistance, the Prime Minister
and the Premiers said.
These areas have a rapid growth rate, and a high
proportion of children and lower income families. They also have
a large percentage of migrants. These are the groups which place
a heavy demand on public facilities, such as education, social
welfare and public transport.
Both sectors have suffered because, while housing has
usually been available, there has not been a corresponding
development of community facilities and social opportunities.
Councils in the areas have found they do not have adequate
finance to provide these facilities in step with demand, without
help from State and Federal Governments.
The main deficiencies appear to be in health, education,
transport, employmqnt and community welfare services.
Submissions received by the Department of Urban and
Regio nal Development from councils in both western sectors
showed that the problems emphasised were similar. Councils
stressed the need for more and better physical facilities, improved
levels of community services, additional-skilled personnel and a
wider range of opportunities for residents in-the area. These
included specifically, more hospital beds, special medical and
health facilities, more schools and better teachers, and increased
job opportunities. The submissions have come from Councils in the western
spctors who have voluntarily joined together to identify problem
areas and implement appropriate solutions with the help of the
Australian and the State Governments.
The local government areas involved in these initial
Area Improvement Programs will include:
Melbourne: Werribee, Bacchus Marsh, Melton, Bulla
Keilor,' Essendon, Sunshine, Altona, Williamstown
and Footscray.
Sydney: Colb, Windsor, Penrith, Blue Mountains,
Elacktown, Fairfield, Holyroyd, Parramatta,
Auburn and Baulkham Hills. 
-3-
In Melbourne, eight of the Councils have formed a
group called the Western Region Commission, and it is
understood that consideration is currently being given to the
inclusion of the two remaining Councils0 Bacchus Marsh and Bulla.
In Sydney, two groups of five councils have grouped
together and prepared submissions on some of the principal
deficiencies of their area.
The Metropolitan Area Improvement Program has the
broad aim of building up physical facilities and community
resources to an appropriate standard over a five-year period.
The Department of Urban and Regional Development will assist
in co-ordinating Federal financial and technical support through
these programs. As part of the Metropolitan Area Improvement Program,
the Department of Urban and Regional Development also proposes
to set up a small expert Task Force to advise the Australian
Government and both States concerned on how Federal funds might
best be allocated. There are a number of different measures whereby the
Area Improvement Programs could be implemented. To improve
the physical resources of each sector there is a need to improve
transport services, to undertake environmental improvement projects
and to assist in the construction of capital works, such as
distributor roads, bridges, sewerage, drainage and flood
mitigation works, and community facilities associated with housing
and employment. There will be an analysis of the potenti.' use
of strategic areas of Australian Gove-i'-Yaent lando To deveiop the
social resources of the region there will be: studies of manpower
planning and employment promotion, the establishment of a regional
library and information '-irvice, research inco needs of
housebound women and cieatornstration p:: oject si-' h a'dventure playgrounds.
To increase * Li, administ.. . tive an;' plar1ing resources
available to the region, assistanw c-uli provided to
metropolitan and State planning , t noyities iA their sector
planning and satellite city deve'. opulent, as well as to groups
of local councils. The Prime Minister and the Premiers welcomed the
Metropolitan Area Improvement Program as a significant step
towards solving some of our major urban problems and involving
local people in planning for the improvement of their areas.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 0: 



DEATMN OF
MNO DATE
N122 22 August 1973
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINIST7R AND MINISTER FOR
FOREIGN AFFAIRS, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, ON
HIS NORTH AMERICAN VISIT, IN TI-fl HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
W~ EDNSPAY, 22 AUGULST, 1 973. 
NORTH AMERICAN VISIT
I would like to take leave of the House to report briefly
to the Parliament and, through the Parliament to the Australian
neoole, on my recent overseas visit to Mexico the first by an
Australian Prime Minister to the United States and to represent
Australia at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Ottawa.
I believe the visit was timely and useful to Australia
both in establishing new and significant contacts overseas at the
Head of Government level and in developing the more diversified
and indenoendent foreign policy for Australia to which the
Government is committed.
In combining a visit to Mexico and a visit to Washington
with the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Ottawa I was
able to restore a more appropriate balance to our anproach to
Central and North America. Washington is not the sole capital in
that vast hemisphere.
MEXTI CO In Mexico which is a leader of opinion in Central and
South America my delegation and I received an enthusiastic and
warm reception, especially from President Echeverria and Foreign
Minister Rabasa. I believe the visit has opened a window onto
Central and South America; that in future we shall have more
frequent and meaningful contacts with Mexico and, indeed, with
other Latin American countries. 
-2-
I found considerable common ground between our two
countries as middle powers on opposite sides of the Pacific.
Like Australia, Mexico has had problems of overdependence on
foreign countries and inadequate returns from the exploitation
of its natural resources. The Mexican Government is also strongly
opposed to the poisoning of the Pacific environment by nuclear
weanons testing and has taken the lead in ensuring that there will
be no such tests in Latin America.
I found that we were in general agreement also on that
complex subject, the Law of the Sea, and our respective representatives
w ill be co-operating closely in future to ensure that coastal states
receive a fair share of the wealth of the oceans and of the sea bed.
I believe that the Mexicans are well disposed to Australia
and our oresent policies and that they are eager to see the
relationship between our two countries further enhanced.
President Echeverria accented my invitation to him to
visit Australia, probably some time next year. In the meantime
we are oleased to welcome a group of Mexican Members of Parliament
and probably, next month, the Minister for Agriculture, Mr Manuel
Aguirre. It is the firm intention of the Government that the
increasing momentum of our relations with Mexico in particular and
Latin America in general shall not be lost. I left President
Echeverria in no doubt that we looked forward to having him here,
not only because of the great n~ erson. il charm of which he and a* -/ 3 
-3-
Senora Echeverria disnose, but also because such a visit will nut
the seal, as it were, on the Government's policy of fostering
closer links with our neighbours across the Pacific.
I shall not take up the time of the House with further
details of my visit to Mexico as I propose to table the Joint
Communiqu. issued after my visit.
THE UNITED STATES
In Was'hington I had substantive and straightforward
discussions with President Nixon, Vice-President Agnew, Secretary
of State Rogers, Dr Kissinger and numbers of other prominent
Americans, including members of the Congress and the Senate
Committee on Foreign Affairs. All showed very considerable
interest in recent develonments in Australia.
My discussions in Washington covered the situation in
the Asian and Pacific region, including relationships between the
Great Powers, our relations with the United States, ANZUS, SEATO,
the situation in indo-China, nuclear testing, Korea, regional
co-operation in Asia, the special importance of Japan and
Indonesia to us, and other matters of mutual interest.
I told United States leaders that we continue to give
strong support to ANZU9 which we see as embodying some of the most
imnortant nermanent and natural elements in the relationship between
the three Pacific nartners. On the American side also, the value
of ANZUS is not questioned. / 4 
I also told the Secretary of State that ANZUS alone of
ou Treaties in this area seemed entirely satisfactory and that
any Australian Government would strongly support it.
I explained our reservations about SEATO and found that
many of them were shared by the United States. I made it clear
that some aspects of the Manila Treaty as distinct from the
Organisation itself, were of continuing value, especially to
TPailand, and that Australia did. not intend to withdraw from SE'! ATO.
I can assure the House that, following my talks in
Washington, I believe those basic matters on which we agree are
much more numerous, imnortant and lasting than those few issues
on which our views might differ. That is certainly the view of
the American Administration,
I believe, in fact, that the Australian-American
relationship will be seen to rest now on firmer foundations
than it did in the past, We have brought it to a new maturity.
I believe too that the American Administration now fully
accepts that Australia is not a small and relatively insignificant
country as it was once called there but a middle power of growing
influence in the South East Asian and South Pacific regrions,
I believe that America respects and welcomes the less
compliant and more independent, though equally friendly annroach,
which the Australian Government now adopts towards the United States.
a0 
In the United States I also paid a brief visit to New
York where I visited the United Nations headquarters and addressed
a very well attended gathering of the Australian-American Association.
The texts of this speech and my address to the National
Press Club in Washington are of course available io any Member
who might wish to have them,
THJE COMM~ ONWEAL~ TH
I turn now to the meeting of twenty-three Commonwealth
Heads of Government and representatives of the other nine
Commonwealth Heads of Government which took place in Ottawa from
2 to 10 August. This was, in the opinion of the more experienced Heads
of Government present, the most successful Commonwealth Meeting yet
held at this level. It was successful because participants
focussed their attention on the main practical issues in international
affairs facing us today. The Conference was attended for the most
part by men with modern ideas. They represented every geographic
region. Above all it was a meeting of equals sharing a common
concern for co-operative effort and frank consultation.
The scope and achievements of the Conference are outlined
in its final Communique which I also table for the House's
information, The document largely speaks for itself. / 16 
-6-
The Meeting was remarkable, not as some have suggested
for differences of opinion, but for the wide identity of interest
in the aDproach of so many members to the realities of contemporary
international life. We started with the basic proposition that we
of the Commonwealth are now all medium or smaller powers and that
we all experienced in some way or other a vulnerability to changes
brought about by the nature of the relationships between the major
powers. From this position we developed an appreciation of the
opportunities for members of the Commonwealth and the benefits
to be realized through closer Commonwealth consultation and
co-operation. In this respect my pre-election statement of faith
in the Commonwealth and its importance for Australia has been
vindicated. I would like to place on record the value of the wideranging
discussions to all present and to draw attention to the
practical and functional co-operation at the Conference.
Moreover, I believe I established or consolidated a
number of very useful personal contacts with a number of Heads of
Governments especially from the Caribbean countries, Africa, and
countries like Bangladesh, Sir Lanka, Malaysia, Mauritius and, of
course, Canada itself. These contacts demonstrate that the
Commonwealth is, as I believed even before I went to Ottawa, a
valuable forum through which Australia can develop its more
diversified approach to our foreign affairs. / 7 
The need to codify acceptable behaviour by multinational
corporations has been widely recognised and is the subject of detailed
study by the United Nations, Problems created by a " brain drain" in
develooing countries have been the subject of international
negotiation and study for a number of years. Similarly our concern
with the threat from atmospheric nuclear tests is shared universally
even if it is not transmitted in every case into effective action.
In this resoect i regret that a very small minority of Members could
not sumoort the original declaration submitted by the Prime Minister
of New Zealand, to which we lent our sunport, in the context of
our present efforts to orevent further such tests.
In Ottawa I was able to indicate to Commonwealth leaders
that Australia will give more active support to Commonwealth
co-onerative ventures, We already are a contributor to its major
channel for multilateral assistance, the Commonwealth Fund for
Technical Co-operation and to the Commonwealth Foundation. I
announced in Ottawa that Australia will also sunport the new
Commonwealth Youth Program to the extent of 860,000 per annum for
the next three years and that we will Darticinate in the further
study of Droposals for a Commonwealth Development and Export Bank
and an institute for the auplied study of government.
I believe the contacts I made in Ottawa will lead to
the develonment of more meaningful relationshios with a number
of countries in the Caribbean and around the Indian and Pacific
Oceans, and in Africa, / 8 
AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATION
I should report to the House that one consequence of my
visit to Mexico, Washington and Ottawa will be the widening of
Australian representation in the Caribbean and in South America.
Following the discussions which I had, I Dropose to take
steps to accredit the Australian High Commissioner in Canada to
the five Caribbean Commonwealth countries, Jamaica, Trinidad and
Tobago, Barbados, Guyana and the Bahamas, pending the establishment
of a separate High Commission in the Caribbean, the head of which
will then be accredited to all five countries. At the same time
I have under active review the Cuban request to establish a Trade
or Consular Office in Australia. I am also consulting Guatemala
and Panama with a view to accrediting non-resident Ambassadors
to these countries. I seek leave of the House to table the Communique issued
at the conclusion of my visit to Mexico and the Joint Communique
adopted in Ottawa by the Meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of
Governments. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 118
23 August 1973
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE WAGE FIXATION
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today the
Government was concerned about systems of wage
increases which tend to give least to those whose
needs are greatest and which tend to widen still
further the gap between high income groups and those
on lower and middle incomes.
The Government has asked Mr. Cameron, Mr. Bowen,
Senator Bishop and Senator Willesee to consult with
the the Australian Council of Salaried and
Professional Associations and the Council of Commonwealth
Public Service Organisations on the appropriate procedures
of pay fixation in the Australian Public Service.
Cabinet has decided not to file responses to the
present applications to vary determinations covering
postal grades and the second and third divisions of
the Public Service.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 123 25 August 1973
FRENCH NUCLEAR TEST
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, said today that the Government had reason to believe
that the French Government had exploded today another nuclear
device in the Pacific the fourth in the present series,
Mr Whitlam said that radioactive fallout from earlier
French tests in this year's series had now been detected in
Australia, indicating a clear breach of the International
Court's order to France to desist. Australia would continue
S its efforts to halt these tests by every appropriate means, 



I1~ L
f
4,~ AUSfXALIA LL
PRIME MONISTER
THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 28 AUGUST 1973 
. I AU TSAA Lc
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 119
28 August 1973
CABINET ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT HIS PRESS
CONFERENCE, CANBERRA, 28 AUGUST 1973
APPOINTMENTS The Executive Council this afternoon
approved the following appointments:
Mr. Alan Renouf Secretary of the Department
of Foreign Affairs
Mr. R. J. Hawke Member of the roerd o-the
Reserve Bank of Australia
Mr. A. C. Woods Acting Secretary of the
Department of Secondary Industry.
SECOND AIRPORT The Department of Urban and Regional Development
has recommended the Galston sub-region as the
site of the second airport for Sydney.
Cabinet has asked the Commonwealth-State
Committee on a Second Sydney Airport to
formulate a strategic plan for the Galston
sub-region which:
establishes a land use plan for the
integration of airport development with
existing and potential uses and presents
a means of implementing this plan;
identifies transportation requirements
generated by airport and other activities
and presents a satisfactory means of
accommodating these; examines opportunities for reducing the
extent and intensity of noise annoyance
arising from the airport and of mitigating
the effects of such noise.
The Comritt, 2 consists of representatives of
the Treasury and the Departments of Urban and Regional
Development, Civil Aviation, Works and Services and
Property, the N. S. W. Departments of Transport and Main
Roads and the State Planning Authority of N. S. W.
Mr. Jones will give you further details.
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATIC:: Cabinet has
approved a submission from the Treasurer and the Minister
for Overseas Trade and Secondary Industry for the reform and
enlargement of the A. I. D. C. The broad effect of our changes
will be to enable the A. I. D. C. to finance Australian
ownership of industry, to extend its operations to
manufacturing, mining and resource development, and to
remove the restrictions limiting its participation to
temporary minority holdings. Some details cf our
proposals have already been released by Dr. Cairns.
Further details will be available from his office.
FEDERAL CODE OF EVIDENCE On the recomjn : idation of the
Economic Committee, Cabinet has approved th, preparation
of legislation for a federal code of evidence to be applied
by federal courts and, if possible also, State courts
exercising federal jurisdiction.
CONSUMER STANDARDS
Committee, Cabinet
Interim Commission
staff of six. On the recommendation -f the Economic
has approved the establi.*-nnt of an
for Consumer Standards, 71.. orted by a
The functions of the Interim C., rdnission will be
to exercise principal reni.,. sibility for
co-ordination of Australian Government action
in the development of uniform standard; for
consumer products, including advisory and
policy functions in relation to Codex
Alimentarius and Commonwealth Food Standards,
but not including standards based on health
criteria on drugs and goods, that would
remain the responsibility of the Prpartment
of Health. ./ 3
/ 2 
( ii) to arrange for meetings of Commonwealth
and State officials to discuss consumer
matters, and to provide a secretariat for
appropriate meetings that may be arranged
of Commonwealth and State Ministers on
standards for consumer products and
related matters.
Cabinet approved the provision of $ 200,000 in
1973/ 74 for the Interim Commission.
It agreed that there should be consultation among
intei. sted Departments, particularly the Departments of the
Attorney-General, Health, Primary Industry and Science,
regarding the detailed administrative arrangements involved.
It noted that the Interim Commission, and
subsequently the Commission, will be responsible for
determining standards for consumer products which might be
used for prescribing minimum standards under the Consumer
Protection legislation, being prepared by the Attorney-General.
EXPORT BANK On the recommendation of the Economic Committee,
Cabinet has agreed to the establishment of an Export Bank.
The Minister for Overseas Trade and Secondary Industry and the
Treasurer will arrange details of the necessary legislative
and institutional changes. They will consider the most
appropriate means of providing Government guaranteed loan
funds for an Export Bank.
Cabinet instructed the Inter-departmental Committee
on Export Banking Facilities to reconvene, with the addition of
the Attorney-General's Department, to recommend to the
Treasurer and the Minister how best to achieve these objectives.
Ministers agreed to examine the charter of the
Export Payments Insurance Corporation with the possibility
of amending the charter to enable the Corporation to function
as a Government Export Bank to provide
export finance especially but not only
beyond 5 years for machinery and capital
equipment;
( ii) lines of credit especially to developing
countries and state-trading organisations.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA OVERSEAS DORROWINGS Cabinet authorised
legislation on the recommendation of the Economic Committee,
to provide for contractual guarantees by the Australian
Government of overseas borrowings in 1973/ 74 by the Papua
New Guinea Government in foreign currencies not exceeding
the equivalent of $ A24 million. Such guarantees would be
subject to the terms and conditions of the proposed loans
being satisfactory to the Treasurer and the Minister for
External Territories. POLLUTION OF THE SEA Cabinet has decided that Australia
should legislate to give effect to 171 amendments to the
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by oil.
The amendments, adopted on Australia's initiative, will prevent
the discharge of oil near the Great Barrier Eeef. Telegrams
have been sent to the Premiers advising them of our decision,
further details of % hich are available from my Press Office.
REVALUATION ASSISTArC. On the reco mcndation of the Fconomic
Committee, Cabinet ayreed that the Inter-dcepartmental Committee
set up on 10 April 1973 be asked to process applications for
adjustment assistance in accordance with the criteria then
adopted by the Cabinct. It agreed on certain cdfiniticns for
the handling of such applications, details which ire
available from my press office.
WORKEPS' COMPENSATION On the recommendation of the Economic
Committee, Cabinet has agreed that the income tax law be
amended to require companies or persons liable to pay periodical
workers' conpensation ( or accident pay) to deduct instalments
of income ta:: from the payments in the same way as cmployers
are obliged to deduct tax from salaries and wages paiit to their
employees. The amendment will apply to pa\ nents made during
or after the month following that in which the amending Bill
is assented to.
INCOME TAX ON COMPANIES Cabinet has agreed to an amendment
in the law on the status of companies for income tax purposes,
details of which are available from the Treasurer.
CONVENTION ON DUMPING OF WASTES AT SEA As announced by the
Minister for Transport, Cabinet has agreed that Australia should
immediately sign the International Convention on the Dumping
of Wastes at Sea.
NAVIGATION ACT Cabinet has decided on rn amendment to the
Navigation Act concerning off-shore vessels, details of which
are available from the Minister for Transport.
FEASIBILITY STUDIES Cabinet has authorised the establishment
of a fund to pay for feasibility studies in developing countries.
It will be known as the Consulting Services Feasibility Study
Fund. The studies would be undertaken by-Australian orofessicnal
engineers, architects, planners, surveyors, agricultural
consultants, and so on. Dr. Cairns' office will have dt. tails
of this proposal.
MISCELLANEOUS Cabinet has decided to repeal the High
Commissioner ( United Kingdom) Act, amend the Audit Act ana
legislate for an Institute of Legislative Drafting.
VISIT TO JAPAN I have accepted an invitation from the
Japanese Government to make an official visit to Japan from
26 to 31 October. I have issued separate press statements
about this visit, about Mr. Renouf's appointment and about
the motor industry.
/ 4 CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
QUESTION: Do you believe that your new policy on the automotive
industry will produce a cheaper car and a better car?
PRIME MINISTER: Both.
QU.' STION: What effect do you think the decision to allow the
J3.) anese to enter the market will have? Do you think we can
sui-port another car manufacturer or another two car
maniifacturers? œ P : KE : IINISTER: I would think that Japanese types of cars
l i cei: tainly be desirable because of their size, their
economy, their safety. There is reason to hope that the
Japane-se companies would be more flexible in terms of
location and Australian participation.
QUESTION: Will you table or release the Consultants report on
which tne second airport decision in Sydney was based?
PRIME MINISTER: When this one is received, I expect so. I
won't give an undertaking but I would expect we will release
it. QUESTION: Supplementary to a matter you mentioned a moment ago,
you said you had reason to hope that Japanese manufacturers
would be more amenable towards location and Australian equity.
Have they given some indication in this regard?
PRI1. E MINISTER: There have been discussions between the
Department of Secondary Industry and the Japanese companies in
the last eight weeks.
QUESTION: Have they indicated what level of Australian
participation or equity they would agree to?
PRIE MINISTER: I haven't been party to the discussions.
You had better get them from Dr Cairns.
QUESTION: Is there any desire to influence the Japanese
manufacturers to move into the growth centres like Albury-Wodonga?
PRIME MINISTER: That would be a very welcome initiative by
them. Borg-Warner, as you know, already operates in Aibury/
Wodonga. There is, therefore, a very considerable component
industry already in that location. I would imagine that any
further automotive industries in Albury/ Wodonga would be very
well situated indeed. Albury/ Wodonga is an excellent
distribution centre.
QUESTION: The Coombs Report said that the tax deductibility of
life assurance and superannuation premiums was both unfair and
also pretty pointless. We now find that the A. I. D. C. scheme
is to be fairly closely nailed into these tax deductibility
provisions. Does this mean that we will be locked into the
life assurance deductions for quite some time? PRIME MINISTER: You read the Policy Speech and you will see
that that was forecast.
QUESTION: Is the Government going to change the composition
of the Board of the D. C.?
PRIME MINISTER: It nasn't been considered. I don't believe
that the amendments that we are proposing provides for an
amendment to the Board, but you had better ask Dr Cairns or
Mr Crean for the details there.
QUESTION: Could you tell me whether t. e are any cihanges
planned for the provisions made for audi' the A. I. D. C.' s
accounts? PRIME MINISTER: I don't think this was considered but ask
them for the details. I don't remember tat.
QUESTION: In view of the confirmation by the Attor.. ey-General
of the existence of the Melbourne Minute Men or Secret Seventy
or Black Friday Movement or whatever, howe\ er you describe
the vigilante force which has set itself . p in Melbourne, can
you tell us whether this disturbes you at all; can you tell
us if you intend to do anything about it; and, in particular,
can you tell us if in view of ASIO's apparent participation
in the early stages of this group if you are quite hanpy that
ASIO can, if you like, be trusted to -cep t-em uror
surveillance and to report honestly to tin Gvernment on their
activities? PRIME MINISTER: I think ASIO has made improvements but
I am considering the general situation o' Australian
Government's intelligence services. As yj,. realise, it is not
the practice to go into any details on tLcese matters, and I
have had to tell you that beforehand, al. predecessors have
told you, so I don't have to repeat it.
QUESTION: Mr Prime Minister, since Ott-a a ave you had any
messages of goodwill from Mr Lee Kuan Ye:" c: Mr Heath and,
furthermore, would you regard your inter-hmnges with them at
Ottawa as tart and unfriendly or would you rather thinh, as
they have been described, or would you rzther think ti. . t they
were directed straight at Mr Heath on multi-nationals
particularly? PRIME MINISTER: I have got no more to say on this at all, and
it is quite false to give any impression that the Commonwealth
Conference was at all engaged for any length of time of such
bilateral matters.
QUESTION: You said that the existence of this private spy
force in Melbourne disturbes you
PRIME MINISTER: I won't say any more on it. I don't answer
questions on security matters 
-4-
QUESTION: But I don't want to ask you about that in particular,
Prime Minister, I want to ask you whether or not you saw any
parallel between that and the Secret Government which
Dr Jonn Burton says existed in that intelligence sort of system
under the last Labor Government?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to say any more about this.
QUESTION: In is policy speech on the Budget, Mr Crean said
that interest on home loans would become deductible from the
Ist July next year but he didn't give details. Can we presume
from that that the rate of deductibility and the scale of wages
that it applies to will be the same as that pledged by you
during the campaign?
PRIME MINISTER: There might be some adjustments because of
changes in average incomes since then but there will be a
graduated scale of deductions.
QUESTION: Sir, pollution from these nuclear tests. Can you
tell us which has been the worst, the Chinese or the French,
and, in fact, has there been any substantial evidence of
fall-out at all from either?
PRIME MINISTER: At this stage, there is evidence of fall-out
from the French tests and not from the Chinese tests. I haven't
looked into this for a few days, maybe a week, but at last
inquiry that was the position.
QUESTION: Anything to worry about?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe all fall-out is something to worry
about. QUESTION: Can you tell us why you are not prepared to discuss
ASIO with the representatives of the Australian media when
you will talk about it at length with a visiting Pom?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Forst didn't ask questions as to what we
would be doing in future or that sort of thing. I adhere to
what I believe is the proper policy of not discussing what is
to be done about security services.
QUESTION: I think this comes within the area that Mr Frost
raised. There is an obvious conflict of reporting between what
Mr Darbour says occurred at the Lodge on March 17 and your own
repudiation, a repudiation which Mr Barbour confirms. In the
light of the fact that Mr Barbour's reports must have considerable
effect on the career of public servants, have you taken any
steps to see that the reporting of ASIO is improved?
PRIME MINISTER: There was an earlier instance of an ASIO report
which was inaccurate concerning other public servants. This
was a specific instance and you know how I acted. QUESTION: Does this mean you will act in the same way in
this case?
PRIME MINISTER: If there are any specific instances there
was no involved in any of the reports which I saw on this
subject. QUESTIOI: I thought you were involved, Sir?
PRIKE !..' irTTRER: Yes, well that's been disposed of hasn't it?
QUESTI',:: . ay I ask why you do not regard this incident as
speci f:
PRI. lE M,!' I-STER: I will not pursue questions and answers on
tni. Thctr is still a Senate Committee enquiring into
these r., ice rs.
QUESTIC:;.: Sir, you refer to multi-nationals. Do you see any
connection between the steady decline in the Stock Exchanges
of Australia and the multi-nationals and their investors in
Australia? PRIME M: INISTER: I'm not an expert on the Stock Exchange movements
and I don't have a comment to offer on t. iat.
QUESTION: You were asked a question earlier on the Goiston
Gorge. PRIME MINISTER: No, the Galston sub-region.
QUESTIONER: Yes, well that's right. What you said was that you
were going to get a report on the Galston sub-region. Now,
Mr Edwards asked, and if he didn't, what I would like to ask
is will you release the feasibility study which says Sydney needs
a second airport, not the one w. hich is going to come about
after they have looked at Galston, but why we have to go out
of Mascot to Galston?
PRIME MINISTER: The only report which has
been about Mascot. As we all know, Mascot
to anybody within range of it, so there is
that. been made so far has
is not acceptable
no point in pursuing
QUESTION: Prime Minister, can I ask you what happens as far
as our post in Paris is concerned now that you are appointing
Mr Renouf as the Secretary of the Department. Do you plan to
replace Australia's ambassador to Paris and, if so, when?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not sure when, but it will be fairly soon.
QUESTION: The post is vacant at the moment though, isn't it? 
PRI. ME MINISTER: No, I think he hasn't left there yet. But
clearly there are approaches to be made to the French Government
about any new ambassador and those approaches have not yet
been made.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlam, could I just return to the question
on lascot. You said that it is not acceptable to anyone there.
PRIE MINISTER: Yes. I think it is obvious that no Australian
Government will increase the air movements at Mascot.
QUESTION: The size of the Government investment you are
prepared to write off at this stage because of the social
costs involved.
PRIE !-iINISTER: No, there is no suggestion to write off
the investment in Mascot, but it would not be acceptable to
increase the investment in Mascot in such a way as to make for
more aircraft movements there.
QUESTION: Wdsn't that what Mr Jones suggested, however, Sir?
PRIME ? INISTER: A report wanted a decision on that question
befor: th committee wanted a decision on that question,
about ilascot, before it went on to consider alternative sites.
The decision not. to have Mascot has been made, and we have
asked t. ve committee to consider the site which the Department
uf Urban and regional Development regards as the best.
QUESTION: 1r Whitlam, does that mean that the other sites
whic: h-, are intended to be considered by the Consultants earlier
this year won't now be considered?
PRIt2 1INISTER: They certainly won't be considered until the
repar: on the Galston sub-region is received. If that report
snous that Galston sub-region is satisfactory, then it is
quite like&gt;.' that the other sites will not be considered. There
are three g-. neral objections to other sites. There's the
double ! 4ascot or to install a ncw airport at Tara Point or at
Watta: rolla. Wo all know that the people in the area of those
three airports would not tolerate new airports or a larqcr
airport. Then in general, there are some nites suggested to
the north-west of Sydney. Any of those sites would preclude
the developrient of Sydney as proposed along that north-west
corriclar. Similarly, along the south-west corridor, and this
reall. leaves Galston or maybe Duffy's Forest. But Duffy's Forest
would be too small. If you had a second airport there, before
long you would have to have a third airport. Then there were
some other ones which are surely precluded by distance; like
Somersby or Wyong.
QUESTION: But there are people at Galston as well as Wattamolla,
bu they are Liberal voters? PRIME MINISTER: There are fewer people in the Galston area
than in any other area and Galston doesn't lend itself to the
development such as is proposed by both Australian Government
and State Government authorities in the north-west and the
south-west corridor.
QUESTION: The public are rather perplexed about tie issue of
the costs and benefits of foreign ownership of Australian
resources. The only public document that sets out the case
in any detail was by the Treasury last year which says that
foreign ownership wasn't such a bad thing. Now, in view of
the fact that the Government is going to spend really massive
amounts of money raising Australian control of Australian
resources, is it possible that we could'have a statement setting
out why foreign control is a bad thing?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the increasing proportion of foreign
control is a bad thing. I would think everybody in the Government
accepts that and most of the people in the Opposition too.
There is no doubt that Sir John McEwen and Mr Gorton and, as
well as the Labor Party, would agree that it is undesirable
to have the increase in foreign control that has taken place in
manufacturing industry every since the war particularly, of
course, in automobiles and petrol and chemicals and base
metal and, also which has taken place in the sixties in our
mineral resources.
QUESTION: Can you tell me from what date does Mr Hawke take
up his position on the Reserve Bank Board, whom does he replace,
and whether you can see any areas where conflict of interest
could arise or where, in reverse, he can be of benefit?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know the date. I would think that
there will be fewer conflicts of interest as far as Mr Hawke
is concerned than as far as any of the other members of the
Board. Mr Hawke, clearly, has economic qualifications superior
to those of pretty well any other non-official member of the
Board except perhaps Professor Bruce Williams.
QUESTION: Are you concerned about the rate of growth of the
Commonwealth Public Service?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I'm told it will be kept to 5 per cent.
This financial year it will be a bit tight but it will be hept
to 5 per cent, so I am advised. There will be some departments
where clearly there will be a drop as in the Defence departments
and some where there will be a smaller increase than 5 per cent
such as Taxation or Customs and Excise. The increases are
mainly in new departments. We are, however, pressing on with
the amalgamation of several departments. 
-7-
QUESTION: Have you any comment on Mr Cameron' s view that all
Se-cond Division jobs should be advertised outside the
Public Service?
PRIME MINISTER: It's an interesting thought. I don't preclude
the fact that positions in the Second Division should be open
to outsiders. There are arguments both ways.
QUESTION: You mentioned a series of Bills on off-shore
pol_ 1lution. Is this likely to strengthen your hand on the
Constitutional position in the off-shore resources legislation?
PRIME MINISTER: I would think so.
QUESTION: Will the new Organisation set up under the A. I. D. C.
umbrella place directors on the boards of companies in which
i~ t takes an interest, and will these directors be under the
control of the Australian Parliament or the Cabinet?
PRIME _ MINIFTMR: I think it would be better if you go to Mr Crean
or Dr Cairns for details like this. I don't think this was
discussed. There can be various conditions laid down for
A. I. D. C. participation on buying an existing enterprise or
setting up a new one. To have nominees on the board would seen
a very reasonable proposition, but I don't think this was
-spelt out inl the submission to us or in the decision.
QUESTION: Are you planning a reshuffle or a limited reshuffle
of tne Government.
PR~ IME MINISTER: I'm not sure when. I'll tell you when or if.
QUESTION: Has the Government received the Wool Marketing
Report from the Wool Corporation yet?
PRI. ME MINISTER: No. The Cabinet hasn't considered it.
QUESTION: Some of the new Bills that you have foreshadowedtnere
are some c uite inrportant ones seem-to be based quite
explicitly on the use of the foreign affairs power under our
Constitution to ratify a international agreement or convention.
Do you see any limits to that type of process or would you be
prepared to express a degree of confidence about how the High
Court might treat it under challenge?
PRIME 14INISTER: I would be confident that the Australian
Parliament's constitutional powers in respect'. to external
affairs enable this parliament to pass laws on many more subjects
than it has hitherto. very obviously, matters such as I have
mentioned this afternoon in the maritime field are such matters.
It's one way of overcoming the absurd situation where the
Australian Parliament can't pass laws about shipping in the
course of voyages between a port and another port in the same
State and where the State Parliament concerned can't pass laws
on that subject either except with the approval of the British
Government. Now, there are, increasingly, international
conventions dealing with all these matters, and international conventions can Only be drafted by Australian Government
representatives on behalf of Australia and can only be ratified
by Australian Government representatives on behalf of
Australia. Clearly this is a field where if Australia is to
ensure proper standards as regards navigation or pollution
or, in a related matter, off-shore resources, there -dill be
many more Conventions; there will be many more lawspassed
by the Australian Parliament.
QUESTION: Will you just give us some idea, at this stage,
wiiat you hope can be achieved at the Constitutional Convention
next week?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you ought to wait until next Monday
when I have been asked to address the Convention. I suppose
I can say now, that the matters which I would hope the
Convention would give consideration to next week, are those which
can be done promptly. There are some matters which wouldI
require a referendun. This Parliament can pass a bill for a
referendum and that bill can be put to the people at the next
general election. Secondly, there are many matters upon which
the State Parliaments which they can refer to this Parliament.
And thirdly, there is the very important question of amending
the Financial Agreement of 1927. The Government is committed to
securing a voice and a vote for local government representatives
from each State on the Loan Council. This is a matter which
the Hfeads of Government at next week's Convention couldl agree
to do straight away. I hope they do.
QUESTION: Do you see it very much as a working Convention?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I would wan*, something practical to come
out of the Convention. And there would be some matters which
I would be very happy to put to a referendum at the next general
election which must take place before the end of next June.
Secondly, I would be very happy for the State Parliaments,
particularly the big ones, New South Wales and Victoria, to
refer scme matters to the Australian Parliament. And thirdly,
I hope that all seven governments present at the Convention will
agree to amend the Financial Agreement to give a voice and a
vote to the local government representatives from each State
on the Loan Council. 



J AUSTRALIA( Press; Statement: No. 1-22.
28 August-1973
GOVERNMENT POLICY ON THE MOTOR INDUSTRY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. E. G. WHITLAM AND THE
MINISTER FOR SECONDARY INDUSTRY,
DR. J. F. CAIRNS
Cabinet has laid down new rules and objectives for
the Australian motor industry. The Government desires to
improve the efficiency with which the community's productive
resources are used and to recognise the interests of consumers.
The Tariff Board has been informed of the Government's
policy. Motor vehicle firms, including Nissan and Toyota,
are being invited to submit to the board statements of action
they propose to take, and of action they consider the
Government should take, to give effect to the policy.
The board has been asked to present its report by the end
of October 1973. Firms are urged to furnish their statements
to the board as promptly as possible.
The Government intends that the industry must operate
at the highest possible level of efficiency and economic
management and with high Australian content. The vehicles must
afford a high level of safety in construction and use and have
effective anti-pollution devices. The industry must be well
located for social, employment and environmental purposes.
There should be improved labour relations and production
techniques, and a substantial Australian participation,
including equity, in the industry.
The Government does not believe that its policy can be
implemented by conventional tariff action alone. The Government
believes that its policy will involve product rationalisation,
joint use of resources, prevention of model proliferation and
relatively greater manufacture of light cars in Australia.
It is envisaged that some regulation of imports may be
necessary. ./ 2 
As part of the Government's plan, the Minister
for Defence and Supply, Mr. Barnard, has been authorised to
obtain a report from the Government Aircraft Factory
on the possibility of its manufacturing a car in Australia.
Australia is now a regional centre for the
automotive industry, and the Government's policy recognises
that manufacturers may wish to co-ordinate their Australian
production with other manufacturing facilities in the Asian
and Pacific region. Manufacturers' import and export plans
would therefore be related to Australian production.
The Government hat agreed that the Japanese companies,
Toyota and Nissan, should be offered an opportunity to
manufacture in Australia. All companies in the industry, including
Nissan and Toyota, will be invited to submit to the Tariff Board
statements of the action they propose to take to give effect to
the policy objectives of the Government.
Since Nissan and Toyota are only now commencing
manufacture in Australia, the Minister for Secondary Industry
has been authorised to have discussions with them about
Government participation in their operations in Australia.
The Government expects the Tariff Board, in making
its recommendations, to indicate the cost to consumers and the
other effects, including those upon employment and environment,
of any action it recommends. The board will also be asked
to consider other measures, such as subsidies, taxation
concessions and Government investment, which together with
tariffs and " plan-type" recommendations, would best insure
the effective implementation of the Government's aims.
CANBERRA. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 121
28 August 1973
NEW SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS NEXT YEAR
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Whitlam, today announced the appointment of Mr. Alan
Renouf, at present Ambassador to France and to UNESCO, to
succeed Sir Keith Wailer as Secretary of the bepartment of
Foreign Affairs. Mr. Whitlam said Sir Keith would begin
pre-retirement leave on 2nd January, 1974. Mr. Renouf
will assume duty on 3 January 1974.
Mr Renouf, who is 54, entered the Department
years ago after active service in the A. I. F. as one of
the original diplomatic cadets when a previous Labor.
Government decided in 1943 to adopt open competition as
the means of recruiting most Australian diplomats.*
Mr. Renouf has served in eleven overseas posts
in Europe, North America, the United Nations, the
Middle East and Africa. Five of these postings had been as
H~ ead of Mission. Mr. Renouf had also served for three
years as a Legal Counsellor in the Secretariat of the
United Nations. Mr. Whitlam described Mr. RenoUf as an outstanding
officer of wide experience who would, he believed, fill the
Secretaryship of the Department of Foreign Affairs with
distinction. Mr. Renouf is also a qualified lawyer holding the
degree of Master of Laws with First Class Honours from the
University of Sydney. Hie has specialised in international
law, has worked frequently in the international economic
field and has had considerable conference experience.
Mr. Renouf is also fluent in Spanish and French.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



J,), AUSTALIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 120
28 August 1973
AUSTRALIA/ JAPAN MINISTERIAL MEETING
The Prime Minister has accepted an invitation from
the Japanese Government to make an official visit to Japan
from 26 to 31 October this year.
This will be only the third time that an Australian
Prime Minister has visited Japan. Previous visits were
made by Sir Robert Menzies in 1957 and Mr. Gorton in 1970.
Mr. Whitlam's visit will underline the importance which
the Australian Government attaches to Australia's relations
with Japan. He will be received by the Emperor and have
talks with the Japanese Prime MinisterMr. Tanaka, and the
Japanese Foreign Minister, Mr. Ohira.
Mr. Whitlam will lead the Australian delegation to
the second meeting of the Australia/ Japan Ministerial
Committee which will take place on 29-30 October.
The Minister for Overseas Trade and Secondary Industry,
Dr. Cairns, the Treasurer, Mr. Crean, the Minister for
Primary Industry, Senator Wriedt, and the Minister for Minerals
and Energy, Mr. Connor, will join the Prime Minister as members
of the Australian delegation to the meeting.
: I . Mr. Whitlam said this would be the most important
single delegation of ministers ever sent overseas by Australia.
Discussion at the meeting will concentrate on trade, economic
And resources questions of interest to both countries.
Mr. Whitlam will be accompanied by his wife and senior
officials.
,, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NO DATE
M/ 125 29 August 1973
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTS
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, said today that the Government had reason to believe
that the French Government had exploded today another nuclear
device in the Pacific the fifth in the Dresent series.
Mr Whitlam said that his previous remarks regarding
earlier French tests applied equally to this latest explosion. 



NO DATE
M/ 126 30 August 1973
PRIE MINISTER ', LC0T-17 NEW DELHI AGREE1TENT
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, today welcomed the news that agreement had been
O reached at New Delhi for the resolution of some of the issues
that have remained outstanding between India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh since the war in 1971.
Mr Whitlam said that the agreement to repatriate almost
all of the Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian detainees, and
to allow Bengalis in Pakistan to return to Bangladesh and some
Deonle in Bangladesh desirous of doing so, to go to Pakistan,
O would help to alleviate major humanitarian problems resulting
from the conflict of 1971.
It was understood that over a quarter of a million
neonle were involved in the nroposed exchanges.
The achievement of the Indian and Pakistani negotiators
at New Delhi was in accordance with the resolve of their
resnective Governments expressed in the Simla Agreement that
" the two countries put an end to the conflict and confrontation
that have hitherto marred their relations and work for the / 2 
-2-
promotion of a friendly and harmonious relationship and the
establishment of durable peace in the sub-continent".
Mr Whitlam noted that Bangladesh, which had been consulted,
had concurred in the agreement now achieved at New Delhi.
Australia, which enjoyed friendly relations with India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh, hoped that the way would now be clear
for normalisation of relations between all the countries concerned.
The Australian Government, Mr Whitlam said, would continue
to take a sympathetic interest in developments. 0 



1, AUSTRAI IA Press-Statement No. 125
1 September. 1973
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL ANTHEM QUEST
Mr. Kenneth Tribe, Acting Chairman of the
Australian National Anthem Quest Sub-Commnittee, announced today
that over 1300 entries had been received in the words and music
section of the Quest which closed yesterday.
Judging of en tries should be completed during the
latter half of September.
CANBERRA. 


PRESS\STATEMENT NO. 126
4 September 1973
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced today that the Philippines Secretary for Foreign Affairs, General Carlos P. Romulo, would visit Australia from 12 to 14 September as a guest of the Australian Government.
General Romulo has been prominent in public life for many years as an author, soldier, educator and diplomat. General Romulo visited Australia in 1942, acting as General MacArthur's aide-de-camp, and again in June 1972 for the 17th SEATO Ministerial Council Meeting. He has held many important positions including President of the United Nations General Assembly from 1949-50, President of the United Nations Security Council in 1957, Ambassador to the U. S. A. from 1952-53 and from 1955-62, and President of the University of the Philippines from 1962-68.
He has been twice Secretary for Foreign Affairs - from 1951-52 and since 1968 and was Secretary for Education from 1965-68. General Romulo has published many works and has been awarded a number of honorary degrees, decorations and awards, including the Pulitzer Prize in journalism.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.


Inflation is the major economic problem facing us today. It is robbing people by reducing the purchasing power of their savings. It is altering the distribution of income in an arbitrary and often vicious way. It is distorting resource allocation and encouraging a rush into supposedly inflation-proof real assets such as land or housing. It is anathema to all of us and rightly so.
Inflation must be fought on all fronts. There is no panacea; no simple solution achievable through one line of policy. But the fact that there is no simple solution to inflation does not mean that we can just throw up our hands in the face of it. On the contrary, we have to tackle it head on.
&nbsp;One obvious area of concern is the broad field of monetary policy. The money supply increased in 1972-73 by 26 per cent. Most of that increase is traceable to developments in calendar year 1972. Actions we have taken since the election have considerably slowed the rate at which money is being injected into the economy. But present prospects are for a further over-large increase in the money supply in 1973-74. Such an outcome would be entirely inappropriate if we are to stand any chance of reining in the rate of increase of prices. We are determined that it must not occur.
Two initiatives are therefore being taken which together will have the effect of producing a sharp cut in liquidity.
First, in the market for Government securities, the Reserve Bank will, with the concurrence of the Government, press its open market operations vigorously with the aim of significantly increasing sales of Government securities. This will both mop up funds in the hands of the private sector and reduce the liquidity of private sector holdings of financial assets. In the process, a sharp rise can be expected in interest yields on existing issues of Australian Government securities and, in due course, in rates to be offered on new issues. Substantial increases in other interest rates will follow as effects of the operations spread through other markets for funds.
Increasing interest rates is not something to be undertaken lightly. But curbing the increase in liquidity and the money supply is an essential pre-condition if inflation is to be countered at all. We do not seek higher interest rates for their own sake. They are needed in order to make the purchasing and holding of government securities more attractive, which they must be if they are to compete effectively with alternative forms of investment. If, as a consequence, the higher interest rates have the effect of curbing the speculative rush into land and property, that will be all to the good.
The effects of this measure will be chiefly felt within the domestic economy. We have, however, also paid close regard to the state of our external accounts. There is a particular reason for doing so in this context: our prospective continuing external surplus ( on both current and capital accounts) is itself a primary source of the strong growth of the money supply which is in prospect over the year ahead.
Measures were, of course, taken late in 1972 and in February 1973 to restrict capital inflow and reduce the external surplus. The tariff cut of last July will also have in due course a further significant effect in that direction. None the less, in 1973-74 reserves again seem likely to increase strongly from a level which still remains excessive.
After close and careful examination of the present situation and prospects in these regards it has been decided to appreciate the exchange value of the Australian dollar. The exchange rate change will establish a new formal parity of 28.3848 Australian dollars per fine ounce of gold. This represents an appreciation of 5 per cent from the former parity. On this basis the rate for the U. S. dollar will become $ A1=&nbsp; $US 1.4875 instead of the former $ US1.4167.
This further appreciation in the exchange rate will help to reduce the growth in reserves and thereby moderate the growth in the money supply emanating from that source. It will also help to keep down the prices of imports. Figures published by the Statistician on September indicated that, following the revaluation of Australian dollar last December, import prices fell by 5 per cent between the December quarter of 1972 and the June quarter of 1973. The appreciation will also serve to dampen somewhat the effects in domestic markets of high prices on world markets for exportable goods.
&nbsp;As on the occasion of the December 1972 revaluation, the Government stands ready to examine sympathetically the position of any industries which are seriously affected by, and find it particularly difficult to bear, the consequences of today's appreciation. It will take such action as may be necessary, in such cases, to ease the processes of adjustment to new conditions.
The International Monetary Fund has been notified of our decision on the exchange rate and we are anticipating its concurrence. The Governor of the Reserve Bank will be making a separate statement giving further details.
Canberra, A. C. T.&nbsp;9 September 1973.



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 1973
PRIME MINISTER: First I'll give you some of the decisions that
Cabinet ~ nade yesterday afternoon:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY: Cabinet decided to set up an
A. C. T. Schools Authority and approved the construction of a
96-bed nursing home in the A. C. T.
HUMAN RIGHTS: Cabinet authorised legislation to ratify the
International Convenant on Civil and Political Rights.
HEALTH: Cabinet approved a three-year program of planning and
research for health services. In the three years from 1973/ 74
to 1975/ 76, the Australian Government will make grants up to
$ 500,000 a year on a $ 2 for $ 1 basis with the States to develop
State health planning agencies; grants up to $ 300,000 a year
on a $ 1 for $ 1 basis to universities for independent research
and evaluation of health care systems; and grants up to $ 200,000
a year to universities-and other organisations for studies
directed by the National Hospitals and Health Services Commission.
In addition, the Australian Government will assist national,
State and regional health assemblies with expenditure up to
$ 25,000 a year.
Cabinet approved legislation to enable the Minister for
Social Security to direct medical and hospital benefit
organisations on the use of their reserves.
REHABILITATION: Cabinet agreed to the establishment of a
Regional Rehabilitation Centre in Townsville.
MEAT: As already announced by the Treasurer, Cabinet has
~ decided to withdraw export incentives for meat. In addition, in
order to recoup the cost of the Government's contribution to
the brucellosis and tuberculosis eradication campaign, Cabinet
has agreed that the proposed export charge on beef and veal be
increased from 1 cent a lb. to 1.6 cents a lb., with provision
for exemption or partial exemption from the charge to be made
by regulation in cases of hardship.
WHEAT: Cabinet considered a joint submission by the Minister
for Primary Industry and Minister for Overseas Trade on credit
sales for wheat. We agreed in principle to credit terms up to
12 months for developing countries. The difficulty in this year
is, as you know, that we could sell all our wheat for cash. This,
however, would disappoint, in fact it would break faith with a
great number of developing countries which have been accustomed
to receiving wheat on credit and some of them need wheat very
badly this year because of local conditions, and we didn't want
to leave them in the lurch just because they had to get credit,
as they always have whereas other countries, this year, were
prepared to buy for cash. It was agreed that the Government may
extend such terms in exceptional cases and would, in such cases, 
bear the additional cost to the wheat industry. Cabinet agreed
to establish a committee, representing the Departments of
Primary Industry, Overseas Trade, Foreign Affairs and the Treasury,
to recommend on the quantity and terms of payment for wheat to
be offered by the Australian Wheat Board to developing countries.
Then there are a few matters on foreign affairs. At my
last Press Conference I told you that I would be making an
official visit to Japan during the last week of October. Today
I would like to announce that my visit to China which I
foreshadowed earlier this year will take place from 31 October
to 3 November, i. e. directly following the visit to Japan.
This will be the first official visit to China by an Australian
Prime Minister although, of course, it will be my second visit,
the first being in the company of many of you, the second also
I hope, in the same company. We shall be accompanied by Mr Crean,
Dr Patterson and Mr Connor. I see the visit as providing a
valuable opportunity to exchange views with the Chinese leadership
not only on a wide range of international issues but also on the
development of our bilateral relationship since the Government
recognised the People's Republic last December. I expect with
the participation of the ministerial colleagues I have just
mentioned, we should be able to broaden the exchanges and focus
on specific areas of mutual interest. While we are generally happy
with the progress made in our relations with China so far, we
hope the visit will give fresh impetus for the development of a
wider and more balanced relationship with China in the future.
The Middle East. Recent developments in the Middle East
have focused international attention on world oil production
and the likelihood of adequate supplies continuing to be available
to importing countries through the next decade or longer. In
this context, I wish to announce that the Government is sending
Mr Ian Haig, a fluent Arabic linguist who was until recently
Australian Trade Commissioner in Beirut, on a special mission to
a number of countries in the Middle East area. Mr Haig will be
in the area from approximately the end of September until the
middle of November. During that time he will study aspects of
the oil industry in the countries he will be visiting together
with the relationship existing between Australia and those
countries and possible ways of broadening those relationships in
the future. In a separate press release which I issued today, I
announced our participation in the next meeting of the Ministerial
Conference for the Economic Development of South-East Asia which
is to take place in Tokyo on 12th and 13th October. Senator
Willesee will represent Australia at this conference. I refer
to this development here because I want to emphasise our strong
and continuing interest in and readiness to assist the efforts
of our nearest neighbours to promote economic growth and to
raise the living standards of their peoples. That Australia has
been invited to join in the work of the ministerial conference
highlights the interest and shows also, I believe, that our
neighbours recognise and appreicate it. 
-3-
I don't know whether you have already heard, but in
case you haven't, I could let you know that the total ban on
French mail has been lifted. I received a telegram from the
Amalgamated Postal Workers' Union in these terms:
" Federal Executive of Amalgamated Postal Workers'
Union of Australia unanimously resolved today
to lift communications bans on metropolitan France"
I have acknowledged that telegram.
QUESTION: Sir, how do you reconcile the Government's decision
to increase interest rates to a record level with Labor's long
established policy of low interest rates colloquially called
" cheap money" and economic policy often repeated and enunciated
by your Treasurer, and does the decision on interest rates mean
that the economic policy or policies of your Government are the
prerogative of a small coterie of ministers and not for the
whole of the Cabinet to decide?
PRIME MINISTER: You all know how much this goes against
Mr Crean ' s grain to have to increase interest rates. It is,
however, a course to which we have to resort because other forms
of controlling or rationing money are not within our hands.
When you mention a small coterie I suppose you are referring to
the fact that that revaluation was decided on Sunday by the
Treasurer, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Prime Minister, as
the revaluation of last December was decided by them. Now we
certainly accept responsibility for this. The interest rate
matter is not solely a matter for those three, and it is, of
course, very largely, mainly, a matter for the banking system.
Parliament can override the banks proposals in this regard.
QUESTION: Who made the decision on interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER: The decision on interest rates through the
banking system is, of course, made by the banking system. The
only matter that was discussed in this regard was that the
Reserve Bank advised strongly that it should go into the
business of selling bonds, and we concurred in that course.
Interest rates in public loans are decided by the Loan Council
on which, of course, the States have a say as well as the
Australian Government.
QUESTION: Is it not the case, however, that the Government put
their views to the Reserve Bank that the Government believed
that interest rates should be increased and not the other way
round as you seem to have just put it?
PRIME MINISTER: No. This matter was raised by the Reserve Bank
and the Treasury. I won't however say any more about how these
matters are determined. Of course we take responsibility for
revaluation. We also, as I announced, quite frankly state that
we concur in the policy that the Reserve Bank proposes to take as
regards the selling of bonds. But it was on a simultaneous,
urgent, insistent advice of the Treasury and the Reserve Bank. 
-4-
QUESTION: In point of fact you haven't told us that the banks
were going to increase bank interest rates. It wasn't in your
statement. PRIME MINISTER: No I'm going on speculation. You are quite
right. QUESTION: Can you tell us when?
PRIME MINISTER: What?
QUESTION: When bank interest rates are going to be increased?
PRIME MINISTER: This was not discussed but the banks always
announce that.
QUESTION: But you did say that the Reserve Bank had advised
you that this should happen that bank interest rates should
be increased?
PRIME MINISTER: This was about the selling of bonds. That is
the only thing in the statement about and it is from that
that all the speculation flows concerning interest rates.
QUESTION: But you, yourself, mentioned bank interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, in answer to Mr Power. He raised this
matteir, and it has been raised in the House.
QUESTION: Bank interest rates will increase?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect so.
QUESTION: Do you know when?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: You aJlso said that you didn't have
PRIME MINISTER: But quite frankly you know that if I did know
I wouldn't say don't you?
COMMENT: Well it strikes mec that it could be said actually.
You say there are no other ways of rationing within your hands.
Does this mean that there is going to he raitioning through the
bank system as well as through the interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, of course, any increase in interest rates
is done with tile objective of encouraging e. xpenditure in some
directions and discouraging it in others. of course interest
rates are a form of rationing.
QUESTION: I would like to say how interesting I have found this
conference. 1 think Parliament ought to be equally interested.
Are you going to stop this practice of explaining things to the
press before you explain it to the House and do you remember how
critical you used to be of other Prime Ministers when they were
doing exactly what you are doing now? 
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think any Prime Minister certainly not
in recent times has given Press Conferences as regularly and
freely as the present Prime Minister. If members of the
Parliament, of the House of Representatives on either side, were
to ask me questions such as I have been asked now I would answer
them as I have answered them now. I have foreborne to ask
members of the Government parties or to suggest to members of
the Government parties that they should ask questions like this.
This is a very obvious device to which anybody in my position
can resort. There has been a great deal of speculation in
the papers as to matters that come before Cabinet and as to
matters which have been determined by Cabinet. If any member of
parliament were to ask questions within the terms of the
Standing Orders on any of these subjects of course I would answer
the question. But I would venture to suggest that if I were to
make a statement on all these matters, as I have just now, and
before questions in the House, I would be constantly interrupted.
And then, of course, I would have members of the Liberal Party and
the Country Party wanting leave to comment on them. Question
Time is three quarters of an hour every morning. Never less than
three quarters of an hour, and any member of parliament can ask
any of these questions and he will get an answer.
QUESTION: In a recent television interview you told a British
television interviewer that you admired most, of the world leaders,
Willy Brandt.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Would you now follow Brandt's example in expressing
your concern either publicly or to the Soviet authorities of
the Soviet Government's treatment of their intellectuals in
particular Dr Sharkarov and Alexander Solzenhitzen?
PRIME MINISTER: I wasn't proposing and, despite your invitation,
I don't think it is likely that I will protest to the Soviet
Union about these matters but nevertheless I can say here what
I think must be in the minds of you all. It is one of the constant
disappointments in the Soviet system that like successive
Russian governments for the last couple of hundred years, they so
penalise their intellectuals. There is a premium put on
conformity and it is one of the ugly features of Soviet life.
I would have hoped that it was diminishing. I regret to say that
there have been so many recent incidents where this penalising
has come to public knowledge.
QUESTION: Do you intend to hold a judicial inquiry into the
security services of Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr MacCallum was going to ask me that question.
COMMENT: No, it's not true, I have another one on the security
services of Australia. 
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is very likely that I shall ask a
judge to hold an inquiry into our security services. When I do,
I will announce the terms and announce the name of the judge.
One of the reasons for doing so, of course, will be so that
interested persons or organisations can let him have their views.
It would not, however, be an inquiry which, because of the nature
of the matter, be held in public. Nor would I believe it is
a matter upon which the report would be published.
QUESTION: The judge'. s name has been mentioned though Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no doubt. I saw one judge mentioned.
I have never mentioned it to him, nor has he volunteered.
QUESTION: Why is it necessary to hold an inquiry into Australia's
security service?
PRIME MINISTER: No comment.
QUESTION: Can I ask you about the security services in New
Guinea. Mr Somare, the Chief Minister of Papua New Guinea,
said yesterday that he felt Papua New Guinea could handle its
own security and intelligence services, and he went out of his
way to link the two together several times at his press club
lunch security and intelligence. Can I ask you what is the
status of the Australian intelligence service in New Guinea;
is it linked to ASIO; is Mr Somare's Government aware of
everything that it is doing; and will the Australian Government
in view of the fairly broad hint that Mr Somare gave yesterday,
withdraw its own security and intelligence services, particularly
its intelligence services, when self-government comes on
1 December. And can I also explain that I am informally dressed
at your invitation because of the lights of the foreign television
crews. PRIME MINISTER: We are gradually deteriorating at this conference.
The first question referred to a British television interviewer.
The next reference was by one of you who, at an earlier conference,
had referred to him as a Pommy journalist, and now I have a
reference to a foreign television station. I would like the
loyal viewers of this session to realise that you are referring
to the BBC. I can say no more I will say no more about this
matter. I would say to the BBC itself, I would say to
Mr David Frost himself what I will say to you. On this matter
I can and will say no more that any activities of this nature
which Australia carries on in Papua New Guinea are carried on with
the knowledge and approbation of the Government of Papua New Guinea.
Mr Somare and I did not discuss this matter. He stayed with me
last night. He had dinner at the Lodge and stayed the night.
QUESTION: Since we last met the Senate has rejected one of
your bills of substance the Electoral Bill. Do you intend to
now seek a double dissolution? 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't even answer that question in the
House of Representatives at this stage.
QUESTION: Do you regard your announcement that the Government
intends to site its second international airport at Gaiston as
irreversible? PRIME MINISTER: No. I think it is a very strong probability.
I don't know how much more you want me to say on this subject at
this stage. The irreversible political fact is that no Australian
Government will increase the operation at Mascot. The former
Government realised that, the present Government realises this.
The people within the area of Mascot or Towra Point or
Wattamolla will not tolerate an increase in aircraft movements
in that area. Everybody knows it. Now it is completely unreal
to suggest that what would be the cheapest proposal, that is
double the facilities at Mascot can ever come into effect. In
those circumstances, as I told you a fortnight ago at this press
conference, the closest feasible site is at Gaiston and it has
the great advantage that fewer people would be affected who are
already there and fewer people in any proposed development of
the area would be affected than at any other site. There are
two other features that should be acknowledged. Sydney does need
better airport facilities than it has at the moment. Secondly,
most of the people who use air facilities live on the north side
of the harbour. In fact, Galston would suit them more than it
would suit most people who use air traffic.
QUESTION: Do you expect the economic measures you announced on
Sunday to lead to some unemployment if they are to be successful
against inflation? If so, what level of unemployment would you
allow before reversing it?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't expect that there will be any
unemployment from the measurus that we announced on Sunday night.
The adjustment measures which we devised after the revaluation
before Christmas are available to meet any consequences of the
revaluation which we announced on Sunday.
QUESTION: I was thinking more of the interest rates. Will they
lead to a cutback on demand?
PRIME MINISTER: They will 1 ad to sonic cutback on demand, but
this will be healthy beca-s tlore was ani extraordinary increase
in the money suppl*, y lin Lic fiiiancia1 yt~ ar an increase of
26 per cent in the amount of money during 1972/ 73. most of that
increase, of course, taking placce while Mr Snedden was Treasurer
and before Mir Crean became TreasLurer. TLhis was obviously an
increase which could not be a', lowed to co) ntinue you couldn't
continue increasing the supply of money at that rate. 
-8-
QUESTION: Have you any comment at all upon the Australian High
Court's decision on the Rhodesian Centre, and is this one
instance where you are sorry you turned thumbs down on the
Privy Council affair?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I don't believe that appeals should be taken
from Australian judges to British judges. The High Court's
decision points out that, as the law stands at the moment, the
Postmaster-General was not entitled to take the steps he took in
respect to the Rhodesian Information Service. We considered this
this morning in one of the Cabinet committees and I expect that
there will be a submission by the Postmaster-General as to
possible amendments of the law. It is important in our view
that we should carry out Australia's international obligations.
QUESTION: The advice from the Reserve Bank and the Treasury
on controlling the money supply did it contain any other advice?
PRIME MINISTER: I can't go into matters such as this. I am sure
you will understand.
QUESTION: On the Rhodesia question. Have you decided not to
introduce legislation using the external affairs power to back
up the sanctions against Rhodesia, and do you intend simply to
work on the postal power.
PRIME MINISTER: I would think that we can also use the external
affairs power. That would be the justification for amending the
Posts and Telegraphs legislation. I wouldn't like to have any
restriction on mails or telecommunications except in the very
special circumstances which international organisations have
applied to the situation in Rhodesia and which they may well, in
the coming years, apply to other countries in Southern Africa.
As I read the judgement I have had to read it pretty quickly
I would believe that the external affairs power would justify
legislation. Of course, as you suggest, it would be justified
under the Posts and Telegraphs legislation anyhow, but we would
be doing it not as a special bill just dealing with Rhodesia
but just as an aspect to amendments to the Posts and Telegraphs
legislation which are always taking place. We may the
submission is not there yet of course make this amendment in
the course of other amendments to the main Posts and Telegraphs
Act. QUESTION: On the question of interest rates again. In February
the Government required borrowers from overseas to deposit
per cent in the Reserve Bank without interest. Since then,
interest rates have shifted up and they will now presumably
shoot up rather sharply. If Australia becomes again attractive
to overseas lenders, would you be prepared in principle to vary
this deposit which is now 25 per cent. 
-9-
PRIME MINISTER: There is no proposal before us, and I am not
proposing to initiate any proposal to vary the 25 per cent.
Australia is very attractive to lenders and traders. We have
got to face the fact that we are still having a very great inflow
of overseas funds, and it is the duty of all countries to try
to see that their trade remains in balance this way. A country
is irresponsible if it is always trading at a deficit or always
trading at a surplus. One ought to try, particularly if you
are a big trading country as we are, to have a balance.
QUESTION: Can you tell us formally why the decision has been
taken to control health fund reserves. Has the Government had
advice from the Attorney-General's Department that it now lacks
any power to control reserves?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't got any papers here with me on this.
You ought to ask Mr Bill Hayden any further details on this.
QUESTION: At the last Ministerial meeting between Japan and
Australia I think the Japanese were keen for Australia to enter
a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation. I think, in the meantime,
some months ago you initiated an inquiry into this. Can you
say what your approach would be on this question at your talks
in Tokyo?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm myself very much attracted to such a treaty.
The traditional name for it is a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce
and Navigation. I am not wedded to any particular form of words
in its title. I do believe, however, that it would be
appropriate for Japan and Australia in a formal context to
acknowledge the very great interdependence they have on each
other. Japan should be certain that she will always have a
secure access to Australia's resources. She is deficient in
those resources. Australia has by comparable standards a
plenitude of such resources. We must never get back to the
situation that was produced about 1940 when Japan was denied
access to markets and resources. It is important that Japan
should always be sure that she gets such resources. And this would
apply not only to mineral resources but also to primary resoures.
One only has to see the distress caused in Japan by America's
sudden cutting off of the soya bean. By the same token, Australia
should be assured that as Japan's prosperity continues she may
well be the most prosperous country in the world per head of
population in the next couple of decades that our prosperity
rises with hers. There are very few countries in the world apart
from adjacent countries, whose prosperity is so interdependent
as that of Australia and Japan. We ought to acknowledge that
position much more frankly and formally than we have. I believe
a treaty would be an appropriate way to do it. 
QUESTION: In view of the cheapening of Australian shares on
overseas markets, is there any prospect of the Government using
its considerable reserves to buy back portions of selected
industries or key industries which at the moment are relatively
cheap on overseas markets?
PRIME MINISTER: This has been formally discussed among people
whom I meet. There is no formal paper being discussed on it at
the moment. I don't in any way disparage the idea.
QUESTION: Do you have any information on the progress of the
current series of French tests in the Pacific. Do you know, for
instance, if they are within one or two tests of finishing?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no more information on this.
QUESTION: I am not sure that I understood your answer to
Mr Barron, but it might have been my fault. I think that when
you reduced tariff rates you said in your statement that those
who lost their jobs because of the Government's action would
receive payment from the Government at the rate of their average
weekly earnings over the previous six months. Do you have in
mind a similar scheme for people who lose their jobs because
of the new interest rate policy and, if not, don't you think
there is a rather large anomaly involved?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no further reduction in tariff
rates. Accordingly, the measure which was taken following the
reduction in tariffs by 25 per cent across the board doesn't
arise. The adjustment assistance which was made available
after the 7 per cent revaluation last December is available
following last Sunday's 5 per cent revaluation.
QUESTION: If I could try to clarify my question. What is the
difference between a man who loses his job because the Government
cuts tariffs and a man who loses his job because the Government
and/ or its bank raises interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe people will lose their jobs
in the circumstances that you mention. 


11 September 1973
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that&nbsp;his foreshadowed visit to China this year would take place from&nbsp;31 October to 3 November.
The visit will be the first official visit to China&nbsp;by an Australian Prime Minister, but it will be Mr Whitlam's&nbsp;second visit. He first visited China in July 1971 when Leader &nbsp;of the Opposition.
Mr Whitlam said that his visit would urovide a valuable&nbsp;opportunity to exchange views with the Chinese leadership on a&nbsp;wide range of international i sues as well as bilateral questions.&nbsp;Mr Whitlam commented that the visit would be particularly useful&nbsp;in reviewing the development of Australia's relations with China&nbsp;since the Government recognised the People's Republic in&nbsp;December 1972.
Mr Whitlam will be accompanied by the Treasurer&nbsp;( Mr Crean), the Minister for Northern Development ( Dr Patterson)&nbsp;and the Minister for Minerals and Energy ( Mr Connor) who will&nbsp;hold discussions with their Chinese counterparts.
Mr Whitlam said that the participation of these Ministers&nbsp;would both broaden the exchanges and enable the participants to&nbsp;focus in depth on specific areas of mutual interest. He commented&nbsp;that he was pleased with the urogress made in Australia's relations&nbsp;with China to date, particularly in view of the long period of&nbsp;isolation between the two countries. He said he hoped his visit&nbsp;would make a significant contribution towards the development of&nbsp;a broader and more balanced relationship with China.
Mr Whitlam will be accompanied by Mrs Whitlam and a&nbsp;number of senior officials.



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 127
11 September 1973
MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE FOR THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF SOUTH-EAST
ASIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced in Canberra
today that Australia will participate in the next meeting of the
Ministerial Conference for the Economic Development of South-East
Asia. The meeting will be held in Tokyo on 12-13 October. It was
proposed that the Special Minister of State would represent
Australia at the Ministerial Conference after his attendance at
the United Nations General Assembly.
The Prime Minister said that Australia welcomed the
opportunity to participate in the work of the Ministerial Conference
which aimed at assisting in the development of the countries of
South-East Asia. Countries attending the Conference will be:
Indonesia, Japan, Khmner Republic, Laos, Malaysia, Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, and the Republic of Vietnam.
Meetings of the Ministerial Conference have been held
annually and have presented an opportunity for participants to
discuss their developmental efforts and possible intra-regional
co-operation. The Ministerial Conference has been the sponsor
of a number of regional projects and studies related to the
solution of regional problems. Among the projects and studies
in hand at the present time are:
The South-East Asian Fisheries Development Centre,
The South-East Asian Promotion Centre for Trade,
Investment and Tourism,
The Regional Project on Transport and Communications,
A project on Population and Family Planning,
A project on Public H~ ealth and Pesticide Control,
The South-East Asian Medical and Health Organisation,
A Study Group on Asian Administration,
The South-East Asian College of Engineering,
A Study of Development Assistance for South-East Asia. 
-2-
The Prime Minister said that these projects indicated
the wide range of interests in economic and development matters
dealt with by the Ministerial Conference. He believed that Australia
could make a useful contribution to the Conference and noted the
importance which the Australian Government attached to co-operation
in the region to foster more rapid economic development to improve
the conditions of life of the people of the region.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NQ DATE
M/ 129 11 September 1973
UNITED NATIONS GENT7RAL ASSEMBLY
T'IENTY-EIGHTH SESSION: AUSTRALIAN DELEGAT1ION
0 The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, today confirmed that the Special Minister of State
and Minister Assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator
Willesee, would lead the Australian delegation to the United
Nations General Assembly, which begins in New York on Tuesday
18 September. While in New York from 26 September to 5 October,
S Senator Willesee will address the Assembly during the General
Debate on 3 October 1973. He will call on the Secretary-General,
Dr Waldheim, and meet other Ministers and delegation leaders for
discussions on matters of mutual interest concerning the United
Nations and other aspects of foreign policy.
Mr Whitlam said that the work of the General Assembly
is conducted in Plenary Session and in seven main committees,
in all of which Australia is involved.
Australia is currently a member of the Security Council
which often meets during the General Assembly and it will be 
-2-
Australia's turn to be President of the Council for the month of
October 1973. The General Assembly will have before it over 100 items
including a number of matters of special interest such as the
organisation of a Law of the Sea Conference next year, Korea, and
the urgent need for action to end nuclear testing.
The 25th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights will be celebrated during the Assembly on 10 December
and the Assembly will consider a wide range of issues relating to
human rights, decolonisation and economic development.
As in the past, two members of Parliament have been
included in the delegation. This year the Hon. R. V. Garland
( Liberal, Curtin and Dr R. E. Klugman ( Labor, Prospect,
will attend.
Mr Whitlam said that as was customary two Papua New
Guinean advisers would join the delegation later in the Session
to assist with agenda items of interest to Papua New Guinea,
The two advisers will be members of the House of Assembly and
will be assisted by Papua New Guinean officials.
The Australian delegation is as follows:
Representatives Senator The Honourable Don Willesee,
Snecial Minister of State and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Leader of the Delegation. 3 
-3-
H. E. Sir Laurence McIntyre, C. B. E.,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary,
Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
H. E. Mr J. Petherbridge,
Ambassador,
Australian Embassy, Stockholm.
Mr A. D. Campbell,
Minister, Australian Mission to the
United Nations, New York.
Mr J. R. Kelso,
Assistant Secretary,
United Nations International
Department of Foreign Affairs. Agencies Branch,
Parliamentary Advisers
The Honourable RV. Garland, M. P,
Dr R. E. Kiugman, M. P.
Alternate Representatives
Mr L. L. E. Joseph,
Counsellor, Permanent Mission to the United
Mr H. C. Mott,
Counsellor, Permanent Mission to the United
Mr J. Bailey,
Legal and Treaties Branch,
Department of Foreign Affairs.
Mr M. Curtin,
First Secretary,
Permanent Mission
Mr R. Wyndham,
First Secretary,
Permanent Mission Nations. Nations.
to the United Nations.
to the United Nations.
Advisers
Mr J. Campbell,
First Secretary,
Permanent Mission tothe United Nations.
Miss I. Svenne,
First Secretary,
Australian Embassy, Belgrade. 
-4-
Mr J. P. McCarthy,
First Secretary,
Australiam Embassy, Washington.
Mr J. A. Tilemann,
Private Secretary to the Special Minister of State and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Mr G. Urwin,
Second Secretary,
Australian High Commission, Ottawa.
Mr H. Bamsey,
Third Secretary,
Australian High Commission, London.
Dr B. Martin,
Third Secretary,
Australian Consulate-General, San Francisco.
Mr P. Reid,
Third Secretary,
Permanent Mission to the United Nations.
Mr R. Harris,
Press Officer,
Director, A. I. S.,
Australian Consulate-General, New York. 



CHA) 3f( A-IAL
PIM E~ MI~ HNOS~ IrtlV
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 128
12 September 1973
ROYAL COMMISSION ON PETROLEUM
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today that
the Premier of New South Wales, the Honourable Sir Robert Askin,
had agreed to a request to make available Mr. Justice
W. H. Collins, of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, as sole
Royal Commissioner to conduct this inquiry. The Prime Minister
expressed the Australian Government's appreciation for the
co-operation and generosity of the Premier of New South Wales
and the Chief Justice for agreeing to make available the services
of a further judge to assist his Government in an important
national task.
The Prime Minister and the Minister for Minerals and
Energy, Mr. Rex Connor, announced on 20 July that Cabinet had
agreed to appoint a Royal Commission to inquire into all aspects
of refining, marketing and pricing in Australia of all types of'
petroleum and petroleum products.
Mr. Whitlam said that the following Terms of Reference
had been approved for the inquiry:
To make inquiry into, and report upon, the following matters,
so far as they are relevant to laws that have been, or could
be , made by the Parliament, namely
All aspects of the production by refining, and the
marketing and pricing, in Australia of all types of
petroleum, diesel and other fuels for internal
combustion and jet engines, derived from any form
of liquid or gaseous hydrocarbons, whether such
hydrocarbons are produced in Australia or elsewhere,
and all types of residual furnace and heating fuels
and other by-products likewise derived. 



No DATE
M/ 131 13 September 1973
AUSTRALIA PROPOSES CITANG", S TO SOUTH PACIFTC COMTIIllON
Australia has proposed changes in the functions of the
0 South Pacific Commission, aimed at revitalizing the organisation.
These were outlined in an address to the South Pacific
Conference in Guam yesterday by Australia's Special Minister of
State, Senator Willesee, who is leader of the Australian
delegation to the conference.
Senator Willesee proposed that from 1975 there should
be a de facto merger of the South Pacific Commission and the
Conference sessions.
At present, membership of the Commission comprises
Australia, New Zealand, France, the United Kingdom, the United
States, Fiji, Nauru and Western Samoa. The Conference sessions
are attended by all the territories and independent island States,
as well as the metropolitan Dowers, but the latter do not vote.
Senator Willesee said that since 1947, when the
Canberra Agreement had led to the formation of the South Pacific / 2 
-2-
Commission, the Pacific " has been washed by the tides of change."
" In 1947 no island entity in this region was a State,"
he said. " None could be a signatory to the Canberra Agreement.
Today three are full members of the Commission Western Smaoa,
Nauru and Fiji and one or two more such as Panua New Guinea
could, if they so desire, be shortly."
Senator Willesee continued: " Today we face the fact
that we are meeting here under the terms of an Agreement which
has been of considerable value but which is increasingly
anachronistic." He said that the 1947 Agreement, seen retrospectively,
was and remained a oaternalistic document. It saw the Pacific
world was divided between controlling metropolitan powers and
their subject colonies, and had not even foreshadowed the
possibility of any of those colonies becoming independent and
hence members of the Commission.
The Australian Government believed that the time had
come to bring the nrovisions of the Canberra Ag-reement or if
that should prove imnossible its practices, up to date.
It was ag-ainst this background that Australia had
proposed changes in the Commission's functions. 



J) A USTR A 1. A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 129
13 September 1973
RECENT EVENTS IN CHILE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today that
the news of the violent overthrow of the constitutionally
elected Government of Chile, and the tragic death of President
Allende, would come as a profound shock to the Australian
people. Mr. Whitlam said that, as a democrat and a socialist,
he had been greatly saddened that men who had sworn to uphold
the constitution of their country had betrayed a long and noble
Chilean democratic tradition of which Salvador Allende had been
the authentic representative.
Mr. Whitlam said that he had instructed the Department
of Foreign Affairs to report to him on the reaction in the
countries of the area to the events of the last few days. In
the light of those reports the Government would consider its
future relations with Chile.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MlINISTER, MR, E. G. WHITLAM,. O. C.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE MASTER BUILDERS' ASSOCIATION CENTENARY
PARADE OF HOMES AND PRESENTATION OF THE " PEARCE RESERVE" TO
THE MUNICIPALITY OF BLACKIOWN, AT KINGS LANGLEY, NEAR SEVEN
HILLS,-FRIDAY 14 SEPTEMBER 1973-
No ONE SEEING THIS EXHIBITION CAN BE OTHER THAN
IMPRESSED AND ENCOURAGED BY THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
BUILDING INDUSTRY, No ONE CAN DOUBT THE INDUSTRY'S ABILITY TO
PROVIDE HOUSING OF HIGH QUALITY AND IMAGINATIVE DESIGN. IT
WOULD-BE A PITY, HOWEVER, IF THIS FINE DISPLAY OF HOMES WERE
USED MERELY AS A PROMOTIONAL EXERCISE, IT SHOULD ALSO SERVE TO
REMIND US OF A RESPONSIBILITY WE ALL SHARE -GOVERNMENTS1
BUILDERS, DEVELOPERS, AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES -TO ENSURE THAT
THE HOUSING NEEDS OF OUR PEOPLE ARE FULLY AND PROMPTLY MET.
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE BEEN WAITING Al" LONG TIME
FOR A FAIR DEAL IN HOUSING, I HOPE YOU WILL FORGIVE ME IF I
RECALL SOME WORDS I USED 20 YEARS AGOp IN MY FIRST SPEECH IN
THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT. I SAID THEN:
NO~ ONE THINKS THAT 20 YEARS AGO THE PEOPLE OF
AUSTRALIA WERE ADEQUATELY HOUSED; AND NOBODY
THINKS THAT THEY ARE ADEQUATELY HOUSED NOW. / 2 
-2-
TWENTY YEARS LATER, THOSE WORDS ARE STILL TRUE, IT IS SHAMEFUL
THAT IN 1973, THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA ARE STILL NOT ADEQUATELY
HOUSED, IT IS SHAMEFUL THAT IN A NATION WITH ABUNDANT SPACE,
CONSIDERABLE WEALTH, A MODEST POPULATION, AND A GENERAL
COMMITMENT TO THE IDEALS OF SOCIAL WELFARE, THOUSANDS OF
AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES ARE BADLY HOUSED AND ARE UNABLE TO AFFORD
THIS FUNDAMENTAL AMENITY OF A DECENT LIFE, MY GOVERNMENT IS
DETERMINED TO PUT THIS RIGHT, WE ARE DETERMINED TO ENSURE, WITH
THE HELP OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN
FAMILY CAN SECURE ACCOMMODATION OF ITS OWN CHOOSING, APPROPRIATE
TO ITS OWN NEEDS,
THE BUDGET BROUGHT DOWN BY MY COLLEAGUE, THE TREASURER,
LAST MONTH WAS ONE OF THE PRIMARY INSTRUMENTS IN THE GOVERNMENT'S
DRIVE FOR BETTER HOUSING, WE TOOK ACTION ON SEVERAL FRONTS,
OUR PRIORITIES CAN BEST BE SUMMED UP BY COMPARING OUR FIRST
BUDGET WITH THAT OF LAST YEAR, BY FAR THE BIGGEST INCREASE
324 PER CENT WAS IN THE CATEGORY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
AMENITIES, ,/ 3 
-3-
WE PROVIDED $ 136 MILLION FOR OUR INITIATIVES IN THE
CITIES, INCLUDING $ 33 MILLION FOR EXPENDITURE ON NEW CITIES
SUCH AS ALBURY-WODONGA. WE HAVE SET ASIDE $ 30 MILLION THIS
FINANCIAL YEAR TO HELP THE STATES ACQUIRE LAND FOR URBAN
DEVELOPMENT. THIS SHOULD BE SEEN AS MERELY THE BEGINNING OF
A CONTINUING INVOLVEMENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN LAND
ACQUISITION AND MANAGEMENT FOR THE BENEFIT AND WELFARE OF THE
WHOLE COMMUNITY. AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE IN JUNE WE AGREED
TO ADVANCE $ 219 MILLION TO THE STATES FOR WELFARE HOUSING
PURPOSES. THIS IS 26 PER CENT MORE THAN IN 1972-73,. WE
PROVIDED $ 102 MILLION IN THE BUDGET FOR HOUSING LOANS UNDER THE
DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES SCHEME THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. FINALLY, AS
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE INTRODUCED A GRADUATED FORM OF TAX DEDUCTIONS
OF INTEREST RATES FOR HOME BUYERS.
THE KEY TO ALL OUR EFFORTS FOR DECENT HOUSING IS AN
ATTACK ON THE HIGH PRICE OF LAND. IT IS INTOLERABLE THAT YOUNG
HOME BUYERS IN THIS CONTINENT SHOULD OFTEN PAY MORE FOR AN EMPTY
BLOCK THAN THEY DO FOR A HOUSE. WE ARE DETERMINED TO SEE THAT MORE
LAND IS MADE AVAILABLE FOR HOUSING AT REASONABLE PRICES, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS NEGOTIATING WITH THE STATES TO ESTABLISH
LAND COMMISSIONS. THEIR PURPOSE WILL BE TO INCREASE THE SUPPLY
OF LAND AVAILABLE FOR HOUSING AND TO INCREASE THE MARKET
COMPETITION IN THE SUBDIVISION AND SALE OF HOUSING LAND. IN THE
SAME WAY, OUR NEW CITY PROJECTS, UNDERTAKEN WITH THE SUPPORT OF
THE STATES, WILL HELP ATTRACT POPULATION GROWTH AND HOUSING
DEMAND AWAY FROM THE METROPOLITAN AREAS AND INCREASE THE SUPPLY
OF LAND FOR HOUSING. I I/ U1 
-4-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ENCOURAGING THE STATES
TO ADOPT LEGISLATION FOR LAND PRICE STABILISATION, FROM READING
THE NEWSPAPERS ONE COULD BE FORGIVEN FOR BELIEVING THAT THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ABOUT TO FREEZE LAND PRICES ALL OVER
AUSTRALIA, WE OUGHT TO BE QUITE CLEAR THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS NO POWER TO FREEZE LAND PRICES, OR EVEN TO
STABILISE THEM, THE STATES HAVE THE POWER TO DO BOTH,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS RECENTLY INTRODUCED A PRICE CONTROL ON HOME
SITES, UNDER THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SCHEME, THE FUTURE SELLING
PRICE OF HOUSING SITES IS RESTRICTED TO THEIR PRESENT MARKET
VALUE PLUS AN INFLATION FACTOR OF 7 PER CENT PER ANNUM, IN THIS
WAY, THE INCENTIVE FOR SPECULATIVE DEALING IN HOUSE SITES IS
REMOVED, NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIA HAVE ALSO ANNOUNCED THEIR
INTENTION OF INTRODUCING LAND PRICE STABILISATION LEGISLATION,
WE WANT ALL STATES TO CO-OPERATE IN DEALING WITH THIS PROBLEM,
WE SHOULD NOT DELUDE OURSELVES THAT LAND PRICE INFLATION
IS CAUSED ONLY BY THE SPECULATOR, LOOKING FOR SIMPLE SCAPEGOATS
LIKE SPECULATORS WILL NOT, IN THE LONG RUN, SOLVE OUR PROBLEMS,
THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT EXCESSIVE DEMAND THROUGH LAND SPECULATION
CAUSES SOME_ OF THE LAND PRICE SPIRAL, LAND PRICE INFLATION CAN
ALSO BE CAUSED BY A REAL SHORTAGE OF HOUSING LAND, AGAIN, I
SUGGEST, THE STATE GOVERNMENTS CAN ADOPT A NUMBER OF MEASURES TO
OVERCOME THIS DEFICIENCY. THEY CAN STREAMLINE THEIR PRESENT
PLANNING MACHINERY TO REDUCE DELAYS IN THE LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS,
THEY CAN ENCOURAGE LAND OWNERS SITTING ON LAND SUITABLE FOR
SUBDIVISION TO SUBDIVIDE IT AND SELL IT, THEY CAN ASSIST IN
REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF UNPRODUCTIVE TRADING IN BLOCKS OF LAND, 
I HOPE I WILL NOT BE ACCUSED OF SELF-AGGRANDISEMENT
IF I QUOTE SOME REMARKS ONCE MADE IN THIS CONTEXT BY SIR WINSTON
CHURCHILL, HE STATED THE POSITION VERY ACCURATEL'' IN THESE
WORDS: " A LAND OWNER WHO HAPPENS TO OWN A PLOT OF LAND ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF A BIG CITY WATCHES THE BUSY POPULATION
AROUND HIM MAKING THE CITY LARGER AND MORE FAMOUS EVERY
DAY AND ALL THE WHILE HE SITS AND DOES NOTHING, ROADS
ARE MADE, SERVICES ARE IMPROVED AND WATER IS BROUGHT
FROM RESERVOIRS A HUNDRED MILES AWAY, AND ALL THE WHILE
THE LAND OWNER SITS STILL, EVERY ONE OF THESE IMPROVEMENTS
IS EFFECTED BY THE LABOUR AND THE COST OF OTHER PEOPLE,
To NOT ONE OF THESE IMPROVEMENTS DOES THE LAND OWNER, AS A
LAND OWNER, CONTRIBUTE, AND YET EVERY ONE OF THEM ENHANCES
THE VALUE OF HIS LAND, HE RENDERS NO SERVICE TO THE
COMMUNITY, HE CONTRIBUTES NOTHING TO THE GENERAL WELFARE,
HE CONTRIBUTES NOTHING TO THE PROCESS FROM WHICH HIS OWN
ENRICHMENT IS DERIVED,"
ONE OF THE DEPRESSING FEATURES OF THE PATTERN OF OUR
URBAN GROWTH IS THAT WHILE WE HAVE BUILT PLENTY OF HOUSES IN
OUTLYING AREAS OF OUR GREAT CITIES, THERE HAS BEEN NO CORRESPONDING
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SOCIAL OPPORTUNITIES,
UNLIKE OUR PREDECESSORS, WE DO NOT EQUATE HOUSING WITH SHELTER,
IT IS NOT' ENOUGH TO ERECT ACRES OF HOUSES IN SOCIAL AND
ENVIRONMENTAL WASTELANDS, WE-MUST PROVIDE MORE AESTHETIC AND
CONGENIAL SURROUNDINGS AND MORE SERVICES FOR THOSE WHO ARE
BUILDING THEIR HOMES, 
-6-
So MUCH OF WHAT IS PLEASANT AND COMFORTABLE IN
OUR LIVING ENVIRONMENT CAN BE PROVIDED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
IN THE LAST SESSION OF PARLIAMENT, WE AMENDED THE GRANTS
COMMISSION ACT TO ENABLE LOCAL'GOVERNMENT TO APPLY ON A
REGIONAL BASIS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, COUNCILS WILL BE ABLE TO DECIDE WHERE LAND SHOULD
BE DEVELOPED AND WHAT WILL BE BUILT UPON IT. LOCAL GOVERNMENT
MUST BE GIVEN THE RESOURCES IN FINANCE AND EXPERTISE TO
COPE WITH ITS INCREASING RESPONSIBILITIES IN ENVIRONMENT,
WELFARE AND HOUSING,
GOVERNMENTS, HOWEVER, CANNOT PROVIDE ALL THE AMENITIES
AND SERVICES THAT AUSTRALIANS NEED, PROGRESSIVE AND PUBLICSPIRITED
DEVELOPERS SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED TO DO MORE. THIS GREAT
HOUSING ESTATE, AND THE RESERVE BUILT UPON IT, SHOWS HOW THE
BEST AND MOST ATTRACTIVE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS CAN RESPOND TO THE
COMMUNITY'S NEEDS, TOO MANY DEVELOPERS IGNORE THESE NEEDS.
BY BRINGING HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE INTO AN AREA TO SATISFY A DEMAND
FOR HOUSING, SEVERE STRAINS ARE IMPOSED UPON SERVICES AND
AMENITIES. I SUGGEST THAT IF PRIVATE DEVELOPERS WANT PLANNING
APPROVAL FOR THEIR INITIATIVES IN SUBDIVIDED ESTATES, THEY MUST
BE PREPARED TO ACCEPT GREATER RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONSEQUENCES
-OF THEIR ACTIONS, ,/ 7 
-7-
THIS HANDSOME DISPLAY OF HOUSES IS TANGIBLE EVIDENCE
OF WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN BUILDING INDUSTRY CAN PRODUCE. THE NEW
RESERVE AND RECREATION FACILITIES WILL ADD GREATLY TO THE
ATTRACTIVENESS OF THE WHOLE AREA. I CONGRATULATE THE MANY
BUILDERS INVOLVED; I CONGRATULATE THE HOOKER CORPORATION,
NO AUSTRALIAN SHOULD FEEL THAT HOUSING OF THIS QUALITY, IN THIS
ENVIRONMENT, WITH THESE ROADS AND SERVICES, IS BEYOND HIS MEANS
OR RESOURCES, NO AUSTRALIAN SHOULD FEEL THAT A COMFORTABLE AND
WELL-BUILT HOME IN PLEASANT SURROUNDINGS IS BEYOND HIS DREAMS,
LET THIS BE THE STANDARD OF HOUSING EXEMPLIFIED IN THIS
EXHIBITION TODAY WHICH WE SEEK FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE.
L 1 



E1MBARGO: 10.00 P. M.
_ AUSI RAI A A,
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 130
14 September 1973
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS GOVERNMZENT GRANT FOR WORLD
DESIGNJ CONGRESS, JAPAN
The Prime Minister, Mr. W-. hitlam, today announced an
Australian Government grant of $ 25,000 to assist 45 designers,
teachers and students from all Australian States to attend the
Eighth World Design Congress to be held next month in Kyoto,
Japan. The grant was recommended to the Prime Minister by the
Visual Arts Board of the Australian Council for the Arts in
consultation with the Industrial Design Council of Australia.
The Congress has generated such wide interest among designers
that a party of 64 Australians will now participate.
Sponsored by the International Council of Societies
of Industrial Design, the Congress is held every second year
and is being held for the first time in the Asian/ Pacific area.
Those travelling with the aid of the subsidy represent
a diverse range of interests. The group includes practising
designers and design teachers from many fields, architects, a
ceramist, and students in mechanical engineeripng, sculpture
and painting as well as industrial design.
. The Visual Arts Board, in recommending the grant, said
that Australia has so far lacked a tradition of good local design
in its industrial products. Although there have been talented
individuals, they have not had sufficient support by way of
professional training and steady demand for their work.
Australian manufacturers have always leaned heavily on foreign
design for their products.
The Board believes that Australians are now taking more pride
in what we can produce, and our international markets are
demanding a high standard of design. Both f" or our own sake
and for the sake of our export trade, we need excellence of
design to become the rule rather than the exception. 
-3-
In administering the $ 25,000 grant, the Industrial-
Design Council has made a particular effort to encourage student
participation in the congress, and students comprise about half
the number of people who have received travel subsidies.
Australian participation in this biennial design
congress has previously been limited almost entirely to one
or two official delegates. " This year, for the first time,
this country will participate in strength, representing about
per cent of the anticipated attendance of 600 overseas
visitors from 35 countries. Some 1500 Japanese designers will
bring the number attending the congress to around 2,000.
The World Design Congress provides a unique opportunity
for the kind of international contact, discussion and exchange
of ideas which are so vital to the development of designers
individually and to the development of attitudes which will lead
to the design of products with qualities more closely related to
the everyday needs of people.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



( N
EMBARGO: 8.15 P. M,
PARRA14ATTA BY-ELECTION
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
PARRAMATTA TOWN HALL,
FRIDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 1973
A fortnight ago, I launched Labor's campaign for Parramatta.
Tonight, I launch another campaign not a campaign on behalf of the
Australian Labor Party, but a campaign on behalf of the Australian
people. And this campaign is not a test for the Australian Labor
Party but a test for the Australian people themselves. And it is
a test for great, important, and vocal sections of the Australian
community. The Australian Government shall, before Christmas,
submit to you, the people, a referendum to give the national
government power over prices. The Australian Government is
determined to combat inflation. We shall all have the opportunity
within the next few days, within the next few weeks, within the
next few months, to see whether that determination is shared by
the individuals and groups who have been so vocal on this matter so
recently. In particular you will all be able to judge within the
next few days, how sincere the Liberal Party, the Country Party,
and the five Senators currently engaged in courtship with the
Country Party, are about the fight against inflation. The acid
test will come next week. We-have heard the Leader of the
opposition demanding a prices and incomes freeze. The National
Government a Whitlam Government, any more than a McMahon
Government, even with so brilliant a Treasurer as Mr. Snedden
has not the power to freeze prices or incomes. The Liberals
know this; the writers of editorials know this; the people of
Australia know this. We propose to ask the people to change it.
to give us at least the power which governments in any comparable
country, whatever their systems, unitary or federal, already have.
We'shall be seeking that power; but before we can do so, we have
to get the Parliament to authorise us to refer the matter to the
people. And whether that reference is made now lies fairly and
squarely with our opponents. We await their declaration of intent.
There are other people involved in this matter, other
people responsible for the course that the Government has felt
impelled to take. I refer to the Premiers in the three eastern
States the anti-Labor Premiers. The basic reason why the
Government has felt obliged to take this course is because of
the refusal of these Premiers either to use their powers the
undoubted powers of these States or to refer their powers to the
National Government. These Premiers blather and bleat about
inflation; yet they would not budge an inch towards helping the
National Government do its job. I acknowlege, rather, I proclaim,
the fundamental responsibility of the National Government for the
economic management and the well-being of this nation. I do not
slide away from that at all. But the Premiers in the anti--. Tabor
States have refused point blank to give us the constitutional and
legal power to do our job. It is because of that refusal that
we now propose to go direct to the people of Australia. 
-2-
At Ermington, a fortnight ago, I undertook to ask the
Premiers of New South Wales and Victoria to refer this power.
I put the proposition to them on the opening day of the
Constitutional Convention, last Monday. I said:
" The Australian Paradox is that the National Government
is in a stronger position vis a vis the States in
financial matters than the national governments in any
other federal system; but it is in a weaker position in
economic powers than national governments in any other
federal system. There is the matter of prices, for
example. The Nixon Administration had the power to
introduce price freezes. The Australian Government has
not the McMahon Government no more than the Whitlam
Government. There may be arguments about the economic
effectiveness of such freezes, but there can be no question
that if they are to be in any way effective whatsoever, they
must be immediate and unchallenged in their application.
I do not assert and I do not concede that the Australian
Parliament could not enforce an effective prices policy
by legislating under the corporations power. I do,
however, assert, and I have to concede, that such
legislation would be challenged in the High Court and its
application would be stalled for many, many months in the
process. The crucial element of immediacy would be lost.
Unquestionably, the Australian Parliament should have
legislative power over prices, whatever the Government in
office. The Parliament can try to obtain the power by
referendum but that would take some months the number of
months depending upon whether the Bill was passed or rejected
by the Senate. Alternatively, the Parliament can obtain
the power by reference, by some or all State Parliaments,
That is something which could be done in a matter of weeks.
The reference of power could be permanent or temporary.
If, however, the Governments in the two great States of
New South Wales and Victoria, Governments which currently
have a majority in both Houses of their Parliaments, decline
to introduce a Bill, then the reference would be ineffective.
I venture to say that without New South Wales and Victoria,
it would be a largely futile exercise, ' While, with those
two States alone referring, it could be made effective
throughout Australia. If the Premiers of New-South Wales
and Victoria were to offer such a reference, then this
Convention would be indeed a landmark in Australian economic,
political and constitutional history."
But those ? remiers have refused to refer this power to the
national government.
The National Government of Australia should have
reasonable constitutional powers to manage the nation's economy.
We have not got it; we now seek it. The States the anti-
Labor States will not do their job; we now have to ask you
to equip us to do the job. 
-3-
I recognise, and everybody recognises, that the kind
of inflation we are now experiencing is not only a matter of
prices. There is the matter of incomes and that means your
income, your salary, your wage. The fact is, of course, that
Australia has a highly complex and highly regulated system of
wage fixation. The system is in fact one-sided; wages are
fixed, prices are not. But I can say this, speaking not only
as the Prime Minister of Australia, speaking not only as the
Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Party, speaking not only
as the Leader of the Australian Labor Party, but as the Leader
of the Australian Labor movement if the people of Australia
give us power to control prices and if our efforts to contain
inflation within reasonable limits then fail, we shall receive
the full co-operation of the trade union movement in restraining
wages incomes. But what the trade union movement will first ask
is that the national government and the whole public shall
together show that they are dinkum on this matter of curbing
inflation. If we show we are dinkum, the trade union movement
stands ready to show restraint in the interest of the whole
people, of whom its members and dependants form the great bulk.
I still appeal to every section of the community to
get this whole matter in perspective. The national government
needs reasonable powers to manage the economy. Inflation is
undoubtedly a major problem, the besetting problem of current
economic management. But is it not the be-all and end-all of
our national problems. And indeed it is as much a inter-national
problem as it is a national one. But I long ago determined that
the Labor Government which I head would not be reduced to a
nullity by any unreal pre-occupation. It would be monstrous
if a Labor Government, coming into power after 23 years were to
attempt nothing more than curbing some of the gross economic
defects created by our predecessors. When the Government framed
its Budget, it had to look at the whole range of problems created
by our predecessors, the whole backlog of 23 years of conservative
rule. Growing inflation was only one of these problems. It is
true that the Treasurer could have brought down a traditional
Budget designed to contain economic growth. It is true, for
instance, that we could have renegged on our program.
But what would that have meant?
What is the big new factor in the spending of this
Government? It is on education. I could have starved the
schools; I could thereby have received plaudits for a " responsible"
Budget; and I should have penalised every Australian child, now at*
school or about to enter school not just for this year but for
the rest of his life. I would not have a bar of it. 
-4-
I for one am not prepared to say that an Australian
child who happens to be in school in 1973 must pay the penalty
for 23 years of Liberal mismanagement or pay the penalty for a
passing economic problem, no matter how difficult and complex
and intransigent that economic problem may be. I am not prepared
to say that Government spending designed to reduce costs or to
promote production in years and decades to come must be
indefinitely postponed, just in order to save money in 1973.
One of the principal reasons why our costs are rising is because
spending in the public sector was postponed or entirely refused
for so long. Why are land costs soaring? Because of the refusal of
past governments to involve themselves in public ownership of
land. Why are transport costs soaring? Because of the refusal
of previous governments to spend money on the upgrading of the
public transport system, and particularly by the refusal of the
national government to involve itself in urban transport systems.
Why are our cities so expensive to the individual and the
family?. Because of the failure of past national governments of
Australia to involve themselves in the business of cities as much
as the governments of all comparable countries have done for long
past.* Why is health so expensive and why are our hospitals
so inadequate? Because the previous government encouraged these
fly-blown private bureacracies and high-flown pretensions of
doctors. I suggest we did not even have a choice about whether
or not we would act on these matters of schools and cities and
hospitals. It was to act on these matters that the people elected
us last December. And we were not prepared to sacrifice yet
another generation of children and pensioners, the handicapped,
the old, the sick, the aboricines and the city dwellers of this
country. We have begun to do the job for which the people of
Australia elected us. We shall before Christmas be asking you to
give us another weapon so that we can continue to do that job.
The times are not so urgent but we are no less sincere when we
again say " Give us the tools and we will finish the job". 



DEPA-TEN OF
FORIG
NQ DATE
M/ 132 14 September 1973
PRIME MINISTER'S MESSAGE TO LAOS
The following is the text of a message sent today by
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
to the Prime Minister of Laos, Prince Souvanna Phoumas
" On the occasion of the signature of the protocol
annexed to the Agreement on the Re-establishment of Peaoe and the
Realisation of National Concord in Laos, I wish to express my
warmest congratulations and best wishes to you and to the people
of Laos. The Australian Government and people acknowledge with
O admiration your tireless efforts to produce a settlement which
will reflect the common desire of the Lao people to direct their
own affairs. In particular it is our earnest hope that under
your guidance the Provisional Government will pave the way for a
lasting peace in which the independence, territorial integrity
and neutrality of Laos will be respected by all parties and by
all nations. We in Australia look forward to t1 e continuation and
expansion of the warm and friendly relationn which have always
existed between our two countries and I would welcome discussions sss1 
-2-
between our representatives at a time convenient to your Government
about ways in which Australia might assist the development of a
prosnerous and unified Laos.
Once again permit me to express my pleasure at the
achievement represented by the signature of the protocol annexed
to the Agreement on the Re-establishment of Peace and the
Realisation of National Concord in Laos and to wish you every
success in the tasks that lie ahead."; 0
0 1 



If
September 1973 FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTS
France's withdrawal of notice of a danger zone in part
-of French Polynesia had not ended Australia's anxiety about French
nuclear tests, the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Whitlam, said tonight.
The notice, signed by the French Minister for the Armed
Forces, appeared in the French Government Gazette of 14 September0
It cancelled, as from midnight 15 September, the notice issued on 4
July " prohibiting" ships from entering a broad zone of the high
seas around Moruroa Atoll and other islands.
Mr. Whitlam said that if yesterday's cancellation of the
shipping notice meant the end of French nuclear tests in the Pacific
it would be universally welcomed, but the French Government had
given no such indication.
Mro Whitlam recalled that in 1970 and 1971 a similar
cancellation had been followed, after a break of several weeks,
by a resumption of testing at a few days' notice. Whether this
would happen again this year might not be known for some time.
Mr. Whitlam also recalled that the French Minister for
the Armed Forces, M. Galley, was reported to have told a press
conference on 31 August that France would not give an undertaking
to cease atmospheric tests or to remove its testing centre from
Polynesia. Australia would not slacken its efforts, by all appropriate
means, to obtain a permanent halt to all nuclear tests, especially
those in the atmosphere, Mr. Whitlam said. 



EMBARGO: 9630PM MOND) AY 17 SEPTEMBER 1973
-SPECHBY THE PRIME MINISTER MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE ANNUAL DINNER~ OF THE AUSTRALIA. N ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERSt
ASSOCIATION, LAKESIDE INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, CANBERRA,
MOND~ AY 17 SEPTEMBER 1973
Your convention is the second of two conventions I have
attended in the past fortnight. Yours is an annual event; the
Constitutional Convention occurs with roughly the frequency of
Halley's Comet. The last one was 82 years ago. I notice that one
of our magazines published a photograph of me on its cover the
other day, purporting to show me in the midst of that distinguished
company in a state of unaccustomed somnolence. All I can say is
that this convention promises to be a more electrifying occasion than
that one. This is by no means my first speech to a manufacturers'
dinner. Two weeks ago I spoke to the Chamber of Manufactures in
Sydney. Next Friday I shall be speaking to the South Australian
Chamber of Manufactures, and next Monday to the Heavy Engineering
Manufacturers' Association here in this hotel.
Now whatever you may think of the Government, I can hardly
be accused, in these circumstances, of snubbing the manufacturers.
My only fear is that you will grow weary of hearing the same message
five times in succession. So let me assure you that tonight's speech
is a completely new model there's no wasteful proliferation of
speeches in qy department. My real difficulty is that two weeks from
tonight I shall be speaking yet again to the Chamber of Manufactures
in Brisbane. I shall have to tell them what I have already told
manufacturers in the southern States. You will understand, of course,
that it always takes a little longer to get our message through to
Queensland. If I may be permitted a truism, gentlemen, we live in changing
times. When I spoke earlier this year to the Metal Trades Industries
Association in Melbourne, we were about to introduce the 25% cut in
tariffs which we announced in July. When I spoke to the Chamber of
Manufactures in Sydney just over a fortnight ago, we had just brought
in our Budget. Now, as I speak to you tonight, we have just announced
a further revaluation of the dollar, a new policy by the Reserve Bank
towards Government securities and interest rates, and, more recently,
our intention to submit to the Australian people a referendum to give
the national Government power over prices. You can see the hazards
of going to too many businessmen's dinners. Basic to all our economic
measures are two clear and simple purposes, two consistent and
overriding aims to stimulate a more vigorous and competitive climate
in Australian industry, and to stem inflationary pressures in the
economy0 
-2-
Let me speak first about inflation. One thing I caution you
against and caution the Au stralian people against is a sterile
obsession with inflation such as our opponents seem determined to
foster. Inflation is not the sole issue for the Australian Government;
the be-all and end-all of economic management. Exaggerated fears may
be as damaging as inflation itself by encouraging defeatism and
timidity, be encouraging a needless, heedless rush to put up prices
against the vague possibility of competitors doing likewise. I would
hate to see the price structure become as irrational, as psychologically
vulnerable, as fickle a feature of our economic life as dare I say itthe
share market. I appeal to you to keep the whole issue of prices
in perspective, to bear in mind that Governments throughout the world
face the same problem that we do, that my Government is determined and
pledged to do all in its power to restrain inflationary pressures0
We shall do this with or without the assistance of the States, with
or without the assistance of our opponents. But we shall do it, I
believe, with the assistance and concurrence of the Australian people.
In our attack on inflation I want to stress one thing above
all: we are pledged to a program of reform and renovation of
Australian society, we were elected to carry out that program, and
we shall carry it out steadily, steadfastly as we have been doing
since last December. It is all very well for our opponents to talk
of curbing inflation. Their last and most notorious attempt to do so
was the Budget of 1971/ 72. Statesmanslike as I always am on these
occasions, I forbear to remind you who was the author of that document.
But you all remember its consequences: stagnation, a paltry growth
rate of 2 or the worst unemployment for 10 years, and, when our
predecessors left office, the highest rate of inflation for 20 years.
That was our inheritance. That was our lesson. You will all remember
how my colleagues and I, when we were in opposition, were regularly
accused by the previous Government of " calamity howling". Yet no one
hawls calamity more than they do. At least they give us calamities
worth howling about: We now have a strong demand for labour: growth
at 7% and rising; and record profits. We have combined this strong
and basically healthy economic situation with the most effective and
far reaching program of economic reform ever undertaken in this country.
We shall not, however, fight inflation with the methods of our opponents.
We shall not throw away people's jobs, we shall not resort to clumsy
stop-go economics,, we shall not renounce our commitments to the people
of this nation and especially to the poor, the children, the sick,
the migrants, the city-dwellers, the low and middle-income earners
whose interests have been neglected so shamefully for so long.
The weapons we have chosen to fight inflation are the same
weapons with which we hope to achieve more competition and greater
efficiency in Australian industry. There is one other weapon, however,
which the Australian Government lacks, and which we shall ask the
people to grant us. That is power to control prices. Our opponents
are rece-nt converts to the idea of a prices and incomes policy. Not
long ago they were saying such policies wouldn't work. For myself, I
frankly confess that I have always had reservations about the value of
price control powers reservations I have publicly acknowledged and
explained. But I have no doubt and I believe the people will have
no doubt that it is intolerable that Australia should be the only
country in the western world whose Government is denied such powers,
and which cannot use them if the need arises. Equally I have no doubt
that if such powers are to be applied, they must be immediate,
unchallenged, uniform in their application. 
-3-
The States have these powers. They have refused to exercise
them; they have refused to refer them to us, either temporarily or
permanently. They won't use them; they won't let anyone else use
them. And with their allies in the national Parliament, they propose
to campaign against the very suggestion that the people employers,
employees, housewives, businessmen, manufacturers should be allowed
to decide whether the national Government should have the powers
or not. Yet these are the Premiers, these are the parties, who
protest about inflation and whip up people's fears about it.
If I were more cynical about these matters, I might be
tempted to believe that our opponents had a vested interest in
inflation, and hoped to confound the Government and weaken its
nerve, I am sorry to disappoint them. We will not be dismayed.
We will not be deflected. We will beat inflation, and beat it with
measures that are fair, constructive and humane.
The prices referendum bill which we introduced in Parliament
today will be a test of the good faith and sincerity of our
opponents. I hear some of them say that we ought to include incomes
in the referendum. Well, of course, incomes are already fixed for
the vast majority of Australians either by negotiation or arbitratio n.
Apparently there are some people, until recently quite vociferous in
defence of the arbitration system, who now lack faith in the ability
and judgement of the Arbitration Commission. But let that pass. I
have no doubt that if the people of Australia give us power to control
prices, we can count, if necessary, on the responsible cooperation of
the trade union movement in restraining wages and incomes. I give that
assurance, Let there be no mistake about the persistence or the consistency
with which I have approached the question of power over prices. At the
opening of the Constitutional Convention just two weeks ago I first
invited the Premiers to refer to the national Parliament the powers
held by the States. I explained that the Australian Government could
seek a constitutional change by referendum, but that this would take
some months, depending upon the behaviour of the Senate. I said:
" The Parliament can obtain the power by reference, by some
or all State Parliaments. That is something which could
be done in a matter of weeks. The reference of power could
be permanent or temporary. If, however, the Governments
in the two great States of New South Wales and Victoria,
Governments which currently have a majority in both Houses
of their Parliaments, decline to introduce a Bill, then
the reference would be ineffective. I venture to say that
without New South Wales and Victoria, it would be a largely
futile exercise, while, with those two States alone referring,
it could be made effective throughout Australia."
On the following day, the Tuesday, I appealed again for a
reference of these powers. It was all too clear, however, that
nothing in the private or public responses of the Premiers of
New South Wales, Victoria or Queensland gave any room for hope that
they would do so. The position then is this:
We have had a Premiers' Conference on inflation; we have had a
Constitutional Convention. The States in this context, of course, 
-4-
I am referring to the anti-Labor States have bluntly refused to
budge or co-operate. It is fruitless to ask them again. We can
only appeal to the people. If our bill is passed this week, we can
have a referendum within two months. Ar~ d by Christmas, I assure you,
we shall have passed legislation to stabilise the growth of land
prices throughout Australia. That will be our first and most important
action if the referendum is carried.
The measures we have taken against inflation revaluation,
tariff cuts will have several important consequences. They will
help keep down the price of imports, they will increase the supply
of goods within Australia, they will reduce any artificial stimulus
to capital inflow, they will stimulate competition. I suggest that
Australian industry, because of strong domestic and world demand,
and buoyant conditions in the rural sector, is well placed to absorb
the effects of our revaluatio ns. Those industries which have special
difficulties we stand ready to assist. And of course, we are assisting
industry in much more positive and enduring ways.
Look back on our decisions and actions since last December,
and you will find our record replete with schemes and initiatives
to benefit industry. Our Budget provided an estimated outlay of
$ 145 million for assistance to industry in 1973-74, $ 34 million more
than actual expenditure in the last financial year. We have increased
assistance under the Industrial Research and Development Grant Scheme
from $ 14 million to $ 16.8 million. We are encouraging higher standards
of industrial design. We have provided $ 1.83 million for better
apprenticeship training. We are developing new manpower policies to
help industry adjust to changing needs and conditions. We are strengthening
the Australian Industry Development Corporation to enable it to
play its full part in developing local industry and keeping it in
Australian hands. We are establishing an Industries Assistance
Commission to coordinate all forms of assistance to industry and to
open up the process of assistance to full public scrutiny. We are
setting up industry panels bringing together employers, employees,
consumers and Government to advise on a whole range of industrial
problems. I do not pretend for a moment that our reforms will be painless,
or that our plans to streamline and invigorate Australian industry do
not involve quite basic structural changes and new attitudes on the part
of us all. It is precisely because I have confidence in the -strength
of indu-stry as well as its good sense and public-spiritedness
that I believe our reforms will be welcomed and understood. Let me,
however, give an example of the sort of practice my Government cannot
tolerate. You will forgive me for choosing an instance that is
uncomfortably, distressingly, close to home. I refer to an agreement
made between five Australian manufacturers for the 12 months to last
April. The agreement raised to an agreed level the minimum price of
Japanese fans exported to Australia. It was entered into after
negotiations between your own Association and the Japan Electrical
Manufacturers' Association. The Commissioner of Trade Practices
investigated the agreement and referred to it in these terms in
his 1972-73 annual report: 00./ 5 
" I notified the parties that I considered the agreement
was contrary to the public interest and should not be renewed when
it expired in April 1973; the agreement had the effect of increasing
the price of Japanese fans to Australian consumers and weakening
external competition without any inquiry by the Tariff Board which
has the responsibility of recommending the level of protection to
which Australian manufacturers may be entitled against imports; in
addition the agreement aggravated a shortage in the total supply
of fans available to the Australian market which occurred in the
unusually hot summer season."
That is what the Commissioner of Trade Practices had to say,
I am glad to record the fact that although your association tdisagreed
with the Commissioner in good faith, the agreement in question was not
renewed. Now I didn't come here to give lectures or to rake over past
history, but I would be less than candid if I failed to make it clear
to you that such agreements as that will not be tolerated by my
Government. Under the restrictive practices legislation we shall
introduce, that agreement would have been illegal. Under our
legislation, consumers will not have to wait while the Commissioner
investigates and makes a report. We shall take action to prohibit
a great range of restrictive practices directly and immediately.
Mr. Chairman, I have spoken bluntly to you. I know you would
not want-from me, or my Government, anything other than straight talk
and square dealing. Let me now tell you with equal candour, with
equal conviction what my hopes are for your industry, and for all
industry. First, we want ready and open communication with you. We
want to hear from you and be involved in your problems. Next, we want
your continued prosperity. Our whole program depends upon a healthy
and prosperous business community. We want to encourage the
transformation of weak, dependant industries into vigorous and more
self-reliant ones, to help industries withstand the pressures of
national change and international competition without the need for
inordinate Government support. We want to encourage more competition,
more rational use of resources, lower prices for the consumer. We see
the growth of sound and healthy industry as basic to the growth of a
modern industrial economy.
Finally, I ask you to keep in mind your basic strength, your
real and growing prosperity0 This year your sales have risen strongly,
your exports have increased, your orders are high. It is fair to say
that, despite rising costs and other pressures, Australian industry
is in better condition today than it has ever been. What better time
to undertake with the new Government, the lasting and far-reaching
reforms that will ensure greater strength and prosperity in years to
come? 


Tuesday, 18 September 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen.: I do try to alternate these conferences between the morning and the afternoon but, frankly, it is impossible to get many in the morning. Today it is possible,&nbsp; so perhaps we can have preference for the afternoon papers. There will be an Executive Council Meeting this afternoon, and there will be a few appointments and terms of reference approved then. So we might be able to give those to youthis afternoon. The Cabinet met yesterday throughout the morning,and we finalised the legislation on Trade Practices includingconsumer protection. We approved legislation, which will now bedrafted, to carry out the plank in the Australian Labor Party'splatform which was inserted at the Surfers Paradise Federal-Conference in July to establish an Australian DevelopmentAssistance Agency. We approved the drafting of legislation toset up an Australian National Parks and Wildlife Commission asin the terms of the Policy Speech last November. We made severa.decisions on tariffs. Perhaps it would suit you best, those whoare interested, if I give you the text afterwards. They were ingeneral terms: the application of the across-the-board 25 percent cut in tariffs to those commodities where before that cutwas made the Tariff Board had completed its report but the.Government had not yet accepted the report, among the arrangementsfor preferential tariffs, particularly with New Zealand.Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Do you see Mr Hawke's statements last night that you couldn't promise wage moderation....
PRIME MINISTER: I will say to you what I said in the House. I have got nothing to add to what I said yesterday.
QUESTION: Has the Government made any recommendation to the Reserve Bank to ask the Savings Banks to limit to 1 per cent any increase in home loan interest rates?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't been in touch with the Reserve Bank since last Thursday morning. As I said at Question Time, less than half an hour ago, after Question Time last Thursday I saw the Governor and the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank. We discussed the interest rates to be charged by the Trading Banks. The Question of Savings Bank interest rates the interest rates on deposits and on advances wore not yo the whole subject hadn't been sufficiently advanced to discus-s that then. Mr Crean will be doing any further aspects on tlia'-
QUESTION: It has been suggested from time to time that your Government will seek to increase the High Court strength by new or additional appointments. Is this matter under consideration at the moment and, if so, when do you expect to be able to make an announcement?
PRIME MINISTER: It is not being considered. I have never heardit suggested. It would be possible, of course, under theConstitution to have the High Court consist of three peopleas it did when it was first established, or five people as itbecame before the First War somewhere about 1907, or seven peopleas it has been for the last generation. There is nothing in theConstitution which limits in anyway the number of judges on theHigh Court. The only provision is that any judge in the HighCourt is there for life so obviously there could not be areduction in the numbers of any who chose to remain there. Butthis has never been suggested. It is true that the Supreme Courtof the United States has nine members, and I think the SupremeCourt of Canada has something like that, but I suppose you wantme to express some view on the matter. Seven is, like any oddnumber, is useful because it avoids the chance of having anevenly divided court. There cannot, however, be separate divisionsof the High Court it has to sit as a whole and, accordingly,there is no particular point in having a greater number than seven.Some of the judges get tied up on hearing cases as single judges.As you know, however, we have approved the introduction oflegislation for a Superior Court of Australia. Mr Nigel Bowen,when he was Attorney-General, brought in such a bill theParliament before last. We will make a few amendments to thatbill, but when the Superior Court is established and in operation,then there will be less need for judges of the High Court to trycases alone. They will only have to worry about appeals. Youwill remember in the last sessional period, in autumn, we didamend the Income Tax Act to relieve the burden on single HighCourt judges in hearing appeals from the Commissioner of Taxation.That work has now been given to the Supreme Courts of the States,and we have co-operated with the States in augmenting their lawlibraries in the taxation field.QUESTION: Do you see any need to put an age limit on the term ofthe PRIME MINISTER: One of the members asked me about this lastTuesday or Wednesday and you will remember from the form ofhis question, that if there is to be a retiring age forFederal judges High Court judges, the Industrial Court judges,the Bankruptcy Court judge, then there would have to be an amendmentto the Constitution. It is not a mattcyr wh1; c the States couldamend the constitution by reference. It is obviously a matter wherethe constitution would have to be altered by a referendum. I saidin my answer to that question that I certainly thought it would bedesirable to have a retiring age for all jurig~ s in Australia. TheStates have long ago provided for a retirinj age for their judgesand where Australian Governments have been able to apply a reti-ingage they have done so. They have done so for the Supreme Courtof the Territories. They have also done so for the legal ersthe presidential members of the Australian Conciliation and
73 127 A-3-Arbitration Commission who have the honorary title ofMr Justice, or in the case of Miss Evatt, Justice. So everybodyhas agreed that there ought to be a retiring age for judges.Nevertheless, as I also said in my answer, it's not a very urgentmatter. There are referendums required before this. When wedo have such a referendum, we will probably also take theopportunity of amending the constitution to permit the High Courtof Australia to do as the Supreme Court of Canada does giveadvisory opinions.QUESTION: Two questions on Chile: Will your Government recognisethe new military regime in Chile?PRIME MINISTER: Not yet.QUESTION: Secondly, forty-four members of the Labor Party lastweek sent a telegram to the Chilean Ambassador in Canada protestingat what they called the illegal overthrow of the Allende Government.Do you agree with the sentiments they expressed?PRIME MINISTER: Yes. You have the press statment I issued onthat subject and you know that we have recalled our Ambassadorfrom Santiago for consultations.QUESTION: On the question of referendums. Does the Governmentnow propose to introduce a bill for a rederendum on the questionof incomes and salaries?PRIME MINISTER: Incomes is the usual word that is used in thiscontext. If a Constitutional Alteration ( Incomes) Bill isintroduced in either House we will facilitate its passage andwe will put it to the people together with the Bill which wehave sponsored the Constitutional Alteration ( Prices) Bill.QUESTION: Why won't you bring down the Bill?PRIME MINISTER: If you have a referendum, then you want to havethe maximum chance of winning it. I believe that there is abetter chance of winning a referendum to allow the AustralianParliament to control prices than there is to win a referendumto enable the Australian Parliament to control incomes. But inboth cases, as you must know, I believe, the Australian Parliamentshould be able to pass laws.
QUESTION: Would you join in writing the " Yes" case with Mr Snedden on the incomes one, or would you expect him to do that?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd help him.
QUESTION: Would it be a joint case though?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, yes, I'd vote for it myself. None of you surely are in any doubt that I think the Australian Parliament should have confidence in such legislative matters. Surely nobody doubts that.
QUESTION: What I am getting at is would you campaign both you and Mr Snedden campaign for this?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't go that far. Wait until the proposition is put. But I would vote for such a proposition myself in a referendum.
QUESTION: You say that you would vote for it yourself. Would you expect then that Mr Hawke and the A. C. T. U. would support you?
PRIME MINISTER: Some unionists would, some wouldn't.
QUESTION: Has Senator Wriedt reported back to Cabinet on the matter of meat prices and additionally, I understand that the Parliamentary Committee on Prices will be tabling its report tomorrow. When will Cabinet consider that report?
PRIME MINISTER: The Cabinet hasn't considered meat prices since Monday of last week. We decided to cancel the subsidy which*is paid on the export of meat and we also decided to raise thelevy on exports so as to pay for the brucellosis and tuberculosiseradication campaign throughout Australia. At the moment there isa campaign only in some States. But as long as brucellosisor tuberculosis can be found in cattle anywhere in Australiait hurts the product, whether we consume it at home or sell itabroad. But I told you all that last time and it has not beenconsidered since. I believe the Parliamentary the JointSelect Committee on Prices will be presenting a report this weekin each House. Then we might consider it in Cabinet next Monday,but we couldn't do it before then. If the report only comesin say on Thursday, it would leave too shorter a time for Cabinetto consider it next Monday. In general, as you probably know,we have a three-day rule. If you can't get a submission in byThursday night, its not considered by Cabinet the following Monday.
QUESTION: Has Dr Cairns given you a paper on trade with South Africa particularly where Government assistance has been set out? Has any consideration or decision been made-on it? I remember you telling me at one of your very early conferences that you wouldn't boycott trade with South Africa because it came under an international agreement.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember any paper on this matter from Dr Cairns. There has been some discussion about a trade exhibition there and the forthcoming one will be the last. In general terms, however, we would not forbid trade with South Africa unilaterally. Wle will sup~ ort, in thei General Assembly or the other specialised agencics of the Uic. Nations, any economicsanctions designed to bring down the South A1fricain Government aswe have supported all such sanctions to hbrinq down the RhodesianGovernment or, at least, to have70 the South Afi-cican Governmentabandon its objectionable policies. Theroe ace also some mattersof international concern where the South A7V: i:. cain Government isacting in defiance of international law, for instance its occupationof Namibia, South-West Africa. They are in illegal occupation -) f
that territory. Now we will support any international sanctionsto compel that Government to reverse its policies to vacate theterritory., failing that, to bring the Government down. We willapply those sanctions if South Africa's major trading partnersalso do.
QUESTION: At midnight tomorrow night, radio and television stations in Sydney will be prevented from commenting on the Parramatta By-Election for three days because of the terms of the Broadcasting Act. Do you agree with this section, and do you intend to repeal it?
PRIME MINISTER; Didn't we try to repeal itlas~ t'year?
ANSWER: You did, yes.
PRIME MINISTER: It's not a matter of very great urgency but the Party is against that ban. We think its -wicked-that the shouldn't be able to comment on elections and that the private capitalist press should have a monopoly at that time. Please tell Mr Duckmanton.
QUESTION: If you get the prices power in the referendum, would you envisage land price control legislation along the lines of the South Australian proposal, i. e. setting a fixed return. Would it be more or less than the 7 per cent, or haven't you got that far yet?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the South Australian legislation is amodel of the practical form of land stabilisation that can takeplace at the present time.. It takes the form of limiting theincrease in price of any land to 7 per cent in any year, plusany expenditure which has been incurred in developing the land.By contrast, as I mentioned in my speech introducing the PricesReferendum yesterday, land in Sydney in the last financial yearrose by the average amount of 45 per cent. As I said in QuestionTime today, the price of land is something which is very clearlyin the competence of any of the States because you can't carrya block of land across a State border. Therefore, Sed-tion 92 can'tbe a barrier in anyway to stabilisation of land prices. This isclearly one price where there is no component of wages, salariesor other income.
QUESTION: Do you think 7 per cent is fair?
PRIME MINISTER: In the present circumstances, yes I would-think.it was. But that, of course, could vary according to otherconditions. You can't take these things in isolation and 7 per centwould seem to me to be a fair, practical increase at the moment.The other States are being terribly slow to introduce pricestabilisation in land and one of the reac-ons is that their Budgetsboom through the stamp duty on land sales. stamp duty isrelated to the sale price, so the more therc! is an inflation ofland prices, the more their Budgets boom. 1' huy have a vestedinterest in the inflation of land prices. We would be able to 1othis quite easily, quite promptly. When the Referendum goes rough,.we could do something like the Cities Commission legislation.
You would havc. the Minister for Urban and Regional Developmentauthorised to introduce a Price Stabilisation Scheme afterconsultation with the relevant State minister in respect of anydesignated growth centre or any urban area for instance, whichhas been reclassified from rural to residential. There are thoseprecedents in South Australian State legislation and in Australianlegislation earlier this year.
QUESTION: Would you consider withdrawing your support for theacquisition of the incomes power for the Commonwealth if Mr Hawkereaffirmed his promise to restrain wages in the event of youracquiring the prices power?
PRIME MINISTER: I have got nothing to add to what I have alreadysaid in the House or here.
QUESTION: The Opposition keeps suggesting that you will haveextreme difficulty and may find it impossible to prevent an increasein mortgage interest rates. Could you tell us whether theGovernment is having difficulty and what plans you have in mindto try and clear up the confusion that is in the minds of manypeople in the community?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no difficulty about this. Last Thursdaymorning the Reserve Bank Governor Deputy Governor agreed to putit to the ' trading banks that there should be a smaller interestrate on mortgages than on other advances. And as you know,when the Reserve Bank issued this statement on Friday afternoonO after the banks closed that was embodied in it. Now the samething can be done about savings banks which are also subject tooverall Australian Government control and, as an intermediary,control by the Reserve Bank. So there is no difficulty about this.As I quoted in answer to my distinguished predecessor today, there&nbsp;is an excellent precedent for this because in March 1970 the Reserve Bank agreed that there should be a smaller interest rate on advances to rural producers.
QUESTION: The Australian Development Assistance Agency. Whose jurisdiction does this come under?
PRIME MINISTER: It is stated in the platform of the Australian Labor Party. It will be responsible to the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
QUESTION: Are you still opposed tn having a Premiers' Conference on the subject of inflation a Prcc,, Le,-F.' Coaxference which might be able to work out some sorL of i trcnsfer of power?
PRIME MINISTER: The proposiLion ' f-i ' L power has been put several times ancl I havo yet tc, se by the eastern Premiers to refer sucl, a wc
QUESTION: I find a distinction between bringing pressure to bear upon a Government to change a wrong and anti-humanitarian policyand your rather extreme statement of saying " bringing down agovernment" over that thing. How do you reconcile this as itis a protection of people with your reluctance to criticise saythe Soviet Government over its treatment of the minorityintellectuals who are being gaoled in that country for
PRIME MINISTER: A week ago in answer to a question by one ofyou, I did criticise the Soviet Government for its treatment ofintellectuals. I did criticise it. It's not just thereis a long tradition, I said, for 200 years of repression bysuccessive Russian regimes of their intellectuals. I think it isa very unattractive feature of Russian Society, the communist one,the tsarist one before that.
QUESTION: If I may ask, Sir, did you mean when you said " bringingdown a government" over things like that, is that not interferringwith other people's affairs, which you yourself have objected to?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, it's interference with the governmentof another country but that government does not represent thepeople of that country. I want it quite clear that I wasreferring to economic sanctions. Don't attribute to me anymotive of using armed force. I believe that if all the majortrading partners of South Afri * ca were to collaborate, they couldch'ange the policy of that government or remove it., Similarly, ifall the major trading partners of Rhodesia, Zimbabwe, were to beas loyal to international decisions as the present AustralianGovernment is, that government would have been removed.
QUESTION: Is your qualification based on international law?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Decisions, resolutions, as-I said earlier,by the General Assembly and the specialised agencies of theUnited Nations. I believe that any of this action is appropriatelytaken internationally. It is, moreover, ineffective unless itis taken internationally.
QUESTION: Two short referendum questions -yes or no answers.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I hope a yes to both -both referenda.
QUESTION: Will.-you allow a free vote on your side of the House if Mr Snedden does introduce a companion bill on incomes? Secondly, might it be possible for this to be achieved in the Senate if the D. L. P. produces its suggested amendment to your bill?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect that any vote that is taken in either House would be as a result of a collective decision by the Australian Labor Party. I am not quite sure what you have in mind when you refer to a D. L. P. amendment. Reading the papers, I see that there is a suggestion by a D. L. P. senator that thereshould be two referenda; one on the bill which I introduced onbehalf of the Government in the House of Representatives yesterdayto put the word " prices" within the matters upon which theAustralian Parliament can legislate, and another to put the wordstprices and incomes"' in the constitution as among the matters uponwhich the Australian Parliament can legislate. I don't believethat it is appropriate to have a vote on two referenda on thoseterms because it is possible that both would be carried. Thenyou would have the constitution with one paragraph referring toprices and another paragraph referring to prices and incomes.Now that is inevitably a duplication and confusing. The betterway is to have two referenda. One for prices, the other incomes.For myself, I would hope that both would be carried.
QUESTION: Are you in a position to announce the High Commissionerfor India yet?PRIME MINISTER: I think I have been asked questions about thisbefore. I announce these matters without prompting. I won'tdelay any announcement on any of these matters.



NQ DATE
M/ 134 19 September 1973
AUSTRALIAN ARCHITECTS CHOSEN FOR NEW
EMBASSY BUILDINGSThe
Australian Government has commissioned six firms
* of Australian architects to design and supervise the building
of new Australian Embassy and High Commission buildings in
* Saigon, Suva, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok and Paris.
The last major chancery construction overseas was the
Australian Embassy Chancery at Washington which was designed in
1960 by Bates, Smart and McCutcheon, of Melbourne.
Announcing this today, the Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,, mid that the architects
had been chosen after consideration by officers o -f the Department
of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Works.
Their selection had also been made in accordance with
the Government's intention that new buildings at Australian
diplomatic missions should not only be functional and efficient
but demonstrate overseas the qualities and skills of some of
Australia's leading architects.
Mr Whitlam said that the program of work comprised:-
9e2 
-2
Post Australian Embassy, SAIGON
Australian High Commission, SUVA
Australian H-i gh
Commission, SINGAPORE
Australian High C omm iss ion,
KUALJA LUMPUR
Australian Embassy, BANGKO K
Australian Embassy, PARIS Pro jects
Chancery Ambassador' s
Residence Chancery Chancery Chancery and
Ambassador' s
Residence Chancery and
Ambassador' s
Residence Architects
Leighton Contractors of'
Sydney
Daryl Jackson
Evan Walker of
Melbourne Godfrey and
Spowers of
Melbourne Joyce/ Nankivell
Associates of
Melbourne Archer, Mortlock
Murray and Woolley
Harry Seidler
Associates of
Sydney Estimated Completion Date
November 1974
June 1975
June 1976
September 1976
September 1976
June 1977
Mr Whitlam said that, in addition to this program of new
buildings, the Sydney firm of Peddle, Thorpe and Walker had been
commissioned to design substantial extensions to the Chancery in
Jakarta. A project involving t'he complete redesign ana
reconstruction of the Chancery and the Ambassador's residence in
Tokyo had also been undertaken by the Department of Works.
Mr Whitlam said that the estimated total cost of the
works was more than $ 32 million during the next three years.
This did not include fees for architects and other consultants,
which would amount to about ten per cent of the design and
construction costs.
7-



1/ 3
T,, IA IA~~. Press-Statement No. 131
September 1973
RADIO-ACTIVE IODINE IN MILK
The Prime Minister announced today that
the low levels of radio-active iodine which had
earlier been observed in Perth's milk supply were
no longer detectable. of the nine major milk
supplies included in the Government's monitoring
program, Perth's was the only one in which
radio-active iodine had been detected.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



3 AI=
NQ DATE
M/ 135 20 September 1973
BORDER ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS AGREEMENT
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
S Mr Whitlam, announced today that discussions would be held in
Jakarta beginning on 25 September for a Border Administrative
Arrangements Agreement relating to the border between the
Indonesian province of Irian Jaya and Papua New Guinea,
An Agreement delineating the border was signed in
Jakarta on 14 February 1973o The proposed new Agreement will
cover a number of issues arising from border relations such as
S traditional movements across the border and immigration matters,
etc.
SMr Whitlam said that the Australian delegation would
be led by the Solicitor-General, Mr R. J. Ellicott, and
that its members would be drawn from Australian and Papua
New Guinean Departments and the Australian Embassy in Jakarta. 



EMBARGO: 8 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, TO
THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AT THE
GENERAL MOTORS HOLDEN DINING HALL, WOODVILLE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
FRIDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 1973
once already this week I have had occasion to draw attention
to the remarkable number of manufacturers' dinners I have been
eating, or will eat in the space of a fortnight five in all.
Manufacturers well know the way to my heart.
These eating engagements are, of course, also speaking
engagements. I am happy to speak to Australian manufacturers
because, quite frankly, I think we have a good story to tell.
I believe there is no section of the Australian business community
which shares greater common interests, more common ground with the
present Australian Government than Australia's manufacturing
industries. It is an historical fact that the strength of Australian
manufactures and the strength of the Australian Labor movement have
grown together. This has been no accident. It is of the essence
of the political and industrial development of this nation; and
this community of interest between Labor and industry was never
greater than at this time in our history when we have an Australian
Labor Government.
Let me from the first get down to the essentials of our
community of interest. They are essentials which transcend, I
believe, the criticisms you may have of my Government in detail
or for that matter, which I may have of you in detail. To mention
these great areas of agreement is at the same time to set the present
economic condition of Australia and the Australian Government's
plans for the economy in a true perspective. It is timely this week
to do so.
First, the Australian Government has an unqualified commitment
to genuine full employment. However acute our perception of the
social and economic evils of inflation may be, we are not prepared
to seek a solution through the weapon of massive unemployment.
In Australia, massive unemployment means empty or half-used factories.
It means, whenever that weapon has been tried in this nation,' our
loss, your bankruptcy, the retarding and sometimes even the enof
your careers as businessmen. There is no matter on which the people
we represent and the industries you represent should share so strong
a common view and a common determination. And that means that
whatever measures we take to deal with the day-to-day problems of
economic management, even when those problems have a high
international component, they will not be solved by us at least
by creating significant unemployment or closing your factories. 
Secondly, we are committed to a national economy running
at the highest level of its capacity and real productivity.
We are a Government of growth. That means that the manufacturer
and the investor can plan with complete assurance on the maintenance
of the highest level of growth. We cannot be content with the two
or three per cent growth prevailing in the year before our election.
We need to sustain and, if possible, surpass the seven per cent
already achieved, not just through our efforts in the last nine
months but through your efforts and the efforts of your employees.
Thirdly, you need, as we need, a high level of real wages
and a high level of real purchasing power. Your prosperity and
our success depend alike on the ability of the consumers
overwhelmingly employees and their dependants to buy your goods
and pay into our revenues.
Fourthly, we have a vested interest in your achieving fair
profits. We need the growth which the investment of your profits
brings; and quite frankly we need healthy taxes from your healthy
profits. As to these last two matters wages and profits you may
recall that in my policy speech last November, I acknowledged that
our program of vast social reform could only work successfully
within a framework of strong, uninterrrupted growth. The expectation
of reasonable profits is as much a factor in achieving that growth
as is the reasonable anticipation on the part of employees that their
real standards will rise.
Fifthly, there is the overwhelming importance to the wellbeing
of all Australians of our social program itself, our social
goals, our social priorities. It's true that by the simplest
accounting, our program involves an increased allocation of the
national resources to the public sector. The whole thrust of our
program is towards public initiatives, initiatives that in modern
societies are either taken by governments, or not taken by anybody
at all. But it should be left there. It is an absurdly oversimplified
proposition to suggest that any increase in public
activity, public initiative, any widening of the public sector is
automatically and inevitably at the expense of the private sector.
For example, this year, in our Budget, we gave education top
priority. It constitutes the fastest growing component of the
Budget. We will provide $ 843 million for education in 1973/ 74, an
increase of $ 404 million or 92 per cent on last year. But
governments do not manufacture the equipment, make the bricks,
erect the buildings, install the fittings which compose a school.
When governments spend on these items they provide new investment
opportunities for the private investor, new scope for the private
manufacturer. And the same opportunities apply in our proposals
in the cities, in hospitals, in transport, in housing. When
governments take initiatives where none existed before, it is
private enter prise, private manufacturing which share in the first
fruits of such initiatives. 
-3-
And to those five great imperatives, these goals, these
objectives in which we share common interests I shall add a
sixth a thoroughly political one. You have a vested interest
in continuing prosperity of South Australia. So have I. I cannot
survive politically, my Government cannot survive, without
prosperity in this State a State which sends seven Labor of her
eleven members to the House of Representatives.
I won't go through the list of specific benefits which-accrue
to South Australia under the Budget and other arrangements made with
the South Australian Government during the year. I may say that
total paym~ nts to the South Australian Government in 1973/ 74 are
estimated at $ 385 million. That represents $ 320 per head compared
with an average payment to all States of $ 270 per head. The benefits
of increased. consumption in this State are benefits which you, as the
State's manufacturers, can share.
These are the things you can bank on, literally bank on,
invest on, plan on, with assurance, with surety, with confidence.
You can bank on-full employment; you can bank on an expanding
economy, you can bank on higher consuming power, you can bank on
the continuance of splendid profits; you can bank on growing
opportunities of the private sector to benefit from the growing
initiatives of government. These are sure and certain things.
Any prudent investor should be able to see these certainties and
seize the opportunities.
Quite frankly, I can only express contempt for the behaviour
of the Stock Exchange last week. The stock market apparently
suddenly discovered inflation. The Government cannot be responsible
for the masochism of the stock market, or be concerned about its
self-inflicted wounds.
I took the trouble to glance at the business pages of the
Advertiser this week. What do I find?
" John Martin Peak Profit and Pay-Out Surprise hoist in
dividend rate by Hills industries Hunter Douglas dividend
up after profit upsurge... . Orlit exceeds expectations earns
15.3 per cent.... . Earnings peak for food group."
This I am asked to believe is the picture of an economy
bludgeoned to its knees by the onslaughts of the socialists in
Canberra! It is a nonsense; and I ask you, as the solid
manufacturers of South Australia, people with a-stake in the
prosperity of your State, of your nation, as well as your own
business, not to have a bar of this masochism, this schizophrenia,
this psychological sabotage. It is in this context the context
of a strong, an expanding economy that I put some of our specific
problems and the Government's handling of those problems. 
-4-
We have acknowledged from the day we took office that
inflation was the major problem of economic management. On the
December, the first report I made to the nation, I said
" In particular, my Government will spare no effort to restore
genuine full employment to this country. Yet we must do this
while continuing a battle to contain inflation. We are under no
illusions about the difficulty of this double task". That was
less than three weeks after the election. So inflation is not
something the Government has just discovered, just started to worry
about. It is just a statement of fact to say that most of the
additional price increases which have occurred in Australia since
we took office have been the result of the international transmission
to this country of inflationary pressures being experienced in
practically every developed country where a free or mixed economy
operates. But we immediately began to take action to curtail these
international pressures. We appreciated the value of the currency
by 7 per cent in December; we didn't go down when the United States
dollar went down and we revalued again by a further 5 per cent
in September. Those actions generated great criticisms. Where is
the foretold disaster?
Then, of course, we cut tariffs by 25 per cent in July.
Let me say this: the 25 per cent tariff cut is not going to
produce the 45,000 to 50,000 which " Industry News", the organ of
your associated Chambers of Manufactures, told us to expect.
The Government set aside $ 25 million for special assistance
to industries and persons who might be victimized by our decision.
The latest figures I have two months after the decision is that
one Australian factory not in South Australia has sought
assistance. The total number of employees claiming special
unemployment benefits provided for tariff cut victims is some
throughout Australia. There were 13 in South Australia.
Three still remain to be placed in new jobs. Catastrophe!
Disaster' Doom.
I do not want it to be thought for a minute that I am cavalier
about these matters, particularly as they may affect manufacturers
in South Australia. I very well know the vulnerability of South
Australia's great industries to changes in demand in your eastern
markets. No policy decision of any government. I lead will result
in the dislocation of South Australian industry. I give you that
unequivocal reassurance. As I told the people in a national
broadcast on the 22nd July; " This Government did not restore full
employment in this country merely to take it away again, even from
a section of the workers."
We are, nonetheless, striving for more efficient, more
competitive Australian industry, throughout Australia. It is
not enough to say that because an industry exists in a particular
place, it has a divine right to that existence in that particular
place for all time. To achieve our aims of a more competitive,
more efficient industry, we have instituted a whole range of measuresthe
tariff review, removal of restrictive practices, new manpower
policies, the establishment of the Industries Assistance Commission.
It is clear that if we are to combat inflation even moderately
better than most comparable countries we shall have to cut away
some of the industrial fat. It is, of course, going to be a massive
task to balance these objectives with our equally determined effort
to minimise hardship to both employers and employees. The Government
is equal to that task. 
I want to introduceapare political note not a party
political note. But it is a matter which I think concerns all
Australians. The politics of Australia have for many years been
conducted in a atmosphere of virtual permanent electioneering.
This is not only because of the frequency of our elections, though,
of course, that is a factor. Since the two Houses of the national
parliament were thrown out of alignment in 1963, there have been
national elections virtually every e-ighteen months. In thirteen
years that I have been either deputy or Leader of the Labor Party
I have fought eight national campaigns. But there is more to i~ t
than that. For many years past ( we might date it from the death
of Harold Holt) there has been a deep element of instability and
unpredictability in our national political life. We have had five
Prime Ministers in seven years. As a consequence, we have lived
psychologically always on the verge of imminent political change.
This has not been good for Australia; it has not made for good
economic or political management. I want to put this very
seriously and frankly to you. It may be that the next elections
will involve an election for both Houses. There must be a
Senate election not much later than April or May next year.
But the timing of an election involving the I-ouse of Representatives
is a matter for our judgement. It is giving away no secrets, it
is a simple statement of political fact that I shall recommend a
dissolution of the House of Representatives at the time of maximum
advantage to the Government. Therefore, the simple poli-tical fact
of life in Australia is that the present Government is going to
be around for a considerable timi-e not less than two years.
Now two years is a long time in the life of a nation such as ours
and certainly a long time in business planning. it is unreal for
business to take the attitude that: the Government could be
sabotaged or undermined without far greater datmage to business
itself than to the Government. The Government itself in its broad
objectives and I believe in the specific measures it takes to
achieve those broad objectives is, an eminently predic-table government.
Wise business, prudent business, sensible manufacturers will
acknowledge that it is better to live'. with and plan with and
co-operate with a basically predictable government, one which will
be the government of Australia for a considerable time to come,
than to sulk in desperate futility in resentment against the
judgement of the people last December about how and by whom they
would be governed for at least tho ensuing three years. 



NQ DATE
M4/ 136 21 September 1973
AUSTRALIAN AID TO0 INDO-CHINA
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr VWhitlam, today announced a further stage in the Government's
plan to contribute to the post-war reconstruction of all
countries in Indo-China.
Mr Whitlam said that Australia's first consignment
of aid for North Viet-Nam had now been shipped by the chartered
vessel " Cosmos" and was expected to reach Haiphong early next
month. The shipment was valued at $ 600,000 and comprised 70g000
kilos of wool and 760 -bons of roofing i-ron. Mr Whitlam said
the recently established Australian Embassy in Hanoi would be in
a position to discuss further requests for aid,
In reaffairming the Government's decision to participate
generously in aid programs for Indo-China, irrespective of the
politics of the people concerned or their Governments, Mr W,. hitlam
recalled that Australia had already given $ U5250,000 to the
Indo-China Operations Group of the international Red Cross for
humanitarian aid for the whole of Indo-China and a further
$ 250,000 to UNICEF to assist maternal and child welfare,
Mr WPhitlam also gave details of Australian aid for
South Viet-Nam, and outlined proposals for Laos and the Khmer
Republic. 
2
In South Viet-Nam, he said, most of Australia's
aid was being directed to projects such as town water supply
schemes, which were regarded as a major factor in improving
public health. Current projects included the provision of Australian
equipment and engineering assistance in the development of
water supply schemes for Da Nang and Vung Tau. The projects would
be developed over the next six years with Australia contributing
$ 6.7 million in the Da Nang scheme and $ 3 million at Vung Tau.
Another $ 3.5 million was being provided to South Vietn'i
National Water Supply Agency and $ 1.6 million to the Saigon
Metropolitan Water Office, in the form of pipes, fittings and
ancillary equipment.
Mr Whitlam added that provision had been made in the
current financial year for Australia to give more aid to Laos
for irrigation, forestry and educational projects, and to the
Khymer Republic for irrigation, flood control and electric powe*
projects. 



Jj4AUS-. 1lA! I( A j4 PRESS STATEMENT NO. 132
24 SEPTEMBER 1973
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTS
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs said today that the Australian Government had
formally and officially informed the Registrar of the
International Court of the nuclear tests conducted by
France at Mvururoa Atoll in July and August and had
pointed out that, in the view of the Australian
Government, this constituted a breach of the interim
measures order made by the Court on 22 June.
Mr Whitlam. said that although he still hoped
that the French Government would make a formal
announcement that its test series had ended, he
understood that this was not the intention of the
French Government. Hie was, however, prepared to
assume that the lifting of restrictions as from
September indicated that the current series of
tests had in fact concluded..
The Prime Minister said that he accordingly hoped
that this would lead to the lifting of the constraints
that had been imposed by Australian trade unions on
commercial and economic relations between Australia
and France. Mr Whitlam emphasised that the Australian Government's
firm position was one of continuing opposition to the
conducting of atmospheric nuclear testing. The
Australian Government had all along made this plain to
the French Government and would continue to do so.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 9.00 p. m. 24 September 1973 Check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, TO
THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE HEAVY ENGINEERING MANUFACTURERS'
ASSOCIATION LAKESIDE HOTEL, CANBERRA, MONDAY, 24 SEPTEMBER 1973
Some of you may remember, when we brought down our
Budget, certain commentators describing it as Phase I of the
Government's economic policy. I suppose this occasion will be
branded as Phase IV of our manufacturing policy. Yours is
the fourth manufacturers' dinner I have attended in the past few
weeks. Now at last I am dealing with the heavies.
Let me begin by proclaiming the fundamental community
of interest between the Labor Government and your branch of
industry. Rather, let me proclaim it in your own words.
In one of your recent annual reports I found this passage:
" Since its formation in 1968, the Heavy Engineering manufacturers'
Association has consistently advocated Government-industry
co-operation as the best means of attaining the national
objectives of development, full employment and prosperity."
I accept those words as an accurate statement of our
common policy our shared objectives, our shared methods.
I should add that my Government has been pursuing the same
objectives since its formation in 1972. So we are both, in a
way, fledgling organisations. You can be proud of your
Association's achievements in the past six years. I am equally
proud of the Government's record in the past 10 months.
I return to those three objectives again " Development,
full employment, prosperity". First, consider employment.
There is nothing more central to our common needs, to our common
philosophy, than the maintenance of full employment. You
cannot afford the waste and losses which large-scale
unemployment inevitably brings. We cannot afford them either;
nor can be afford, or tolerate, the social axd political
consequences. We inherited the worst unemployment for 10 years.
We have restored full employment in less than 10 months.
Second, prosperity. I venture to suggest that Australia
is more prosperous today than it has ever been. In saying this,
I do not overlook the vast areas of poverty that remain for
many of our people, and I acknowledge that for such Australians
the very word " prosperity" has a hollow ring. Nevertheless, it
is true that for most of us consumer spending is running at
record levels; profits are higher than ever; world demand
for our exports is immensely strong. And nowhere is this healthy
situation more' manifest than in manufacturing industry. In short,
we have record prosperity. / 2 
-2-
Your third criterion is development. Let me assure
you that the Government regards the development of strong,
healthy Australian industries as a fundamental, long-term
objective. It is one of our essential and unqualified
commitments and it is reflected, I believe, in every major
policy announcement, every major economic decision we have taken
since coming to office. We are a Government of growth. Our
success, perhaps our survival, certainly the achievement of our
basic social objectives, depends upon the maintenance of strong
and prosperous local industries. We need your strength, we
need your growth, we need your prosperity.
I think you will agree on reflection perhaps even
my friend Senator Cotton will agree that our incentive in
this matter is far more powerful than it was for our predecessors.
It is precisely because we are pledged to certain reforms, to
a program of social change and renovation which the Australian
people entrusted us to carry out, that we are more than ever
determined to maintain and develop the underlying strength of
our industrial economy. Does anyone imagine that my Government
of all governments can be indifferent to the needs of industry,
and epecially of your industry an industry that provides
the know-how and the muscle for important development developmental
projects, for construction, for transport, for shipping or
pipelines, for power supply and generation, for water conservation
projects, for northern development, for vital defence industries
( like light aircraft) that we are determined Australia shall
maintain for herself? ( Now that a certain by-election is
behind us, I might even mention such things as airports.) Of
course your industry's prosperity is essential to us, essential
to our plans, our vision, our whole philosophy. You are the
businessmen, and yours are the industries, that will be needed
to bring many of our plans to fruition.
I give you this further assurance tonight: Nothing
my Government does to correct our economic difficulties either
those we have inherited or those we have imported will be
allowed to jeopardise the fundamental strength of Australian
industry. The very opposite is true. The whole burden of our
attack on inflationary pressures has been through measures
designed to strengthen industry, streamline it, to build up its
efficiency and sharpen its competitive edge. We inherited
a pattern of growing inflation. The great bulk of that inflation
has been due to factors and pressures imported from countries
where inflation is running at a high rate. It is as much an
international as a national problem. There is no simple solution.
But faced with this situation, what did we do? We did not throw
up our hands in despair or bludgeon the economy to a standstill. / 3 
-3-
We took prompt and responsible action. We initiated a series
of carefully timed and related steps designed to increase our
level of imports, build up the supply of goods and reduce
domestic prices. We are now seeking a further weapon from the
people direct power over prices. Depending on the attitude
of the Senate, we shall submit that proposal to a referendum
of the people before Christmas or as early as possible in the
new year. That has been our approach a steady, responsible,
coherent attack on the roots of the problem. How easy it
would have been for us, faced with an inflationary problem,
to act as other governments have done, and throw thousands of
Australians out of work. How easy to take refuge in
conventional remedies, despite their futility in the past!
But what would be the effect on industry if we did? Loss of
production, half-empty factories, businesses driven to the wall.
Your industry, as you are all painfully aware, is only now
recovering from the effects of the most recent attempt to
restrain inflation by such means. Again, how easy it would
have been for me and the Treasurer to yield to the clamour of
our critics, the editorialists, the airmchair propagandists,
and cut back on public spending in the Budget. Think of the
plaudits we would have received for acting responsibly. But
think of the consequences. We would have totally abrogated
the trust placed in us by the people. We would have denied
to industry, to you, to manufacturers, the great long-term
opportunities that our program offers for investment and growth.
Let me explain those opportunities. I have pointed
out to manufacturers on other occasions that it is an absurdly
over-simplified proposition to suggest than any increase in
public activity, any widening of the public sector, is
automatically at the expense of the private sector. For example,
in our Budget this year we gave top priority to Education. We
shall provide $ 843 million for Education in 1973-74, an increase
of 92%. But governments do not manufacture the equipment,
make the bricks, install the fittings that make a school.
When governments spend on these items they provide new investment
opportunities for the private investor, new scope for the private
manufacturer. The same opportunities apply to our proposals
in the cities, in hospitals, in transport, in development projects.
When governments take initiatives where none existed before
initiatives that would not otherwise be taken at all it is
private investment and private industry which share in the
benefits of such initiatives.
I have not yet mentioned one great quality of your
industry that commends it to the new Government. That is:
you are an Austrdlian industry, you are overwhelmingly Australianowned
and controlled. You exemplify what we hope to achieve in
other sections of the economy: greater Australian ownership
and control of our industries and resources. Moreover, as you
yourselves have pointed out, the very platform of my party / 4 
recognises the importance of heavy engineering in the achievement
of our national goals. Section 8 states that the party's policy
is to encourage nationally the scientific development of our
national resources through the use of our raw materials and
human skills in the fields of metallurgy, metal fabrication and
engineering. This is to be achieved through Government and
private co-operation in the development of national industries
for the greatest advantage to Australia. Section 5 of the
Platform provides that the Government will protect industry by
whatever means are necessary after thorough examination by an
independent government authority.
Many of the decisions we have taken reflect this
awareness of your special importance, your central role in
Australia's future. We established at the outset a new Department
of Secondary Industry, and, within that Department, an Engineering
Industries Division. You have always emphasised the need for
co-operation between government and industry; so have we.
My colleague Dr Cairns has announced his proposal for " industry
panels" to bring together representatives of industry, government,
the trade unions and consumers to advise on the development
of industries. Your Association has had discussions with
the Department of Secondary Industry on setting up a panel in
the area of heavy engineering. We will strengthen the Australian
Industry Development Corporation and free it from restraints,
to enable it to play its full role in developing Australian
industry and keeping it in Australian hands.
I acknowledge the anxieties you have experienced
recently over our tariff proposals. The Tariff Board completed
a long review of your industry early last year. Our predecessors
accepted the Board's recommendation for protection on the grounds
that you are an efficient, economic industry and a national
asset. I should not wish to dispute that finding for a moment;
I wholeheartedly endorse it. But in-view of your application
for a review of tariff levels in the light of our currency
realignments, I do not wish to anticipate what future assistance
your industry may receive or deserve. As you know, we have
decided to transform the Tariff Board into an Industries Assistance
Commission. It will co-ordinate all forms of aid to industry
and improve the allocation of resources among industries throughout
Australia. It will throw open the whole process of assistance
to public scrutiny. It would be unfair to mislead you at this
stage with predictions of what the new Commission will or will
not do. But I assure you of this: no section ot industry ranks
higher in our estimation, or higher in our priorities, than yours.
I know the measures we have taken against inflation
two revaluations, our 25% tariff cut, our policy on interest
rates are not necessarily the measures you would have chosen
yourselves. Yet I suggest that Australian industry, operating
within a basically sound economy, is in a strong position to
withistand the effects of our measures, and to respond to them
in positive and beneficial ways. As you know, we have undertaken
that the Government will assist any industry adversely affected
by our revaluations or tariff cuts. We have set aside $ 25m to 
help industries and employees hurt by our tariff measures.
The latest information I have is that one Australian factory
has claimed assistance. The total number of employees
claiming benefits as a result of our measures is 25 throughout
Australia. Three still remain to be placed in new jobs. That
is how disastrous our measures have been to date. So let us
be realistic. If you have worries or grievances we expect
to hear from you. But we want to hear of specific and detailed
cases. We do not want vague and generalised forecasts of
unspecified calamities.
There is no point in my coming before you pretending
that nothing has changed since last December, or that Government
decisions on which you based your plans and expectations last
year will remain unaltered. You know as well as I do that much
has changed. We have a new department with a new and able
Minister at its head, dedicated to your welfare. New positions
are being created and filled in that department. We are
establishing new machinery for consultation and co-operation
between government and industry. We are establishing new
machinery to assist industry and assess its needs.
I ask you to accept that all our reforms are designed
with one purpose: to strengthen Australian industry. Not to
benefit me, or the Government, but to benefit you and
ultimately the Australian people. We have a new Government,
a vigorous Government, a Government that is likely to be around
for some years to come. I suggest that you accept that reality
and work with us, beside us, for tChe welfare and progress of
our nation. Because you are prudent men, realistic men, and
in the last resort, courageous men, I know it is not in your
nature to shirk the challenge of change and opportunity.,
If I merely wanted to offer you comfort and reassurance, I would
simply remind you, as I have already done, that we have your
interests at heart and will safeguard your security. But I
do more than that. I invite you to accept that our plans for
Australian industry, undertaken now in the context of a sound
and expanding prosperity, will lead us forward to a richer,
more progressive, more exciting future. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: I have a few announcements which I regret
I couldn't give to you or my fellow members of the Parliament
before this. Some of the announcements I have relate to
decisions by the Executive Council and while the Executive
Council used to sit on Thursdays and we brought it forward
to midday on Tuesdays, one still has to wait till it concludes,
before one can make any announcements of the decisions which
the Government recommends to it. Secondly, some of the
decisions have to be received by the Premiers before one can
announce them and there again this has not been done the
messages to the Premiers they would not have been received
by the Premiers very long ago.
There are some appointments in the transport field.
The Secretary of the Department of Transport has been appointed
as a sole Commissioner under the Royal Commissions Act to
inquire into the whole of the Maritime Industry and the development
of transport policies. I will circulate the terms of reference
of the Maritime Industry Commission o. f Inquiry which Mr. Summers
will conduct. I would like to pay tribute to Mr. Summers for his
acceptance of this completely new national task, there is no-one
in Australia who knows so much about it, and who is so well
equipped to discharge it. As you know we are resolved to
amalgamate the Departments of Transport and Civil Aviation.
The new head of the Department will be coming from Canada,
Mr. C. C. Halton. He was born in Britain and he has had a most
distinguished career in private industry in Britain and in
public service in Canada. Mr. Jones met him when he was in
Ottowa earlier this year, and I met him when I was there for the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. He has experience in
many fields of transport, he is a distinguished economist,
it is a very great advantage to Australia to have a man who is
aware of the similar federal system in Canada and who has operated
within it, and also is acquainted with the system in the
United States. Mr. Jenner will be Acting Secretary of the
Department from 30 September until Mr. Halton's arrival.
Sir Donald Anderson, the present Secretary of the Department of
Civil Aviation will become full time Chairman of Qantas on the
1st October. Mr. R. Phillips will be Acting Director-General of
Civil Aviation until his Department is merged with the Department
of Transport. Mr. Jones can give you further details about
Mr. Halton, the first Secretary of the amalgamated department.
The Auditor-General was involved in a car accident and
Mr. W. Scott will act as Auditor-General while he is off. / 2 
-2
V~ have decided to expand the services of the Australian
Legal Aid Office, which was announced last July. In view of the
demands Already being placed on the Office, the Government decided
to allocate an additional $ 750,000 for the Office in this
financial year.
There are two other inquiries which we will be setting up.
One is into Government Procurement Policy and I can circulate the terms
of reference to you. We expect to announce the membership of the
Committee of Inquiry in the next few days. We have also decided to
set up a F. M. Radio Inquiry. The Senate Standing Committee on
Education, Science and the Arts, recommended that there should be a
new inquiry into F. M. broadcasting. Senator Douglas McClelland,
Minister for the Media, made a submission to Cabinet along the same
terms, and I have a brief note of the purpose of this inquiry.
We want to set up F. M. We want to know what bands it should operate
in or what bands other media might have to operate in. A very great
deal of expenditure is involved, so we want to be sure that the
correct decision is made.
Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Do you believe you are bound, under whatever circumstances,
to fulfil your election undertaking to give a 35 hour week to the
Commonwealth Public Service?
PRIME MINISTER: As my colleague, Mr. Cameron, pointed out so
effectively at Question Time in the House this morning, it becomes
very difficult to carry out this particular promise in the Policy
Speech, because we have so effectively, promptly and fully carried
out the other promise to remove unemployment. You remember that in
the Policy Speech, I said that in the lifetime of this Parliament,
the 28th Parliament, the working hours of all Commonwealth employees
will be reduced by 1 hours to 35 hours. I am the Minister responsible
for the Commonwealth Public Service, I can redeem this promise by
making a recommendation anytime in the next two years.
QUESTION: Do you accept Mr. Cameron's argument in Parliament
this morning that it might be impractical to do so?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't make any commitments to two years ahead.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I under stood that you had made commi * tments
two years ahead, do you now expect to honour those commitments?
PRIME MINISTER: It would be more difficult, but I won't say that
I won't honour them. I acknowledge that I made the commitment.
That is in the lifetime of this Parliament.
QUESTION: Did Cabinet yesterday, discuss the Industries Assistance
Commission? If so, what was the result and what was the attitude of
Dr. Cairns?
PRIME MINISTER: We did discuss it. I expect to be introducing the
bill this week. Might I say, Mr. Haupt, that I was a bit disappointed
in an article of yours this morning in the Financial Review which
misrepresented ' what I had said you said, referring to my speech in
Adelaide last Friday " After berating the business community on
Friday, for masochism, schitsophrenia and phsychological sabotage".
I beratted the stock market, not the business community. I was
quite precise in the people I beratted. / 3 
-3
QUESTION: How do you react to Bob Hawke describing you and the
Cabinet, of accusing you of political imbecility and political
insanity? PRIME MINISTER: I have no comment to make on these remarks.
QUESTION: You have said at least twice in the last week that
the bulk-of Australia's present inflation is due to trends imported
from overseas. What evidence do you have for this statement?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a very great demand, this season, for
exports for instance, in meat. That is the developed countries,
such as the United States, which had previously placed restrictions
on the import of our meat are now anxious to get as much as they can.
This is a very clear case where the price of meat had been put up.
More and more the inflation is spreading between all developed
countries. I give you that instance.
QUESTION: In the wake of Parramatta, do you plan to relinquish the
Foreign Minister portfolio, so you can spend more time at home to
concentrate on domestic politics?
PRIME MINISTER: I will tell you if I have any changes, when I
have decided to make any such changes.
QUESTION: Did Mr. Byrant discuss with you, his move to send his
wife to Maningrida? Who covered her expenses on that trip?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
QUESTION: Again in the wake of Parramatta, you said that the
Galston decision was one that may have gone against you, or maybe
the reason why there was such a swing against the Government
PRIME MINISTER: Of course it was. I
QUESTION: Do you also.-accept Mr. Whelan's assessment that the public
relations campaign of your Government has broken down and that the
policies of your Government are not getting through to the people.
PRIME MINISTER: I think that's right the public haven't seen the
whole picture this way, that will obviously-be cured by the time of
any general election.
QUESTION: The Melburnians today are reported to be very
PRIME MINISTER: Melburnians? What, the citizens of the city of
Melbourne? QUESTION: Exactly. It was reported today that they..
PRIME MINISTER: I thought you were referring to a Category school.
QUESTION: are reported to be extremely nervous today about the
presence of an alleged El Fatah terrorist in their city.
PRIME MINISTER: He's left. / 4 
-4
QUESTION: You said in answer to a question on notice from
Mr. Lynch that you had discussions with General Romulo about the
trial of Senator Aquino in Manila. Could you give us the substance
of your discussions or could you give the Australian Government's
position on Senator Aquino' s trial.
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Aquino's trial is now, I gather, to be in
public. I don't want to comment on internal matters. Senator Aquino
is very well known to Australians. There would be no Filipino,
even the President himself, who would be so well known to Australians.
Accordingly, his trial will be followed with very great interest by
a great number of people, in Australia, including myself.
QUESTION: will you elaborate on Azzam's whereabouts
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Can you say why you can't do that?
PRIME MINISTER: The reason is obvious. Ladies and Gentlemen, I will
not make comments on security matters. And there are many security
implications in the question you asked. If it is known how he's
travelling, when he left, where he's going, there are'security
implications for a great number of people, including Australians,
in transit or at their posts. Ladies and gentlemen, I don't want to
have to always say the same thing about security matters. I will not
comment on them.
QUESTION: Will the Australian Government recognise the new
Government in Chile?
PRIME MINISTER: Not yet.
QUESTION: Some months ago I asked you whether it would be possible
to announce cabinet decisions to Parliament before announcing them at
the Press Conference. After today's events, do you think it would be
a good idea to announce them each Tuesday morning when Parliament is
sitting? PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't. I have already told you it's impossible
to announce some of these decisions. Cabinet was going all day
yesterday. We have the Executive Council meeting from now on,
ordinarily at midday on Tuesday. Obviously, I can't announce
decisions of the Executive Council, such as the appointments, the
terms of reference of the Royal Commissions, when Parliament sits
because it sits, at present, before the Executive Council meets.
Again, there are some matters which I have to convey to the Premiers
before I can announce them publicly.
QUESTION: Sir, you said this morning that you would have gladly
announced, brought in your list, I think you said, if Mr. Snedden
had asked you earlier in Question Time...
PRIME MINISTER: There are some matters I could have announced then,
yes. There was for instance one matter which came out in answer
to a question by one of the members on my side, Mr. Hansen, the
Member for Wide Bay asked a question concerning his electorate.
I doubt whether the decision had yet been received by Mr. Bjelke-
Petersen, at the time the question was asked, but that is an instance
where I could have announced in the Parliament if the question had
been asked at the beginning of Question Time instead of right at
the end. 
QUESTION: Do you plan to do this in future?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Did you want the Press Conference today not not?
QUESTION: Yes Sir, but I would rather have the press announcements
made earlier, so that perhaps we could think of more intensive
questions to ask you.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I did a week ago hold it in the-morning.
I wasn't able to hold it this morning for one reason of course,
there were several of these things that had to be confirmed by the
Executive Council or conveyed to Premiers, but you haven't asked
me about the ones that have beih-conveyed to Premiers.
QUESTION: Well Sir, I was just going to ask that one. I don't
know if it was concerning the Prices Referendum, but I was going to
ask you, have any eastern State Premiers in recent days offered to
cede to you temporary powers on prices and incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no change from the position at the
Constitutional Convention.
QUESTION: Have you agreed to the latest request for a conference
of Australian political leaders on inflation?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the suggestion came in a telegram from
the leader of the L. C. L. in the South Australian Parliament.
And as I said when I was asked this morning about this, I had
a discussion with him on Friday night.
QUESTION: Can you tell us what your answer was?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't believe that the time would be well spent.
National economic policies are only effectively carried out by the
National Parliament.
QUESTION: Could you tell me how many inter-departmental committees
are presently operating? Will you make public a list of the interdepartment
committees set up by your Government? And also would you
make public a list of inter-departmental committees set up by the
previous Government, which are still operating?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There is a question what ones my Department
are involved in and I expect to give an answer to that this week.
It would in fact take a very long time to compile that list.
There are many more such committees than there were when we took
over. And this--is-one of the reasons why the Public Service,
well at least in my Department, has had to be expanded, is to answer
correspondence and to answer questions like that. And I have to
take into account whether the time, the money is well spent.
I try to answer all the letters that come in, except when they are
part of a campaign such as that one which we were subjected to a
few months ago, I don't bother to answer that sort of claptrap, but
apart from that form of syndicated pressure, I receive well over a
thousand letters a week, and a very great amount of manpower and
womanpower is involved in answering those letters. So I can't
responsibly put aside people to get an answer to the question that
you just asked me. / 6 
-6
QUESTION: Would you tell us what you have written to the
Premiers about?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I would probably write 10 letters to each
Premier each week.
QUESTION: When are you going to hold a special Premiers meeting
to discuss changes to the Constitution over the composition of the
Loan Council?
PRIME MINISTER: Probably on 11 October. I had suggested Friday
12 October, which is not a sitting day, that didn't suit one or
more of the Premiers, and it is pretty sure now to be on Thursday
the 11th. The Premier of Queensland will not be here, but the
Acting Premier, Sir Gordon Chalk, is willing, at some inconvenience,
to come. So I think it will be the 11th.
QUESTION: Will you investigate or find out who did pay for
Mrs. Bryant's trip?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: And do you consider this to be unusual practice?
PRIME MINISTER: No I am not going to inquire. I assume that this was
justified. Certainly, I am not going to inquire into such matters.
QUESTION: My question relates to the purchase by the National
Gallery of the Jackson Pollock painting
PRIME MINISTER: A masterpiece.
QUESTION: For $ 1,340,000. Were you consulted before the painting
was purchased? Do you agree with its purchase? Would you agree that
the money could be better spent on purchasing Australian works both
here and overseas. And finally, as the former owner Ben Heller was
on the point of tears as he talked about it last night, about his
pending parting with the painting. Would you consider authorising
the Director of the National Gallery to sell ' Blue Poles' back to
Mr. Heller at a modest profit?
PRIME MINISTER: If we are going to sell it, I have no doubt that in
a year or so we could make a handsome profit * on it. If one likes to
regard it in that light, investment in art is very profitable indeed.
Pollock is one of the great figures in modern. American art and
this is regarded as his masterpiece. I knew of the proposal. It
came to me from the Gallery Acquisitions Committee, which took over
when we took over, from the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board, a
recommendation came from that body. I am not going to overrule the
advice of such bodies when we are able to enact the National Gallery
legislation, then of course, they will have the right to spend the
appropriation as they see fit. I know this is quite a contribution
in overseas aid to redress the American adverse balance of payments.
QUESTION: Could I clear up the question of the Premiers. Were you
talking in geneial terms about problems of communication with the
Premiers week by week or were you talking about some specific thing
that you put to them today?
PRIME MINISTER: Some specific thing. / 17 
-7
QUESTION: Can you tell us what it was?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I am not going to volunteer these things.
I did identify one because it came out in Question Time.
QUESTION: Control of doctors' fees seems to be one of the
major problems facing the health scheme, and I wondered if the
prices referendum was passed, if it would give the Government power
to control doctors' fees whether this had been discussed?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't believe that the prices referendum would.
QUESTION: What about incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: That would. I would expect that would.
QUESTION: You said in your policy speech that referendums would
be held to give the Commonwealth power over interests rates and terms
and conditions of employment. Can you say when the referendums will
be held and can you elaborate on the proposals now?
now
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't/ believe that it is necessary to hold a
referendum over interest rates because the significant interest
rates can probably be regulated under this Parliament's power over
foreign corporations and trading and financial corporations formed
within the limits of the Commonwealth. We are going to introduce
legislation, as you know, in respect of building societies both
terminating and permanent and hire purchase companies and possibly
merchant banks. They would, I would think, all be financial
corporations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth.
The same would apply to various trading corporations so formed.
I would expect that the next House of Representatives election
there would be a referendum I think it is very likely, I
don't know what other proposals there are and one has to limit
the number but it would seem to me that it would be appropriate
to hold a referendum to permit the national Parliament to pass laws
on the conditions of work at the next House of Representatives
election. As you know, at the Senate election, whether it is for
the Senate alone or not, we will be putting referenda to synchronise
elections for the two housesof this Parliament to permit this
Parliament to refer matters to State Parliaments upon which this
Parliament at the moment has the exclusive right to legislate.
Also to spell out in greater detail the conditiond upon which the
State Parliaments can refer matters to tl1{ S, Parliament. Also if
this Premiers' Conference on the Loan Council incorporating Local
Government representatives proves abortive, on a referendum to
amend Section 105A of the Constitution to permit the
national Government to make debt arrangements with elected local
government bodies.
QUESTION: The appointment of the new head of the Department of
Civil Aviation and Transport. Is this an indication that we can
expect the Government to look overseas for senior public servants
in the future and do you expect any reaction from the Public Service
from the implication that there was no one in the Australian
Public Service suitable-to fill the position?
PRIME MINISTER: We will aim to get the best people available.
We believe Mr. Halton is better than anyone available to the Australian
Government in Australia, as the first head of the new combined
Department of Transport. There are some people from overseas that
are already involved in advice to us Mr. Justice Woodhouse of the
New Zealand Court of Appeal. / 8 
-8
QUESTION: Is there any right of appeal, in this case?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Not for First Division men. They are
appointed by the Executive Council.
QUESTION: The latest figures on industrial dispute show that
in the first six months of this year, working days lost because
of strikes, have increased by 65 per cent over the same six months
last year. Will you tell us why this is so?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not aware of the figures and I won't hazard an
opinion on them.
QUESTION: Do you think that this hurts your Government's electoral
standing. And why is it, apparently, that your Government is less
able to deal with the unions, or create an economic...
PRIME MINISTER: Because of the Lynch Laws. Most of the industrial
disputes, as I observe them, flow from demarcation issues.
There are too many unions in Australia, and one of the reasons
why there are too many unions, is the fact that unions take on a
different legal status and personality since the same union has to
be registered in five arbitration jurisdictions. There are many
instances where the same union has to be registered in the
Commonwealth jurisdiction, the Queensland, South Australian
and West Australian jurisdictions. It doesn't apply in Victoria and
Tasmania because the States there rely on wages boards rather than
compulsory industrial arbitration. You will remember that it is
over four and a half years ago now that the Commonwealth Industrial
Court recommended, as a matter of urgency, to all the Attorney-Generals
in Australia that they should take steps to amend their laws to permit
a single legal entity or personality or incorporation for industrial
organisations, and this has still not been done. We tried to do all
we could in the Commonwealth jurisdiction, in this Parliament's
legislation early this year in the Conciliation and Arbitration Bill.
It was thrown out by the Senate. We brought it in in a new form
which ought to make it more palatable, but still making it easier
to amalgamate unions. I don't know what the Senate is going to do
about it.
QUESTION: Do you share Mr. Cameron's attitude on the 35 hour week
being given to power workers and do you support or approve of the
action being taken in New South Wales at the moment?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to volunteer an opinion on this.
These are State employees, they have a quarrel with a State
Government, which happens to be a Liberal Government. But it is
idle for me to express an opinion on this. It is not a matter
where we can do anything as the employer. We have no right to
intervene. It is not a matter where the laws are deficient.
It is not a demarcation issue.
QUESTION: Do you agree with Mr. Cameron?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not volunteering a comment on it. / 9 
9-
QUESTION: Has Cabinet sought an opinion from the Attorney-General's
Department as to whether power over prices can be construed to
include power over wages, and secondly, you mentioned a referendum
on conditions of work might be held with the next House election.
Would power over conditions of work include power over wages?
PRIME MINISTER: Among other things, conditions of work would
include power over wages and salaries, it would include leave and
a very great number of other industrial matters. But in particular
the formula " conditions of work" would cover an increasing matter
where awards are being by-passed, where people are not technically
employees but contractors. You will remember the distribution of
milk changed from a system of employees distributing it to a
system of persons contracting to distribute milk. The same system
as newspapers have for the distribution of newspapers and this has
spread largely in the building industry. Now this form of contract
is aimed to by-pass industrial arbitration or industrial agreement
and accordingly the word " conditions of work" is the one we usually
use now because it would cover all such cases. You also asked if
the Attorney-General's Department had been asked for an opinion,
whether prices covers wages or wages and salaries. The Attorney-
General was asked this in the Senate last week, he said he had not
been asked for an opinion. He had not volunteered an opinion,
the position is the same today.
QUESTION: Mr Hayden referred at Question Time to discussions
he said were going to occur today about housing loan interest
rates. Do you think the Government will decide this week on its
scheme for protecting lower income earners?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't spoken to Mr Hayden since Question Time. 



I Ap.~~
A . t II estab lishing F4" hbrociod casting
'. Wad/ or U1i i P! AA-- l hhav. ing regard
f or-bth t-bec Governiont S de. rn, ro t-o se-c FM broadcasting
j~~ roi~ cd s quicltl, y possible, In its concer t
thei plann ingqi mis aes of 1-li p, The inquiry
t E t6 coniccern itself with* the cor . ts to the Public of
utL re. sbrvic -s zind to t a I a cco0u n iff tho. Gov ernment.' F
po1~ to ncourag plurality of involvement i h
I n reachingi this decision the Cabinet took note
0~ f t. he ; interim report of Hio Seonate Stianclinq Committee on
*-Edu tion, Science -ind. the A rtswhc includedI a
* recommenhation thrat a noew. inqu Lrv-into -i broa~ dcisting
be made.-
CAYBERRA. . A. C. T.
September .1973 



NQ DATE
M/ 137 25 September 1973
AUSTRALIA TO OBSERVE ANDEAN PACT
The Special Minister of State, Senator Willesee,
announced today that Australia had been accorded observer
status to the Andean Pact organisation. Senator Willesee
said that the Pact, whose members were Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela, was an important
sub-regional grouping, whose activities were of considerable
interest to Australia. Pact members were concentrating on
increasing economic co-operation and integration for their
national and regional economic benefit. Observer status would
enable Australia to keep in close touch with the organisation's
headquarters in Lima.
In accordance with the practice of the Pact
organisation, the Australian Embassador to Peru, Mr H. A. Dunn,
has been designated as the Australian observer. Mr Dunn is
also Australian Ambassador to Argentina and to Uruguay.
Senator Willesee said that this move reflected the
Government's desire to strengthen Australia's relations with
Latin American countries. He recalled that Australia sent an
observer to the General Assembly of the Organisation of American
* States last April. 



AR L AFFAIRS
NQ AT
M/ 4026Setebe 17
AUSRAA COTIUESORPTRAINO EGL
repaBtegraiia tien1S4ak stntoeanlaesh an1anube3 o
people inranlae whoisar Pakistanisctens aoornd hAears
Mr~~ M toWah itl saiuncd tht usrwaasi co-odntiguan
$ US500t effnoirnt tetronaatisosnatlw t thie Unieou reaation
ofg orion-quarer foRfumiellsi o phe pepinclly by airlift.
rtae Begbae irainPkosnteatroe fimdaustladesh snuor f
tepNew DeBlha greemen tahor esov outistanizn huanitharia
ixsse betwen Indiat Pakistan. agaeh t a oe h
0Agreemntwoul ptae a the ayC fownraisatooion aftheg sa tio
intesubontnenfot and anss irovee sinmrlations bepteenthen
contie concernedutrli'dcntiuton neo 



IMA L AFFAIR NQ DATE
M/ 139 26 September 1973
SENIOR AUSTRALIAN DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, announced today a number of senior appointments to
Australian diplomatic missions overseas. He announced that
Sir James Plimsoll, would become Australian Ambassador
to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and that he would be
succeeded as Ambassador to the United States by Sir Patrick
Shaw, currently Australian High Commissioner to India
and Australian Ambassador to Nepal. Sir Patrick Shaw would
be succeeded in New Delhi by Mr Bruce Grant, who until recently
has been Public Affairs Commentator for " The Age".
Mr Whitlam also announced that Mr K. C. O. Shann, C. B. E.
had been appointed Australian Ambassador to Japan to succeed
the Honourable Gordon Freeth who would be retiring at the end
of the year. Mr Shann has been Deputy Secretary of the
Department of Foreign Affairs since 1970.
Mr Whitlam said that all of these senior appointments
had been made bearing in mind the Australian Government's desire
to maintain close relations with the countries concerned.
Sir James Plimsoll was a former Permanent Head of the Department
of Foreign Affairs and had served with distinction as
Ambassador to the United States. In his new appointment as
Ambassador to the Soviet Union he would bring with him long
experience in the conduct of Australian foreign policy.
Australian relations with the Soviet Union had developed
significantly in recent years and Sir James Plimsoll's
appointment would enable this development to be maintained.
Mr Whitlam said that he was confident that
Sir Patrick Shaw's long experience as a senior officer of
the Department of Foreign Affairs would serve him well in his
new assignment to the United States. 
-2
Mr Whitlam recalled the great emphasis which successive
Australian Governments had placed on relations with the
United States as he had himself reaffirmed during his recent
visit to Washington. Mr Whitlam said that he was also confident that the
appointment of Mr Bruce Grant to succeed Sir Patrick Shaw as
Australian High Commissioner to India and Ambassador to Nepal
would enable Australia to further develop its relations with
one of' the most significant regions in the Asian continent.
Mr Grant had in past years been one of Australia's best known
commentators on Asian affairs and his international reputation
in the area would be of great value in his new appointment.
Mr Whitlam also paid tribute to the work of
Mr K. C. O. Shann, C. B. E. as Deputy Secretary of the Department
of Foreign Affairs of which he had also been Acting Secretary
on a number of occasions. Mr Whitlam recalled in particular
Mr Shann's period as Ambassador to Indonesia from 1962-1965,
at which post at a particularly difficult time he had served
with great distinction. Mr Whitlam said that he was looking
forward to his forthcoming visit to Japan and that the appointment
of Mr Shann to succeed Mr Freeth reflected the Government's
desire further to consolidate mutual relations in a broad range
of activities. Duhring the past few years Mr Shann had himself
been closely involved with the development of Australia's
relations with Japan.
Mr Whitlam said he expected that Mr Grant would take
up his appointment in November. The other three senior officers
would take up their new appointments early in 1974.
Sir James Plimsoll, was born in 1917 and was
educated at Sydney High School and the University of Sydney
where he obtained the degrees of Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor
of Economics. He worked as an Economist with the Bank of New
South Wales from 1938-42 and served in the Australian Military
Forces from 1942-47. He has had a long and distinguished career
with the Department of Foreign Affairs having been Secretary
e / 3 
-3
of the Department from 1965-1970. He served between 1949-1950
at the Australian Mission to the United Nations, New York and
at the Australian Embassy in Washington. He was Australian
Delegate on UNCURK, Pusan from 1950-1952. Following a number
of senior appointments in the Department of Foreign Affairs he
became Australian Permanent Representative to the United Nations,
New York where he served from 1959-1963. From 1963-1965 he was
Australian High Commissioner to India and Ambassador to Nepal.
His most recent appointment has been as Ambassador to the
United States, which position he has held since 1970.
Sir Patrick Shaw, C. B. E. was born in 1913 and was
educated at Scotch College and the University of Melbourne where
he obtained the degree of Bachelor of Arts and Diploma of
Public Administration. He joined the Public Service in 1936 and
was Private Secretary to the Leader of the Government in the
Senate from 1937 to 1939. He served in Tokyo from 1940-1941
and was Official Secretary in Wellington from 1943-1945. From
1945-1947 he was First Secretary and Charge d'Affaires in
Chungking and later First Secretary in Nanking. From 1947-1949
he was Head of the Australian Mission in Tokyo and Commonwealth
Member on the Allied Control Council for Japan and Australian
Delegate on UNCURK. From 1951-1953 Sir Patrick Shaw was
Permanent Delegate to the United Nations Mission and Consul-General
in Geneva. He served as Ambassador to the Federal Republic
of Germany from 1956-1959 and concurrently as Head of the
Australian Military Mission, Berlin. He was Australian
Ambassador to Indonesia from 1960-1962 following which he occupied
a number of senior positions in the Department of Foreign Affairs
becoming Deputy Secretary of the Department in October 1964.
From 1965-1970 he was Australian Permanent Representative to the
United Nations, New York. He has been High Commissioner to
India and Ambassador to Nepal since April 1970. Sir Patrick
Shaw is married with two children.
Mr Bruce Grant was born in 1925 and was educated at
the Perth Modern School and the University of Melbourne where
he obtained the degree of Bachelor of Arts. He served in the Royal
/ 4 
-4
Australian Dlavy f'rom 1942 to 1945 and joined the editorial
staff of-the Melbourne Age in 1949. He was London correspondent
for The Age from 1954 to 1957. He was awarded a Nieman
Fellowship at Harvard University in 1957/ 58. He was South East
Asian correspondent for the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald
from 1959-1963. In 1964-65 Mr Grant served as Washington
correspondent for the Age. He was Fellow in Political Science
at the University of Melbourne from 1965-1967, lecturing in
international relations. He was Public Affairs Commentator for
the Age from 1968-1973.
Mr Grant is the author of a number of Publications on
Asian affairs of which his book " Indonesia" published in 1963
is well known. He was Roy Milne lecturer for the Australian
Institute of International Affairs in 1969. His book " A Crisis
of Loyalty", a study of Australian foreign policy, was published
in 1972. He was a member of the Council of Monash University
from 1970-73. He was President of the Melbourne Film Festival
1971 and 1972. Mr Grant has also contributed short stories to
Australian and overseas journals such as The New Yorker, Esquire
and Meanjin. Mr Grant is married with two children.
Mr K. C. 0. Shann, was born in 1917 and was
educated at Trinity Grammar School and the University of Melbourne
where he obtained the degree of Bachelor of Arts. He joined
the Commonwealth Public Service in 1939 with the Department of
the Treasury and after working w,. ith the Bureau of Census and
Statistics and the Department of Labour and National Service
joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1946. He served
with the Australian Mission to the United Nations, New York
from 1949 to 1952 and after a number of appointments in the
Department of Foreign Affairs in Canberra was assigned from
1955 to 1959 as Minister and later Ambassador to the Philippines.
During 1957 Mr Shann was Australian Representative on the United
Nations Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary on which he
also served as Rapporteur. From 1959-1962 he was Senior
External Affairs Representative at the Australian High Commission,
London. He was Australian Ambassador to Indonesia from 1962-1966
after which he returned to Australia to become First Assistant
Secretary of the Division of the Department handling Australia's
International Aid. He was appointed a Deputy Secretary of the
Department in April 1970. Mr Shann is married with three children. 



NO DATE
M/ 141 27 September 1973
REPORT OF AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO SOUTH
PACIFIC CONFERENCE
Attached is a copy of a statement tabled in the
Senate on 26 September 1973 by the Minister Assisting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, who was
Leader of the Australian Delegation to the 13th South
Pacific Conference at Guam, 11-20 September 1973. 
As leader of the Australian delegation, I attended the
first four days of the 13th South Pacific Conference which was held
at Guam from 11 to 20 September 1973. The delegation included two
Members of Parliament, Mr A. S. Luchetti and Mr P. E. Lucock, who
were nominated at the Prime Minister's request by the Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence.
Twenty nine years ago the Labour Governments of Australia
and New Zealand signed the Australian-New Zealand Agreement ( more
popularly known as the ANZAC Pact), which included articles proposing
the establishment of a regional organisation known as the South Seas
Regional Commission, This was the genesis of the South Pacific
Commission ( SPC) which was born of the Canberra Agreement of
February 1947. Since that time the South Pacific has been washed by the
tides of change. In 1947 no island entity in this region was a
state. None could be a signatory to the Canberra Agreement. Today,
three are fully independent Nauru, Fiji and Western Samoa and
have taken their place as members of the South Pacific Commission.
Tonga re-entered the comity of nations in 1970. Papua New Guinea
is now on the threshhold of full nationhood.
The 1947 Canberra Agreement was a paternalistic document,
based on a separation of the controlling metropolitan powers and
their subject colonies. While the Agreement played a significant
and valuable part in the economic, social and political development
of the region, it has become increasingly out of step with the times.
It is anachronistic that we have a South Pacific Commission,
comprising the metropolitan powers, plus in recent years the
independent Island states of the region, sitting in judgment over
recommendations of the South Pacific Conference, at which only
the Pacific Island states and territories have a vote.
Against this background and having in mind the Government's 
-2-
policy that Australia should seek to play a co-operative and helpful
but not a dominating role in the South Pacific, our delegation
went to the South Pacific Conference at Guam this year with three
positive ideas. Two were proposals and one a suggestion.
The first proposal was that from 1975 the South Pacific
Commission should be financed on a part voluntary basis. The
second proposal was that there should be a de facto merger of the
Commission and the Conference sessions. The suggestion was that
the Conference should be remodelled so that it could be shortened
in length and its focus placed on the development process in the
entire region. Australia and New Zealand had launched the voluntary.
contribution principle by announcing at the South Pacific Forum
held at Apia in April this year voluntary contributions of
$ NZ250,00O each towards the 1974 SPC Work Program. France made a
voluntary contribution of 5A50,000 at Guam.
A preliminary Session of the Commission, which met prior
to the opening of the Conference in Guam, accepted the principle
of part voluntary financing. As a result, the SPC's technical
assistance work, its prime function, should in future be able to
draw on greater financial resources.
Our main proposal for a de facto merger of the Conference
and a Commission sessions de facto because of the difficulties
in amending the Canberra Agreement received the unanimous support
of all the voting members of the Conference. The non-self governing
territories thus voted for equal status with the metropolitan powers.
The Conference then set up a special " future status
committee" of Islanders which iported to the Conference on possible
changes in the constitution and functioning of the South Pacific
Commission. The report included a recommendation that the Australian
Government initiate discussion immediately with all participating
governments at the highest appropriate level to revise the Canberra
Agreement so as to reflect the needs and aspirations of the Pacific
people. 
-3-
Consideration is now being given to the holding of a
Conference early next year for this purpose.
This result is even better than we had hoped. Our
ileas went with and strengthened the tide of Island opinion. The
" future status committee" report also incorporated the main elements
of our suggestion for remodelling the Conference. The implementation
of the recommendations will, of course, depend on the results of the
meeting of the Commission governments next year.
However, the Conference debates did not all run smoothly.
Tie French delegation walked out of the meeting on 17 September,
wien the Cook Islands introduced a draft resolution condemning
French nuclear testing in the Pacific. That was unfortunate.
Despite our differences we value French participation in the SPC.
Tie support given by Australia to the resolution on this matter
one not normally dealt with by the SPC must be seen in the light
of France's disregard of the interim order of the International
Court of Justice and on the detection over a widespread area of
Australia of radioactive fallout from the French tests.
The Cook Islands resolution, amended by Fiji, was sent by
the Chairman of the Conference to the Secretary-General of the United
O Nations with the request that the views of the Conference be made
known to the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council.
The resolution was adopted 10 votes to 5. Those opposing were
American Samo'a, the British Solomon Islands Protectorate, New
Caledonia, Niue and the New Hebrides. The Wallis and Futuna Islands
were not present and the French Polynesian delegation had returned
home. The voting figures might give the impression that some
delegations did not believe that the nuclear tests were a cause
of concern. This was not so. Every delegation, including that of 
New Caledonia, indicated opposition to the tests in one form or
another. The negative votes reflected more the concern of some
island delegations that acceptance of the resolution might provoke
the withdrawal of France from the Organisation.
The South Pacific Commission has clearly reached a turning
point. The 13th South Pacific Conference marked an important
milestone in the political development of the South Pacific.
Australia went to the Conference this year seeking changes, not
kudos, and we achieved that result.
If the recommendations of the " future status committee"
of the Conference are adopted, the South Pacific Commission should
remain a useful regional organisation for many years to come. 


EMBARGO: 7.30 P. M.NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA,MPl. E. G. WHITLAM, SUNDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 1073
Good evening. I want to speak to you tonight about some very&nbsp;important decisions taken this week by the national Parliament.
I want to explain what these decisions mean to you, the people&nbsp;of Australia. The Parliament has decided to seek your authority&nbsp;to deal as effectively as possible with a problem affecting all&nbsp;of us the problem of inflation. We will be asking you to give&nbsp;the national Parliament power over prices and power over incomes.
These two requests will be submitted to you as a referendum a&nbsp;vote of all the people in the six States on 8 December.
Let me tell you why the Government -and both Houses of&nbsp;Parliament have taken this course. It's just ten months since&nbsp;you elected us to Government. You may recall that soon after&nbsp;the elections a fortnight after we assumed office I addressed&nbsp;you on national television and acknowledged that inflation wasthe major problem of economic management we had to face.I pledged to continue the fight against inflation whileat the same time restoring full employment. We have achieved&nbsp;genuine full employment. That part of the task is done. The&nbsp;other battle the battle against this worldwide problem of&nbsp;inflation continues.
I want to emphasise that there are some old-fashioned methodsof controlling inflation that our Government rejects. We willnot attack inflation by creating unemployment. We will not attackinflation by throwing Australians out of work. We will not exposeindustry to clumsy, stop-go fluctuations in demtand, which candestroy its ' efficiency and incentives. This year we have liftedour national growth rate to a near record of 7 per cent; we areenjoying conditions of buoyant business prosperi-t--y. We want tokeep things that way. So our attack on inf,_ at ion has been througha series of carefully timed and related measures. We have cuttariffs. We have twice revalued the currency, stimulating theflow of imported goods and reducing the. ir prices. We-haveinitiated a whole series of long-term policies to assist industry,to protect the consumer, to encourage greater efficiency andcompetition in a system where business and Government mustshare responsibilities.
There is, however, one weapon against inflation that the&nbsp;national Parliament lacks. It is the only capon thzat will givezeal force to the measures we have taken. 1iLweapon is powerover prices and incomes. The national Parlia1. ecnts of allcomparable countries, including those withei: l systems,possess such powers; our Parliament does not. Every other majorindustrial nation has been able to use such powe-rs whlen the nationalGovernment needed them; we have not, Accord-: ngly, my GovernmentWill be asking you to grant these powers to the AustralianParliament.
Our referendum has been designed to give you the widest&nbsp;choice&nbsp;of alternatives. We shall submit to you two separateqijestions one concerning prices, the other concerning incomes.You will therefore be able tp decide whether you wish to givet: ie national Parliament power over prices alone, over incomesaLone, over both, or as at present over neither.You may ask why we are seeking a specific power over incomes.I give you one reason. There are many lawyers who believe thata power over prices alone would include a power over wages aswall since wages may be regarded as the price of labour. Butt: aat would leave the Parliament without power over other formsof income, like rents and dividends. So we believe the fairestcourse is to seek a power over incomes of every sort not justtae wage earner's pay packet.
Let me remind you how this referendum came about. You will&nbsp;ramember that early this month, representatives of the Australian&nbsp;Government, the State Governments and local government met in&nbsp;Sydney to consider changes in the Constitution. At that convention&nbsp;I invited the Premiers on three separate occasions to refer to the&nbsp;national Parliament the powers over prices which the StateParliaments have. The Premiers of the major States were unwilling&nbsp;to do so. I have to say frankly that, had they done so, therewould be no need for this referendum. Some people argue that theStates could apply these powers themselves; again they have notdone so. Even if they did, we believe the difficulties ofapplying control over prices and incomes would become immenselycomplex if many different governments were involved.Remember, we are not asking you to deprive the States of anypowers they are using; we are merely asking you to give us thesame powers that the States have but refuse to use. Inflation isnot a problem for the States; it is a problem for us all. If thepowers we need are to be effective, they must be immediate, beyondchallenge, and uniform in their application. Only the nationalParliament can act in that way.
You may ask why these&nbsp;questions have to wait till December&nbsp;to be decided. The answer is that we are required by the&nbsp;Constitution to wait at least two months before asking you to votecn our proposals. That gives both sides time to prepare their&nbsp;arguments, which will be printed and distributed to every voter-inAustralia. I remind you,, in passing, that new voters must be&nbsp;Enrolled no later than 12 November. But do not imagine we will sitidly by till this issue is determined. We shall act, if necessary,&nbsp;to strengthen the measures we have already taken.I do not want to give the impression that the powers we areEeeking will be a magic cure for inflation on their own. I shouldntot be honest with you if I did. For there is, of course, no magiccure; no simple solution. Other countries have proved that.B~ ut we believe that the Australian Parliament, charged withresponsibility for the management of the national economy, shouldhave a full range of weapons in its armory. Do not ask us to fightthis battle with one arm tied behind our backs. Grant us theweapons which other national governments possess and have found itnecessary to use.
A second reason why the Commission can contribute to a&nbsp;better use of the nation's resources stems from its status as an&nbsp;independent statutory authority. The Commission will be able to&nbsp;develop and pursue a long term program of inquiries, free from dayto-day political pressures. This in turn has very important&nbsp;implications for the amount and quality of its information and&nbsp;for the depth of analysis which the Commission can undertake.This cf course includes analysis of the effects of itsrecomrendations on the use of resources in different industries.For example, industries which are comparatively wasteful in theiruse of resources and which impose a significant cost on thecommunity can be systematically examined through public inquiries,and obliged to justify any special assistance they receive fromthe government by demonstrating the benefits they bring to thecommunity. The Commission will be obliged, through its publicreports, to explain why it considers that certain industries shouldreceive more assistance than others.
I propose now to consider some of the more important&nbsp;clauses in the Bill and the reasons for them.
Clause 21 states that the functions of the Commissionare tD hold inquiries and make reports...." in respect of mattersaffecting assistance to industries and other matters that may bereferred to the Commission....". This clause covers any industry,whether in the primary, secondary or tertiary sector of the economy.It is therefore the clause which gives effect to the Government'swish to extend the present advisory system for manufacturingindustries based on the Tariff Board. Together with Clause 23 ( 2)which allows the Commission to consider all possible forms ofassistance for a particular indtstry Clause 21. provides the basisfor systematic analysis of the si-ructurn of industry assistance inAustralia, and thus for evolving a more coherent and rational policyby the Government towards industrial development.Clause 22 provides certain policy guidelines for theCommission which place the work of tihe Commission firmly in theframework of general economic management.
The guidelines will also help those making submissions&nbsp;for assistance from the Government, by providing a basis for them&nbsp;to relate their claims to the public interet. Thev also make clear &nbsp;the need for Australia's assistance policies to recognise our&nbsp;international trade obligations.



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO TH' ANNUAL DINNER OF THE QUEENSLAND CHAMBER OF MIANUFACTU] REPS,
LENT4OJIS PLAZA HOTEL, BRISBANE, MOLJDAY 1ST OCTOBER, 1973
During the past few weeks I have spoken on five occasions
to business leaders throughout Australia. I certainly intend no
slight to Queensland by the fact that this gathering is the last
of the series. On the contrary, you will receive the distillation
of all the accumulated wisdom of my travels. You may justly call
this my summing up, my final address to the jury.
In everything I have had to say to the business community
and especially to manufacturers I Lhave sought to omphasise one
bas: ic fact about my Government. And it is this: We are committed
to your prosperity, we need you. 1e need your success, your
growth, your co.-operation.
I have to confess that this is partly a vested interest.
And, as such, it is the more compelling. The fact is, as I
have always stressed, that if my Government is to bring fruition to
our ambitious plans for Australia's welfare and development, we can
do it only in the context of an expanding economy, a buoyant and
prosperous private sector. We were elected on a platform of
reform; we will stand or fall depending on how successfully that
mandate is discharged. We need business, we need industry, we need
men like yourselves, to help us to discharge it. You are our
in. l. insensable allies.
So that is my first unequivocal assurance to you. Whenever
you hear people say that the Government is indifferent, or even
hostile, to the business world, you will realise how shallow, how
short--sighted, how politically naive, such a judgement must be.
Of course you will have criticisms to make of the Government in
detail, just as the Government may have particular criticisms of
business or industry. That is a fact of life, and a fact of
politics, whatever Government may be in power. 1ut I ask you
to remember that our underlying commitment is to the maintenance
of strong and prosperous local industries. That commitment has been
reflected in every major policy announcement, every major economic
decision we have taken since coming to office.
To illustrate my point, I mention some of the measures we
have chosen to fight inflation. Rather, I shall mention first one
3f the methods we have not chosen. We have not chosen to fight
inflation by creating massive unemployment. Yours are the industries
that would suffer most from such measures as indeed, you have
already suffered to your great cost. I hardly need to remind you
of the losses entailed by empty or half-used factories. So we will
not attack inflation by destroying jobs. That is not simply an
ideological commitment to the wage earner, though of course such a
commitment is central to our perception of social . justice. It is
a commitment no less realistic, to your welfare as well. We will not
expose Australian industry to stop-go fluctuations in demand which can
destroy its efficiency and inventives. As part of our attack on
inflation we have created conditions in which most industries can
produce to capacity and benefit from the lower unit costs which
result. 
-2
So let me spell out the essentials of our community of interest.
' Full employment is one, and in the past 10 months we have restored
genuine full employment. Next, we are committed to growth, to a
national economy geared to the highest level of its capacity and
real productivity. That means the manufacturer and the investor
can plan-with complete assurance on the maintenance of the highest
possible level of economic growth, and don't forget that in the
past 10 months we have lifted our national growth rate to a near
record 7%.
N~ ext, we both need a high level of real wages and real
purchasing power. Then again, we have a vested interest in your
achieving fair profits. We need the growth which the investment of
such profits brings. And finally, we believe there are enormous
opportunities for manufacturers, for prudent investors, in the
initiatives we have taken to enlarge the public sector of the
economy. When Governments take initiatives where none were taken
before as we have in the cities, in education, in transport,
in housing it is private enterpris e and privato mnufacturing
which share in the fruits of these initiatives.
There is another message I have tried to convey to the
businessmen of this country. It is one of pure optimism, or if
you like, of self-congratulation. I ask you to remember that our
economy is basically strong and healthy, and that jusinoss is
currently enjoying a buoyant prosperity. We hear a good deal
about anxiety or uncertainty; we hear little about the real
tangible strength of the Australian economy at this time. After
all, manufactuers should know this better than anyone.
Niowhere is our prosperity more apparent than in manufacturing.
Consumer spending is running at very high levels.
In the June quarter the level of activity rose in almost
every major area of manufacturing industry. Sales rose by 12%
over March 1973 and a further increase of 15% is expected
in the December half-year. In the June quarter capital expenditure
rose by 23% over March, and orders were 11% above the already high
March values. So whatever doubts you may have about the future
let there be no doubts about the present. We are thriving.
I know that for many of you the Government' s approach to
industry may seem to be one of denial, rather than generosity;
of exposure to chill winds, rather than protection. I acknowledge
the anxieties you have experienced over our tariff cuts and
revaluations, though I must say frankly that we h~ ve seen little
evidence so far of any harmful effects of these measures, either
on industry or the workforce. And I am confident that the measures
were justified by considerations of the national economic interest
that you, as businessmen, will recognise. I acknowledge also that,
for some of you, our proposals for reforming the tariff machinery
for establishing an Australian Industry Development Corporation,
for legislating in far--reaching fashion for consumer protection and
against restrictive practices, may seem part o~ f some complex and
oppresive pattern of interference or intimidation. That is what
our critics would like you to believe. They arc wrong. / 3 
3
It is my purpose to assure you, to convince you, that they
are wrong. In the first place, we have undertaken that the
Government will assist any industry adversely affected by our
revaluations in tariff cuts. As to our long-term reforms, I
stress that their purpose is not to weaken industry but to
strengthen it still further to meet whatever challenges may be
posed by international events or economic conditions at home.
I am talking now of industries that are genuinely strong,
genuinely responsive, competitive, flexible and efficient.
A weak industry is not strong-whatever governments may do to
help it. In the long run, it will not survive. Nhat we aim
to do, in all our measures for encouraging and assisting industry,
is to make sure that efficient and well-run industries not
only survive but prosper.
So I give you this assurance: nothing we do, either in our
fight against inflation or in our general economic policies,
will do anything to damage the underlying strength and prosperity
of Australian industry. We are pledged to your growth and progress.
I do not see anything in our announced policies that industry
should fear. In a sense, our plans for consumer protection, for
industry assistance, for banning restrictive trading practices
far-reaching and important as they are-involve no more than logical
extensions of what are now accepted principles. If you take our
legislation on restrictive practices, for example, you will see
that what we are doing is directly prohibiting certain practices
instead of leaving them to be restrained separately after timeconsuming
inquiries. We have not so much a new objective, as a new
and more direct means of achieving it. At the very least you will
concede that our appraoch will eliminate a great deal of uncertainty.
As the influence of this legislation spreads we can expect a sharper
and more competitive spirit to emerge in the economy, with industry
quicker to respond to changes in the market and to new opportunities
in general. ' This must benefit everyone.
Similarly, with our attitude to industry assistance.
We are by no means abolishing the accepted principle that deserving
industries should be assisted to develop and flourish. Far from it.
What we are doing is extending this principle to all industries
not just manufacturing and ensuring that the whole process of
assistance is subject to the most rigorous and extensive public
scrutiny. I am sure there is no one in this room who would not agree with
me that the report on industry assistance prepared at my Government's
invitation by Sir John Crawford and on which our legislation was
based is one of the most far-sighted and historic contributions
to the welfare of Australian industry ever prepared or published.
The other basic thought I have sought to convey to the business
community is our desire for full and frank communication with you.
We seek this communication, this understanding, with industry
and business just as much as we seek it with the trade union
movement. We want to hear from you and be involved in your problems.
/ 4 
Ole established at the outset of the Government a new
Department of Secondary Industry. Like you, we have always
emphasised the need for co-operation between industry and
government. My colleague, Dr. Cairns, has announced his
proposal for industry panels to bring together representatives
of industry, government, the trade unions and consumers to advise
on the development of industries. We have ncver run away from
consultation with industry, and I assure you that in future we
will never be anything but receptive to your views, sensitive to
to your needs, and sympathetic to your rightful ambitions.
It will help you, I think, if I state as clearly and
concisely as I can the wayt we should like to see industry develop
and the hopes we have for its future. They are confident hopes.
r? ha1y are based on a generous appraisal of your innate strength,
your good sense, your capacity to adapt and adjust to fresh
opportunities. We want to see industry, and the whole economy,
become more adaptable to changing technology and to changing
economic conditions both at homo and abraod. Whatever government may
be in power, there can never be, in today's unstable world, a
guarantee of absolute security for any industry, or indeed for any
sector of industry. You know how vulnerable primary industry has
proved to changes in the world climate; secondary industry on the
whole has been more fortunate. We want to ensure for all industry,
as far as possible, a greater resilienco and strength -a greater
competitive spirit and efficiency to enable it to withstand the
inevitable vicissitudes of a changing and more uncertain world.
2e want our manufacturing industries to become m~ ore oriented to
international markets not through sudden switches of policy, but
by gradual application and readjustment. In all these efforts,
industry will to assured of the guidance and support of the
Austral ian Government.
My final message tonight is addressed to you,
not as businessmen or manufacturers, but as Queenslanders. It
concerns the future of your State its relationship with the rest
of Australia and my own Government. I hope I am not breaking
confidence if I disclose, Mr. President, that when you wrote to me
recently about what I should say at this dinner, you said:
" Mayne it is time we were told once again that our industrial output
per head is the second lowest in Australia." Well, I would rather you
made the point than I, but quite frankly, it never occurred to me
to resort to such partisan and inflammatory remarns. Nevertheless,
I think there is a lesson here that is worth repeating. Whatever
the industrial output in Queensland, there is no reason why it
should not be among the highest in Australia, and I sincerely believe
the policies of my Government will help strengthen your industries
and raise your general prosperity.
For myself, I have never had anything but affection and
admiration for your State. After all, I am spcendi ng a few days'
holiday in one of your coastal cities this week. But I suppose,
like me, you have occasionally detected a slight sense of
estrangement between Mr. Bjelhe-Petersen's Government and mine.
There is, quite frankly, a coolness between us such as exists
between no other two governments in Australia. It can only be
damaging and desiructive to both of us. I seek an end to it. 
I am sure it is not for any want of generosity or willingness on our
part that the normal goodwill and mutual cooperation so essential
between State and National governments so essential to a
Federation somehow has faltered in the case of Queensland.
So that you may judge our good intentions, let me tell you of
some of . the things we have done for Queensland. When I first came
to Brisbane as Prime Minister that was in March this year I said:
" My Government's commitment to the welfare and progress of
Queensland is both general and specific. It is ' ased on two
great themes. There is first our general commitment to the
cities. It is in these areas that my Government's attack on
the problems of land and housing costs, school opp ortunities,
hospitals, public transport, unemployment, sport and culture
are principally directed. We have established a Department
of Urban and Regional Development to co-ordinate our work:
of rebuilding and regenerating our cities. Queensland will
share in that process. The related task of brinrjing new
standards of social welfare to the people has been entrusted
to our new Department of Social Security. I remind you that
this Department is headed by a Queenslander, my colleague
Bill Hayden. The second part of my Government's commitment to
Queensland is a specific one. It is in our policies for
northern Development. That Department is also headed by a
Queenslander, Dr. Rex Patterson. It is our aim, in co-operation
with the Government of Queensland, to develon the vast and valuable
resources of northern Australia for the benefit of the Australian
people. It is in the north that the great sugar and cattle
industries and much of our mineral industries hiave keen established.
It is in the north that Australians face their greatest challenge
in retaining the ownership of the nation's resources and
developing new industries under Australian control.
My Government has made one other specific pledge to the
Queensland people. We have undertaken that one of our two main
initiatives in regional development will be concentrated in
Townsville. I said last year in my policy speech that the national
Government was already responsible for decisions which have determined
the growth and the burdens of Townsville more than any other
Australian city except Canberra itself."
A few figures will suffice to show the extent of my Government's
assistance to Queensland. Remember that we spend much more on one
average Queenslander tnan we do on other Australians.
Our total payments to Queensland in 173/ 74, for all purposes,
are estimated at $ 585 million. This represents about $ 300 per head
compared with average payments to all States of about S270 per head.
Our housing advances of $ 17.4 million in 1973/ 74 will be 20% up on
last year. Our payments for education will rise dramatically as a
result of the recommendations of the Karmel committee and once
again Queensland will be getting a bigger percentage increase than
Australia as a whole. For primary and secondary schools we will be
paying $ 26.3 million in 1973/ 74 an increase of 148% over the
previous year ( for all States the increase is 144% from $ 74 million
to $ 181.9 million). For tertiary education we will pay Queensland
$ 47.9 million in 1973/ 74 an increase of 140% over the previous year. 
6
: We are taking several important initiatives in health,
and welfare a grant of $ 250,000 in 1973/ 74 for site acauisition
and planning of hospitals in Brishane, $ 2.3 million for co. mm.-unity
health facilities, an estimated $ 1 million for school dental
services. To help plan and develop new cities we are paying
$ 4.4 million to Queensland in 1973/ 74 and we have orovided
$ 3.1 million as a first contribution to Queensland to overcome
the unsewered premises.
Vie have moved quickly to improve your urban and country transport
systems. As we see it, the area most urgently requiring attention is
public transport. In Brisbane alone between 1960--61 and 1970.-71
the number of passenger journeys on public transport fell by
On a per capita basis the decline was even more diram-atic; it was
just about halved. So in F] c-, ruary A, thues tralian Government approved
a scheme to provide two-thirds. of the cos t of i~,' pvi-ngq urban publ. ic
transport. In our first Budget an allocation of $ 3?. 00 million
was made to commence this program. Tn Brisbane this year work will
begin on the Merivale Street Bridge, electrification of the railway
betw; Ueen Ferny Grove and Darra and construction of a third railway
track on the northern corridor to Jorthgate.
Our ex-enditure in this field will increase ranidly as these
projects get fully underway and other projects are added.
We have taken other action to improve your railways.
I wrote to your Premier on 8 Feruary confirming the Australian
Government's willingness to accept responsibility for your railway
system, if the Queensland Government wished to offer it.
Your Premier re quested more information on our initiative to help
his Government decide. ' ihis information has been provided and I
await Queensland's reply.
Four of the other States have agreed to hold discussions
to see if a mutually satisfactory basis for such a transfer
of responsibility can be devised. In both South Australia and
Western Australia these discussions are well advanced. For don't
forget, there are three main benefits to Queensland if you were to
accept our initiative. Your Government would be relieved of the
heavy burden of capital debt and interest payments in respect of the
railways. We would accept full responsibility for financing the
urban railway projects I have mentioned. At present Queensland is
required to provide one-third of the cost of these projects.
And we would accept the responsibility of ensuring that the railway
system in your State was efficient and provided the services
you need. That is an account, by no means exhaustive, of the kind of help
the Australian Government is providing. I have been in constant touch
with Mr. Bjelke-Petersen on matters of mutual concern to us.
Mind you, most of our dealings are conducted : y post; it is rare
that we have dinner together. But I confess in all sincerity that
I find it puzzling, disappointing, and not a little hurtful that the
Australian Government's earnest and proven concern for Queensland
is so often resented and mistrusted by your State Government. / 7 
7
nueensland is a great StCate; the mocst docentralized,
the most diverse, tihe mo-t colourful, rich,-in resnurcres.
ann d mny wys. the proudest arA mo: st indIividua listic of all.
It proviedes an unmistakab-le uleand vicjour to the wh-olo nat ion.
Yet I hiave to say that in many ways you are 1.) ehinC, the rest of us.
I have. referre' to your industrial output; there is also the fact
that youif eXjpen-ditLure on edtacationi, for emilis the lowest
per capita in Australia. Furthecrmore, you arc. m~ oving rapidlly
to ? iards nroblems of urban C econcration. It is estimated th-1-at the
opulation of greater flris,.-ane tiill double be) tweec-n now ane!
or 199" 0; th~ ere is no faster urb-an growthi in any ot our cities.
It is important that Queensland acts prome tly ' Lo avoiC, thne deep)-
seated prob-lorms of urban gro.-th al! rcacdy rrarifest in large -parts
of S'ydney and '-! el. 1ourne.
Preserve y., our identitv and y'our\ pride in yourre( lves,, 1ut
niot, I entreat you, at the cost'L of y. our progrress ind '. our
identification with thle nation's s YroaC interests aind, aspi rations.
Teeare many areas in the treatmcnt of Ahoriginals, in
off-shoro rosources, in the uetterrmination of '. ounc*, arJies, in
fmineral dovolopment where our j.~ ieas 11-ave conflic Led' and where,
TI concede, there arc legjitim,. ate-L-rgumentr, on b~ ~ os
IDut I s-aqge-st it would ; I tacif-1 if a stecrile o*)-c3, s4or w., ith
flaerijt~ were ao.' uto i mredethe roqrCus:;-of-cesad
i. 2 local iealousies ainclp,-aro7* L,-: i'. 3entiment 7s \ Yr. e allowed to standl
in your Way. Queenslant* cannot: a-fford -to boecomc Lin okl* l SLate out.
A ustralia cannot thrive Without " Australia.
I offer you tonight a lasting contract of co--o-Peration for a
greater and more prosperous ) ucenslan, 14 in a gr-atrr an,, more
nrosnerous . ThjA. tralia. Tn such a contract, srou, tlie reno7. ned and
suc~ s~ u m~ ifatursof thi rtate, w. 1 lya laostirc and
c~ sscn~ alprt.
B R I S BAT 1E .110ODAY 1 OCTOIMhP. 1973 



EMBARGO: NOT FGO RELEASE BEFORE 6.00 P. h. EST MONDAY 1 OCTOBER
STATEI-ENT BY THE PIiE MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 132
1 OCTOBEa 1973
ROYAL VISIT 1974
The Queen and Prince Philip have been pleased to agree
to the following dates for their visits to Norfolk Island, Papua
New Guinea and Australia in February/ March next year.
Monday
to Tuesday Friday
to Wednesday Wednesday
to Friday Friday
to Tuesday Tuesday
to Friday Saturday
to Sunday 11 February
12 February
22 February
27 February
27 February
1 March
1 March
5 March
5 Miarch
8 1iarch
9 March
10 March Norfolk Island
Papua New Guinea
Canberra Scuth Australia
Western Australia
Northern Territory
On the first stages of the visit The Princess Anne and
Captain Mark Phillips will accompany The Queen and Prince Philip.
The Royal Party will visit Norfolk Island and Papua New Guinea
aboard the itoyal Yacht BRITANNIA.
They will also accompany The Queen and Prince Philip on
the flight from Port Mioresby to Canberra on Wednesday 27 February
but other commitments will make it necessary for them to return to
London by air from Sydney on Thursday 28 February.
They will therefore leave Canberra by air for Sydney on
Wednesday 27 February and stay overnight at Government house.
The Queen and Prince Philip will rejoin the iroyal Yacht
BRITANNIA at Darwin and leave Australia from there on Sunday
March 1974. Consultations will now take place to prepare a program
of engagements for the visit, These details will be publicly
announced when approved.
CANBERJRA, A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 5.00P" 4 FRIDAY 5 OCTOBER 1973
AUSiI XI 1A JPress Statement No. 134
October 1973
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS
The Australian Government has contributed more than
$ 5,000 towards the costs of bringing five prominent Asian
educationists to Adelaide to participate in the University
of Adelaide's Centenary Celebrations.
Announcing this in Adelaide today, the Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Whitlam, said that the
Asian visitors would take part in a seminar on " Asian-Australian
Educational and Cultural Relations Past, Present and Future",
which would be a feature of the University's celebrations.
He said that the visiting Asians would be:-
Professor Dr. Slamet Iman Santoso, Deputy Vice-Chancellor,
University of Indonesia, Jakarta.
Professor Nernial Singh Sandhu, Director, Institute of
South-East Asian Studies, Singapore.
Professor P. L. Huang, Vice--Chancellor, University of
Hong Kong.
Professor Syed Alatas, Director of Malay Studies,
University of Singapore.
Professor Datuk Ariffin bin Ijj. Ngah Marzuki,
Vice-Chancellor, the National University of Malaysia.
Mr. Whitlam congratulated the University of its initiative
in arranging such a seminar, the aims of which he said, conformed
clcsely with the Government's interests in furthering Australia's
relations with the countries of Asia.
ADELAIDE. S. A.
October 1973 



fA alWL AFFAIRS
No DATE
M/ 143 7 October 1973
FIGHTING IN THE MIDDLE EAST
The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr hitlam, said today that the Australian Government deplored
Lhe resumption of fighting in the Middle East.
Australia hoped that the present hostilities would
be brought to an end at the earliest possible moment and an
effective ceasefire established.
Mr Whitlam said that the fighting which was now going
on underlined once again the urgent need for a just and durable
settlement of the Middle East problem.
The Australian Government would continue to support
all efforts to bring such a settlement about. It believed
that Security Council Resolution No. 242 of 1967 provided
a sound equitable basis for a settlement. 



EMBARSO; 5.45PM MONDAY 8 OCTOBER 1973
' A U S A1
P IM PE M\ HSTER Press Statement No. 136
8 October 1973
HIGH COURT DESIGN COMPETITION WINNER
The winning entry in the Australia-wide competition
held for the design of the High Court of Australia building,
planned for Canberra's National Area, was submitted by
the firm of Edwards, Madigan, Torzillo and Briggs, of
Sydney. Announcing this tonight, the Prime Minister,
Mr. Whitlam said the winning firm had designed the new
Australian National Gallery to be built in Canberra.
They had also won Sulman Awards for the Warringah Shire
Library in Sydney ( 1966) and, in association with the
New South Wales Government Architect, for a student residence
at Mitchell College of Advanced Education in Bathurst, N. S. W. ( 1970).
The competition for the High Court building was conducted
by thae National Capital Development Commission on behalf of the
Australian Government. The first stage, which attracted 158
entries from architects registered to practise in Australia,
prod-aced six finalists, who were asked by the assessing panel
to prepare designs for the second stage.
The six finalists were: Cameron, Chisholm and Nicol of Perth;
Rodney Connors, of Sydney; Guy Maron, of Cheesman, Doley, Neighbour
and Raffen, of Adelaide; McIntyre, McIntyre, of Melbourne;
Perrot, Lyon, Timlock and Kesa, of Melbourne; and Edwards, Madigan,
Torzillo and Briggs.
9he assessors were:
Sir Garfield Barwick, Chief Justice of the High Court.
Sir John Overall, former Chairman, National Capital
Planning Committee.
Professor P. H. Karmel, Chairman, Australian Universities
Commission.
Mr. E. H. Farmer, N. S. W. State Government Architect.
Mr. Daryl Jackson, Partner in the Melbourne firm of
Daryl Jackson and Evan Walker, Architects. / 2 
-2-
In their report, the assessors commented that the winning
design " promises those qualities necessary to make a great building,
a structure of both national and international significance."
Models and a selection of drawings entered by the finalists
will be placed on display from Saturday at the Commission's
planning exhibition, Regatta Point:
( Photograph and assessors report available to
interested media.)
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
8 October 1973
L I. h 



6 4 PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 9TH OCTOBER, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Thanks. Are there any questions?
QUESTION: If the referendum on price control on December 6 is
carried, can you tell us what precise steps you intend to take
in an effort to control prices. You have mentioned that you
would intend to bring down a Land Stabilisation Act in
Parliament the following week but can you be specific on what
other steps, and also can you give me a ditto answer if the
referendum on incomes is carried?
PRIME MINISTER: I indicated that t he incomes referendum would
enable us to have the same procedure for determining non-wage
incomes as the Constitution has always provided for the
determination of wages. In other words, we would extend the
operation of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to
specified forms of incomes other than wages.
QUESTION: You announced a series of ministerial changes in the
House this morning. Could you tell us why you made each of them
and whether they indicate that you are unhappy with the
performances of some ministers in some portfolios?
PRIME MINISTER: Iwon't accept the second invitation but I
will deal with the first one. The principal reasons were that we
now have several ministers with experience in administration
which means that some of the senior ministers are able to of fload
some of their responsibilities. In particular, I will be
able to give Foreign Affairs to Senator Willesee, Dr Cairns has
been able to give Secondary Industry to Mr Enderby, Mr Barnard
has been able to give Supply to Mr Enderby also and I think it
will be announced this afternoon that Senator Murphy will be
able to let Senator Cavanagh carry out the same responsibilities
in the Senate as Mr Daly carries out in the House of Representatives,
i. e. the determination of the business of each chamber. That
means that the four senior people; myself, Mr Barnard, Dr Cairns,
Senator Murphy are able to share some of their responsibilities
with others. The other major reason is that by giving two
departments or more departments which are due for amalgamation
to the one minister we can accelerate that process of amalgamation.
Already, of course, Mr Jones has both Transport and Civil
Aviation and Senator Murphy has both the Attorney-General's
Department and Customs and Excise. As you know, it is our
intention to combine those two departments or at least to disperse
several aspects of one of them. Mr Barnard now has merely
Defence, Navy, Army and Air which are all to be amalgamated.
into one department. Then there are two minister who each
have two departments now, Mr Johnson has Works as well as Housing
which he's had hitherto and Mtr Enderby has both Secondary
Industry and Supply. Now that means there are five ministers
who all have two or more departments and those departments will be
amalgamated. 
-2-
QUESTION: I -take it that Mr Enderby will also have the AIDC
as part of his Secondary Industry responsibilities?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Who will have AIDC?
PRIME MINISTER: Dr Cairns.
QUESTION: Why? I mean it was Secondary Industry, it wasn't
Overseas Trade that AIDC was connected with?
PRIME MINISTER: No, that's not necessarily so. AIDC is really
to marshal resources in regard to trade and investment-so that
they will not be as much in foreign hands as they have been up
till now, so AIDC will be Dr Cairns, Minister for Overseas Trade.
QUESTION: On Supply you speak of this rationalising this with
Secondary Industry. Is that all of Supply?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I haven't gone into detail there. I have
already made a statement about various aspects of Supply being
allocated to different departments. So I have got nothing to
add really to the statement I made on that about a month ago.
Similarly, Customs and Excise will not be amalgamated with any
one department as you realise. To give the two principal
features; there are revenue, there are law enforcement aspects
of Customs and Excise. Well they will go to different
instrumentalities. QUESTION: Are you prepared to make any comment on reports
that Mr Bryant gave up his portfolio only very reluctantly?
PRIME MINISTER: No of course not.
QUESTION: Will Dr Cairns retain authority over the Industries
Assistance Commission?
PRIME MINISTER: No, that is Prime Minister.
QUESTION: The Special Minister of State. Will that department
continue or will
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: You talked about divesting yourself of additional
responsibilities. Do you plan to divest yourself from
responsibilities for the Arts and the Industries Commission which
you have just referred to?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no present intention of divesting myself
of either, but probably never of Arts.
QUESTION: But what about tariffs?
PRIME MINISTER: Well that is protection in general isn't it.
But certainly for some time I would be wanting to retain 
-3-
protection, i. e. the Industries Assistance Commission because
there has to be somebody to co-ordinate the various aspects
which will now come to the Industries Assistance Commission
from various departments; Secondary Industry, Customs and
Excise, Primary Industry.
QUESTION: The reasons you gave earlier, sir, don't seem to
cover the reason why Mr Bryant
PRIME MINISTER: I have twice refused to answer any specific
questions like that.
QUESTION: Well you did agree to outline the reasons for the
changes? PRIME MINISTER: I have given the general reasons. I do not
comment on individuals.
QUESTION: You said earlier that you wouldn't make any changes
until after the Senate elections and the question is why have
you? PRIME MINISTER: Did I?
COMMENT: Yes, at a press conference.
PRIME MINISTER: Did I. I don't remember having said so.
QUESTION: Well could you give a particular reason why you felt
it was necessary to make the changes now and not say wait until
after Christmas or during the Christmas recess.
PRIME MINISTER: The two reasons I have already given. There are
now several ministers who can take responsibilities which at
the time we became a government, 10 months ago, there was a more
limited number of ministers able to discharge. Secondly, I
want to accelerate the progress of amalgamating some of these
departments. QUESTION: What part did Dr Coombs play in any of the reshuffling?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, none.
QUESTION: Like Mr Bryant he didn't have anything to say to you?
PRIME MINISTER: Dr Coombs had nothing to do with this.
QUESTION: Did he advise
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly not.
QUESTION: Will you now go overseas next year, I think it's
South East Asia and to the European countries?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, I will be making no fewer trips than
hitherto. 
-4-
QUESTION: You have made some tentative approaches to attempt
to resolve the power dispute in New South Wales which is basically
within the New South Wales competence. What steps are you taking
to resolve the airport dispute which is more closely within your
competence? PRIME MINISTER: I expect the Public Service Arbitrator will.
be calling the parties, including the Public Service Board, into
compulsory conference this afternoon.
QUESTION: On your initiative sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I was aware.
QUESTION: When, if at all, are you going to recognise Chile?
PRIME MINISTER: Thursday.
QUESTION: Do you expect that Thursday's Premiers' Conference
will discuss anything other than Loan Council representation
for local government?
PRIM4E MINISTER: The Conference is being called as was forecastas
was announced by me at the Constitutional Convention five
weeks ago to discuss the participation of local government in
the Loan Council. You know, of course, that the Labor Party's
program since the 1971 Federal Conference has provided that local.
government in each State should have a voice and a vote on the
Loan Council. You will remember that I emphasised this in the
policy speech last November. You will remember also that the
Australian Government insisted that local government should have
delegates at the Constitutional Convention as a condition of
the Australian Government itself attending the Constitutional
Convention. Now it is for that purpose, the discussion of that
program, that the Premiers and I are meeting in Canberra on
Thursday. I doubt if we will have time to discuss other matters.
If so, it would be in quite general terms. In light of the
officials' report which was made about three months ago,
wasn't it I have asked the Premiers to comment on the suggestions
that the officials from the seven Treasuries made. Many of the
Premiers have not yet commented on those suggestions. In
particular, there is, I regret to say, very little activity in
the stabilisation of land prices which is one of the worst
inflationary aspects in Australia and which is completely within
the jurisdiction of the States.
QUESTION: On the subject of prices. Did Cabinet make a decision
yeste! rday not to make a decision on meat?
PRIME MINISTER: It did make a decision not to institute any
tax on the export of meat. The Parliamentary Commiittee on Prices
had by majority made such a proposal; the Calbinet is not
attracted by it. 
QUESTION: You haven't announced the decisions Cabinet took
yesterday. Do you intend now to make all these announcements to
Parliament first, or didn't you make. any decisions?
PRIME MINISTER: Well take this one here ( on meat). This is a
matter from a Parliamentary committee; it's not a Government
matter. The Government considered, naturally enough, the
recommendation of a Parliamentary committee. Parliamentary
committees are free to make recommendations as they wish.
The Labor Party doesn't, and I don't, believe that any of the
other parties considers what recommendations Parliamentary
committees should make or that the members of each Party on a
Parliamentary committee should make; so the Government considered
the report of this Parliamentary committee. The Government's
attitude will be reported to our party meeting tomorrow. There
aren't, however, any other decisions which I would think it is
appropriate to mention here. There is the membership of one
of these consumer bodies, but I think Mr Morrison has given that
to you already hasn't he the Interim Commission on Consumer
Standards. You have got the membership of that, haven't you?
We have also decided, if you want to know, to introduce
legislation to enable us to ratify the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological Biological) Weapons and Toxin Weapons and of
their Destruction. We also approved a statement by the Minister
for the Environment and Conservation, Dr Cass, in relation to
the development and management of Australia water resources.
You can get the details of that statement from Dr Cass. We have
also decided to accept the amendment that the Senate made in
the A. C. T. Representation Bill. I would imagine that there
will-be a motion to that effect in the House today. Those
would be the decisions apart from the matter that Mr Chalmers.
asked about the meat.
QUESTION: With respect, you didn't answer my question on what
specific measures you intend to bring in if the price control
referendum is carried?
PRIME MINISTER: You mentioned one; the stabilisation of land
prices. There is one other I have mentioned and that is that
in the meantime, there is any change to the jurisdiction of the
Prices Justification Tribunal obviously legislation will be
brought in under the new prices power in the Constitution to
validate the inquiries and the recommendations of Chat tribunal.
I think that was included however in the resolution of the
Federal Executive last Saturday which I drafted and which
I think the Federal Secretary gave to you on
Saturday, so I didn't go into it again.
QUESTION: Would you see that before Christmas you could put a
freeze on a whole range of foodstuffs or other items?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't see that. 
-6-
QUESTION: It seems rather odd for a Labor Government to
exclude the only people they exclude from higher interest
rates are people with less than $ 4000 in savings banks?
PRIME MINISTER: No. This has been left to the banks to
administer and Mr Crean can give you the details there. I think
this was announced by Mr Hayden a week ago.
QUESTION: Is it correct that Senator Bishop was considered for
a position in the Cabinet reshuffle?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Did his illness over the weekend have any effect
on the final decision?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, of course it did. I don't want to say
any more about it at this stage until he comes out of hospital
and I have been able to speak to him directly.
QUESTION: Are you not embarrassed that the Federal President
of your party has indicated that he will campaign against you in
your referendum to gain federal control over incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: If he does campaign there will be some
embarrassment but I will not be deterred by it. I will support
the Government's proposals. I deplore sonic of the things which
are said by some people in the union movement about what use any
federal government would make of the incomes power if it is
given to the federal Parliament. There has been a very great
deal of irresponsible extravagent talk on this subject and I
will play my part in repudiating it. It is quite absurd that
the only incomes in Australia that can be regulated are incomes
which take the form of wages, and there have been stages, for
instance, in the early 1950s when the Commonwealth Conciliation
and Arbitration Court as it then was did, in effect, bring in
a wage freeze under existing powers. But the statistics will
show that the proportion of the gross domestic product represented
by wages and salaries has gone down. It is clear, therefore,
that other incomes have amounted over the last 20 years or
years to an increasing percentage of the gross domestic product.
In other words, there hasn't been a regulatin of other incomes
non-wage incomes that there has been of wage incomes. This is
quite unfair. It produces a great deal of social tension and
economic distortion in the community. The Australian Parliament
ought to have this power over incomes. The States have it of
course, except for people covered by Commonwealth awards they don't
use it. They have done nothing to produce a better balance;
socially and economically in the community. It's about time for
the national parliament to have that power.. 
QUESTION: Will our Ambassador to Chile be returning to his
post?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Do you intend that Mr Bryant should remain Minister
for the Capital Territory for very long?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to say any more on this until I
have been able to speak with Senator Bishop. I don't want
Senator Bishop to be reading about things before I have been
able to speak to him directly.
QUESTION: On the incomes referendum. Mr Hawke has said that he
expects the A. C. T. U. Executive, next Monday, to make a decision
contrary to that of the Labor Party's Federal Executive, i. e.
opposing the incomes referendum. If the union movement does
oppose the incomes referendum, do you really expect that it
will succeed?
PRIME MINISTER: I know how difficult it is to carry any
referendum. I believe that some unions will there will be
differences of opinion within the union movement there may be
differences of opinion in different cities on this matter.
The way some unions talk it looks as if some of them will be
spending more money on trying to defeat an incomes referendum
than they will in trying to carry a prices referendum. Sheer
sabotage. 



STATEMENT TO THE HOUSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER
I inform the House of the following Ministerial changes.
The new Ministers were sworn in by His Excellency the Governor-
General earlier today.
Senator the Hon. J. L. Cavanagh has been appointed Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs. The Hon. Gordon Bryant has been appointed
Minister for the Capital Territory. The Hon. Les Johnson has
been appointed Minister for Works and the Hon. Kep Enderby has
been appointed Minister for Secondary Industry and Minister for
Supply. I inform the House also of the following additional Ministerial
changes not yet in effect but intended to be given effect in the
near future.
The Hon. Rex Patterson, who is at present representing the
Australian Government at the International Sugar Agreement
Conference and. who will return to Australia during next week,
will after his return be sworn in as Minister for the Northern
Territory. Also. after my visit to Japan where I am to represent
the Government as Minister for Foreign Affairs as well as Prime
Minister, and my -visit to ChinaSenator Willesee, who is
himself now abroad representing Australia at the United Nations
General. Assembly and other international meetings, will be
sworn in as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The new arrangements will produce a more even and better
balanced distribution of the workload within the Cabinet.
In particular, some portfolios having common interests will be
brought together under one minister and the ultimate
amalgamation of the departments concerned thus facilitated,
I have already in one instance -the Department of Supply,
foreshadowed to the House a proposal for it's amalgamation
with another department. The rearrangement will also reduce
the heavy durdens previously falling to some senior Ministers.
As honourable members will be aware, the Minister for Repatriation
Senator Bishop, is ill. During his ansence the Minister for
the Capital Territory, Mr Bryant is acting Minister for
Repatriation. Mr Bryant is also representing the Minister for
Aboriginal Affairs in this House.
Canberra, 9 October, 1973 



s-I I
Press Statement No. 137
11 October 1973
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO A NATIONAL
REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION SCHEME
The Prime Minister announced today the
resignation of Professor Patrick Atiyah from the'
Committee of Inquiry into a National Rehabilitation
and Compensation Scheme.
He said Professor Atiyah had felt obliged,
for personal reasons, to return to England earlier
than expected. lie had taken up a post in the
University of Warwick.
The Prime Minister said he regretted that
the Inquiry would be deprived of Professor Atiyah's
knowledge and assistance. However, the Committee
was now well advanced in its work, and for this
reason he had decided, after consultation with the
Chairman, Mr. Justice Woodhouse, that it would not
be practicable to replace Professor Atiyah.
A. C. T.
11 October 1973 S7
CANBERRA. 



HEADS OF. GOVERNMENT. MEETING
CANBERRA, 11 OCTOBER 1973
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
Welcoming remarks.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss, and I
hope agree on, proposals of the Australian Government which
are directed towards our objective of assisting and
strengthening local government and making it a fuller and
more effective partner in our Federal system.
There can be no doubt of the firmness of my
Government' s commitment to that objective. It is encompassed
in our Platform; it was explicit in my Policy Speech before
the last election;. most recently I re-affirmed it in my
speeches to the Constitutional Convention0 Indeed, our
meeting here today. had its direct impetus from the discussions
we had at the Convention0
Repeatedly, I have emphasised that one of the
essential requirements for full achievement of our objective
is a re-casting of the arrangements embodied in the present
Financial Agreement. These are arrangements which were based
on the situation of the 1920s, when the relative roles and
responsibilities of the Australian Government, the State
Governments and local government were vastly different from
what they now are0 They ar e not good enough0 They have not
been adequate for some time. They are certainly not adequate
for the future. We do not seek change for change's sake nor, as
some would say,, to centralise power in Canberra0 The planning
and provision-of public services and facilities to meet the
expanding needs of the whole community is becoming an 
increasingly complex task. It is one which cannot be
accomplished satisfactorily if we cling to old concepts, old
demarcation lines of interest and responsibility drawn up in
the distant past. Of course, when the Financial Agreement was
drawn up local government authority borrowing was relatively
insignificant. Things are very different now. The situation
now is that local government authorities have been borrowing
more each year than the total amount of their outstanding debt
only twenty years or so ago. It can be fairly said that if
the Financial Agreement were being drawn up now it would be
unthinkable that local government would be. entirely excluded
from it. Over at least the last two. decades there have
been serious deficiencies developing in the provision of many
of the public services and facilities which it has fallen to
the State-local government sector to provide. Partly this
has been a product of insufficiency of resources; but it has
also reflected processes of planning and of determination of
priorities which have been inadequate or too narrowly based.
My Government has set itself the task of helping
to remedy, in co-operation with the States and their
authorities, the deficiencies which now exist. We have made
a strong beginning witness the new or enlarged allocations
in our budget for 1973-74 for such purposes as education,
community . health, public . housing, sewerage services, land
management, urban--transport and . growth centres. . Total
allocations . to the.. States in 1973-74, including the State
Governments' Loan Council programs but excluding 
unemployment relief grants, are estimated to be no less than
24 per cent greater than the corresponding allocations in
1972-73. Local government is an area of special importance
which has suffered imbalances between responsibilities and
resources. The importance of local government derives from
the very fact that it is local that the services and
facilities which it provides have such a close and direct
impact on the welfare of the population it services. It is
our aim, in part, to make available to local government
resources more adequate for its functions. But our aim is
larger than that. If local government is to play the fuller
and more effective . part that I believe the community wishes
it to play, then we must also increase the effective influence
local government exercises in relation to the fundamental
decision-making affecting its activities, It will represent
a most significant step towards real Federalism, real local
participation in public affairs and, indeed, real
decentralisation of government when this is achieved.
We have already taken several very important
steps in that direction, We secured the representation of
local government at the Constitutional Convention, In its
Autumn Sittings the Australian Parliament passed a new Grants
Commission Act authorising that body to inquire into
applications for assistance by regional organisations of
local government, Any assistance recommended by the
Commission and approved by the Australian Government will be
paid to the States under section 96 of the Constitution on
condition that it be passed on to the local government 
organisations concerned. Additional members have been
appointed to the Commission and its staff is being expanded
to enable it to deal with this large new responsibility. It
is hoped that applications by regional organisations will
begin to be received and considered early next year.
Additionally, under the Australian Assistance Plan there will
be available to local government authorities special
assistance to enable them more effectively to provide welfare
and health services to their communities.
The proposals I am now putting to you and for
which I now seek your unanimous support represent a further
long step towards the same objective0 They are proposals of
which I have spoken many times before, including at the
recent Constitutional Convention, so I expect that you have
already thought about them a good deal yourselves. They
are:-that elected local government have both a voice
and a vote in the Loan Council0 It is of the
utmost importance, I believe, that the voice of
local government the voice of those people
with the closest knowledge of community needs
at the local and regional level be heard in
this decision-making forum; and
that the Australian Government be empowered to
borrow on behalf of elected local government.
There are, broadly, three bases on which the
first of these proposals might be sought.
One would be to admit representatives of local
government to the Loan-Council on the same basis as the 
present members, with full representation and voting rights
covering all matters dealt with by the Loan Council. While
I see considerable merit in this, I recognise that, in terms
of the present nature and range of Loan Council interests and
functions, it would raise some difficulties.
The other two bases would impose some limitations
on the role allotted to the local government representatives
in the Loan Council. We could, for example, limit local
government participation in both discussion and voting to
those matters directly affecting local government. Again,
I see difficulties in this approach, since the borrowing
programs of both the State governments and their local
and semi-government authorities are, I gather, generally
discussed in the same context at Loan Council meetings.
There would be a. constant problem as to the precise point
at which local government representatives would be admitted
to the discussions in the Loan Council. I have not the least
doubt that, experienced in and aware of the Loan Council
procedures as you are, it is unnecessary for me to enlarge
on this problem. For my own part, I see such arrangements as
providing much too limited a role for local government for
it to meet my Government's objectives.
The intermediate approach is therefore the one
I wish to propose to you. This would admit representatives
of elected local government to all Loan Council discussions,
with a right to vote on those matters directly affecting
local government essentially, the borrowing programs for
the bodies they represent and the allocations of these
programs. 
6.
Before I throw this proposal open for discussion
there are some points of principle and procedure that I
should canvass. First, there is the legal . framework within which
such a situation could be achieved. As I see it, the
Financial Agreement could be amended to accommodate and
provide a firm and proper basis for the new arrangements. I
am advised that the necessary amendments to the Financial
Agreement could be made, by agreement between the Australian
and State Governments, without taking it outside the scope
of section 105A of the Constitution as it stands. It would,
of course, be accepted that, in accordance with practice, any
such amendments should be validated by Acts of the Australian
and State Parliaments. Borrowings by local government bodies are at
present governed by the Gentlemen's Agreement, which also
covers borrowings by statutory authorities of the Australian
and State Governments. I should make it clear that my
proposal concerning representation in the Loan Council is
limited to elected local government bodies, I appreciate
that some of the largest borrowers,. individually, under the
Gentlemen's Agreement are statutory authorities mainly
public utilities of one kind or another, These bodies I see
as having adequate representation in the Loan Council through
the Premiers, They are essentially arms of the Governments
concerned. Indeed, there is in many cases only a fine
dividing line between the types of function they perform and
those of some State departments, and the respective functions
of the two vary from State to State, 
7.
It is clear that the proposed new arrangements
would require that provisions which are now part of the
Gentlemen's Agreement be re-cast, as would the nature of the
" programs" to be considered by the Loan Council. I envisage
that, in place of the existing division of the programs into
" larger" and " smaller" authorities, what would now be
required would be separate borrowing programs for local
government bodies and for the State Government
instrumentalities . I have no firm view on whether there
would still need to be a borrowing limit corresponding to
the existing amount of $ 400,000 below which there would be
no program ceiling imposed by the Loan Council. I am
inclined to think that there should be such a limit if we
are to avoid loss of the flexibility that now exists for
borrowings by smaller bodies. However, I see that as a
procedural matter to be resolved if agreement is reached on
the principle of local government representation.
The other proposal that I have said I want to
place before you is that arrangements be agreed upon for the
Australian Government to borrow on behalf of local government.
The Financial Agreement as it stands does not provide for
this. Let me provide some background. At June 1947
( satisfactory figures for earlier years are not available)
local government authorities total outstanding debt was about
$ 140 million about 7 per cent of total State Government
debt; at June 1971 the preliminary figure, provided by the
Statistician, was $ 1,730 million almost 15 per cent of
estimated total State Government debt at the time. In 
8.
twenty-four years local government authorities debt increased
more than twelvefold compared with an increase of not quite
sixfold in State Governments' total outstanding debt. Yet
after the period of extraordinary growth in the magnitude and
cost of local government activities, their place and role
in the forum determining the nation's broad public
borrowing programs was as it had. been at the beginning
in a word, nil. Does it not. strike you as odd that, while we
have established arrangements for borrowings by State
Governments to be undertaken on their behalf by the
Australian Government, local. government authorities are
largely left to fend for themselves in the capital markets?
Especially with the growing complexity and sophistication
of these markets, they are handicapped as borrowers.
I see this as being not only odd, but also as
quite unsatisfactory. Given the nature and range of public
servicesand facilities that local government authorities are
called upon to provide, why should they not also have the
opportunity to have the Australian. Government, with its
superior capacity as a borrower, undertake borrowings on
their behalf? I repeat here what I said earlier; that if
the Financial Agreement were being drawn up now it would be
unthinkable that these authorities could be ignored.
The costs of servicing their borrowings bear
heavily and increasingly so on the budgets on local
government authorities. While the picture differs from
State to State, and as between individual authorities, 
9.
overall interest payments by local government authorities
would now be equivalent to about 12 per cent of their
revenues. Interest payments plus capital repayments amounted
to some $ 177.5 million in 1970-71 and were equivalent to
about 25 per cent of revenues.
If the Australian Government were to be able to
borrow on behalf of local government authorities, the costs
of servicing the resultant debt would of course be
significantly lower than if those authorities borrowed the
funds directly themselves. And this would mean lesser costs
of services and lesser burdens on the local ratepayers.
It would be possible, of course, for the
Australian Government to borrow moneys and pass them on,
under section 96 of the Constitution, to State Governments
on condition that they be made available to local government
authorities. This procedure is not what I have in mind when
I speak of Australian Government borrowings on behalf of
local government. Premiers will appreciate the difference
between borrowings made by the Australian Government on behalf
of their States and borrowings made wholly on the Australian
Government's account which might be used to finance payments
to the States under section 96.
What I am seeking is your agreement to amend
the Financial Agreement to enable the Australian Government
to borrow for and on behalf of elected local government
bodies, just as it borrows for and on behalf of the State
Governments, and to provide the funds direct to those bodies.
The amendment would also make provision for consequential
arrangements for the servicing of such debt. 
I am not proposing that local government should
be required to havp borrowings for their purposes undertaken
on their behalf by the Australian Government regardless of
their wishes in the matter. It would be for each authority
to choose whether to take advantage of the new facility or
to rely on its own abilities as a borrower.
I am well aware that there would be a number of
legal and practical arrangements to be settled before the
proposal could be implemented. However, I am again advised
that the necessary amendments could be made to the Financial
Agreement to enable this to be done without taking it outside
section 105A of the Constitution as it stands.
In brief, those are the proposals I put to you
for your consideration and, I trust, agreement. It will be
clear from what I have said that I am seeking the cooperation
of the States in arrangements to provide local
government with a role and the resources adequate to its
responsibilities. With your assistance and co-operation
I believe, as I have already indicated, that this can be done
within the existing constitutional framework.
I urge your agreement to these proposals; that
way we can proceed quickly and with the least fuss and bother
to the urgent task of putting local government on a
satisfactory and viable basis0 I do not think there can be
any argument that such assistance is necessary indeed, it
is being demanded by the community. If, together, we cannot
agree on such arrangements, however, I do not see any adequate
alternative open to my Government but to seek to have the
Constitution amended for the purpose. However, as I say, I 
110
do not see that course as necessary if we can agree to adopt
the arrangements I have outlined. Indeed, I have not discussed
the alternative course in any depth here because I think each
of you will be as anxious as I to see your own local government
authorities playing their part in public affairs more
effectively. It must be made quite clear, however, that if I
am mistaken in that belief then my Government will adopt
the alternative course. I also . make it clear that I expect
that at this meeting here today we will decide between the
alternatives of co-operative action or constitutional
amendment. I am not, of course, seeking a solution to all
the practical and procedural problems today. Neither am I
suggesting that those problems should be cleared away before
the decisions in principle are reached. If we can reach
unanimous agreement on the broad proposals I have outlined,
we can then quickly proceed to establish machinery to put
them into effect. But I am seeking such agreement today for
the reason that, in its absence, I would wish to have before
the end of the current sittings of the Australian Parliament
the necessary legislation for a referendum on the amendment
of section 105A. 



NQ DATE
M/ 144 13 October 1973
FIGHTING IN THE FMIDLE EAST
8 The Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Whitlam, referring to his statement of 7 October on the
renewed outbreak of fighting in the Middle East, said today
that the Australian Government was deeply concerned at the
continu,, tion and extension of the conflict since that date.
Il Mr. Whitlam said it was particularly regrettable
that innocent civilians had become victims of the fighting.
The conflict, he said, not only meant tragic loss of life
for the countries directly involved, but also had farreaching
implications for international peace and security.
In this situation, the Australian Government
continued to believe that a ceasefire should be put into
effect at the earliest possible moment, so that a renewed
international effort could be launched to resolve the
long-standing problems which lay behind the repeated
outbreaks of hostilities in the Middle East.
Mr. Vhitlam stressed the key role which the
United Nations had to play in bringing about a ceasefire and
in subsequent moves to find a lasting settlement in the
Middle East. The Security Council, as the United Nations
organ charged with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
be the major centre of this activity.
The Council had already . met but had so far
been unable to find a basis of agreement to permit a
call for an iL-Iediate ceasefire. / 2. 
-2-
The Council menibers were, however, maintaining
continuous urgent consultations in an endeavour to reach
agreement, and Mr. Whitlaua was pleased that the Australian
Representative, Sir Laurence Tlclntyre, as President of' the
Council for October, was playing a key role in these
consultations. MYr. Whitlam said it was vital that these consultations
should succeed and that the Council should be able to
discharge its crucial responsibilities to restore peace to
the Mliddle East. He urged all parties to the conflict and all
members of the Security Council and of the United Nations,
to give their wholehearted support to these efforts.
M~ r. Whitlam said he fully endorsed the statement issued
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 11 October,
in which the Secretary-General appealed to all countries
involved in hostilities to turn the tragic conflict into a
starting point for a new effort at a real settlement.
Mr. Whitlan said that Australia itself would continue
to follow its neutral and even-handed policy in the Middle
East. Ref erring to some overseas reports about his reply in
Parliament on 10 October to a question about Australian nationa@
volunteering to fight in the Middle East conflict, he reiteratect
that holders of Australian passports were free to travel to
whichever countries they wished to visit0
This policy, he said, did not in any way imply approval
or encouragement of Australian citizens volunteering for
military service in the forces of any foreign country. 



NQ DATE
MV/ 14 6 16 October 1973
SENATOR WVVILLESEE TO LEAD AUSTRALIAN
DELEGATION TO DAC MEETITNG IN PARIS
The Prime Minister and Minister f or Foreign
Affairs, Mr Whitlam, said today that the Minister Assisting
tlie Foreign M" inister, Senator Willesee, would lead the
Australian delegation to the High Level Meeting of the
Development Assistance Committee ( DAC) of the OECD in Paris
on 18 and 19 October.
The DAC is concerned with encouraging the flow
of assistance to developing countries. The High Level
Meeting, the annual policy meeting of the Committee, will
review the Committee's work program and discuss the major
issues facing aid donors and recipients.
Mr Whitlam said that the impending changes in the
structure of Australian aid administration and the review
scheduled to be carried out this year by DAC on Australia's
aid performance made it particularly appropriate that
Senator Willesee should lead the delegation to this important
international aid meeting. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA\,
TUESDAY, 16 OCTOBER, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen, there have been some appointments made
I would expect about half an hour ago by the Executive Council to
the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
Mr Barney Williams R. D. Williams and Professor J. E. Isaac,
have been made presidential members and Mr Jack Heffernan a
member of the Commission. Mr Barney Williams has been Federal
Secretary of the Australian Bank Officials Association since 1950
and at ACSPA since 1956. He was recently, you will remember,
appointed to the Bank. Board. Professor Isaac holds the
Chair of Economics at Monash and has been on the Civil Aviation
Tribunal I forget the name of it. Mr Heffernan is one of the
joint Secretaries of the Amalgamated Metal Workers Union and
Secretary of the Metal Trades Federation of Unions. A Deputy
President of the Commission, Mr Chambers, who for very many years
before that was the Public Service Arbitrator and Deputy Public
Service Arbitrator, has been appointed Deputy Chairman of the
Prices Justification Tribunal.
A couple of things of interest to Canberra. Cabinet
has agreed to proceed with a new building for the High Court.
You will remember that the winning design was announced last week.
The National Capital Development Commission was authorised to
enter immediately into a formal agreement with the architects
for the new building. It is intended that the contract will be
let and construction begun as soon as funds have been approved.
The estimated cost will be $ 9 million.
Cabinet also approved a site at Barton for a new
building for the Attorney-General's Department. The estimated
cost of the building is $ 5 million. However, there will be no
expenditure in fact this year.
Mr. Jones, the Minister for Transport, I believe made
a press statement yesterday on Cabinet's decision concerning the
report of the House of Representatives Committee on Road Safety.
Cabinet also split up among various Ministers responsibility
for following-up the recommendations in the Report of the Senate
Committee on Mentally and Physically Handicapped Persons which
was tabled in May 1971. Nothing was done about it in the last
Parliament but Ministers are reviewing all the recommendations
in that Senate Report.
There are two pieces of legislation to be drafted.
The legislation is being drafted but it doesn't say that every
feature which we have asked to be drafted will be confirmed when
the legislation appears in draft form. One of the features flows
from the statement in the policy speech concerning a Law Enforcement
Agency. You will remember that I said that the Commonwealth Police
Force will be upgraded with better training, pay and conditions to
meet the growing threat of political terrorism and organised crime. 
-2-
Its facilities will be expanded and its role extended to that of
the American FBI. The Commonwealth Police Force will become the
key link between Australian Law Enforcement Agencies and
Interpol to fight against international crime and the drug traffic
must be primarily a national part. And there were some further
details in the policy speech on that. Now flowing from that
commitment, Cabinet yesterday considered proposals put forward
by Senator Murphy, Attorney-General and Minister for Customs and
Excise. Cabinet asked the Attorney-General to prepare for further
consideration, draft legislation for the creation of a Law
Enforcement Authority bringing together under one organisation the
work of law enforcement currently performed by the Commonwealth
Police, the A. C. T. Police, the Northern Territory Police and the
law enforcement units within the Department of Customs and Excise.
The legislation is to be drawn with provision for an independent
tribunal to investigate complaints against police and on a basis
that would provide for divisions within the authority appropriate
to the A. C. T. and the Northern Territory. The Cabinet had in mind
that when the legislation is passed, the Department of Customs and
Excise will be abolished with part of its functions being
transferred to the new authority and half being included in a
Bureau of Customs. Additionally, Cabinet decided that arrangements
should be put in hand now for the functions of the Department of
Customs and Excise in the registration of British ships and in
indigenous oil policy to be transferred to the Department of
Transport and the Department of Minerals and Energy respectively.
Mr Daly, the Minister for Services and Property, was
authorised to prepare legislation to ensure disclosure of donations
from now on to political parties.
Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Did Senator Murphy yesterday ask that ASIC be included
in the group of forces to be brought under the control of one
organisation. If so, and that was not done by the Cabinet, can
you tell us why?
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Murphy made no such proposal; ASIC is not
a law enforcement agency.
QUESTION: Do you have any specific knowledge of donations by
multi-national companies to opposition parties and further are
you sure that multi-national companies haven't made donations to
the Labor Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no knowledge of specific companies which
have made donations to the Liberal Party. I have no doubt that such
donations figure very greatly in the donations that the Liberal
Party has received in recent months. I don't recall donations
of this character this is from overseas companies to the Labor
Party. 
-3-
QUESTION: Prime Minister, as a matter of clarification, in your
policy speech you said " rates of taxation need not be increased
at any level to implement a Labor Government's program"
Subsequently, in relation to this year's Budget, you interpreted
that as an undertaking not to increase taxes in this year's
Budget just past. Is that generally an undertaking that during
your term of office you will not increase taxation?
PRIME MINISTER: I have got nothing to add to that and I am not
going to promote speculation on this issue.
QUESTION: Sir, don't you think that you have in fact created
speculation by the doubt you cast on it?
PRIME MINISTER: No I haven't. If you ask questions and I answer
questions on this it will create speculation. I recommend
Kenneth Davidson's article today.
QUESTION: Mr Daly's legislation. Will provision be made for an
Appropriation for party funds to fight election campaigns.
PRIME MINISTER: That's not proposed in this legislation.
QUESTION: Do you propose to introduce that legislation.
PRIME MINISTER: There is no proposal.
QUESTION: What is the attitude of your Government to efforts by
Rhodesia to recruit migrants from Australia, and what would be
the position of Australian passport holders who accepted an offer
of assisted passage to Rhodesia?
PRIME MINISTER: We are obliged under United Nations Security
Resolutions to do nothing to support that regime or to facilitate
movements into or out of Rhodesia. As you know, any Australian
citizen who is promoting the policies of the Rhodesian regime would
have his passport recalled. I don't say that there are not persons
in Rhodesia in possession of Australian passports who are not
performing functions which have no relation to the policies of the
regime but if a person with an Australian passport were promoting
the policies of the regime that is an abuse of the passport and it
would be recalled.
QUESTION: How?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been passports recalled before as you
know. QUESTION: How would you do it if they were living in Rhodesia?
PRIME MINISTER: If they didn't obey, you couldn't go and get it.
QUESTION: Would you cancel it? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: It would be cancelled at the first place where
it was presented outside Rhodesia. I suppose there isn't much
* you can do about people who stay in Rhodesia but a passport is
supposed to facilitate movement and any attempt to use it for
that purpose would result in its cancellation.
QUESTION: Senator Georges has inferred quite strongly that
Dr Coombs had something to do with the removal of Mr Bryant
from Aboriginal Affairs. Would you care to comment on that?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no foundation for that allegation
whatsoever. Needless to say, I don't discuss with Dr Coombs or
with anybody other than my immediate ministerial colleagues any
changes in the ministry.
QUESTION: Senator Georges also suggested that Aboriginal Affairs
had been become a disaster area littered with failures and excess
expenditure. Do you think that a wider range of inquiry is needed?
PRIME MINISTER: No. present inquiries should be adequate.
QUESTION: Do you anticipate any controversy over Mr Heffernan's
appointment to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't expect so. It would be generally
acknowledged that Mr Heffernan's qualifications are very
appropriate. He is a very well qualified person in the industrial
field. I believe he will be able to help in the work of the
Arbitration Commission very greatly.
QUESTION: Last week some 57 members of your Labor Caucus sent
out a petition calling on the Government not to recognise Chile
until Caucus had discussed it. Will you go ahead in recognising
Chile before Caucus has discussed the issue, and what's the
position now?
PRIME MINISTER: We have taken the steps to recognise the Government
that is there. That was done last Thursday. I think I told you
a week ago that that is what would happen. There does seem to be
some misapprehension about this. Therefore it might be useful
if I were to point out to you that, of the countries which have
had diplomatic relations with Chile not just recognition but
those that have had diplomats accredited to Chile, in our region
China, Indonesia and Japan have done what we have done; in the
Commonwealth, Britain, Canada and New Zealand have done what we
have done; countries which have fraternal governments which
have done the same as we have are all the Scandanavian countries
and West Germany. You probably know already that every Latin
American country has done so except Cuba and every Western European
country except Italy. New Zealand and Australia were the last of
all the countries that I have mentioned to take the step of
acknowledging the letter which the new regime had delivered to
the foreign missions in Santiago. You know that we have expressed
our disapproval of the method by which the regime usurped power
by withdrawing our ambassador.
QUESTION: Will he return, Sir? 
PRIME MINISTER: Not for the time being.
QUESTION: The A. L. P. Platform lays down that the Federal
Parliament should be clothed with supreme powers. Are you asking
A. L. P.' s supporters within the trade union movement to join with
you in supporting the incomes referendum rather than accepting
the viewpoint of the trade union movement as annunciated by
Mr Hawke?
PRIME MINISTER: The Party's attitude was determined and
published on Saturday week after the meeting of the Federal
Executive in Adelaide. I would hope that most members of the
party and supporters of the party would heed the party's wishes in
this regard.
QUESTION: Do you have sympathy for Bob Hawke's stand in opposing
the referendum or whether you....
PRIME MINISTER: Not much.
QUESTION: Or would you go to the other extreme and believe that
he has actually been disloyal or breaking the rules of the party?
PRIME MINISTER: No, of course I don't. He is entitled to come
to his conclusion and to get support for it if he can. I think
it's wrong but he would accept the same right on my party to
come to a conclusion and seek support for it.
QUESTION: Can you say what topics you hope to discuss with Chinese
leaders during your forthcoming visit to Peking?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't got any specific list but as you can
well believe, there are a great number of political and economic
and cultural matters which we would like to discuss with them and
which we anticipated they would like to discuss with us. There
is no agenda at this stage.
QUESTION: Will you protest against their nuclear tests, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, of course. I did when we were there together
last time. I was the first Australian to do so, and I have been~
followed by Dr Cairns who has done so as a Minister.
QUESTION: When the High Court handed down its majority decision
-on the Rhodesian Centre, you did suggest that you would ask the
Postmaster-General to amend the Postal Act. Have there been any
developments on that? 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no submission on this since I
said that. I think we will be doing so but there has not been
a submission yet because, as you will appreciate, there is a
very great deal of legislation which we have been considering.
It looks as if we will be introducing and I hope passing almost
200 Bills this year, which is easy the largest number and I
would think incomparably the most substantial body of legislation
that the Australian Parliament has every considered. There are
some pieces of legislation which you will appreciate have to be
done quite quickly. There are quite a number which will have to
be through before the 1st of December when Papua New Guinea
becomes self-governing. There are also quite a number of pieces
which we would like to have on the Statute book in time for the
Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
on 10 December. There are also a very great number of pieces
which for various financial or tariff or administrative reasons
have to be through before the end of December.
QUESTION: Could I ask you some questions on the progress of the
Appropriation Bill through the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: You can ask me one. You have the same right as
anyone else.
QUESTION: Could you give us an idea when you expect that to
proceed to a vote in the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: Do you mind if I consider that question?
COMMENT: Right.
QUESTION: The second question is, what is your general attitude.
Do you think the Senate is entitled to refuse Appropriation or
Supply? PRIME MINISTER: No, of course its not. It would be quite
unprecedented. QUESTION: And thirdly, Mr Anthony suggested that you couldn't
use the Election Bill to go to the Governor-General to ask for a
double dissolution. He said it is not something you can put on
the shelf and keep there for a double dissolution. Mr Snedden
has said that he doesn't know whether the causes for a double
dissolution have evaporated or not. What is your opinion on this
constitutional situation?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Anthony, not for the first time, is wrong;
Mr Snedden, not for the first time, can't make up his mind. The
position is quite clear that the conditions for a double
dissolution are available for me to make a submission to the
Government-General whenever I wish. 
-7-
QUESTION: I was wondering whether you could elaborate oiii the
Bureau of Customs. Will it be attached to this new Law
Enforcement Agency....
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so.
QUESTION: And what about its functions?
PRIME MINISTER: It will be primarily a revenue body in the same
way as the Commissioners of Taxation are.
QUESTION: What about by-laws?
PRIME MINISTER: The legislation is being drafted and I think it
is enough for me to leave it at that. We are committed to
establish a Law Enforcement Agency as we undertook in the policy
speech. We are committed, when that legislation is enacted,
to abolish the Department of Customs and Excise as at present
constituted. QUESTION: Would you have been better able to attack inflation if
you hadn't given an election promise not to raise personal taxes?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the same answer as I have already given
to the " Age" s; till applies. 



( 0
JS/ O
Ji, AUSTRiALlA. l-
PIR R/ 1i ? i9lM R S EP R
i, li Press Statement No. 140
17 October 1973
ALBURY-WODONGA AREA DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today that he
will be meeting the Premier of New South Wales, Sir Robert Askin,
and the Premier of Victoria, Mr. Hamer, at the Wodonga Civic
Ce'tr,-on 23 October to sign the Albury-Wodonga Area Development
Aeement. Mr. Whitlam said that the signing of the Agreement would
be an historic step, signifying the strong commitment of the
three Governments to develop the new growth centre at Albury-Wodonga
with a concern for the quality of environment having regard to human
requirements and public involvement.
Mr. Whitlam said that a primary purpose of the Agreement was
to estz. blish a development organisation to undertake the planning
* and development and organisation of the growth complex.
Mr. Whitlam took the opportunity to record the satisfaction of
the Australian Government, and his cwn personal satisfaction, at the
successful completion of this first phase of an outstanding example
of how the Australian Government and the States can work together in
close co-operation.
Mr. Whitlam said that complementary legislation to be presented
to the three Parliaments was currently being drafted, and that
Australian Government legislation would be introduced as soon as
possible after the signing of the Agreement.
Mr. Whitiam said that, in view of the significance of the
occasicn, he would be inviting, in addition to the two Premiers,
members of the Ministerial Council, representatives of local
government and members of the Interim Consultative Committee
which has been the vehicle for public participation in the
development so far to a luncheon to mark the occasion.
CANBERFA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, AT
A PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON FOR HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA, 18.10.73
The head of Government, and the head of the Opposition
to the Government, will now be able to join in a welcome to our
Head of State I welcome Her majesty as Queen of Australia.
From tomorrow that title will, in this country, take precedence
over all our other titles.
I, of course, am still rather new to hobnobbing with
Royalty. You will forgive me, therefore, if I drop a name
occasionally. ( laughter) It was at Windsor ( laughter) on Good
Friday, that Her Majesty was gracious enough to say how gladly
she welcomed the suggestion for the change in her title her
Royal Style and Title. The new title expressly, directly, clearly
the role of the monarchy in Australia. ( applause)
It is the Queen herself who, under the Constitution,
under the two Houses, makes up the Australian Parliament. It
is in the Queen that the executive power of this nation is vested.
It is to the Queen that the salaries of the ministers are to be
paid. It is in the Queen's name that the Governor-General assents
to a bill passed by the Houses.
Tomorrow, in fact, the Queen will assent to a Bill passed
by both Houses. There is no difficulty in getting this Bill through
both Houses it is the Royal Style and Titles Bill. But the Queen,
tomorrow, will discharge further of her functions as Head of State.
For the first time, I believe, the Queen herself will swear and
administer the oath of office to a minister. The Queen for the
first time, in Australia, will sign letters of credence. They
will be for her Australian aibasssadors to Japan, the Soviet Union
and the United States, and a letter of commisnion for her High
Commissioner to India. She will complete the formalities for the
ratification of treaties with our nearest and greatest neighbour,
Indonesia, and with another of her realms, Canada. She will apply
laws to the Coral Sea Islands territories. I don't want to raise
questions of off-shore waters or seabeds there are too many
distinguished visitors from some of the Australian provinces for
me to do that. And tomorrow, in assenting to the Royal Style and Titles
Act Her Majesty will appoint the new Great Seal.
Now, on this occasion, Her Majesty comes to Australia
to perform and celebrate a very great occasion for Australia, at
home and abroad the opening of the Sydney Opera House. It is
an event which has been long awaited and long deferred. 
-2-
I think on each of your recent visits Your Majesty will
have been told that the Sydney Opera House would be opened soon.
You live in the midst of the monuments of history so Your Majesty
will realise that these things do take a little time. This has
taken 14 years; the Parthenon took 15 years; the Royal Church
at Westminster took five centuries. This building will stand in
our region with buildings as great as Borobodur, Ankor Wat. And
they will say the Sydney Opera House. It will be used as long
and probably by even more people than Westminster Abbey or the
cathedrals of equal age or the Pantheon itself. This building is
in Sydney. The earth has not anything to show more fair than
Sydney harbour. ( faint laughter) I would have expected a greater
manifestation of national spirit in the National Capital. I will
say it again: the earth has not anything to show more fair than
Sydney harbour. I'm really only warming the audience up for Mr.
Snedden and Her Majesty. ( laughter and applause)
Now there are indeed sermons in these stones as well as
songs. The course of the planning and erection of the Sydney
Opera House was not always plain sailing. While it took time in
the courage and initiative and the enterprise and inventiveness
to bring about this great building, we must also acknowledge some
of the timidities and frustrations and jealousies and compromises
which played their part in its story. But it is a magnificent
building. Our civilisations are known by their buildings and future
generations will honour the people of this generation the people
of this kingdom by this building. ( applause)
Any occasion that brings you here Ma'am is very much a
family occasion. Last time you brought Prince Charles and Princess
Anne. I am sure it would be the wish of this gathering that you
should hear at first hand the pleasure it brings to all your people
in this country that Princess Anne is about to be married. We look
forward to welcoming her and her husband when you come here next
year. And next year, of course, Your Majesty will also be visiting
Papua New Guinea a self-governing part of Your Majesty's realms.
And you will be illustrating at first hand the opportunity which is
afforded to the people of Papua New Guinea through the free exercise
of choice of their people to serve an independent nation and to be
a member of the Commonwealth of which you are head.
I must express, also, on behalf of this gathering our
pleasure that you have brought your husband with you. Indeed I
think I can say it is with some relief that he has come again.
I'm speaking not only of the fact that when he was last here in
March there were no ladies other than Senatrices at the gathering.
That was an uproarous occasion and the Speaker and the President
well remember the afternoon which followed. This is a very much more
decorous more demure occasion; the Parliament will be better for
it. I am not only expressing relief on behalf of the Presiding
Officers for the good name of the Parliament, I am also expressing
relief mna very more self-interested way. I am the first Prime
Minister since Sir. Robert Menzies who during his term of office has
been able to survive a second visit from Prince Philip. And indeed
I read in the papers that a couple of weeks ago some of my colleagues
were about to urge me to cable him " come quickly". At last the jinx
has been broken. Prince Philip has abandoned his role as the Nemesis 
-3-
of Australian Prime Ministers. We have long ago got over our
misgivings. When you Ma'am as heiress presumptive took as your
consort another Philip we had misgivings because the last Philip
who was a consort to the Queen of England did play rather too
strong a political role as we still read. Now, of course,
Prince Philip has eschewed all forms of political activity.
He has devoted himself to many good causes in this nation. One
perhaps might pick out, in particular, the issue of conservation.
It is the field which is so free of petty jealousies and frictions
and pressure groups. There is an automatic consensus on the public
good on any conservation issue. And while all around are losing
their positions, at least Prince Philip is able to'survive.
In welcoming you once again to Australia and to the
Australian Parliament on behalf of the Australian people, let
me adapt : the words of the first Elizabeth when she addressed her
Parliament:" You will find in all your realms a better and a
stronger people but never will you find better friends than in
your Parliament of Australia". 



6' d 3, 7 3,
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR E. G. WHITLAM, AT THE
SIGNING OF THE ALBURY-WODONGA
AREA DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
JUST NINE MONTHS AGO, SIR ROBERT ASKIN, MR HAMER
AND I MET HERE IN ALBURY-WODONGA AND AGREED ON A HISTORIC
PLAN FOR A NEW AUSTRALIAN CITY IN THIS AREA. IT GIVES ME
GREAT PLEASURE TODAY TO MEET THE PREMIERS AGAIN TO SIGN
THE ALBURY-WODONGA AREA DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
! ITH THE CONCURRENCE OF THE STATES THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INITIATED THE MEETING IN JANUARY, BUT FROM THAT
DAY IT BECAME A JOINT VENTURE. LET'S NOT IMAGINE THAT THIS
IS AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROJECT EXCLUSIVELY FAR FROM
IT, ITS SUCCESS DEPENDS ON CONTINUED'CO-OPERATION BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES. THE THREE
GOVERNMENTS ARE EQUAL PARTNERS.
THE JANUARY MEETING WAS THE FIRST STEP. IT THEN
BECAME THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTERIAL COUNCI.
MR UREN, MR FULLER AND MR BYRNE TO ESTABLISH AN AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE THREE GOVERNMENTS WHICH WOULD EMBODY OUR JOINT
COMMITMENT AND PROVIDE A SOUND BASE ON WHICH THIS AREA CAN
GROW IN HARMONY WITH THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. 
-2-
THEY HAVE DONE WELL, THE DOCUMENT WE HAVE BEFORE
US TODAY IS EVIDENCE OF THAT, IT IS A CREDIT TO THEM AND
TO THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN INVOLVED, IT REFLECTS A CONTINUING
SPIRIT-OF CO-OPERATION AND PROVIDES A FIRST-CLASS EXAMPLE
OF HOW THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES CAN WORK
TOGETHER TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR THOUSANDS OF
AUSTRALIANS OVER THE NEXT FEW DECADES,
THE PREPARATION OF THIS AGREEMENT HAS BEEN A
FORMIDABLE LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TASK, IT HAS TAKEN ONLY
NINE MONTHS, I KNOW THAT MANY MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL COMMUNITY
WOULD LIKE MORE ACTION, BUT THE IMPORTANCE, THE SIZE AND
THE. QUALITY OF THIS PROJECT CALL FOR A GREAT DEAL OF
FORBEARANCE AND PATIENCE ON THE PART OF US ALL,
A PRIMARY PURPOSE OF THE AGREEMENT IS TO ESTABLISH
A STRONG AND EFFECTIVE DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION TO BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GROWTH COMPLEX,
EXPERIENCE OVERSEAS AND IN THIS COUNTRY HAS SHOWN CLEARLY
THAT THIS IS AN ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT IN THE SUCCES) F F
NEW CITY DEVELOPMENT ,/ 3 
-3-
DETAILS OF THE DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION WERE
ANNOUNCED AND WELL PUBLICISED BY THE MINISTERIAL COUNCIL
ON 4 JULY, To REFRESH YOUR MEMORY CHARTS HAVE BEEN
CIRCULATED AND I HOPE THEY WILL BE WIDELY BROUGHT TO THE
NOTICE OF THE PUBLIC,
AT FIRST GLANCE THE FORM OF THE ORGANISATION MAY
APPEAR COMPLEX, BUT FUNDAMENTALLY IT IS NOT, IT IS A FULLY
INTEGRATED ORGANISATION WITH COMMON MEMBERSHIP AND COMMON
STAFF, THE THREE LEGAL CORPORATIONS ARE REQUIRED TO MEET
THE CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF THE THREE GOVERNMENTS,
IN PRACTICE, HOWEVER, THE ORGANISATION WILL WORK AS A SINGLE
ENTITY RESPONSIBLE TO THE MINISTERIAL COUNCIL,
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEES OF THE
ORGANISATION WILL IDENTIFY WITH ONE BODY AND ONE GOAL
NAMELY THE CREATION OF A NEW GROWTH CENTRE WITH A HIGH-QUALITY
ENVIRONMENT, IMAGINATIVELY PLANNED AND DEVELOPED,
I WAS PARTICULARLY PLEASED TO'SEE THAT PROVISION
HAS BEEN MADE FOR A CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL TO PROVIDE A VEHICLE
FOR PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN THE PROJECT, OVER THE PAST
NINE MONTHS THE INTERIM CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE, MADE UP OF
REPRESENTATIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY INTERESTS,
HAS PLAYED A VITAL AND CONTRIBUTING RO'LE IN THE DEVELOPMENT
SO FAR, ,/ 4 
THE AGREEMENT OF COURSE REQUIRES COMPLIMENTARY
LEGISLATION AND I UNDERSTAND THAT THE STATES ARE CURRENTLY
DRAFTING BILLS, YOU HAVE MY ASSURANCE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT LEGISLATION WILL BE INTRODUCED WITHOUT DELAY
AFTER THE SIGNING OF THIS AGREEMENT,
YOU WILL ALSO BE AWARE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS ADVERTISED FOR A CHAIRMAN OF THE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION,
WE SHALL MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO ENSURE THAT WE GET THE RIGHT
MAN FOR THIS ALL IMPORTANT POSITION,
YOU WILL ALSO BE AWARE THAT $ 9 MILLION HAS BEEN
BUDGETED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR EXPENDITURE IN
1973-74 ON THE FIRST PHASE OF THE ACQUISITION PROGRAM UNDER
THE PROVISIONS OF APPROPRIATE STATE LAND PRICE STABILISATION
LEGISLATION AND SELECTED PUBLIC WORKS, THIS IS ONLY THE
BEGINNING IT WILL BE A CONTINUING COMMITMENT,
AN IMMENSE AMOUNT OF WORK HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE ON
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A PLANNING STRATEGY, A FIRM COM1ITMENT
HAS BEEN GIVEN, AND INCLUDED IN THE AGREEMENT, THAT AREAS TO
BE ACQUIRED FOR URBAN AND ASSOCIATED DEVELOPMENT WILL BE
ANNOUNCED NO LATER THAN 30 JUNE NEXT YEAR, THE MINISTERIAL
COUNCIL WISELY DECIDED NOT TO WAIT ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION BEFORE PLANNING COMMENCED, 
WE WOULD ALL LIKE TO SEE THINGS HAPPEN IMMEDIATELY,
BUT IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT WE HAVE THE RESULTS OF THE VERY
NECESSARY MAJOR STUDIES. THAT ARE UNDERWAY BEFORE THE OVERALL
STRATEGY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT IS ANNOUNCED.
I WOULD LIKE TO RECORD THE SATISFACTION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND MY OWN PERSONAL SAT ISFACTION AT
THE SUCCESSFUL CONCLUSION OF THIS FIRST PHASE IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF ALBURY-WODONGA, IT AUGURS WELL FOR THE
FUTURE AND, AS I HAVE SAID, PROVIDES AN HISTORIC EXAMPLE
OF HOW THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES CAN WORK
TOGETHER IN THE INTERESTS OF THE TOTAL AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY.
-o-o-o-0-o-0-o-



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
A DINNER OF THE AUSTRALIAN-FARMERS' FEDERATION
HOTEL CANBERRA, TUESDAY 23 OCTOBER 1973
I WELCOME THIS OPPORTUNITY TO ADDRESS ONE OF THE
LARGEST, MOST REPRESENTATIVE AND MOST RESPECTED PRIMARY
PRODUCERS'I ORGANISATIONS IN THIS COUNTRY.
ONE OF THE SIGNAL FEATURES OF YOUR FEDERATION
AND I FIND IT SPECIFIED IN YOUR CONSTITUTION IS YOUR
POLICY OF POLITICAL NEUTRALITY. YOU ARE AFFILIATED WITH
NO POLITICAL PARTY OR SECTIONAL INTEREST. I GIVE YOU CREDIT
FOR RECOGNISING THAT THE TRUE INTFRESTS OF THE PRTMARY
PRODUCER ARE NOT NECESSARILY SERVED BY THE POLITTCAL FORCES
MOST VOCAL, MOST STRIDENT, IN YOUR SUPPORT. Yotj KNOW IT
IS OFTEN SAID THAT WE IN THE LABOR PARTY ARE HOSTILE TO
THE RURAL COMMUNITY: THAT LABOR IS A CITY-8AS~ F) PARTY
DANCING TO THE TUNE OF POWER-HUNGRY UNIONS.
THE FACT IS THAT LABOR IS NEITHER AN' URBAN NOR A RURAL
PARTY, BUT A NATIONAL PARTY. WE ARE A NATITONAL GOVERNMENT,
GUIDED BY NATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS, AND DETERMINED TO
PRODUCE A MORE OPEN, MORE EQUAL, MORE TOLERANT AND MORE
PROSPEROUS SOCIETv THAN WE INHERITED FROM OUR PR[ DFCESS: ORS.
I WANT TO CONVINCE YOU THAT JUST AS THE GOVERNMENT'S INTERESTS
ARE NATIONAL INTERESTS, SO YOUR INTERESTS, THE FARMERS'I INTERESTS,
DEPEND IN THE ULTIMATE ON A BROAD PERCEPTION OF THE NATIONAL GOOD,
.1./ 2 
-2AHAS
ANY COUNTRY, ANY STATE, EVER PROSPERED THROUGH A
CONCENTRATION ON ONLY ONE SECTOR OF ITS PEOPLE OR INDUSTRY?
WE USED TO BE OVERWHELMINGLY A PASTORAL ECONOMY; WE ARE A
GREATER NATION TODAY BECAUSE OUR ECONOMY IS MIXED AND DIVERSIFIED.
AND YOU, THE FARMERS, LIKE ALL AUS! TRALIANS, HAVE BENEFITED FROM
THIS GREATER STRENGTH AND DIVERSITYi YOU CAN SEE THIS BY LOOKING
AT THE RURAL ECONOMY ITSELF. YOU ARE LESS DEPENDENT ON THE
RANDOM FORTUNES OF ONE COMMODITY WOOL. MANY A PASTORALIST
HAS BEEN SAVED BY THE BUOYANCY OF THE CATTLE MARKET OR ONE OF
OUR GRAIN MARKETS. TO ADAPT A FAMILIAR PHASE, WHAT IS GOOD
FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS GOOD FOR THE COUNTRY.
I CONFESS THAT NOTHING EXASPERATES ME MORE THAN THIS
BASELESS ACCUSATION THAT LABOR IS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY. THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT RECONGISES THE GREAT CONTRIBUTION MADE BY THE
RURAL SECTOR TO THE NATIONAL ECONOMY AS A PROVIDER OF FOOD
FOR OUR GROWING POPULATION, AS A PROVIDER OF LARGE EXPORT
SURPLUSES EARNING VALUABLE FOREIGN EXHANGE. RURAL EXPORTS
LAST YEAR ACCOUNTED FOR MORE THAN 50% OF THE VALUE OF OUR EXPORT
EARNINGS, DESPITE THE RISING CONTRIBUTION OF MANUFACTURED GOODS
AND MINERALS TO * THE TRADE BALANCE. ALTHOUGH THE RURA[
POPULATION HAS DECLINED SUBSTANTIALLY IN THE POST-WAR PERIOD$
WITH A LARGE DROP IN THE FARM WORKFORCE, THE PRODUCTIVITY OF
AUSTRALIAN FARMERS HAS EASILY OFFSET THIS TREND. THROUGH
GREATER INVESTMENT IN MACHINERY AND FERTILISERS1 PRODUCTION HAS
CONTINUED TO EXPAND EXCEPT IN YEARS OF DROUGHT, So AUSTRALIAN
FARMERS ARE EFFICIENT FARMERS, AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION~ ABROAD,
AS A TRADER IN PRIMARY PRODUCTS, IS HIGH. DOES ANYONE SERIOUSLY
BELIEVE THAT WE IN THE LABOR PARTY CAN BE INDIFFERENT OR HOSTILE
TO AN INDUSTRY AS VAST, AS EFFICIENT, AS PRODUCTIVE, AS ESSENTIAL
AS YOURS? 
IF WE LOOK BACK ON THE HISTORY OF PRIMAR'. INDUST-T
IN THIS COUNTRY, WE SEE ONE OUTSTANDING FEATURE. I PUT IT
TO YOU THAT TI. CHIEF CHARACTERISTI OF YOUR INDLSTRY,
WHATEVER GOVERNMENT IS IN POWER, IS. ITS VULNERABILITY, IORE
THAN ANY OTHER SECTOR OF THE ECONOMY YOU ARE SUBJECT TO
UNPREDICTABLE AND IMPONDERABLE CIRCUMSTANCES. YOU ARE AT
THE MERCY OF THE SEASONS, AT THE MERCY OF WORLD CURRENCY
REALIGNMENTS, OF FLUCTUATING INTFRI'ATIONAL MARKETS, GLUTS
AND SHORTAGES. CAN YOU HONESTLY SAY THAT THE POLICIES
PURSUED DURING 23 YEARS OF GOVERNMENT BY OUR OPPONENTS
BY YOUR SELF-PROCLAIMED POLITICAL ALLIES HAVE REMOVED
YOUR FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS OR GUARANTEED YOU ANY PERMANENT
SECURITY AND PROSPERITY?
JUST THREE YEARS AGO, YOU WILL REMEMBER, FARM INCOMES
IN THIS COUNTRY WERE THE LOWEST IN TERMS OF PURCHASING POWER
SINCE 1944, WHEN DROUGHT AND WAR-TIME CONDITIONS PRODUCED
A QUITE DRASTIC RURAL RECESSION. No GOVERNMEN1, OF COURSE,
AN GUARANTEE YOU IMMUNITY TO ACTS OF2 GoD OR TO INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENTS BEYOND OUR CONTROl.., I MERELY SIIGGEST " HAT
PAST GOVERNMENT POLICIES TOWARDS RURAL INDUSTRY HAVE 4OT
SOLVED YOUR UNDERLYING PROBLEMS, AND IN KANY CASES HAVE SERVED
TO PERPETUATE THEM. 1 1/ 4 
-4-
I GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE, IN THE LAST 30 YEARS,
GOVERNMENTS HAVE POURED SOME $ 77 " MILLION INTO THE DAIRY
INDUSTRY BY WAY OF BOUNTIES, -THESE BOUNTIES HAVE DONE
NOTHING TO SOLVE THE INDUSTRY'S MAdOR PROBLEM THE ADJUSTMENT
OF FARM PRODUCTION LEVELS TO REALISTIC LOCAL AND OVERSEAS
DEMAND, BY FAVOURING THE WEALTHIER PRODUCER AND THE RICHER
DAIRYING STATES, THEY HAVE DONE LITTLE TO IMPROVE THE LOT
OF SMALL DAIRY FARMERS, MANY OF WHOM ARE REPRESENTED IN
YOUR FEDERATION, THIRTEEN YEARS AGO, AN INDEPENDENT
COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY OUR PREDECESSORS UNANIMOUSLY
RECOMMENDED THE ABOLITION OF THE DAIRY SUBSIDY, THAT
RECOMMENDATION WAS IGNORED, WHAT BETTER TIME TO PHASE OUT
THIS SUBSIDY THAN NOW, WHEN RETURNS IN THE MAJOR ALTERNATIVE
ENTERPRISE THAT OF BEEF PRODUCTION ARE AT RECORD LEVELS,
AND WHEN THE LONG-TERM PROSPECTS IN THAT INDUSTRY ARE
REGARDED AS HIGHLY PROMISING? DON'T FORGET THAT IN
CONSULTATION WITH. THE INDUSTRY AND STATE AUTHORITIES, WE ARE
EXAMINING THE BEST MEANS OF PROVIDING RE-ADJUSTMENT
ASSISTANCE WHILE THE BOUNTIES ARE PHASED OUT,
I GIVE YOU ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF UNFAIR AND
SELF-DEFEATING CONCESSIONS TO THE RURAL SECTOR, IN THE
BUDGET THIS YEAR WE LOOKED CRITICALLY AT A NUMBER OF TAX
CONCESSIONS RECEIVED BY FARMERS, WE FOUND THAT THESE
CONCESSIONS MADE LITTLE REAL SENSE FROM YOUR LONG-TERM
POINT OF VIE1W, OR FROM THE COMMUNITY'S POINi: OF VIEW, 
I REMIND YOU THAT A CONCESSION TO ONE GROUP OF 1AXPAYERS CAN
BE MADE ONLY AT THE EXPENSE OF TAXPAYERS GENERALLY; IT IS
GOOD GOVERNMENT PRACTICE TO LOOK AT THESE THINGS CRITICALLY
t
FROM TIME TO TIME, WE FOUND THAT SOME TAX CONCESSIONS
FARMERS WERE RECEIVING WERE DESIGNED TO ENCOURAGE FARM
INVESTMENT, THEY WERE INTRODUCED, IN THE MAIN, IN THE
DECADE AFTER WORLD WAR II WHEN AUSTRALIA WAS CRITICALLY SHORT
OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES AND WHEN THERE WAS AN URGENT
NATIONAL NEED TO EXPAND EXPORTS, CONDITIONS HAVE, OF COURSE,
CHANGED DRAMATICALLY SINCE THEN, OUR EXPORT INCOMES ARE
HIGH AND RISING; OUR INTERNATIONAL RESERVES ARE NEAR RECORD
LEVELS LEVELS UNDREAMT OF 3 OR 4 YEARS AGO. IN THESE
VASTLY ALTERED CIRCUMSTANCES, ARTIFICIAL BOOSTS TO FARM
INVESTMENT AND EXPORT PRODUCTION MAKE, QUITE SIMPLY, LITTLE
OR NO ECONOMIC SENSE, THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE CAN IGNORE
THE VITAL IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMICALLY HEALTHY AND EFFICIENT
INDUSTRIES, IT SIMPLY MEANS THAT IT NO LONGER PAYS US AS
A NATION TO DEVELOP FARMS MORE RAPIDLY THAN IT WOULD PAY YOU
YOURSELVES TO DEVELOP THEM,
IN THIS CONTEXT, IT IS IMPORTANT TO CONSIDER THE
CURRENT HEALTH OF THE RURAL SECTOR, WORLD DEMAND HAS
INCREASED SHARPLY FOR MOST OF AUSTRALIA'S EXPORT COMMODITIES,
ESPECIALLY WOOL AND MEAT, THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS HAS ESTIMATED NET FARM INCOME IN 1972-73 AT A
RECORD LEVEL OF $ 1,880 MILLION, A RISE OF $ 744 MILLION OVER
THE YEAR BEFORE, PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES FOR 1973-74 SHOW A
NET FARM INCOME OF $ 2,865 MILLION, UP 52% OF 1972-73, ,/ 6 
-6-
THE BUREAU'S PRELIMINARY ESTIMATE OF THE GROSS VALUE OF
RURAL PRODUCTION IN 1973-74 IS A" MASSIVE FIGURE OF $ 6,110
MILLION MORE THAN $ 1,000 MILLION GREATER THAN THE PAST
YEAR, AT THE SAME TIME THE RATE O'INCREASE IN RURAL DEBTS
IS SLACKENING OFF, AND FARMERS ARE REPAYING THEIR EXISTING
DEBTS MORE QUICKLY. HIGHER FARM INCOMES HAVE ENABLED MANY
FARMERS TO REPAY THEIR DEBTS; AND THIS, COMBINED WITH
BUOYANT AND RISING PRICES, HAS MADE THE FARMING COMMUNITY
MORE PROSPEROUS TODAY THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE WORLD WAR II,
Now I DON'T WANT TO MAKE TOO MUCH OF THIS. IN MANY
WAYS IT IS FORTUITOUS, JUST AS YOUR RECENT RECESSION WAS
FORTUITOUS; AND AS I HAVE ARGUED ALREADY, THE INHERENT
CHARACTERISTIC OF YOUR INDUSTRY IS ITS PATTERN OF INSTABILITY,
I SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT YOUR CURRENT OVERALL PROSPERITY
PRESENTS A GOOD OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE FARMING MORE OF A
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE, MORE VIABLE, MORE EFFICIENT, MORE
SECURE, MORE FLEXIBLE AND RESPONSIVE TO MARKET TRENDS, WE
ARE OPPOSED TO OPEN-ENDED COMMITMENTS WHICH PLACE NO LIMIT
ON TREASURY ALLOCATIONS AND SUBSIDIES AND WHICH CAST ThE
FARMERS, IN THE EYES OF THE COMMUNITY AT LARGE, AS A
MENDICANT CLASS, HEEDLESS OF SOUND BUSINESS PRACTICE AND
DEPENDENT ON THE TAXPAYERS' CHARITY$ I GIVE YOU MY ASSURANCE
THAT THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONTINUE TO ASSIST PRIMARY INDUSTRY,
BECAUSE YOUR CONTINUED PROSPERITY IS ESSENTIAL TO US ALL, . BUT
OUR ASSISTANCE WILL BE GEARED TO NATIONAL INTERESTS AND NEEDS,
,/ 7 
7-
THE GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR DIRECTING GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRY WILL BE-OUR INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION. As YOU KNOW, THIS IS BEING SET UP ON THE
BASIS OF A REPORT FROM SIR JOHN CRAWFORD IN ORDER TO
SUBJECT CALLS FOR ASSISTANCE TO ALL INDUSTRIES, INCLUDING
RURAL INDUSTRY, TO REGULAR INDEPENDENT AND PUBLIC SCRUTINY.
IN THIS CONNECTION, I COMMEND THE FULL AND GENEROUS SUPPORT
I HAVE RECEIVED FROM YOUR ORGANISATION ON THIS ISSUE. YOU
RECOGNISED QUITE FRANKLY THAT SUCH A COMMISSION MIGHT,
ON OCCASIONS, WORK AGAINST THE SHORT-TERM INTEREST OF ONE
OF YOUR INDUSTRILS, BUT THAT REGULAR, INDEPENDENT PUBLIC
SCRUTINY OF ALL ASSISTANCE PROPOSALS WILL, IN THE LONG RUN,
BENEFIT MOST ECONOMIC PRODUCERS AND ALL OF US AS CONSUMERS
AND AS TAXPAYERS. THAT IS A. REALISTIC AND SENSIBLE APPRAOCH, BUT IT
IS NOT, I GATHER, THE APPROACH TAKE' BY THE COUNTRY PARTY,
THEY SEEM TO THINK THEY KNOW BETTER THAN YOU, THE FARMERSi
WHAT IS GOOD FOR THE FARMING COMMUNIV. THIS MAY NOT BE THE
PLACE TO SPECULATE ON THE COUNTRY PARTY'S MOTIVES,, BUT I MUST
DISCOUNT THE SUGGESTION THAT THEIR APPROACH TO THIS MEASURE
HAS ANYTHING TO DO WITH THEIR PLANS TO COINTEST CITY ELECTORATES.
I CANNOT BELIEVE FOR A MOMENT THAT THEY ARE MORE INTERESTED IN
WINNING SUPPORT AMONG CITY MANUFACTURERS ' TIAN IN FLIFTHERING THE
INTERESTS OF COUNTRY PEOPLE. I LEAVE TIIOS ; F UESTIONS TO YOU)
YOU KNOW THE COUNTRY PARTY BETTER THAN I DO. J NOTICE) HIOWEVER,
MR. ANTHONY'S STATEMENT THAT THE COMMISSIOiJ WILL USLhZP THE
GOVERNMENT'S AUTHORITY. I ,/ 8 
-8-
HE SUGGESTS THAT THE COMMISSION WILL BE SO POWERFUL THAT NO
GOVERNMENT WILL BE ABLE TO REJECT ITS ADVICE, COMING FROM
A MEMBER OF GOVERNMENT THAT REJECTED ADVICE, AND CONCEALED
ADVICE, ON INNUMERABLE OCCASIONS'-I FIND THAT HARD TO ACCEPT,
IT IS, OF COURSE, A FANTASY, IT IS INTENDED TO CREATE
DOUBT AND UNCERTAINTY ABOUT PROPOSAS-THAT ARE IN FACT
QUITE CLEAR AND HAVE BEEN SPELT OUT-IN OUR LEGISLATION IN
PRECISE DETAIL, THE HEART OF THE LEGISLATION IS THE SO-CALLED
MANDATORY REFERENCE PROVISION. THIS REQUIRES THE GOVERNMENT
TO REFER TO THE COMMISSION FOR INQUIRY AND REPORT ALL QUESTIONS
OF ASSISTANCE TO A PARTICULAR PRIMARY OR SECONDARY INDUSTRY
BEFORE TAKING ACTION TO PROVIDE SUCH ASSISTANCE. THE MANDATORY
REFERENCE PROVISION PROVIDES A VITAL SAFEGUARD TO THE
INTEGRITY OF THE GENERAL SYSTEM, WHEREBY THE GOVERNMENT
DECIDES ON THE DIFFERENT AMOUNTS OF MONEY TO BE GIVEN TO
PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES, IT ENSURES THAT THE SYSTEM FOR
DISCRIMINATING BETWEEN DIFFERENT INDUSTRIES WILL BE OBJECTIVE
AND IMPARTIAL. IN THE ABSENCE OF THIS PROVISION THERE WOULD
BE VERY GREAT PRESSURE ON PARLIAMENTARIANS, AND IN PARTICULAR
ON MINISTERS, TO HAVE LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE DECIDED BEHIND
CLOSED DOORS WITHOUT PUBLIC INQUIRY, CONTRARY TO THE
PRINCIPLES OF OPEN GOVERNMENT AND THE INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS, ,/ 9 
Twl ViwwFroy PW~ VI S ION DOES NOT RESTR IWr TWf
GovE~ wr'IsSF REEDOM~ TO M~ AKE ACROS-S-ThE-BOARD AWUSIEVTS
OF TARIFFS AWO OThER ASSISTANCE, iTV EXTEND FREFEPRMArIAL
" MEArTMEtIT TO DEVELOP I t4fr COU NT RI FS OR -TO NEGOI VATE7 CHA G ES
IN4 LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE FOA THE PUJRPOSE OF INTEERNATIONAL
TRADE AGREEMENTS.-IT DOES NOT R ESTR ICT THE GO) VERN~ T'S
ABILITY TO PROVIDE URGE14T TEMPORARY FINANCIAL ASS ISTAN4CE
TO INDUSTRIES FOR PERIODS NOT EXCEEDIIG ' TWELVE, M OWi* HS.
TolE 6OVENME4T wiLL-BrE AELE-TO REiPER To ThdE Commiss tON
THE QAESTION Of 4SSISTAWE TO Atty AuSTRALIAtI INDUSTRYj
AN I MjAKING, ITS INQUIRY THE C0144ISSION WILL BE FREE
TO C014SIDER AND REPORT ON ALL FORM4S OF ASSISTANCE WICk
T4E INDUSTRY INd QUESTION IS RECEIVING. IN CASES WERE
ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN UNCHANGED OR UNREVIEWED FOR AT LEAST
SIX YEARS, THE COMMISSION WILL BE ABLE TO INITIATE lWUIRE%
THIS WILL BE A SAFEGUARD A6AINST THE~ fIDEFINITE CDWA&amp;'&amp; jVU~ tW0A/-
OF ASSISTANCE TO PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES AFrEA 17 IS twEDEP
IREMIND) YOU THAT TWl GOVERIW1EPJT iv) LL STILL HAVE
AVAIJLABLE TO IT SOURCES OF ADVI CE 6TIER rorHE-Comm&amp; is otv
THIS ADVICE WILL COME FRom INDUSTRIES ') F-IENSELXESj q~ f r-Ror
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS SUCH AS ' YOURSi IF Tih6ApVICE 0, F rHb
COMMISS ION IS S0 GOOD THAT IT CANINOT 867 RWECTIP' IHAT119
WILL SURELY BE IN TWf JNTERETSTS OF Tif W/ f1l"#/ AS A WN0C3L
J F THE ADVICE IS NO# 07,, Ir SHOULD NOT WE VERY HAA4) l-o
RIEJECT. I MIEELY 14OI4DER k~ HETER OUR~ OPPONENTS AR~ E IN~ TEREST Ej,
IN GM1ING? GOOD ADVICE AT ALL. 
OUR LEGISLATION FOR THE INDUSTR, ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
WILL NOT AFFECT OUR PLANS FOR RURAL RECONSTRUCTION. W4E WILL,
HOWEVER, BE GUIDED BY ADVICE FROM THE COMMISSION. AFTER A
REVIEW OF THE RURAL RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME THIS YEAR, THE
GOVERNMENT DECIDED TO CONTINUE THE* SCH . EME UNTIL 1976, BUT WITH
MORE EMPHASIS BEING PLACED ON THE BUILD-UP OF UNECONOMIC FARM
UNITS. MORE THAN $ 47 MILLION WAS INCLUDED IN THE BUDGET FOR
EXPENDITURE IN THE CURRENT FINANCIAL YEAR. AN IMPORTANT PART
OF THE SCHEME IS THE REHABILITATION OF NEEDY FARMERS WHO WISH
TO LEAVE THE LAND. THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS
EXAMINING PROPOSALS FOR A MORE IMAGINATIVE AND CONSTRUCTIVE
PROVISION IN THIS REGARD, SIMILARLY, THE FRUITGROWING
RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME, WHICH IS DESIGNED TO HELP FRUITGROWERS
IN FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES TO REMOVE SOME OR ALL OF THEIR TREES
AND EITHER LEAVE THE INDUSTRY OR PUT THEIR LAND TO AN
ALTERNATIVE USE, HAS BEEN EXTENDED FOR ANOTHER YEAR AT AN
ESTIMATED COST OF $ 2 MILLION.
IN THIS CONTEXT, THERE IS ONE PARTICULAR BUDGET MEASURE
THAT I WANT TO EXPLAIN TO You. As YOU KNOW, WE DECIDED TO
REMOVE THE EXEMPTION FROM SALES TAX ON CARBONATED SOFT-DR! NKS
CONTAINING 5% OR MORE OF AUSTRALIAN FRUIT JUICE. THIS DECISION
WAS TAKEN BECAUSE SUCH EXEMPTION WAS THE WRONG INSTRUMENT FOR
ENLARGING THE FRUITGROWER'I S MARKET. ONLY A FRACTION OF THE $ 23
MILLION A YEAR WHICH THE EXEMPTION COST THE GOVERNMENT WAS
RETURNED TO THE GROWER. IASSURE YOU THAT WHILE ASOLISHING THE
EXEMPTION THE GOVERNMENT IS READY TO PROVIDE FIJNDS TO ASSIST
ANY SECTOR OF THE FRUITGROWING INDUSTRY THAT MAY BE ADVERSELY
AFFECTED. THIS HELP WILL PROVIDE MORE LASTING BENEFIT THAN THE
SALES-TAX EXEMPTION WHICH REQUIRES CONTINUING SUBVENTIONS BY
THE TAXPAYER. ./ 11 
11
WE. HAVE TAKEN OTHER MEASURES TO ASSIST RURAL
INDUSTRIES. AN AMOUNT OF $ 20 MILLION WAS PROVIDED IN THE
BUDGET TO FACILITATE LONG-TERM RURAL LENDING BY THE
COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT BANK FQR A WIDER. RANGE OF PURPOSES.
THEY INCLUDE THE FINANCING OF FARM PORCHASES, REPAYMENT OF
SHORT-TERM DEBTS IN APPROPRIATE CASES, AND ASSISTANCE IN CASES
OF FINANCIAL DIFFICULTY ASSOCIATED WITH THE DEATH OF A FARM
PROPRIETOR, OUTSIDE THE BUDGET ITSELF, THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN
A WHOLE SERIES. OF DECISIONS THAT WILL BENEFIT THE FARMER. IN
OUR EARLY DAYS, WE SHOWED OURSELVES. READY TO RESPOND TO THE
URGENT NEED TO ENCOURAGE WHEAT PRODUCTION. WE NOT ONLY
ACCEPTED A DELIVERY QUOTA OF 514 MILLION BUSHELS THE HIGHEST
OP RECORD.-BUT ADDED A " FLOATING POOL" OF 20 MILLION BUSHELS
ON TOP OF THAT, READY FOR ANY STATE THAT.. EXCEEDED ITS PORTION
OF THE NATIONAL QUOTA. WE INCREASED THE FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENT
ON WHEAT FROM $ 1.10 TO $ 1.20 A BUSHEL FOR THE NEXT HARVEST.
THIS WAS THE FIRST INCREASE IN THE ADVANCE FOR 15 YEARS.
Wœ EHAVE ALSO AGREED TO AN IMMEDIATE PAYMENT OF A SECOND ADVANCE
ON THE 1969-70 CROP. OUR INITIATIVESIN QUICKLY ESTABLISHING
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS-WITH CHINA HAVE BEEN WELCOMED BY THE
. AUSTRALIAN WHEAT INDUSTRY. As YOU KNOW, THE MINISTER FOR
OVERSEAS TRADE, DR. JIM CAIRNSj RECENTLY ANNOUNCED OUR FIRST
LONG-TERM WHEAT CONTRACT WITH CHINA. THE DEPARTMENT OF
PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS NOW WORKING ON A NEW WHEAT* STABILISATION
PLAN TO REPLACE THE ONE-YEAR EXTENSION OF THE CURRENT PLAN.
WE HOPE TO IMPROVE THE PROVISIONS FOR STABILISATION. 
r"
THEN 7tH-RE WERE OUR TARIFF CUTS, IN JULY 1973
T* HVE GOVERNMENT REDUCED ALL TARIFF RATES By 257 TO ALLOW
IMPORTS TO EN4TER AUSTRALIA MORE CHEAPLY. IBELIEVE
PRIMARY PRODUCERS WILL REAP SIGNIFICANT BENEFITS FROM THE
TARIFF CUT. IN PARTICULAR IT IS EXPECTED-TO REDUCE THE
PRICE OF A WIDE RANGE OF FARM MACHINERY. ' IT WILL REDUCE
TO SOME EXTENT THE NEED FOR AN ADDITIONAL REVALUATION
OF THE DOLLAR, AND WILL HELP PRIMARY PRODUCERS BY RESTRAINING
THE RATE OF INFLATION AND HENCE THE COST OF LABOUR EMPLOYED
IN PRIMARY INDUSTRY.
IASK YOU TO REMEMBER THAT ItN ANY PERIOD OF INFLATION
THERE ARE DIFFICULT PROBLEMS FOR ALL DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED
GOVERNMENTS. IT IS NO ACCIDENT THAT THOSE IN CHARGE OF
NATIONAL AFFAIRS DURING INFLATIONARY PERIODS OFTEN BECOME
SOMEWHAT UNPOPULAR. TO ACT RESPONSIBLY THEY MUST REDUCE
THE COMMUNITY'IS LEVEL OF SPENDING IN ONE WAY OR ANOTHER.
THEY MUST BRING IT CLOSER TO THE COMMUNITY'S CAPACITY TO
PRODUCE OR IMPORT GOODS AND SERVICES. REDUCING ANYONE'S
SPa NDING IS NOT THE BEST WAY TO COURT POPULARITY YET IT
MUST BE DONE IN THE INTERESTS OF RESPONSIBLE ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT. THE PRESENT INFLATIONARY PERIOD IS IN MANY WAYS
REMINISCENT OF THE WOOL BOOM IN THE EARLY 1950O'S, AT THAT
TIME SIR ARTHUR FADDEN THEN LEADER OF THE AIJSTRALIAN
COUNTRY PARTY AND TREASURER FOUND IT NECESSARY TO INTRODUCE
THE WOOL SALES DEDUCTION TAX, UNDER WHICH WAS DEDUCTED
FROM EACH GRAZIER I'S WOO&amp;~ CHEQUE. 
13
A; YOU MIGHT EXPECT, THIS DIDN'T MAKE ARTIE FADDEN THE MOST
POPULAR MAN IN THE BUSH. I QUOTE FROM HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY:
" CRITICISM OF THIS DECISION ROLLED IN LIKE A TIDAL WAVE,
BACKED BY HOSTILE RESOLUTIONS FROM BRANCHES,. CANCELLED
MEMBERSHIP SUBSCRIPTIONS AND DEMANDS FOR MY EXPULSION."
I AM SOMETIMES RELIEVED THAT I BELONG TO SUCH A GENTLEMANLY
BODY AS THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY.
I MENTION THESE MATTERS TO ILLUSTRATE MY POINT THAT
DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED GOVERNMENTS ARE SOMETIMES FORCED BY
CIRCUMSTANCES TO TAKE UNPOPULAR DECISIONS DECISIONS WHICH.
THEY BELIEVETO BE IN THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE NATION. IT
IS EASY, AT THE PRESENT TIME, TO DEPICT US AS AN ANTI-RURAL
PARTY, TO CONCENTRATE ON THE UNPOPULAR DECISIONS WHICH WE
AVE FELT IT NECESSARY TO TAKE IN THE GENERAL INTEREST, AND
CONVENIENTLY IGNORE THOSE THINGS WE HAVE DONE WHICH
HAVE HELPED THE COUNTRYMAN.
AS A GOVERNMENT WE STAND READY TO HELP AUSTRALIANS
' IV ARE SUFFERING MISFORTUNES WHERE EVERI THEY MAY LIVE ON
FAAINS, IN COUNTRY TOWNS OR IN THE CITIES. IF THE FARMING
COMMUNITY IS AGAIN EXPOSED TO ECONOMIC HARDSHIPS WE WILL R"
PREPARED TO PLAY OUR PART IN HELPING-INDIVIDUALS TO MAKE
THE BEST AND MOST RATIONAL CHOICES AND, IF NECESSARY, CUSHION
THEM AGAINST ECONOMIC ADVERSITY, WE HAVE qLWAYS VOTED FOR
SUCH POLICIES WHEN WE WERE IN OPPOSITION; WE WILL ADOPT 1&amp; EM
IF NECESSARY NOW THAT WE FORM THE GOVERNMENT. IN FEBRUARY TH( S
YEAR WE ANNOUNCED PROPOSALS COSTING $ 10 MILLION TO HELP CHILPA E
IN ISOLATED RURAL AREAS UNDERTAKE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLING.
/ 14 
-14-
PERHAPS I CAN SUM UP MY GOVERNMENT'S BROAD INTENTIONS
BY QUOTING A STATEMENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN WOOLGROWERS' AND
GRAZIERS' COUNCIL, THE COUNCIL HAP THIS TO SAY: " THE MOST
IMPORTANT LONG-TERM STEP THE GOVERNMENT CAN TAKE IS TO
IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF NATIONAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION BY
ENCOURAGING THE EXPANSION OF LESS PROTECTED INDUSTRIES IN THE
ECONOMY ( WHETHER PRIMARY OR SECONDARY) AND DISCOURAGING THE
GROWTH OF THOSE INDUSTRIES WHICH CAN ONLY PRODUCE WITH THE
HELP OF MASSIVE LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE EITHER SUBSIDY OR
TARIFF. THIS WILL INCREASE THE LEVEL OF REAL ECONOMIC GROWTH
FOR THE BETTERMENT OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY,"
I SUGGEST THAT THE GOVERNMENT, IN THE INTERESTS
OF THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE, IS DOING JUST WHAT THE WOOLGROWERS'
AND GRAZIERS' COUNCIL SUGGESTED. I BELIEVE THAT OUR POLICIES
WILL BENEFIT, NOT ONLY THE GREAT FARMING COMMUNITY OF THIS
NATION, BUT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AS A WHOLE.
-o-o-o-0-o-o-o-



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 141
24 October 1973
NATIONAL ANTHEM POLL PLANS
The Bureau of Census and Statistics, at the
request of the Government, is planning a nation-wide
opinion poll to establish preferences for a new
National Anthem.
The poll will be conducted in February next
year and people will be asked to make their choice from
the three songs already selected by the National Anthem
Committee. These are: Advance Australia Fair, Song of
Australia, and Waltzing Matilda.
Results of the poll will be used by the Government
to make a final decision on the anthem.
A cross-section of the community, aged 18 and over,
throughout Australia will be covered.
The poll is being organised by the Bureau of Census
and Statistics as part of its NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY.
The Bureau's responsibilities include many Australia-wide
household surveys such as the quarterly surveys of employment
and the major surveys recently completed on migrants and on
income. These surveys provide valuable information upon which
the polihies of the Government and other organisations can be
based. All surveys are based on scientifically selected samples
of up to 60,000 people in all walks of life.
The National Anthem poll will be an extension of this
continuing NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY programme. While giving
an accurate measure of opinion the costs involved are minimal
compared with those for a national referendum.
All surveys conducted by the NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY
are preceded by a small pilot test to ensure that the survey
procedures are efficiently designed. A pilot test for the
National Anthem poll will be conducted during November.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 6. OOPM WEDNESDAY 24 OCTOBER 1973
AS TH A A
PRIME MINISTER 1
Press Statement No. 142
24 October 1973
BEGINNING OF NATIONAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENT COLLECTION
The Prime Minister announced today that he had
approved the purchase of two 18th-century cellos made
by the Italian master, Giuseppe Guarmeri~ in 1710 and 1721.
The cellos and bows have been purchased in New York
for a total price of $ 54,950. They will be the foundation
of a national collection of great instruments. Their
purchase was recommended by the Music Board of the
Australian Council for the Arts.
The Chairman of the Music Board, Australian composer,
Don Banks, in recommending the purchase, said that the cellos
were two of the world's finest instruments, and would be a
tremendous asset to the musical life of Australia.
They would be available to Australia's leading
cellists and to vis iting performers giving concerts in
Australia. He said there were cases overseas where instruments
of similar quality were used as inducements to attract fine
performers to work in certain cities or to be retained in
leading positions in orchestras and chamber music groups.
He said that such instruments were becoming
increasingly rare and the price paid was a very fair one.
In a few years it would inevitably have gone up considerably
as competition for these instruments is constantly increasing.
Giuseppe Guarneri, one of a famous family of instrument
makers, was the father of the celebrated Giuseppe Guarneri del
Gesu, who made many famous violins, but no cellos.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
EMBARGO: 



NQ DATE
11/ 149 24 October 1973
UITI,' D NATIONS DAY
On the occasion of United Nations Day, the Prime Minister
Minister for Foreign Affairs, M,' r Whitlam, re-affirmed Australia's
adherence to the principles and purposes of the UN Charter and the
Importance Australia attaches to the work of the United Nations
Organisation. le recalled that the U11 Charter came into force on
24 October 1945 and on the anniversary of that event it was
appropriate for the individual member countries of the world community
to focus attention on the activities of the United Nations and its
Specialized Agencies.
Mr Whitlam said that for Australia, the United Nations
continued to be the most important international instrument in
man's quest for an international order based on peace and racial
equality, mutual respect and the elimination of poverty and
illiteracy. He emphasised that Australia had all along maintained
that the Security Council should be actively involved in finding
a way out of the tragic struggle in the Middle East.
Mr Whitlam pointed out that some of the most significant
a'chievements of the United Nations had been in the social and
economic fields. He noted in particular that the guiding principles
for United Nations activities 4n these areas ,; ere contained in the
Charter and in such instruments as the Universal Declaration of Human
R-. ghts which has been one of the most enlightened achievements of
the Organisation. On 10 December this year, the United Nations will
celebrate the 25th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
ir 1948. Mr Whitlam said the work of the United Nations in these
/ 2 
-2
fields had been a source of encouragement for the Australian
Government in the promotion of economic and social justice in our own
society as well as internationally. The Government has an Pctive policy
of giving effect to all relevant international instruments concerned
with the protection and enhancement of human rights.
11I Whitlam said that the UN Charter is aimed at promoting
the dignity and well-being of the ordinary man and woman and is not
an abstract document concerned only with the political interests 0
and objectives of Governments. Australia's part~ icip~ ation in the
United Nations is intended to further our concern that all peoples
should have the right to determine and pursue freely their political,*
social, cultura~ l and economic development.
The Prime Minister noted that this year the United Nations
is emphasizing international development and that today has also
been designated as World Development Informiation day. Hie said that
this was an appropriate time to assess Australia's commitment to
the development goals of the United Nntions.
Mr Whitlam recalled that the Government intended to expand
present assistance programs in Asia, Africa and the Pacific, and
to work towards an official aid target of 0.7 per cent of gross0
domestic product by the nd of the present decade, in keeping with
the principal aim of the International Strategy for the Second
Development Decade. 



AAFFAIRS NQ DATE
M4/ 150 24 October 1973
D. A. C. REVIEW OF AUSTRALIAN AID
The following is text of a communique released at
the conclusion of DAC Review of Australia on 23 October 1973:-
The Development Assistance Committee ( DAC) of the
OECD held its annual review of the assistance efforts and
a p) olicies of Australia on 23 October 1973, under the Chairmanship
V of Ambassador Edwin Martin.
The Australian delegation was headed by Mr Max
Loveday, First Assistant Secretary, Development Divisi-on,
Department of Foreign Affairs. The examining countries
were Denmark and Japan.
The Committee noted with satisfaction that net official
development assistance ( ODA) disbursements ( US Dollars 272
million in 1972) had risen as a proportion of Gross National
Product from 0.53 per cent in 1971 to 0.61 per cent in 1972.
Australia ranks fourth among DAC member countries in that
respect. The Committee welcomed the announcement that the
Australian Government would be working towards an official
aid target of 0.7 per cent of GNP by the end of the decade.
It expressed the hope that Australia's contributions to
multilateral organisations would sub, c~ tialy increase in the
future. Owing to a decline in private flows, total net
official and private flows to the developing countries decreased
to Dollars 422 million and represented 0.95 per cent of GNP
in 19,72,. after having reached the one per cent target for
the two preceding years. 2 
2
In 1972, Australia extended all of its ODA in the forms
of grants and was therefore in full compliance with the DAC
reconmmendations on financial terms. There were no changes
in Australia's procurement policies or practices in 1972,
but Australia, at the DAC High Level Mleeting held o-i 18 and
19 October, agreed to extend its official financial development
assistance contributions pledged henceforth to multilateral
institutions on an untied basis.
The major part of Australia's ODA continued to be
extended to Papua TNewG, u, i nea. The Committee took note of
Australia's intention to maintain a substantial volume of
assistance to Papua New Guinea following its accession to
full internal self-government on 1 December 1973. At the
samae time the Committee emphasised that it was desirable that
other DAC members as well as international institutions
supplement Austrlia's efforts in favour of Papua New Guinea
with a view to speeding up its orderly economic and'social
development. Interest was shown by the Committee in the decision
to establish an Australian Development Assistance Agency.
i;
As from 1 December 1973, this agency, whichwill be
responsible to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, will be
entrusted with the administration of all Australia's
bilateral aid and its participation in all programns of
multilateral aid to developing countries.
The Committee expressed satisfaction at the growing
emphasis Australia intends to place on social factors and in"
particular on measures designed to alleviate unemployment
in the developing countries. It welcomed Australia's
decision to contribute to multilateral programs dealing with
population problems. 



A A
No DATE
M/ 151 25 October 1973
AUSTRALIAN-INDONESIAN RELATIONS VISIT
OF THE I'NDONSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER, MR ADAM MALIK,
AND OFFICIAL CONSULTATIONS
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam,
announced today before his departure for visits to Japan
and China that the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mr Adam Malik,
will visit Australia from 6-10 November as a guest of the
Australian Government. Mr Malik will be accompanied by
O Mrs Malik. Mr Whitlam said that Mr Malik's visit will be
his fourth to Australia. He visited here in December 1967,
as leader of the Indonesian delegation to the memorial
service in Melbourne for the late Prime Minister, Mr Harold
Holt; in April 1968, to lead the Indonesian delegation
to the 24th Session of the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East ( ECAFE) in Canberra, following which he held
discussions with the Australian Government; and in February
1972, when he accompanied President SLharto on his State
Visit to Australia. Mr Vhitlam said Mr Malik would be a very welcome
visitor. His visit would provide yet another opportunity
to continue the close and constructive dialogue, at a high
level, that had developed between the two countries on matters
of mutual interest. Following his visit to Australia,
Mr Malik will visit Papua New Guinea as a guest of the Papua.
New Guinea Government. / 2 
-2-
Mr Malik's visit will, he said, follow the second
in the series of annual consultations between senior
Australian and Indonesian officials on foreign policy matters
of common interest to be held in Canberra on 6-7 November.
11r Whitlan recalled that the first round of annual
talks had been held in Jakarta in Aug,_ ust 1972, as a result
of a decision by the Australian and Indonesian Governments
during President Suharto's visit to Australia in February
1972, that the two countries should keep in close touch
through freqi-ent a: nd frank consultations. The Jakarta talks
had been most successful and officials were looking forward
to a useful exchange of views in the forthcoming discussions
on such matters as developments in the South East Asian
region and Australian-Indonesian bilateral relations.
The Australian delegation would be let by the
Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Sir Keith
Waller, who also led the Australia~ n delegation to
the first round of talks. The Indonesian delegation will be
led by Mr Djajadiningrat, the Director-General of Political
Affairs in the Indonesian Department of Foreign Affairs. 



VMBARGO: 44o
5. OOPM THURSDAY 25 OCTOBER 1973
Press Statement No. 142
October 1973
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Right
Honourable Norman Kirk and Mrs. Kirk will make an
official visit to Australia from 13 November to 17 November
1973. The visit will begin in Canberra with an arrival
on Tuesday 13 November. The Prime Minister will officially
open the Chancery of the New Zealand High Commission in the
afternoon and he and Mrs. Kirk will be the guests of the
Governor-General and Lady Hasluck for dinner that evening.
Mr. Kirk will have official talks at Prime Minister
level and with Cabinet Ministers on Wednesday afternoon
14 November. That evening he and Mrs. Kirk will be the
guests of honour at a* Parliamentary Reception at Parliament
House. The Prime Minister and his wife are due to make a
day visit to Melbourne on Thursday 15 November and to arrive
in Sydney on Thursday evening 15 November where they will
stay until their departure for New Zealand on Saturday
17 November. The visit by the New Zealand Prime Minister is a
follow-up to the discussions in New Zealand in January this
year when it was agreed to meet at least once a year for an
overall review of relations between Australia and New Zealand.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



raaW AFFAIRS
VE NQ DATE
M/ 153 October 1973
PRIM~ E MINISTER AT JAPAN
PRESS CLUB
The following are the introductory remarks
b, 2y6 MWtOhhceitr tolbPaer mri,, m e taoMn id ntihsesu tbeJsrae pqauanen dn tP rMeiqsnusie ssttCeilorunb sf oirna ndTF ookaryneosi wgenor nsA: ffairs,
panseI last had the pleasure of mceting representat4. ves of the
Veygreat charges have occurred in both our countries since then.
Even greater changes have occurred in the prospects for our region.
At that time, I was the Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament of
my country. Now I have the honour to be Australia's Prime Minister.
That is not a marvellously important change as far as you are concerned,
though I have no doubt you will be interested in some of the changes
of policy the election of my government has brought about. But at
that last press conference, I had just completed a visit to Peking. Just
2 days after I spoke to you, President Nixon made his historic announcement
W t he intended to go to Peking before May 1972. I was still in Tokyo
ehe made his broadcast. I well remember the reaction here at the time.
I can assure you that the suprise was felt in my country as well as yours.
There was even some shock in some quarters in Australia. I myself was
suprised, but delighted. Japan has been able to move very rapidly towards
established honourable and sensible relations wiith the People's Republic.
W-6tralia recognised the Peoule's Republic as soon as the new Government
took office. The American detente with both China and the Soviet Union
has been followed by the end of her tragic and disastrous intervention
in Indo-China. These are very important and hopeful developments in themselves.
But because of the speed with which they took place, and because they
represent such a marked change from the thinking and attitudes which
have dominated the affairs of our region for a generation, they have
created some uneasiness. It is not always easy to adjust to change,
even when those changes are basically good and hopeful. in themselves. I
believe hcwever, that countries like Japan and Australia have a duty to
work together to ensure that the new opportunities for peace and progress
in our region are not thrown away.
As you know, the reason for my current visit is to attend the
Japan/ Australian Ministerial Committee. This committee was established
by agreement between the Governments of our two countries when a
previous Australian Government was in office. The first meeting
was held in Canberra last October. For this meeting in Tokyo, I have
brought with me very senior Ministers in my government our Treasurer
Mr Crean, Minister for Overseas Trade, Dr Cairns, our Minister for 
Minerals and Energy, Mr Connor and our Minister for Primary
Industries ( Agriculture) Senator lireidt. I think the composition
of our delegation speaks for itself about the importance Australia
attaches to the Committee Meeting and to the relations with Japan.
And you also can get some idea of the matters to be discussed by
looking at the Ministerial responsibilities of these Ministers.
In particular, we recognise that our policies regarding investment
from overseas and the use of our resources are of particular
interest to Japan. Ive recognise that Japan is entitled to be
reassured that she will continue to have secure access to
Australia's resources at fair prices. The Government and people
of Japan can be reassured on that point.
The growth of close relations between Japan and
Australia in recent years has been very remarkable. I am
quite sure those relations will continue to the increasing
mutual benefit of our two countries and I would hope to the
benefit of our region.
Q. I understand that there is much opposition within
Australia against the signing of a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce
and Navigation with Japan, and I am given to understand that you
yourself, Mr Prime Minister, have come up with certain ideas
about this treaty. Could you tell us what you have in mind?
P. M. In past years the Government of Japan has
suggested to the Government of Australia that Australia should
enter into a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation with
Japan as very many other countries have already done.
Earl~ ier Australian Governments were not enthusiastic
about the offer. I wouldn't like you to think that they
were hostile. That would not be an accurate description.
It has never been a very big public issue in Australia
but it would be correct to say that earlier Australian Governments
were not responsive to the suggestion.
My colleagues and I would welcome an arrangement between
Japan and Australia which would acknowlede the voery real
significance that we have for each other.
We believe that there are great mutual advantages in
our relationship. Vie believe there are great benefits to be
shared between us in that relationship and we would like to have
such an arrangement or treaty so that the conditions in which we
co-operate and consult would be known to the whole world and
would be acknowledged by each of the parties.
I suspect that this general idea will be discussed by
the JapDanese Ministers Rnd the Australian Ministers at this
second Ministerial Conference between our two countries on
Monday and Tuesday of next week.
-2-
I am not suggesting that there should be a text laid on
the table and people should discuss it in detail or specifics
then, but I would think it desirable that in the weeks following
this Ministerial Conference officials should discuss the general
propo sit ion. Australia, in those circumstances, would be very happy to
suggest the form of such written arrangements.
Q. Prime M~ inister, in the penultimate paragraph of
your prepared remarks you say that Australia recognises the
Japanese view in which the Australians concurred, about the
Australian Minerals and Energy policy.
I would like to ask you whether you have come to Japan
to spell out your policy. 0
P. M. I have spent quite a deal of time in recent weeks
discussing these matters with the four Ministers who are coming
with me, and our officials have done the same.
We Ministers and the officials have done so together,
and I believe there will be quite an amount of specifics discussed
or Monday and Tuesday.
Q. This question concerns migratory birds0
The Japanese Government has proposed that in the treaty
for the protection of migratory birds an awful lot of them fly
between Australia and Japan can you tell me what your view is
towards this proposition and do you think this will be taken
up at this Ministerial Conference?
Last year we signed a similar treaty between Japan and
the United States and recently we signed it with the U. S. S. R.
We are trying to develop a coordinated system or
network of such treaties for the protection of migratory birds,
and could you tell us your view about the conservation and
preservation of nature?
P. M. This treaty is not on the agenda for this
Ministerial Conference.
We are very happy to enter into treaties to preserve
wild life0 We have recently ratified, or taken steps to ratify
an international treaty in this regard endangered species
last year. My government has acted to ratify this treaty, and
we would be responsive to this suggestion. 
. There is, of course, one aspect of conservation which
is of very great concern to Australia and Japan, and that is
whales. Q. Prime Minister, you have a Companies Takeover
Act which is a legacy of the previous administration which is
to expire by the end of December this year.
What is the view or policy of the Labor Administration
towards overseas capital?
P. M. We will probably extend this piece of
legislation. I am not sure that by the end of the year we will be
able to frame a better piece of legislation.
Therefore, we will probably just extend the present one.
' 9 as Japan'sO ura ttgietnuedrea l toa ttfiotruedieg n tocwaapridtsa l. foreign capital is the same
One of the reasons why Japan has become so economically
strong is that she has been very willing to learn from other
countries but not to yield to other countries.
Ever since the Meiji era the'governments of Japan and
Japanese companies have determined to preserve Japan's
sovereignty and identity and integrity.
Japan, through the farsightedness and independence of
earlier generations, is now in the situation of being the third
greatest economic power in the world and the country which has
the best economic future proportionately in the world.
We believe in Australia we can learn from the Japanese
example. Obviously we can't muster all the capital we need by
ourselves. We can't develop all the skills we need by ourselves but
this is not an excuse for being a minority partner or not being
a partner at all in Australian resources and industries and
their development. In the last 15 years or less in Australia, we have
discovered very great mineral resources.
Australian minerals as a whole are 62 per cent in
f oreign hands. That is to Australia's disadvantage. 
It is a reflection on preceding Australian Governments.
We are determined to see that that percentage does
not grow. We welcome partnerships within the discovery, the
development, the marketing of our resources, and particularly
we welcome partnerships with our best trading partners.
Of those, Japan would probably be the best.
Our understanding is that Japanese companies are willing
to be good residents in other countries.
They are more understanding and cooperative partners
than some of the older ones with whom Australia has lived
hitherto. We admire Japan's independence and farsightedness.
We hope to emulate it, and to work with her.
Q. In your prepared statement you talk about Japan's
move toward China, the Australian move towards China and the
American detente between China and the Soviet Union in the
Indo-China war and then you say that these moves towards
China have created some uneasiness and it is not always easy
to adjust to change even when those changes are basically good
and hopeful in themselves.
Is there any more in this, can you elaborate?
P. M. Last time I had a press conference in Tokyo was
in July, 1971. As I recall in the statement I circulated, it was just
at the time when Dr Kissinger' s visit to Peking was announced A^
and the prospective visit of President Nixon was announced.
This very clearly was an event which startled most
countries in the region.
It startled the Government of Australia at the time.
And then events have moved with very great speed
since them. Japan, for instance, switched from Taipei to Peking
in September last.
Australia did in December, and two years ago Peking
was admitted to the U. N. and Taipei was excluded. 
-6-
Now in all these circumstances a great number of the
countries in this region the western Pacific were caught by
surprise, and some them still feel uneasy in the new
circumstances. It is in that context that I made this remark.
Q. There have been reports concerning the wreck of
the Australian freighter " Blythe Star", apparently in -the vicinity
of Japanese trawlers who were strongly advised to go to the
rescue of the crew.
They did not, disregarding one of the strongest rules
of the sea0 Apparently they were pilfering Australian waters, and
apparently they put fish above humzan ' Life0
Are you going to take this matter up with the Japanese
Government? P. M. There are allegations to this effect, there
has been no confirmation of the allegations0
The Ambassadors of' Japan in Australia and of Australia
in Japan, both of whom are at this conference, would be the
proper persons to follow up any such allegations if they were
confirmed. Q. You men~ tion in your statement that the growth
of close relations between Japan and ! Austraiia in recent years
has been very remarkable.
Could you cutline your-concept of the future of
Australia/ Japanese relations?
P. M0 There are two particular aspects which are of
outstanding relevance to the region. one is the direct
relation between Japan and Australia.
Japan sells more things to Australia than any other
country other than the U. S.
We are of very great importance to each other0
The other thing is that there is a vast contrast in
development in all the economics and social standards between
Japan and Australia on. the one hand and all the countries which
lie between them on the other hand0
Clearly, Japan and Australia can't be affluent enclaves
in a deprived and potentially turbulent part of the world0
Those are the two things which make it particularly
important that Australia and Japan should acknowledge their
relations with each other and their responsibilities to their
neighour0 
Could I illustrate from one particular industry, the
automobile industry.
It is Australia's ' Largest industry.
It is wholly in overseas hands0
You know that in Japan you would never have allowed
your automobile industry to be in foreign hands0
We have noted the steps you took when Chrysler was
waningto nvet hrewe noted the steps you took in that case.
We should have had the foresight to act that way
ourselves0 Some Japanese motor car companies are now interested in
manufacturing in Australia, and the size,-the style, the safety
of Japanese cars is every bit as good as the counterpart quality
of the cars which are manufactured by other overseas companies
in Australia0 We believe that the Japanese companies would be better
partners in very many respects than the companies which we
already have. Q You mentioned earlier that under certain
conditions you would agree to a Friendship, Commerce and
Navigation Treaty0
What sort of conditions did you. mean?
P. M. I decline to go into any further detail on
this subject. Q. I -understand there is a certain fear in Japan
about the future of Papua New G-uinea0 a
Could you tell us a littl~ e about the future of Papua
New Guinea and why should the Japanese be afraid of the future?
P. M. I wasn't aware that there was any fear in Japan
about the future of Papua New Guinea.
There were no grounds in my view for any such fear.
I take this opportunity -to discount any such fears.
Papua New Guinea will become a self-governing country
on 1 December this year.
It will become an independent country within a very
short time thereafter. 
-8-
Papua Nlew Guinea has shown, in the last few years,
remarkable political development.
The Chief Minister of Papua New Guinea is very well
disposed towards Japan.
His first schooling was received at the hands of the
Japanese in the early 1940' s in his country.
He has visited this country.
His prospective Minister for Foreign Affairs will be in
Tokyo at these ministerial talks on Tuesday afternoon.
I would hope that Japanese companies and officials
would have a continuing and confident interest in Papua
New Guinea, as they should, I would suggest, have in all the
countries between Australia and Japan because Japan has the
greatest potential to realise and the greatest opportunity and
I would therefore think the greatest obligation to help in the
development of all these countries,
Australia has similar opportunities and, therefore,
obligations In kind although not, of course, in degree.
Australia has done a very great deal to develop
Papua New Guinea.
We would welcome assistance ' by Japan.
I think -the Government of Papua New Guinea -a very
effective government would welcome such assistance too.
I would thinic there should be no fears as to the
future of Papua New Guinea.
Q. Mr Prime Minister: You have fcr some time been
advocating a conference of the Asian and Pacific region.
Do you mean this as a precedent for the now mummified
ASPAC or SEATO or what were the implications for making such a
conference in regard to the ASEAN.
Do you intend to make this proposal in this ministerial
meeting and do you also intend to make this proposal to China.
P. M. I may well discuss the general idea both in
Tokyo and in Peking.
I don't want to commit myself to the word " conference"
but I think that there are advantages in having arrangements
under which the countries of the W~ estern Pacific and
South Ea.-: t Asia can meet periodically to discuss matters of
mutual interest. The great disadvantage, I believe, that so many of
the countries have suffered hitherto and Australia has certainly 
suffered from this, is that whenever heads of government or
foreign ministers of any countries of the region get together
people expect that there will be some aid program or military
pact emerge from their discussions.
We ought to become used to an exchange of view
without any particular motive or agenda of that character.
Reference has been made to SEATO which arose in the
general context of the Geneva Conference of 1954 and ASPAC
which arose in the context of America's involvement when the
Geneva Agreement finally broke dcwnñ in the middle 1960' s
We now see how ineffective such arrangements were.
There are some economic arrangements and, for instance,
one which Australia recently joined was the Ministerial
Conference for the Development of South-East Asia, and we
appreciate Japan's helpfulness in Australia joining that
economic gathering. Let me draw a couple of comparisons: in Africa
there is the Organisation of African Unity, in the Americas there
has been, for longer, the Organisation of American States.
When these bodies gather ft is to the advantage of all
of them to do so.
They all see advantages i~ n doing so.
People don't have false hopes that there is going to
be some military pact o~ r aid. program emerge from them.
Another body to which Australia belongs is the
Commonwealth of Nations -the British Commonwealth of Nations
which so many woid rec-ognise it this is a body where there
is no economic or military significance at all, but all the
members find value .1n having this d-iscussion in that context.
There is no such body in this region, and I believe
wie are all the poorer for the want of it.
The only body which has a regional significance and
viability is ASEAN. RS&amp; J
ASEAN is, understandablA'y, not wanting to extend until
it has fully consolidated itself.
It has made very great progress indeed.
You mention China.
Obviously there are difficulties in this situation 
where some of the countries in the region do not recognise
Peking I think that applies to two of them there are others
whose relations with Peking have been suspended or have never
been activated although the countries I had in mind there have
never recognised Taipei-L to put it another way they do not
assert, as Japani did and A-ustralla did until December last year
that Genera'lissimio Z'hiang Kai-Shek was -the President of the
whole of China. Obviously there are inhibitions in having such
arrangements and consultations at this stage.
We, I suggest.. want to get away from the idea that any
arrangements in this region must have some ideological purpose
or must have the participation of north Atlantic countries.
Each the participation of north Atlantic countries,
the ideological purposes have both been. shown to be
couner-poducive Q. A supplementary qu. estion: Australia
participated in the South-East Asian MYinisterial Conference
for Economic Development recently in Tokyo for the first time
and while Japan regards this gathering as a purely economic
assembly, I take it that your view is not necessarily to
regard it as pure. 1y an economic assembly.
I don't think you have rejected the possibility of this
body developing in the future into some kind of regional
cooperation arrangement with some political overtones.
May I invite you to comment on -this?
P. MN. We accept this body in the context in which it
has operated up until now -an economic one.
We have no ulterior or concealed motives in joining
It is valuable in what it does, and it is not a substitute
for further organisations because people may think that one
also means " ideological".
I think one of the vices of ariangements in this
region has been that so often they had ideological overtones.
Really, in this region, we have got to work more and
more irrespective of ideology.
So, I don't want to use the word " Political" because
". ideological" is one aspect of " political".
The MEDSEA that we referred. to and youi asked about
that's economic, and valuable as an economic body. 



NQ DATE
M4/ 152 28 October 1973
VISIT OF SINGAPORE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator
Willesee, announced today that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Singapore, Mr Sinnathamby Rajaratnam, would
visit Australia from 9 to 17 November as a guest of the
Australian Government.
Mr Rajaratnam, a founding member of Singapore's
governing Peoples Action Party, has been active in public
life since his election to the Singapore Legislative Assembly
in 1959. In August 1965, he became Singapore's first
Foreign Minister0 He also held the Labour portfolio from
1968 until July 1971. This will be Mr Rajaratnam's first
visit to Australia. Senator Willesee said that the Australian Government
welcomed the opportunity afforded by the visit to exchange
views with Singapore on the international scene and on
aspects of bilateral relations between the two countries.
Mr Rajaratnam, will have discussions in Canberra on 15 and 16
Noemer Senator Willesee also noted that Mr Rajaratnam had
accepted an invitation from the Australian Institute of
International Affairs to be this year's Dyason Lecturer.
Mr Rajaratnam, the first Foreign Minister to deliver
the Dyason Lectures, will speak to audiences in Perth on
9 November, Sydney on 12 November, Melbourne on 13 November,
Adelaide on 14 November, and in Canberra on 15 November0 



AW L AF AIR
ARW NQ DATE
M/ 155 30 October 1973
AUSTRALIA/ JAPAN M~ INISTERIAL COMMllITTEE:
JOINT COMMUNIQUE
The following is the text of the communique issued
in Tokyo on 30 October 1973:
The Australian Delegation to the meeting was led by
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
The Hon. E. G. Whitlam M. P. and included the Minister for
Overseas Trade, The Hon. J. F. Cairns The Treasurer,
The Hon. F. Crean The Minister for Primary Industry,
Senator The Hon. K. S. Wriedt and The Minister for Minerals
and EInergy, The Hon. R. F. X. Connaor M. P..
The Japanese Delegation to the meeting was led by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr M. Ohira,
and included the Minister of Finance, His Excellency Mr K. Aichi,
the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, His Excellency
Mr Y. Sakurauchi, the Minister of International Trade and
Industry, His Excellency Mr Y. Nakasone and the Minister
of State for Ec onomic Planning, His Excellency Mr Z. Kosaka.
The Prime Minister of Japan, His Excellency Mr Kakuei
Tanaka, sent a message of welcome to the meeting.
In their keynote speeches, the two Foreign Ministers
noted the encouraging development of relations between Australia
and Japan in all fields and the firm basis of mutual co-operation
which existed between them.
They recognised that a high level of interdependence
had developed between the economies of the two countries.
They acknowledged that it was essential that a spirit
of friendship and co-operation should continue to govern
relations between the two countries in the economic and related
fields, and it was therefore agreed that the two Governments 
-2-
would begin discussions on a broad bilateral treaty in these
fields. The Committee held wide ranging discussions on economic
and financial matters of mutual interest.
It reviewed the economic situation of the respective
countries. It noted with satisfaction the prospects for growth in
the long term in the * two countries, and the opportunities which
this offers for increased co-operation in the economic field
between the two countries.
Concern was expressed on the question of the
inflationary tendencies now apparent in the international
economy and Ministers reported actions which their respective
Governments were taking to deal with these problems, bearing
in mind the growing interdependence of nations in a world
economy. Ministers exchanged views on the progress being made
towards reform of the international monetary system, designed
to provide a basis for the stable long term development of
international economic relations.
The Committee welcomed the achievements of the recent
GATT Ministerial Conference held in Tokyo and reaffirmed that the
multilateral trade negotiations should result in the expansion
and the ever greater liberalisation of international trade of
both industrial and agricultural products.
Ministers pledged their cooperative efforts to assure
early and constructive results of these negotiations in concert
with other countries of the world.
Ministers recognised the close interdependence andDI
complementary nature of the bilateral trade between Australia
and Japan which was of such great importance to the two
countries and welcomed the evidence of further expansion of
the trade. In view of the important developments which had taken
place in trade between the two countries in the decade since
the agreement on commerce was last revised in 1963, Ministers
considered that it would be appropriate to review the agreement 
-3-
taking account of the discussions referred to in paragraph
above. Australian Ministers explained the basic policies of
the Australian Government or, foreign investment and noted that
foreign investment would continue to play an important role in
Australia's economic development.
They further noted that all foreign investment
proposals in Australia would in future be examined more closely
to assess the benefits of such investment for Australia.
Japanese Ministers stated that freer movement of
international capital investment was essential for the sound
development of free and open international economy.
They further explained, and Australian Ministers noted,
that the nature of the investment from Japan to Australia had
been not to own and control the Australian resources but to
contribute to the development of resources and secondary
industries in Australia mostly through participating in the
Australian initiated projects.
The Committee recognised the contribution which
capital investment has made to the development of the
economies of the two countries0
Australian Ministers explained the more liberal
import policies initiated by the new Government and especially
tariff policies including the 25 per cent across the board
tariff reduction. Japanese Ministers explained the 20 per cent cut
across the board reduction in Japanese tariffs0
The Committee recognised that both actions were
significant contributions to the liberalisation of international
trade0 The Japanese Ministers noted with appreciation the
positive response by the Australian Government to the points
made by the Japanese Government about Australian tariff
policies following the last Ministerial meeting.
While the various actions taken had met some points
of concern the Committee recognised the need for further
discussions at the official level on these matters. 
M/ 1/ S-S
-4-
Australian Ministers recognised Japan's concern to
obtain stable and adequate supplies of primary products,
especially foodstuffs, and materials for industry.
They stated that Australia looked forward to the further
development of trade in these products in a way which would bring
benefits to both countries.
The Committee reviewed the measures taken by the
Japanese Government in response to the hope expressed earlier
by Australian Ministers for greater and more predictable
access to the Japanese market for Australian primary products and
discussed the question of the supply and demand situationan
access for agricultural commodities.
It was agreed that it was desirable for discussions
between officials to be initiated on these matters.
The Committee noted that such discussions would
signify an important aspect of the further development of
cooperative relations between the two countries.
Stable and continuing growth in trade in these items
was very important to both countries and ministers recognised
that, where appropriate and feasible, international commodity
agreements and mutually beneficial long term supply arrangements
which were consistent with their international obligations
would contribute to the achievement of this goal.
Australian Ministers expressed the view that Australia
should develop strong and healthy secondary industries which
would provide employment and contribute to the welfare of the
Australian people.
They took the opportunity to outline to Japanese
Ministers the new measures and policies extending beyond tariff
assistance that are currently being developed to promote the
development of a more efficient secondary industry in Australia,
Ministers recognised the mutual interdependence
and complementarity of Australia and Japan in energy and
natural resources. The Committee emphasised the importance of the mutual
reliability of the Japanese market for Australian natural
resources on the one hand, and on the other, of Australia as 
a source of' supply of' these resources.
Ministers reaffirmed that it was desirable for officials
of the two Governments to continue to have discussions and exchange
of information on various aspects of their mutual interests in
developing, and processing and trade in mineral and energy
resources including uranium in Australia.
Ministers discussed the world situation on energy
supplies and noted the importance to both countries of continued
access to oil supplies.
Ministers also discussed alternative energy sources
and the increasing use of nuclear fuels for the production of
energy. Ministers noted that Australia had the potential to
become an important source of nuclear fuel.
The Committee welcomed the recent measures taken by
both countries to facilitate entry and stay for business
purposes, and agreed that the two Governments should continue
to give full consideration to this matter for mutual benefit.
The Australian Prime Minister introduced the W 1
Minister for Defence and Foreign Relations of Papua New Guinea,
Mr Maori Kiki, who gave an explanation of recent developments
in Papua New Guinea.
He reviewed the progress being made towards
independence, and explained Papua New Guinea's current
development policies as well as its interest in obtaining
development assistance from overseaso
Japanese Ministers noted the developments in Papua
New Guinea, expressed the wish that Papua New Guinea would
attain independence at an early date and noted that Japan
looked forward to the progressive establishment of full
cooperative relations with Papua New Guinea in all fields.
Australian MVinisters expressed their appreciation for
the hospitality and arrangements made by the Japanese Government
for this meeting of the Ministerial Committee.
At the conclusion of the meeting Australian and
Japanese Ministers expressed their pleasure at the wide
ranging and cordial nature of the discussions. 
-6-
Encouraged by the success of this meeting, Australian
and Japanese Ministers looked forward to the next meeting of
the Ministerial Committee, which has been provisionally
scheduled for 1974 in Canberra. 



mA NQ DATE / t
M/ 154 30 October 1973
M WHITLAM'S KEY NOTE ADDRESS TO THE SECOND
AUSTRALIA-JAPAN MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE METING,
TOKYO, 29 OCTOBER, 1973
* Below is the text of the key note address given in
Tokyo by the Australian Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr E. G. Whitlam, at the Second Australia-
Japan Ministerial Committee Meeting on 29 October 1973.
" At this, the second meeting of the Ministerial
Committee, I have the honour to lead the largest and
most senior delegation of Australian Ministers ever to
leave Australian shores to represent our country in
another country
There could be no clearer proof of the importance
which the Australian Government attaches to our
relations with Japan. There could be no clearer
proof of the breadth, the many-sidedness of those
relations. There could be no clearer proof of the
significance we attach to this Committee and the
seriousness with which we approach our work upon
it. This Committee first met last year when a
different Government was responsible for Australian
affairs. Our support for the establishment of this 
I~ 2E~ d GI-C O. fLI 1 u 1Kr o
na~ Ties chang.. nothi'z -in the j,. riin-_ ir ñ o
t 11 c 1 cses t ru o s O: cIL, r( 2I. 7; amostecn..; 2
cW s. ti-m h cur ra': -~ cth matto; ic~
* p 4 can.,.
nc -1,1 do. b -l -al
atc ht iaa ;~ pr the -t;
Lhsechngej an ca j-r
fimo otC
S L' i. r 
the United States and The People's Republic of China.-
This chan. ze has had important conocquzz-nces folrJ j.
and Australia.
Just before last year's meet-g, Japan normaieal
her relations with the Pepp e~ &amp; Spiulni.
Tokyro at the time Preslident Nixon anounccd i~ n
July 1971 his inten-tiJ. on of visiting leking.
aclaiowledged at that time that Japan faced special
difficulties not facc-d by Austral-La., I* said ~ t7.7
-that time., Aere and in Canberra, that;) the task
presented a high chal. enge t'. o jaanl-, statcsrv~ n-shi
It is a tribute to t; equalityl c: J:. a1es1h
that -the task was achhived in little-nocr e tna
Since China's ent ry int -Jae Unites-Nations, Since
President Nixon. s visit to Peking. since the detente,
betwe:) n the T irl2ted S-a-tes aria ch Sovie't Un-con, sic
the end of foreisn in2terv; entior, in I'&amp; h-Caviae
tried tLo emroi. islsc ne; opr ts whi..~ te
great developae nt s ef e 2 to our r0e i1c0-1 ht also.*
t1-ried to cmphasisO hc. 7 easy it woldol be for aios'"
like Japan and Au'sr~ at e thos-onolri-. es
slip and how tragic -Cor oiir region Cucht a losz, YouldQ:
be if we allowed. it tr. occ-ur..
Both Japan and Australia have takniñ 2 advant-3ge of
the great-cr freedom Crmel h greater xiiity
of policy that detente cmtz
it is gratifying ifor n -to thM Cc~ r 7.
similarity in approach u,. d directions feuwr~ e
Go vernments and our -t o covuntr iea, Av. stra" 11a re cogni :, sea
China in December las1. , immdiate-Ly a1ter my Gove. rnmentcame
into poweir and vc, ik Japarj. ar, w akir. 203d
progress in develop-3M.-a s Mca: K-bae,'..
relationship. ohcucu-r-eh~ C~ ZC. the,
Demo cratio. RoriibJic. oJ* V112, t N~ a D7ho u oweg
th". e need -fox-aew ; xoLar~. re-c-Lon,
Jio~ gh bof -f.; rce-: m.:!. LX1.. cJ. 
genln' a-v 1; ake, Ithey must-~ mcaiY b-
1 nd growth r ir: dee-p thou~ ghñ
o~ c.~ conu~ a~ on .7i-' h ri' 1b1-U cis.
i~ s : Q~ r. bsuv. har h, Sggei. tion -h -~ a
onx her of our t-wo cmuntrJ o r our two G~~ tel
has -, 1unged rec'klessly or-thoughIIt!~~~ nrto new c3s
f ., king the changes of -003. icies wre ha~ te : in the t
' vea. Jo h t. r, nr. c { Auta~., bo{ te Ta. zka
Govrm~ tand the ' Ji~~ G\ cr~ jt a-v blass-dt
o~ If oren;' o Far JtVrorm being recedess or nrdc.
A irc c e -o c! b eenr. I
~ Of~ i~). chad vC nxoi 3~ atd. 3U ~ d
I ot n bL t I : 7Y
it-rsts coin_*. zce f o c'! sI-fJs~~' z~ tis
orco&gt; urEL~ da ~ havt arK7
higch deogree of1 nt e r tieond en cc. To remai n pre. r-perov,
in'rv~ ticaJ. c~ rcny., As g-reat exporters, mei
of ~~ horc tio i a ccLo-
r r~ ce c Le'tL nr : 1-1-ed G. Ie c Th
c c 6s As the tw-moait deveic. ped, indi-t-rial is
of i; h. Ila r, ' Pa ciJfic, G Ini -xe a cciomn ii. rz n
wcy~~ I' -hoici j re~ io s r~ o rv3~ C) I00 r
haw: v:, ccrffn l.-! tcrest in hto~ ~ gci1nelh
not ' tlhco: Ie lan f; rca v-i
be 4-CL
coop ~ m. ziir~ Y~ J~ j O~' C Ai~ V&gt; vi c. 
, ace -the Dcac-CY lC ire io n, -e pae o" th
-corld. The relations between our tw o-om'iES
-uasod n Thre oog.-iItioncfhi rJrLh
CDMviUt-! Y Go irntcrcstz..
The! gcorntJ2ulng, tapsh f or loth our '-overrm. cntrelate
our specifi. c national initerest to the: zc t-roader,
common interests-anda to oromote ourrecie
t c wh lo th-e ~ stirm-pc~ o~ n(
*. resce common int ercot s
T'l plco, f-OSU
C Tacan cact nosrn
ci oiiwiasise ' Fth. at ow..-J. iie are no-14 -i2lov C; tqsinst
07. r Othor atto' -but for iastralia.
We r. a c ocna s e thatC c on c Xiup s in ti
t o ' Ln4,-e:.' ruptl' the ojL nrinierals frora vaust: . alia
jnterr[,: Yo" bifttoSUPPC~ by a-rbitx'ary inmport
r s trav{; 7? Oh. sc -c.-ne T: kc-eY ) enden~ fC(-the
twoec~ gOfl~ 3 ~ nI w~ lc : r-i-ue-to malke 1' eas3cya', le
quan~~ t:;,-s ) f mar~ t erials available -3t prices ,-hj. c: h
Ilt. o1' te: -Ge our ~ XCes lbeinjr C, t
uc) CJtat pan a~ s c s to wtralia. 3y -2t in
Jap ,41 h
N. 
1Qvrz~ a ~ ilibeouLineci ouring t* he meeting, but I
mnight say Iiere -that czr intention i. c not tUo prn
ir'% rctmerit from ove: seas, We welcome itL; wTe want it
b a od on terims wi mean that the control of our
induotries and our. resources 7. ests in Austrealicn h-nd0-,
Japan as much as any country in the worldJ apprecLat-es
the need for control o-ver it_ 6 own industries.
Th-is is-. all we a-, e sceeking, no more, no 7less. A-gain.
olua -policies a-ce no'U anr~ ianyone: they are for Autr.,.!_ LL.'
let Lic say emphatical. y thiat Australia will not disc--
ica-airi t Jx
strxaJlia -Viros wti Oapan a very deep fnterest
SenSUcing thla, ; hc great indust. ria-lised nations of tII!
have an, ,. stead to t'Vhe DL-';-oarez
th~' iol~: om. 2: nc-t". tic believe that trie
natonslik Aast'-ar
,_ nt4, J1cd to ha-vs cou and. steady inarke't their
6X. ua i a' ~ in 3 x: m. bI~ ce ' here 5
I ~ needo rt'. g ir. ' eriat icnaj. rl2. c. e on t'
_ r Lt 1o0r fL I~-K GJ g o t f e ' v4Cor ' i Is s i
. LJfa:' r as i is ~~ Hnes-~ ( 1u, e ar: i ct c~ i etic
Of tlLe rcsoroc. oducersCSi-i ng ~ lhe resou~ c
A .; I~ s~ If. a c incer-ned. ther e isno
D* cOur 0io-111i, Lo sit selfishly on our
r esouc es at thne expense of other coui-tries.
&gt; 1 : ron Ta a ~ ever,; time .; hern Aus-: cwauc-. 3.2
ar~ ~' at shre in ( h9co nt-c_ oerid -as
oftheIr own resourceS, they are also'becoming aware
of ' G* he : i__ or~.: onal JimpU ca Uions of thir-oc-sion
oi KA1 esuce.
' de '.)' Lieve we ni-ost have approprviate!, national oice
at~ chre~ ' 2t ~' oior~ mi~ ntand -xrCloitation of'ores. rc:
Ji'.: ve thc!. T. i 11C Cr'nal and. tenioalfesos
o ; c7rdr -esoxrces ;. are jafle-xltr2cahbvliny.
4-ioc. 4 n vring t-
A -br v' J Cr' ir-. La 
7-
I j WO wae n o enlwarge opmorfunites fo: C.
alans-ustr ' o -hare in the owniershiJ-p
amc! developDmentñ of Australian mine
soe~ urces,
wi! r: s ll enccirage 5Lcro processing -if
rL: lcr0. s i-l A4 strala; n nally9
g; u. to encurn tat oU-r
ccmm: nc a fa-2 pri. ce in tl! h
world is becoming increasingly concerned about i&gt;
access to mineral and enrergy resources.
We rank amongst the world's five rain prccers
of bauxite, iron ore, tin' nio'Kelv s12ycL, le. d., zinc,
manganese and. we have major deposits cf uranium. In
many cases cur importanc in the ': crJ2 as a proCucer
is increasing. Bte-ntua" ally, therefore, Australia will become a,"
significant element. in the.. resource strategies of
importng c'otries, particu3ariy Japan.
We would be Foolish indeed. and other covut2 e's
wc-, ld us'a. as fooLiS'h JL f fnlito U takc . l
account, o-2 ; nes' facts.
Wo ar-2-going to Cevelo, theref'orul&gt; a resources
policy. That aoes not nean that we are goi. ng t-play
off one buyLr~ againt aniomer or one seller a,-ainst
ano-thi? Th7t nct the 6iiztraiiar n -i-ay0 \' Io r
neni~ L low cae r1x, policy on! f~ ve
1) e must, . hat Auw, 3ta. aiias
wn : needs f. ncJ indus-tri.. l
requirca. n-is are mett
2) e shall -4a Le 1-ll account of the
k; O-C ro~ 3n j: Lt~~ e? . r( rights of3~
. k: ori. inaa Ilh '" lc ivciSe tradition-.]
c* ! c. s i~ J.. e Pt of tlr~, so m,-iuch
y~<!--<? t~ h~ 1 yJisoveedwcalth lies, 1. t-->
r I II LO'
1 Y
I~ .\ r . o 
-8-
1-hin th e fra-., e!. i -) rk o th o se f ive rncioes, J
cva;-re ly apon i that Australia wil-l -remain a steady-
3, up;,-,-ier o~ f rtsuo, rces and ptable place for Ivetnt
Y-iay say ' thlat tZhcre is a broader reaso. n over andi
abcve our own national coneerns which maKes mneetru. y
c.-Ini~ ous of Japan's neefl. for reassurance on' ' Uhese
mat t.-er s There is n! cody more con! scio-,:-s -than 1; More
a-,] Prcia-; Ve of twhi-t a former Mo linisctel
of Japan told me was Japans " N~ ew Courc-e". h-ovo
c-mpiasi sed by helicK-in the ilertyo2 onf 4
new course~ on ap. LpropriatUe occasions. in -Canbcri2Th n?
T okrvc-. n W-ash slgtc n, n P ek: inrr
belie-; e tha-t ja ) n is cittmnd ; h ae ns
e the fi,' Ist Great~ utr l power to " h ' eak tune xus
, btTfneconoi: c ~ te h and miiitary -t-, renf1,-h and
j'Tha . fair and ade-quat' 1 6ee to t-hIe raw aci. c
and y-sesmre hr UnT~ rc
m-ili~ ta-y th1re-ats-or fo3rooo.
2Li gise. a tthig f:.' Japan af~&amp; g reat -thing
as v rLl as -jaran oseta Ueshls cu:
succe.: ds. f ar as Autr,-: L is z1na. n. ecI2 r
in that course'and -11o makie wh'jatev-er contribution7.
Australia can to iLs succeos~. So I believe it is in
Au. ' S n1ereSt-, Jfl ElCSUl 2
Ja~. about the continuity and certainty ofth
resr~ ilrces she nieeds, fromn us. It is i. n this spirit
t-hat'-my colleague:: -d 1 etc-reJ whclehiearted~ j-, r r p,, 7
-iave 3-aid -mxa. h t-h~ eb Uctl 1aI'acte'i. icx2 0.
. LUt! a) 11--L o nn e 
formaliz ed by a. . reraat oYQf friclliip czlc
and navigation between our .1couzitries. ' For a va , riety
of reasons, previous Australian Gove rMmnts* ho Kef-rred
consideration of' this" mat1tcr.
My Government has decided that i-t is nowciq and
t imeSly that our ti-o countries should enter into ss: oe
aprpriate broad arr~ mgemenat. W~ e cvisage that uc
treaty a treaty of eccnomic co-oper ation ard"~ friendship
shoiuld set out the ' broad framework o2 lain. between
our two countries, not to regulate those relatdirns but
rather to define aad6 sybolise the in,:_ rea-_ irng
W. co-oporat-ive spirit-4. in ,; hich I belilv the s: rc-:. tions
will be conducted
Obviously do no IV opse t; 1-at u. h a t-rety 2-hou-l
be concluded durirr o-rsn ii; to " oewol
hope however, a' thoo -;. ll1 be an agreement::
principle to proceed alr~ these lines.. and thce&gt;. ef o 2 -e
mnany hav rJapan an-Au-: ra'ili havoe
en ere1 into suCh. a t': y
blieve that a. trceaty ., 1ich czt. ; lis~
K. i eccunc _ co-rtL~
rmere fcumal v. y a ay, ral , ic' i:
* th. e real commuity of _ LtQx-ests, ti eca I intt i rñ 1ce
which exists between o', 2r twvo nat-ions a-d + our tw0,; c peoplesa
friorndship, an terAn e: Qdonce, an 2cniy i. interee-ts
which I mn -very-oare be adVOarC(.: uI c-.. berations
of-thi-' historic imsetiz-gor 



NO DATE
M/ 1.57 30 October 1973
FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA
The following is the text of a statement on foreign
investment in Australia, made by the Australian Prime Minister,
Mr Whitlam at the Austraiia-Japan Ministerial Committee
Meeting in Tokyo on 29 October 1973:
" The Australian Government recognises that foreign
S investment in Australia is a matter of special significance
for relations between our two countries. Australia is
endowed with mineral resources of world importance. The
proper development and prdent use of these resources is
basic to our economic progress and growth. They are also
of direct concern tc you as a large and long term importer
of raw materials. The policies that we pursue in the development
of our natural resources and the nature of the partnership that
is established between Australian and Japanese investment will
be a major factor in the future of our two countries and of our
region. As you are aware the policy of my government is to
adopt a more selective approach towards foreign investment in
Australia than hithertc. No longer is there a wholly uncritical
approach to foreign investmento We intend to ensure that
foreign capital inflows are associated with productive
investment which adds to Australia's real resources and brings
us benefito This does not mean. that we have no wish to see further
overseas capital flow into Australia.
In the past foreign investment has made a very great
contr. bution to the development of the Australian economy.
Within a generation A-ustralia has developed from a largely
agricultural and pastcra economy into a modern, increasingly
industrialised and diversified economy. _ i 
-2-
The resources and know-how that the flow of overseas
investment has brought have been of great value in this
development. We believe that overseas capital must continue to
play a significant role, in partnership with Australian capital,
in our future economic growth.
There is no general prohibition on foreign investment
in Australia. My government has the firm policy objective of
promoting Australian control of Australian resources and
industries. We also want to achieve the highest possible
level of Australian ownership of our resources and industries.
By the phrase " the highest possible level of Australian
ownership" we mean the highest Australian equity that can be
achieved in negotiations, project by project, that are fair
and reasonable to both parties and are within the capacity of
our own savings to support. However in some special energy
case, which I shall mention shortly, we do have a particular
objective of 100 per cent Australian ownership.
There will be no discrimination against Japanese
investment, Japanese investment will continue to be given
treatment as favourable as that extended anywhere else.
This policy is being applied in a pragmatic way and
all cases will be considered on their merits, This already
applies in our examination of proposals under the Companies
( Foreign Take-overs) Act. We aim to make our judgements taking
into account the full circumstances of each new project or
proposal, including such factors as the size and location of the
proposed project, the use made of advanced technology, marketing
arrangements, environmental aspects, labour relations and
Aboriginal interests.
There are certain industries where we regard
Australian ownership and control of particular importance.
These relate especially to sources of energy where growing
world shortages and other factors make this essential.
Uranium is one of these energy sources and we have an objective 
-3-
of full Australian ownership in development projects involving
uranium. We also regard this as a desirable objective in
oil, natural gas and black coal.
We recognise however that Australia's resources
of capital and technology are relatively limited, that the size
of the projects to be undertaken is often very great and that
we shall need to call upon overseas expertise, technology and
capital to contribute to the proper development of these
vital energy resources. Thus while we seek to require
equity in new projects involving these four minerals to be
in Australian hands. We do look for overseas participation
in some ways: through access to technology, loans and
especially long term contracts. The Australian Industry
Development Corporation A. I. ID. C. is a basic means by
which the government will seek to ensure Australian equity
and control and there are important areas in which A. I. D. C.
will be able to work both with overseas companies and
Australian investors. Proposed increases in the percentage
of foreign equity in existing projects which already have high
overseas equity may well be subject to particularly close
scrutiny. Our general object is to moderate such holdings in
these projects. For other minerals our approach is more flexible.
We desire partnership between Australian and foreign equity
capital. I want to make it quite clear that there is no
proscription of foreign equity participation in mining.
The nature of the partnership between Australian
and foreign equity capital that is appropriate in each case
will need to be assessed on its merits. In some circumstances
it may be acceptable for foreign investors to participate
significantly in decision-making in a project. The size of
the project, the amounts involved, and the type of mineral
are all factors to be taken into account. In pursuing our
objectives we shall be flexible and guided by the practical
needs of particular cases.
It is not our aim to have a different set of criteria
for overseas participation in mineral exploration from those
for participation in the development of proved mineral deposits. 
In the uranium field in particular, and desirably
also in oil, we aim to adopt the same sort of approach in
exploration as I have already outlined for development of
these minerals. However, in order to maintain a desirable
level of exploration activity, we would, if necessary, accept
a lower level of Australian ownership in exploration.
Given the limited Australian capital resources
available and the higher risks usually involved in exploration,
there is, however, much to be said for concentrating Australian
equity at the production stage.
In some other sectors, successive governments have
for decades restricted foreign investment. These include
banking, civil aviation, radio and television and are no doubt
well known to the Japanese government. Moreover investment
from overseas for the establishment of new foreign-controlled.
life and general insurance companies is generally not favoured.
The go: ernment intends shortly to introduce
legislation to control the activities of major non-bank
financial institutions. Further overseas investment for
the establishment of non-bank financial institutions is not
favoured. In relation to foreign investment in real estate,
the Treasurer indicated in a statement issued on 20 March
1.973 that overseas interests should not enter into significant
commitments for real estate purcnases in Australia for the time
being and that the Reserve Bank would not normally grant
exchange control approvals for foreign investment in real estate.
The policy on this matter, which relates to rural as well as
urban land purchases, is under intensive study. In the
meantime any specific proposals will be examined on their
merits. Let me emphasise however that in the generality of
cases, for example in investment in manufactur. ing, our approach
is a pragmatic one and that proposals by Japanese firms will be
given equal weight to those by interests from other countries. 
The Australian government believes that the policies
on foreign investment, while designed to ensure a more selective
approach than in the past, provide a framework which is flexible
enough to allow mutually acceptable and beneficial arrangements
through fair and reasonable negotiations. Our policies should
establish relations between Japan and Australia on a sounder
footing. If, there are any particular cases or questions that
you have in mind, we would be happy to discuss them, either in
the present meeting or subsequently. 



PRESS RELEASE
PRICE INCREASE BY
AUSTRALIAN PAPER MA. NUACTURERS LIMITED AND
CELLULOSE AUSTRALIA LIMITED
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER,
THE HONOURABLE L. 11. BARNARD, M. P.
I have today been notified by Australian
Paper MIanufacturers Limited. and. Cellulose Australia
Limited in the following terms:
" Australian Paper Manufacturers Limited and its
wholly owned subsidiary, Cellulose Australia
Limited, will conform with the findings of the
Prices Justification Tribunal's report dated
24th October 1973 and the two companies will
increase the domestic selling prices of their
paper and paperboard products by an overall
weighted average of six per centum with effect
from 31st October 1973".
The companies' revised price lists have
been supplied and are available for inspection at
the offices of the Prices Justification Tribunal,
' 1 Treasury Place, East Melbourne.
October 1973 



No DATE
M/ 156 31 October 1973
WHITLAM/ TANIAKA JOINT COMMUNIQUE
Below is the text of the communique issued in Tokyo
on 30 October 1973 by the Prime Minister of Australia,
SMr Whitlam and the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Tanaka:
" The Australian Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, The Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M. P. accompanied
0 by Mrs Whitlam, paid an official visit to Japan from
26 October until 31 October 1973 at the invitation of the
Government of Japano
During their stay in Japan, Mr and Mrs Whitlam were
received in audience by Their Majesties the Emperor and
Empress and were given a luncheon at the Imperial Palace.
The Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Kakuei Tanaka,
Sand Mrs Tanaka hosted a dinner in honour of Mr and Mrs Whitlam
at the official residence of the Prime Minister.
During his stay in Japan. Mr Whitlam had talks with
leading Japanese figures in various fields.
V Mr and Mrs Whitlam also paid a visit to Nara, where
they had an opportunity of acquainting themselves with the
traditional culture of Japan.
Mr Whitlam attended, as the leader of the Australian
Delegation, the 2nd meeting of the Australia-Japan Ministerial
Committee which was held in Tokyo on 29 and 30 October.
Mr Whitlam had valuable exchanges of views with the
Prime Minister, Mr Tanaka, and with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr Masayoshi Ohira, on a wide range of major issues
of mutual concern in the current international situation.
These talks were held in a warm and frank
atmosphere reflecting the close and friendly relationship
between the two countries. 
The Ministers welcomed the Security Council
Resolutions 338, 339 and 340 of October 1973 adopted for an
immediate and complete ceasefire in the Middle East.
The Ministers further emphasised the need for prompt
action to implement in all its aspects Security Council I
Resolution 242 of 1967, which in their view continued to e t
provide the best basis for a just and durable settlement in the
Middle East. The Ministers, taking note of the new situation in
the Asian and Pacific region in which the two countries are
located, and noting the signs of the relaxation of tension
in the Asian and Pacific region, agreed that the two governments
should cooperate with each other for the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region which has an important bearing on world
peace. The Ministers also noted that, in the new and
changing situation in the Asian and Pacific region, regional
cooperation would play an increasingly important part in the
progress and development of the region.
The Ministers agreed that the two governments shoul1d
contribute to the promotion of regional cooperation and the
enhancement of the spirit of solidarity, and thereby should
endeavour to meet the needs and interests of the countries in
the region. In this context, the Ministers noted with satisfaction
the participation of Australia in the Ministerial Conference
for Economic Development of South East Asia which was recently
held in Tokyo. The Ministers expressed their satisfaction at the
agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in Viet-Nam Vp"
signed in Paris on 27 January 1973, and also at the agreement
on restoring peace and realising national concord in Laos of
21 February 1973, and the protocol to that agreement signed
on 14 September 1973.
The Ministers reaffirmed that all provisions of the
agreements should be observed and implemented scrupulIously I 
so as to open the way to a atn ec naltecountries
of Indo-China, and to enable the peoples of those countries
to settle their affairs themselves peacefully without outside
interference. The Ministers agreed that in order to secure peace
and stability in Indo-China, there was an urgent and strong
need for all countries to extend humanitarian and economic
assistance to this region.
The Ministers affirmed the importance they attach to
the preservation of peace in the Korean Peninsula.
The Ministers welcomed the new developments in the
Korean Peninsula, and expressed the readiness of their
governments to contribute to the furtherance of peace and
stability in that area.
The Ministers recognised the importance of promoting
disarmament under effective international control, in particular
further effective measures relating to the cessation of the
nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
and expressed their determination to work for lasting world
peace. In this connection they reaffirmed their strong
opposition to the conduct of all nuclear weapons tests,
particularly in the atmosphere, by whatever nation.
The Ministers, reviewing the relations between
Australia and Japan expressed their satisfaction with the fact
that cordial and friendly relations in the political, economic,
social and cultural fields continued to develop.
The Ministers agreed that the two governments, with a
view to further promoting cooperation and mutual understanding
between the two countries, should consult together on various
questions of mutual interest.
It was agreed that the two governments would begin
discussions on a broad bilateral treaty which would help to
formalise stabilise and broaden relations between Australia
and Japan in the economic and related fields. 
-4-
The Ministers discussed a wide range of economic
issues of mutual interest including development and trade of
mineral and energy resources, trade of foodstuffs and
agricultural products, and conditions for business activities
and investment. The Ministers agreed that it was essential for the
prosperity of both countries to promote further cooperative
relations between the two countries in the broadest possible
area on the basis of mutual benefit and advantage.
The Ministers, taking note of the development of
broad exchanges not only in the political and economic fields
but also in the cultural and academic spheres and a marked
increase of mutual interest therein, were at one in their
view that these cultural exchanges should further be promoted
in order to strengthen the friendly relations between the two
countries.* To this end, the Ministers recognised the necessity
of concluding a cultural agreement between the two countries,
and agreed that negotiations for that purpose should be
commenced at a mutually convenient time.
The Ministers, cognizant of the need for increased
contacts between the two countries in the fields of the
protection of nature and the preservation of the human
environment, agreed to commence, as a first step in
cooperation to that end, negotiations to conclude a treaty
on the protection of migratory and other birds.
Mr Whitlam expressed his deep appreciation to the
government and the people of Japan for the very warm welcome
extended to him, his wife and members of his party during their
stay in Japan. Mr Whitlam extended a cordial invitation, in the name
of the Government of Australia, for Mr Tanaka to visit
Australia. This invitation was accepted with appreciation.
The date of the visit is to be decided later through
normal diplomatic channels." e l 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT PREMIER CHOU EN-LAIPS BANQUET AT PEKING ON OCTOBER 31, 1973
Prime Minister Whitlam's Speech at Peking Banquet, Peking,
October 31, 1973 ( Nsinhua) Following is the full text of the
speech in reply by Australian Prime Minister Edward Gough Whitlam
at the welcoming banquet given by Premier Chou En-lai here this
evening:
Premier Chou En-lai, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Your Australian guests are immensely impressed by the
splendour and warmth of our reception at the airport, along the
boulevard and in the Great Hall of the People.
The days of our staying here two years and three months
ago we will never forget, our reception on that occasion and now
on this. Australia is moving in a new direction, in its relationships
with the world and specifically with the region in which Australia
inevitably belongs. The course that we are setting is already clear
and committed. Our concern is no longer exclusively with nations in
far removed areas of the globe. Now, our concern is with all nations
and particularly those with whom we share a common environment and
common interests and with whom we seek relationships of equality.
In Peking today, we give expression to our new international outlook0
With no nation is our new aspiration symbolised more than it is with
China, a power not only in our region but in the world0 We look to
a future in which over-emphasis on particular associations will no
longer distort the proper relationships which should exist between
Australia and all neighbours0 In our view, this meeting in Peking
contributes significantly towards that future0
China is our close neighbour0 In China today we see a great
modernising force, capable of exerting profound influence in the
world. Close co-operation and association between our two peoples is
both natural and beneficial0 This co-operation this association
will be strengthened by our talks this week in Peking the first
such talks ever between Prime Ministers of China and Australia.
In 1971 a small pa~ rty and I visited China before the first
visit of Dr0 Henry Kissinger only a week before and on this
occasion, I understand, we are visiting China only two weeks before
him. At that time, on behalf of the Australian people, I said that
should I become Prime Minister we would establish diplomatic relations
with China and that I would visit China in my first year of office0
The first promise we fulfilled within three weeks of gaining office.
The second at the ready invitation of Premier Chou En-lai, I am
fulfilling now. Thank you, sir, for your invitation0 For myself
and for those who accompany me, we hope that we may have many opportunities
to return the generosity and hospitality that you and the
Chinese people have offered to us0 
-2-
I wanted to make this visit in my first year of office as a
demonstration of the significance attached by the Australian people
to developing relations with China, and in the belief that our two
countries should now work in concert for the mutual benefit of the
welfare and security of our two peoples.
In China's approach to relations with other countries, we
find a welcome emphasis on the principles of the equality of states
and respect for the r ights and views of small and middle powers0
At a time when profound changes are taking place in the patterns
of international relations, it is particularly important that the
role of small and medium powers should be understood and appreciated,
and that they should seize the opportunities for greater independence
which the increased fluidity of the world situation presents to them.
In this context, China's support for the principles of respect for the
national sovereignity, independence and territorial integrity of all
states can make a significant contribution to strengthening peace.
These fundamental principles we support and as we work together for
their implementation, our two countries will be drawn into closer
co-operation. We hope and expect that our two countries, in a
relationship of mutual trust, will work increasingly together to
secure respect for these broad principles in the affairs of the region
which touches both our countries.
Australia shares China's desire for a fully effective
solution to the Vietnamese conflict and China's desire that the Paris
Agreements should be fully implemented by all parties concerned0
Similarly, both countries look forward to the early restoration of
peace in Cambodia0 The Governments of both our countries have welcomed
the agreements reached between the parties concerned in Laos and we
share a desire that the correct implementation of these agreements
will ensure peace in Laos.
We are both concerned that the different social systems
of the countries in the region should nut inhibit the flow of ideas
and that greater consultation and dialogue among these countries may
remove the barriers of misunderstanding and lessen the possibility
of international conflict.
As relations between China and Australia develop, the
continuing importance of expanding trade will be balanced by the
development of close contact over a broad range of political issues.
Consultations on international questions of interest to both countries
are adding substance to our relationship0 Exchanges in the scientific,
technological and cultural fields will expand and buttress ties between
the two countries0 Our relationship will not be exclusive but will have
relevance beyond our purely bilateral concerns. For we believe that
there are great benefits for all in putting aside the rigidities and
animosities of the cold war era and grasping the opportunities
inherent in the more open framework of relationships now developing
in the world, to build a structure of cooperation based on mutual
respect and mutual trust. 00o/ 
-3-
In this spirit, ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to join
with me in a toast in honour of Chairman Mao Tsetung, in honour of
acting Chairman of the Republic Tung Pi-wu, in honour of Premier
Chou En-lai in honour of the heads of the Diplomatic Missions and
their wives, in honour of all distinguished guests present, to the
continued happiness and well-being of the Chinese people and to the
friendship between Australia and the People's Republic of China. 



NQ DATE
M/ 158 31 October 1973
WHITIJAMV/ OHIRA PRE1SS CONFERENCE, TOKYO ; 1
Following is a transcript of the joint press
conference held by the Japanese Foreign Minister, Mr Ohira,
and the Australian Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, at the
conclusion of the Australia/ Japan Ministerial Committee
talks at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Tokyo, on
October 1973.
Mr Ohira We have just completed the two day second meeting
of the Australia/ Japan Ministerial Committee.
This is the second meeting of this Committee, and
is the first full-scale and highest level contact between our
two countries since the Labor Party came to office in December
last year. You are all very familiar with the situation between
Japan and Australia. Our relations are such that for Japan, Australia is
the second largest trading partner next only to the United States.
For Australia, Japan is her largest partner.
But it is not only that our relations have grown to a
tremendous level quantitatively.
I want to emphasise that the relationship between our
two countries has come to an enormous completeness, that of
mutual dependence and complementarity.
This, however, does not mean that there are no problems
on each of our sides.
There are problems on each of our sides.
But I believe on all of these issues or programs
between us we have been able to conduct a very effective exchange
of views without reservations, a dialogue that has been very 
useful for our relationship.
On our part, the Japanese Ministers who have taken part
are deeply satisfied with the accomplishment of this meeting.
Before I answer your specific questions, permit me to
raise two matters that are worthy of particular note:
One as you know, for some time the government of
Japan had been asking the Australian government for the
conclusion of a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation.
At the present meeting, Prime Minister Whitlam. has
told us that indeed Australia today is thinking about such a
treaty, but not just a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation but in
terms of a new treaty that would formalise the Japan/ Australian
relations on a much broader basis.
And, in the meeting between Prime Minister Whitlam and
our Prime Minister, Mr Tanaka, Mr Tanaka expressed his
wholehearted agreement to the proposal explained by Mr Whitlam.
So from now on between the two governments the
officials will be racking their brains and will be vorking hard
to come up with a draft of a treaty after thoroughly studying
what kind of relationship there should be between our two
countries, as we want to respond to the new age.
We hope to produce a draft that would fully answer the
expectations placed upon us by the two Prime Ministers.
Salient point number two, energy and resourtes matters,
which have of late brought about much tension in the world,
is a matter of particular concern to Japan.
Japan has vital interest in a stable and continuous
supply of energy and resources. 00 -a
Australia, on the other hand, has the capacity to
supply a large quantity of energy and other natural resources.
And, through supplying such resources, Australia seeks
to increase the opportunities for employment of its citizens and
thus to raise the standard of living and welfare of its people.
Therefore, the current energy and resources crisis
has helped to bring to the fore the relationship of mutual
dependence and complementarity between our two countries. 
At the various levels our two governments will now
begin close contact, and we are sincerely desirous that our
already close relationship be further enhanced.
Finally, I would like to say that, as you have been
able to observe, our guest, Prime T-inister Whitlam, is a man of
informal disposition and charming character.
I think that for both the Japanese and the Australians
we are lucky that a person like Mr W-hitiam. has come to such close
contact with Japan, and I take this opportunity to once again
wholeheartedly welcome the delegation led by Mr Whitlam and
appreciate the outcome of this conference.
Mr Whitlam: Mr Ohira, I am very happy indeed, in the presence of
our countries Ambassadors and press, to appear with you on this
occasion. This has been a very significant few days in the
history of Australia and, I hope, in the history of Japan.
I join with you in expressing satisfaction at all the
proceedings and the results of our meeting.
I was here, also as Prime Minister, to have discussion
with Mr Tanaka. I did so on the morning of my arrival last Friday.
I conclude with another on the morning of our
departure tomorrow.
We had a very memorable and enjoyable dinner as his
guests last night, and then yesterday and today, there was the
second Ministerial Meeting.
I had previously, two and a half years ago, met you,
sir, and Mr Sakurauchi, Mr Nakasone, in Tokyo.
One year ago, you, and Mr Nakasone in Canberra.
My colleag-ues9 Dr Cairns and Mr Crean, have already
been here as Ministers and have met you.
Others of my ministerial colleagues have also been
received by you.
In all these individual meetings that wve have had, in
government or in opposition, we have formed a very high degree
of understanding with the government of Japan. 
4-
And now, collectively, as Australian M~ inisters, the
largest number of Ministers ever to leave Australia to visit
any other country or for any other purpose, we are happy inaeed
with the outcome of these discussions concerning the relations
between our two countries.
You didn't mention, perhaps you were leaving it for
me, that in many ways the highlight of our visit was at
Mr and Mrs Tanaka' s dinner last night when the Prime Minister
of Japan suggested that the outcome of our deliberations, the
treaty, might be known as the Treaty of Nara.
It was an appropriate title in Japan, commemorating
the significance of Japan's ancient capital and cultural centre.
From Australia's point of view it is an appropriate A4
name for the Nippon-Australia Relations Agreement0 O14-0
In both countries the name will be honourable.
There has been a change irñ the attitude of the
Australian government to relations with Japan.
Earlier there had * been reluctance, a negative
attitude, towards the proposal that Japan had made for some
years for a broad-ranging treaty between our two countries.
0 My government was favouarable to the idea.
It took a posit Lyve attitude towards it and from the
first discussion that Mr Tanaka and. I had, in your presence,
Mr Ohira, last Friday morning, through all the intervening
formal and informal. meetings between us, the idea was greeted
warmly. So in the next few weeks and months we can expect our
officials to be discussing this matter.
We each made suggestions as to the content of the
agreement in our concluding plenary session this morning.
But this is a memorable occasion0
It is very satisfyang to the Australian Delegation,
and we are happy indeed that the Prime Minister of Japan,
himself, should have given such a warm reception to the idea
and should have suggested such a memorable name for it0
I must say, as I said to you privately, the whole
of the Australian Delegation, the Ministers, the officials, 
have been delighted with the arrangements which have been
made in Tokyo and also in the provinces.
We have been most warmly received and we have a better
understanding of all the issues which have been raised by Japan.
We believe Japan has a better understanding of the
issues that Australia has raised.
But it is typical of the efficiency and courtesy of
this country, the host co-Untry, that wherever we went,
arrangements were so pleasant and effective, and we thank you,
* 0 Mr Ohira, very much for the arrangements over which you presided,
in the conference and outside it.
Quest ion:
0 Mr Ohira, I would like to ask you whether you are
concerned by Mr Whitlam's announcement at the meeting yesterday
that the Australian government in future aims to prevent any
further foreign ownership of Australian energy resources?
Mr Ohira.-In regard to important energy resources, the
government of Australia desires to establish their own national
ownership and control, a desire and aspiration that I can fully
understand and appreciate.
However, this policy is a selective policy, as I
understand it, and it does not apply to all minerals
necessarily. There is a reservation to that policy, namely, that
the important surplus will be available for export.
This is an important point number one.
Another important point, point number two, is that
Australia has assured us that this policy is not going to be
implemented in any way to discriminate against any particular
country. All countries will be dealt with in fair fashion and
I fully understand Australia's policy in so far as these
reservations are concerned.
Our question is, how we can best be sure of a stable
supply of the resources or minerals that we seek on such a basis.
Our job is to explore how we can be sure about that
and I am sure we can find a way. 
-6-
Quesion: The Japanese business circles are very interested
in your Pilbara project.
We understand that Australia seeks to develop this
entire region industrially and the Japanese business circles
wish to co-operate to that end.
The Japanese business interests seek to have equity
participation in that project but I wonder what was the tenor
of' your discussions yesterday?
Could you tell us, Mr Whitlam, more specifically about
Australian views with regard to the Japanese participation in
this project, e. g. will Japanese equity participation be
possible only through AIDO?
Mr Whitlam: There was some discussion about the Pilbara and
also about the AIDC.
It was not, however, a conclusive discussion because
it will not be probably until the middle of 1974 that the
Australian National Government and the Western Australian
State Government will receive the pre-feasibility report0
At this stage, I think one can only generalise to
this extent0 In so far as natural gas is involved in the development
of the Pilbara, the objective will be to have wholly Australian
ownership or control and the AIDC may be one of the implements
for achieving that0
And, accordingly, any overseas participation in the
natural gas would have to be through the AIDC. eO( P"
On the other hand, iron ore is clearly a componenlyp arc
in any development of the Pilbara, and this may be, at various
degrees, either a complete steel works or say pelletisation.
In neither case would total Australian ownmership be
required, and while the AIDO might participate in the ownership
of any iron ore developments in the Pilbara, it would not be the
only component in such developments.
And, overseas interests would not have to go through
the AIIDC as regards the development of the processing of iron
ore 
-7-
Question: Mr Whitlam, what is the most important achievement of
your talks as far as Australia is concerned?
Mr Whitlam: To hear, at first hand, to explain at first hand, the
attitudes, the policies, the programs, of the two governments.
I suppose one can add also the response by the
Australian government to the longstanding Japanese proposal for
a broad bilateral treaty between the two countries.
Question: Mr Whitlam has suggested that Asian and Pacific
nations join in an organisation some-thing like the organisation
for the American States and the organisation of African States.
What is japan's position in this proposal?
Mr Ohira: What kind of machinery for regional co-operation should
be created, if any, is a study for the government of Japan.
As you know, Asia is a highly complex region where
interests of many big powers are intertwined.
If we are to produce a truly effective machinery for
effective co-operation, we need to exert tremendous efforts to
produce many ideas.
Speaking honestly, I don't think time is quite mature
as yet, in my judgement, to produce any idea now, but I think
it is a proposal that the government of Japan should continue
to examine as a concept.
Question: When do you see a target date, so to speak, by which
you wish to complete discussion and preparation for this Nara
Treaty? For example, can you foresee the signing of such a
treaty by the time of the third meeting of this Committee
next year?
Mr Ohira: There has been no specific agreement between the two
countries as to by when they should produce such a treaty.
But we are to start our work immediately. 
-8-
I don't think there is a need for us to wait until
the occasion of the third meeting next year of this Ministerial
Committee. On the Japanese side we feel we must finish the work
and coincide the treaty way before that.
Mr Whitlam: I would agree with what Mr Ohira has said.
There will be two occasions in Australia next year
when Japanese Ministers will be present.
One will be the third of the Ministerial M'eetings
and there will also be, of course, the occasion, we expect, of
the visit by the Prime Minister of Japan to Australia.
It may well be that the treaty will be concluded before
either event but it would be signed before or at either of those
occasions. 0
Question: What is the Japanese reaction to the Australian
suggestion that although we don't want any overseas ownership
of our energy resources, we still want their assistance both
financially and technologically?
Do you think Japanese interests would be prepared to
put in money and technology to ensure a continuation of supply
of these energy resources?
Mr Ohira: Japan does not seek any ownership or control of
natural resources. This is not only in Australia but with respect of any
resources producing country.
What Japan seeks is to assure herself of a stable
supply of natural resources.
Now, in trying to secure this supply, if the business
interests concerned see that the economics favour such an
arrangement in response to the request of the resources
producing countries, then we should not sp~ areany efforts in
extending our co-operation financially or technically. 



E. LARGO: Mot fc: r ulication or bro-. ; t L.' ore
4 pm, Saturday, " ov-nber 3, 197'
SAiTUR DAY,. NOVvMBER 1973
VISIT BY THE SHAH OF IRAN
( Statement by the Acting Prime iinister, The
Honourable L. H. Barnard, MP)
His Imperial Majesty, the Shahanshah of Iran,
has accepted an invitation by His Excellency the Governor-
General, to pay a State visit to Australia az a guest of
the Government during 1974. He will be accompanied by Her
Imperial Majesty, the Shahbanou of Iran.
Announcing this today the Acting Prime Minister,
Mr. Barnard, said that he looked forward to the visit and
welcomed the opportunity it would provide to consolidate
and to develop further Australia's already friendly
relations with Iran.
Mr. Barnard said that this would be the first
visit to Australia by the reigning Monarch of Iran, who
acceded to the throne in 1941 and whose progressive
policies and Government have contributed so much to the
attainment by Iran of the high regard in which it is held
today. EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before
4pm, Saturday, November 3, 1973 



AF FA I-R
NQ DATE
M/ 160 5 November 1973
AUSTRALIAN/ CHINESE JOINT PRtESS COI'MFUNIQUE
The following is the text of the joint communique issued
by the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the Chinese Premier,
Mr Chou En-lai, in Peking at the conclusion of the Prime Minister's
visit to the People's Republic of China.
" At the invitation of the Premier of the State Council of
the People's Republic of China, Chou En-lai, the Prime Minister
of Australia, Mr E. G. Whitlam, paid an official visit to the
People's Republic of China from 31 October to 4 November 1973.
Mr Whitlam was accompanied by Mrs Whitlam, the Treasurer,
Mr Frank Crean, the Minister for Northern Development and the
Northern Territory, Dr Rex Patterson, Mr T. Burns, M. IJ. A., and
a party of officials..
Mr Whitlam welcomed this opportunity to renew his
acquaintance with China and Chinese leaders. While in Peking,
the Prime Minister, IKrs Whitlam and his party visited a factory,
0 a people's commune and famous historic and cultural sites and were
warmly welcomed and cordially received by the Chinese Government
and people. The visit was the first official visit to China by an
Australian Head of Government and marked a new and important stage
in the relations between the two countries.
Chairman Mao Tse-tung met Prime Minister Whitlam and had
a friendly conversation with him.
Premier Chcu En-lai and Prime Minister Whitlam held talks
in a cordial atmosphere on a wide range of international problems
and on the question of further developing the relations between
the two countries.
The Australian Treasurer and the Minister for Northern
Development and the Northern TPerritory had separate meetings with
responsible members of the Ministries of Finance, Communications, 
-2-
Fuel ana Chemical Industries, Foreign Trade, Agriculture and
Forestry and the N~ ational Planning Commission of the People's
Republic of China and exchanged views on matters of' interest to
both sides. The two sides agreed that these talks and meetings were
very helpful in deepening the understanding and friendship between
the two countries and peoples, as well as in the continued efforts
of the two countries for the improvement of the international
situation. Both sides affirmed that countries, big or small, should be
equal. Every nation has the right to safeguard its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity against foreign aggression,
interference, control and subversion.
The two sides affirmed that China and Australia, being
situated in the Asia/ Pacific region were closely interested in the
development of the situation in this region. They both expressed
their opposition to the seeking of hegemony in this rcgion by
any country or group of countries.
The two sides stated that although thie social systems of
China and Australia are different, the two countries can and
should develop relations on the basis of the five principles of
mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual
non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs,
equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. This is not
only in the interests of the two peoples, but will also contribute
to an improvement in international relations.
The two sides reviewed the development of bilateral
relations between China and Australia and expressed satisfaction
at the progress which had been made since the establishment of
dip'Lomatic relations between the two countries on 21 December 1972.
The two sides expressed their gratification that as a result
of an exchange of visits by their respective Ministers responsible
for foreign trade, the two countries had concluded a trade t
agreement. They welcomed also the successful negotiation, uLnder?",
the umbrella of this trade agreement, of an agreement covering the
purchase of Australian wheat by China over a three year period.
They agreed that both Governments should study the practical 
possibilities of further developing economic relations and
investigate prospects for long-term agreements involving other
commodities. Both sides noted that a good beginning had been made in
the field of cultural exchanges, with the successful visit to
Australia by the Canton Acrobatic Troupe and the completion of
arrangements for a student exchange program. Both sides agreed
that it was desirable to develop a planned program of cultural,
scientific and technological exchanges between China and
Australia. To this end, they discussed specific areas in which
contacts and exchanges would be mutually beneficial. It was
agreed that representative missions in the cultural, scientific
and technological fields would be exchanged during 1974.
An understanding in principle was arrived at between the0
two sides on travel from China to Australia by relatives of C--' i
Australian citizens of Chinese descent and Chinese citizens
residing in Australia. Mcqt,
It was agreed that the flinisters for Foreign Affairs of C~~ A
the two countries would exchange visits at times to be
determined in 1974.
The two sides also agreed to promote actively further
exchanges of views between Australian and Chinese officials on YO
questions of mutual interest.
The two sides noted with satisfaction that the official
visit to the People's Republic of China by the Australian Prime
Minister had strengthened the ties between the two countries and
friendship between the two peoples.
Prime Minister Xhitlam expressed his deep appreciation to
the Government and people of the People's Republic of-China for
the very cordial welcome extended to him, his wife, and members
of his party during their visit to China. 



SPEECH BY THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER,. MR L. H. BARNARD
AT THE OPENING OF THE TASMNA DIVISION O
THE MUNICIPAL ASCAO'S CONFERENCE IN
LAUNCESTON -5 NOVEMBERJ 1973
Today I am talking to you about our new deal
for Local Government in Australia.
We are not seeking changes for changes sake
nor, as some would say, to centralise power in Canberra.
What we are really dging is to give a new and realistic
meaning to Federalism, real local participation in public
affairs and in effect, real decentralisation of Government.
The Australian Government is moving quickly to
develop its policies for Local Government and the cities.
Our commitment to Local Government is an important part of
our overall commitment to urban and regional development.
I think most of you here today know about the three
specific promises which the Labor Party made to Local Government
while in Opposition.
Firstly, we promised direct Local Government
representation at the 1973 Constitutional Convention. You
will all be aware that on the Steering Committee of that
Convention there was some division over this question.
we remained firm to our commitment and I am pleased
that the outcome was successful and that Local Government was
represented at the convention.
Secondly&gt; we promised to change the Loan Council so
that Local Government representatives from all States could
have a voice and a vote on that Council.
On the 11th of last month the Prime Minister met
the State Premiers to resolve this question. Unfortunately,
some of the Premiers ( not including Tasmania) would not
accept our proposal. But we are not going to let the matter
rest there. We now propose to ' hold a referendum on the matter
early next year. I
Thirdly, we promised to amend the Grants Commission
Act to authorise the Commission to enquire into and make
recommendations on grants to regional groups of Local
Government. In May, we changed the Grants Commission Act
which will give some relief for Local Government areas. You
will remember that Mr Whitlam has been speaking for years
about the Grants Commission doing a similar exercise for
regions in need within the States as it now does between the
States. No one doubts the strength of Local Government'. s
case for more financial assistance.
Under the new Grants Commission Act some relief is
in sight for Local Government areas. Let me turn now to some
aspects of the Grants Commission operation. 
We should be quite clear that the responsible
Minister under this legislation is the Special Minister
of State, Senator Ddn Willesee.
I know that people in Local Government would'
like the grants from the Commission to flow through as quickly
as possible. But we must all realise the difficulties. The
Grants Commission now has to adapt to its new role, recruit
extra staff and work out how it is going to deal with
applications from Local Government.
When the Commission is ready to begin considering
applications an announcement will be made.,
On present indications this might not be before
January next year. In the meantime a handbook is being
prepared to assist regional organisations in drawing up
their submissions. Another colleague of mine, Mr Tom Uren, the Minister
for Urban and Regional Development, has two important
responsibilities in this area.. Firstly, he is responsible
for approving regional groupings of local councils through
which submissions to the Grants Commission must be made.
Secondly, he can comment to the Commission on the
submissions from regional groups. In this way, Mr Uren can
inform the Commission on how the applications may be assessed
in the light of the Australian Government's overall regional
planning and development objectives.
What we are trying to do is to encourage councils
to think big. Certainly far bigger than they have in the
past. We hope that this new move of ours will provide an
effective and useful fillip to bigger regional planning.
As you know, the Department of Urban and Regional
Development has already made some tentative grouping of
regions. We expect that Local Government will want to make
some comments to the Department through the appropriate
Minister in each. State. The appropriate Minister in Tasmania
is, of course, Mr Michael Barnard. I would like to emphasise
that at this stage the suggested regions are tentative. This
is because we can in time carry out longer investigations.
Also we expect to gain a lot of experience in the first couple
of years in the working of the Act.
In its investigations the Department has found that
regions already adopted by the various State Governments for
the rural sectors in each State will probably be suitable for
purposes of the Grants Commission Act.
As a general rule the State's regions have been taken
as the main basis for approved regional organisations in nonmetropolitan
areas.
I would like to stress again that the report being
sent out to all Councils is designed to encourage comment
through the appropriate State Minister on the suggested
regions. We will also have the benefit of experience
before we decide on the final regions after a couple of years. ./ 3 
These are still very early days in our new approach
to urban and regional development generally and Local
Government in particular.
We must make sure that we act quickly because the
needs are both great and urgent. But, on the other hand,
we must also make sure that we take notice of the views of
Local Government representatives. All of us must try to
make sure that we take notice of the views of the citizens
we all represent. I have already mentioned the role played by the
Grants Commission and the requirements for regional groupings.
But these are small elements of the Australian Government's
plan for a new federalism.
The Department of Urban and Regional Development is
charged with the responsibility for the development and
implementation of national and regional development strategy.
It is also charged with the development and monitoring
of an urban and regional budget programme to co-ordinate
resources allocated for investment in urban and regional
services by federal departments, state and local governing
bodies. The Department of Urban and Regional Development
has a role in the administration in the Grants Commission Act.
But it will be guided by a wider concern to promote effective
regional development and to improve generally the resources
of Local Government so that it can operate efficiently.
Unfortunately we are being thwarted in our attempts to advance
the role of Local Government by the attitudes of some State
Premiers. on this issue it is not the Federal Government
which is adopting a centra ' list stance but some of the States.
We want to give an effective say to local populations on local
matters. We want to give, local populations an effective say
about the things that immediately concern them. We are not
being allowed to and that is why we are being forced to go to
a referendum so that Local Government has direct access to the
Loan Council. These are just a few thoughts on what we are doing
in this important area. They have been Labor Party policy
for some time. We are fulfilling the-promises made many years
ago. I think we are on the verge of an exciting new era for
our third tier of Government in this country. Whatever way
you may look at it, it is certainly the best deal that Local
Government has ever had in our living memory.
Thank you for having me. It has been a pleasure to
be here today to give you a progress account of what's
happening in this field. By the time you meet again no
doubt a lot of the administrative problems will have been
sorted out but most importantly I hope that the Australian
people will have decided to support your cause and give you
direct access to the Loan Council and therefore the means
to put into practice imaginative plans. 



DEPTENT OF1
NQ DATE
M/ 161 5 November 1973
VISIT BY MSTDA1ESE FOREIGN MINISTER
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Sudan, Dr Iansour Khalid, arrived in Canberra
this morning for a brief visit to meet members of the Australian
Government, Members of Parliament and Government officials.
Announcing this today, the Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, said that Dr Khalid, who had
been his country's Foreign Minister for two years, was a leading
figure in the Sudanese Government whose views on a number of
0issues would be of considerable interest to the Australian
Government. The Special Minister of State, Senator W1illesee, who
will become Australia's new Minister for Foreign Affairs
tomorrow, will meet with Dr Khalid tomorrow morning, and
tomorrow evening Senator Willesee will host a dinner for the
Sudanese Minister in Parliament House.
0Tomorrow afternoon, Dr Khalid will call on the
Minister for External Territories and Science, fIr Morrison.
Dr Khalid, who arrived in Sydney yesterday, will leave
0Australia on Wednesday afternoon. 



NQ DATE
Mv/ 162 5 November 1973
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER ANDT MINISTER
AFFAIRS, 1-UWWHi ITLAM~, ON HIS= PLTRN
CHINA AND JAPAN, 5NOVEMBR= 1973.
" Within the next few days I shall be reporting to the
Australian Parliament on the results of my visit to China and
Japan. I believe this visit, in the company of several of my
ministerial colleagues, was the most successful and productive
overseas mission ever undertaken by an Australian Government
delegation. We have forged new understandings with two of our
greatest neighbours with Japan, our most important trading
partner, and with China, the most populous nation in the world.
With both countries we have redefined our relationship
to the benefit of both sides and set new perspectives that will
endure for years to come.
Our basic task in Japan was not an easy one. Essentially
it was to explain to the Japanese Government that in the development
of our minerals and energy reso'Urces Australia in future will be
the master of her own house. We will not allow the present
proportion of foreign ownership and control of these resources
to increase. In Tokyo we made this position quite clear. The
Japanese understood it. They accepted it. At the same time we
reassured Japan that Australia would never deny Japan access to the
raw materials she needs, We will remain a dependable supplier.
That position, too, was understood and welcomed.
I did not go to Japan to carp or complain, as the Leader
of the Opposition did, about Japan's defence spending or internal
policies. I did not go, as Mr ' 2nedden did, to incite Japan to a
resurgence of militarism. I went to seek new friendship and
understanding. 
A 6
The fruits of that understanding will be embodied in a
lasting treaty of friendship and cooperation between the two
countries. For years the Japanese Government sought such a
treaty with Australia. The previous Australian Government refused
to conclude such a treaty. We have now cleared the way for o
negotiations on the Treaty of Nara to begin without delay.
As an example of the kind of cooperation that will flow
from our better relationship, Senator Wriedt obtained most
encouraging indications of Japan's willingness to make long-term
arrangements for the purchase of our primary products, especially
wool. I am confident that such arrangements will bring benefits
to both countries. My visit to China was the first ever made by an
Australian Prime Minister. It brought great practical benefits
to Australia as well as great personal satisfaction to me.
It marked the end of a generation of neurotic fears and
lost opportunities. Australia has now established a firm and
cordial friendship with a government representing a quarter of the
earth's population. That friendship, I believe, will be lasting
and fruitful. As a result of my extraordinarily long and thorough
discussions with Premier Chou En-lai, Chairman Mao Tse-tung and
other Chinese leaders, the Australian Government now has a much
better knowledge of Chinese attitudes to a whole range of world
problems. Such knowledge is essential to the conduct of a mature,
confident and constructive Australian foreign policy.
We are no longer working in the dark. China knows what we
think. We know what China thinks. On many issues such as nuclear
tests, the Middle East, Bangladesh and Korea we frankly
acknowledged and fully explained our differences.
On many practical issues we made great progress.
Dr Patterson secured Chinese agreement to important long-term
contracts for the sale of sugar to China. This arrangement may well
prove to be the biggest commodity deal Australia has made with 
-3-
another country. It follows the highly valuable wheat contract
with China concluded recently by Dr Cairns.
I believe we are now entering a more enlightened and
productive era in our relations with China. I believe the great
foundations of friendship and cooperation we have laid on this
visit will stand for years to come. 



STATV. MENT THE FRI! W E MINIST7fl" &amp; i MINISTER FO1-FOY' IGN AFFAIRS,
NR WijITEA;:, P, ON iiI ' TtiiN iROiv1 CH INA AI. D JAPAN
NOVEMBER 1973
Within the next fdw days I shall be reporting to the
Australian Parliamnent on the results of my visit to China and
Japan. I believe this visit, in the company of several of my
ministerial colleagues, was the most successful and produlctive
overseas mission ever undertaken by an hustralian Government
delegation. We have forged new understandings with two of our
greatest neighbours with Japan, our most important trading
partner, and with China, the most populous nation int the world.
With both countries we have redefined our relationship
to the benefit of both sides and set new perspectives that will
endure for years to come.
Our basic task in Japan was not an easy one. Essentially
it was to explain to the Japanese Government that in the
development of our minerals and energy resources Australia in
future will be the master in her own house. We will not allow
the present proportion of foreign ownership and control of these
resources to increas,-e.
In Tokyo we made this position quite clear. The
Japanese understood it. They accepted it. At the sane time
we reassured Japan that Australia would never deny Japan access
to the raw materials she n~ eds. We will remain a dependable
supplier. That position, too, was understood and welcomed.
I did not go to Japan to carp or complain, as the
Leader 3f. tLh-e Oppositiondid, about Japan's defence spending,
or internal policies. I did not go, as Mr Snedden did, to
incite Japan to a resurgence of militarism. I went to seek new
friendship and understanding.
The fruits of that understanding will be embodied ina
a lasting treaty of friendship and cooperation between the two
countries. For years the Japanese Government sought such a
treaty with Australia. The previous Australian Government
refused to conclu, 4e such a treaty. We have now cleared the way
for negotiations on the Treaty of Nara to begin without delay.
As an example of the kind of cooperation that will flow
from our better relationship, Senator Wriedt obtained most
encouraging indications of Japan's willingness to make long-term
arrangements for the pur'chase of our primary products, especially
wool. I am confident that such arrangements will bring benefits
to both countries.
My visit to China was the first ever mde by an Australian
Prime Minister. It brought great practical benefitsto Australia
as well. as gre at personal satisfaction to me.
It markedt,-e end of a generation of neurotic fears and
lost opportunities. Australia hasR now established a firm and
cordial friendship witha government representing a quarter of
the earth's population. That friendship, I believe, will be
lasting and fruitful. 
As a result of my extraordinarily long and thorough 4
discu.; sions with Premier Chou En-lai, Chairman Mao Tse-tung
and o; hei Chinese leaders, the Australian Government now nas
a niuch better knowledge of Chinese attitudes to a whole range
of worldproblems. Such knowledge is essential to the conduct
of a mature, confident and constructive Australian foreign
policy. We are no longer working in the dark. China knows what
we think. We know what China thinks. On many issues such as
nuclear te. ts, the Middle East, Bangladesh and Korea-we frankly
acknowledged andfully explainedour differences.
On many practical issues we madegreat progress.
DrPattersonsecured Chinese agreement to important long-term
contracts for the sale of sugar to China. This arrangement may
well prove to be the biggest commodity deal Australia has made
with anotner country. It followsthe highly valuable wheat
contract with China concluded recently by Dr Cairns.
I believe we are now entering a more enlightened and
productive era in our relations with China. I believe the
great foundations of friendship andcooperation we have laid on
tni: vLsit will stand for y. ars to come. 



STATEMENT TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. E. G. WHITLAM, WEDNESDAY 7.11.73
VISIT TO JAPAN AND CHINA
I seek leave to make a brief statement on the visit by
certain of my Ministerial colleaguesand me to Japan and China.
The Ministerial delegation to Japan, for the second
Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee, was the largest and
most senior ever to represent Australia abroad. My visit to
Peking was the first by any Australian Prime Minister. Both
visits were marked by great warmth on both sides; both visits
were characterised by frankness and firmness from both sides;
both visits notably advanced the interests of Australia and
our friendship and understanding with these two great neighbours,
Japan and China.
On the visit to Japan from 26 October to 31 October
I was accompanied by the Minister for Overseas Trade, the Treasurer,
the Minister for Primary Industry and the Minister for Minerals and
Energy. On the visit to China from 31 October to 4 November
I was accompanied by the Treasurer and the Minister for Northern
Development. In both countries my colleagues and I were supported
by senior officials.
I firmly believe that the visit will prove to be of
considerable importance and value to the whole of Australia.
With Japan, we have both broadened and more clearly defined
the Australian-Japanese relationship and formed a firm basis for
its continuing and future development in the years ahead.
In China I consider that my visit symbolised the successful
ending of a generation of lost contact between Australia and the
most populous nation on earth. 
-2-
Japan is our major trading partner in the world and China
is the only one of the world's five major powers with whiCh,
until last December, we have not had any meaningful or regular
official contact.
In Japan, the talks with Prime Minister Tanaka and Foreign
Minister Ohira, and the wide-ranging and very frank and
substantial discussions at the Ministerial Committee Meeting,
have broadened the Australian-Japaneseunderstanding which is vital
to both countries.
I believe that any misunderstanding that existed in Japan
about the nature of the Government's policies on minerals and
energy and on overseas investment have now been cleared away.
Likewise, any uncertainties the Japanese may have felt about the
reliability of Australia as a long-term supplier of the raw materials
which are essential to Japan has also been dispelled.
In Japan, too, I believe that valuable understandings have
been reached about the long-term access for Australian primary
products to the important and growing Japanese market.
The exceptionally close and important relations between
Japan and Australia are to be expressed in a broad bilateral
treaty. Mr. Tanaka readily accepted my suggestion, and himself
announced that the Treaty be called the Treaty of Nara bearing
the title of Japan's ancient capital, which I also visited.
It will be identified as the Nippon-Australia Relations Agreement
NARA. Australian and Japanese officials will very soon begin
detailed discussion on the Agreement.
I believe the Treaty of Nara will be seen as one of the
historic treaties which Australia will have entered intO. 
-3-
Honourable members will note that we have also agreed to
enter into two further agreements with Japan a Cultural
Agreement and an agreement on the protection of migratory and
other birds as well as to conduct wide-ranging official discussions
on a number of issues including access for agricultural products,
tariffs, and minerals and energy matters, including uranium.
We have also agreed to renew the Agreement on Commerce with Japan,
which was last revised in 1963. There was a useful exchange of
views on developments in Papua New Guinea in which that country's
Minister for Defence and Foreign Relations, Mr. Maori Kiki,
participated. I believe my visit to China was most valuable in restoring
balance to our foreign policy and in diversifying our foreign
relations. I had no less than 11 hours of formal talks with Premier
Chou En-lai and over an hour with Chairman Mao Tsetung. As
Honourable members will appreciate, in the extensive time accorded
to me by Premier Chou the discussions extended over a very wide
range of international issues of interest to both countries.
I believe that we now have a much greater understanding
of Chinese attitudes on these issues. I believe, too, that on the
Chinese side, there is now a much clearer and first-hand understanding
our policies. While there were areas of agreement, there were
also issues on which our policies differed and, in such cases, I
did not hesitate to put our position fully and frankly to my Chinese
hosts. For example, I reaffirmed at the highest level the Australian
Government's determined opposition to nuclear testing in the
atmosphere. our differences on these and other matters were
discussed on a basis of mutual respect.
I believe that the warmth ot the reception I and my party
received in Peking demonstrates that China like Japatn recognises,
to a greater extent than some Australians may believe, the growing
importance of Australia as a middle power, especially in the Asian
and Pacific region. 
-4-
As Honourable Members will know, important and valuable
arrangements were made for the sale to China of up to 300,000
tons of sugar per year for a three to five year period commencing
in 1975. Arrangements were also made for the active promotion of
closer consultations between Australian and Chinese officials
and for a program of visits in both directions. The Australian
and Chinese Foreign Ministers are to exchange visits at times
to be determined in 1974. It was also agreed that we should develop
a planned program of cultural, scientific, and technological
exchanges between Australia and China, and that representative
missions in these fields would be exchanged in 1974.
Honourable Members will be pleased to know that an
understanding in principle was reached between the two sides
on travel from China to Australia by relatives of Australian
citizens of Chinese descent and Chinese citizens residing in
Australia. This should facilitate family reunions.
I believe that my visit will give new direction and
increased momentum to our existing relationship with Japan and
will lead to the development of a more meaningful relationship
and a continuing dialoguewith China which, for so long, for
much too long has been a closed book to this country.
I would like to pay tribute in the Parliament to the tireless
efforts of the Australian Embassies in Tokyo and Peking during our
visit. The ambassadors and their staffs performed, under
considerable pressure, in a manner of which Australia should be
proud. I would also like to record here my appreciation of the
objective and constructive advice tendered to my ministers and me
by the senior officials who accompanied us from Australia.
I table the Communique issued in Tokyo after my visit to
Japan as Prime Minister, the Joint Communique adopted by thO
Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee, my statement to that
Committee setting out the Government's policy on foreign investment
in Australia, and the Joint Press Communique issued in Peking on
4 November. 



THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, ADDRESSING THE
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, HOTEL CANBERRA, CANBERRA,
THURSDAY, 8 NOVEMBER, 1973
QUESTION: Following your conversation in Peking with Prince Sihanouk,
can I ask you what is the Australian relationship now with the
Royalist Government in Cambodia? Has Prince Sihanouk been given
any assurances? Has he been told, for instance, that his Government
will be recognised if the Lon Nol regime were to fall?
PRIME MINISTER: Australia maintains relations with the Lon Nol
Government. As I said in Peking, and many of you were there when
I said it, it will continue to do so as long as that Government is
in the United Nations and Pnom Penh. Prince Sihanouk knows that
that is our attitude and that while he is the Government-in-exile
he can't, of course, expect to be recognised as the Government of
his country by the Australian Government.
QUESTION: What are the areas about which there is'still
speculation following your visit to Japan. Is your statement that
we would aim for and desire 100 per cent ownership-of our four
energy resources. Could you clarify what you meant by that? Are
we intractably wed now to a policy of developing those resources
without foreign equity, and do you believe we can do that?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope that we can do it; we will certainly try.
It ought to be possible to strive for that objective, i. e. for
100 per cent Australian ownership of uranium and oil and natural
gas and black coal.
QUESTION: In the last twelve months you have travelled more than
any other Prime Minister in a similar period; you have achieved
possibly all your major immediate policy objectives. I understand
that next year you intend to visit South-East Asia early in the
year and also Europe later in the year. Do you think now that
Senator Willesee could be given these two missions while you
concentrate on domestic matters at home?
PRIME MINISTER: I would add that I expect to visit the United Nation
in about September. I will be making these visits and Senator
Willesee will be continuing to make no fewer visits than he has
been making throughout the year. A head of government these da-,' s
inevitably has to make a great number of visits. I don't believe
that I will be making fewer visits that I had intended to make
in any case.
QUESTION: My question follows on that asked by David Barnett
and it is in relation to a statement that was issue3d in Pcking
by Prince Sihanouk. To clarify the position one step further,
Prime Minister, has Australia cut military and econor-Fi-I t~ o
the Lon Nol regime, has it limited its diplomatic nr-s-ice therc.
and are you looking forward to Prince Sihanouk beinr1 installed
back in Pnom Penh? 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: In respect to the last question, it is not for
me to express a view. It is for the people of Cambodia, I hope,
to choose their government without outside interference. I will
read what I said in Peking at the press conference in answer
to your question on this subject:
While I was in Peking where Prince Sihanouk resides, I
welcomed the opportunity to have an exchange of views
with him. He is the acknowledge spokesman of GRUNK AND FUNK.
He is the only representative of either who is known to
me or to the ambassador or to Australians in general.
It was a valuable opportunity to hear at first hand his
views on the situation in his country and in the region.
I was asked: " It doesn't suggest any change in our
recognition of the present Lon Nol Government". I answered:
" No, as long as the Lon Nol Government is in possession
of the capital of Cambodia and is ' in the United Nations
the present Australian attitude towards it will continue."
I was asked: " How are we voting in the United Nations".
I answered: " We have been abstaining on the procedural
issues." I was asked: " Will we continue to abstain?"
I answered: " When the question of the seating of the
Government arises, we will vote for that Government with
which we have relations but we-are abstaining on the
procedural matters. We did not oppose the inscription
of the item. our concern in Cambodia is that the people
of Cambodia should have a government of their own wish.
We will do all we can to put an end to the hostilities
and to deter any supplies from outside. It is the only
part of Indo-China where there has not yet been a ceasefire
or an agreement or an accord. This is all the more
deplorable since, for so many years, from the Geneva accords
of 1954 until the invasion of Cambodia by and from South
Vietnam in March 1970, Cambodia had enjoyed an undiminished
peaceful identity."
There was one specific question you asked me about military
and economic aid. The military aid ceased last year within a
couple of weeks of our coming to office, as it did throughout
Indo-China. The economic aid, in the sense of support for the
currency, will end at the end of this year. Colombo Plan aid
continues, and will.
QUESTION: May I take your mind of f foreign affairs? The Senate
has rejected, unacceptably amended or unreasonably delayed items of
important Government legislation. The prospects are that it will
deal in a similar fashion with the National Health Scheme or the
Schools Commission. In this sense, the Senate is preventing your
government from implementing important matters which you pledged
in your policy speech. How long can your Government tolerate a
hostile Senate, and what do you propose to do about it? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: I won't put our opponents out of the position
where they have to wonder about this. The situation has arisen,
as you know, that whenever we like we can have a double dissolution.
The objectionable feature of the Australian constitution and of
most of the State Constitutions it has never been applied in
Australia is that the Upper House can send the Lower House to
the people without going to the people itself. The Upper House
in the Australian National Parliament can do that twice a year.
It can do it before the end of November when the Budget for the
financial year has to be passed; it can do it before the end of
June when the interim supply up until the end of November has to
be provided. I can do that at any time. If it does it, it will
go to the people not only the House of Representatives. That
position is available to the Australian Government.
QUESTION: On page three of your stat-ement,-you said in illustrating
your foreign policy, that you start with the basic thesis that
the crucial factor governing the well-being. of the West Pacific
region is the relations between China, Japan and the* United States.
There is another great power, sir, which has a. . coastline in this
particular area, the Soviet Union. It also has a great deal of
shipping in the Indian ocean region tand in * the North West Pacific.
To what extent do you take the role of the Soviet Union into
account in this basic premise of yours, and whet role do you think
Australia should and does have vis-a-vis the Soviet Union?
PRIME MINISTER: I' am speaking of the passage you quote about
the relationship between Australia and Japan. It is there that
Australia can help very greatly in relationships between Japan
and China and between Japan and the United States. When we were
there over two years ago, relations between Japan and China were
almost-as bad they were between China and America and China
and the Soviet Union. Also, in the interim, relations,
particularly on economic matters, Australia's relationship with
Japan can help relationships between all these three. Australia
does not have the same leverage or influence with the Soviet Union
as it has with Japan or as it has with the United States. However,
there is the situation that a detente to a considerable extent has
been established between the United States and the Soviet Union.
It might have been badly shaken by the Middle East war but it seems
to have been restored. The centre of Soviet power and influence
is not in the Pacific. Obviously, the centre of Chinese and
Japanese influence is in the Pacific. The fact that Russian
shipping of both naval and maritime kinds is to be found in tc
Pacific and in the Indian Oceans is a completely natural and
expected development because the Soviet Union is the second largost
economic force in the world.
QUESTION: Why did you feel it necessary to st: lc own -as Foreig4n
Minisc'-er. Do you regret the decision? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: The answer to the second one is yes. Of course,
I would have liked to have been Foreign Minister; I have been
the greatest that they have had in the last generation! The fact
is that it is not just the paper-work that takes up your time,
which is what people usually say; it is the number of calls that
one has to receive. Quite frankly, if you look at the number of
visitors coming to Australia -many times as numerous as has
happened in any previous year -it is just beyond me to receive
as Foreign Minister the number of foreign ministers who call.
Senator Willesee was doing an immesne amount of this work but
QUESTION: May I clarify what appears to be some ambiguity in your
central statement in Tokyo concerning foreign investment in our
energy resources, mentioned by Mr Barron uranium, oil, gas and
coal? You spoke of the possible need for more foreign money
for exploration. Will foreign capital be permitted to explore all
those energy resources in Australia and-* if they find these energy
resources in Australia will they be permitted to own and develop
them? PRIME MINISTER: It may be necessary or desirable to have overseas
interests participating. It largely depends on the cost or the
skill of finding resources. We don't really need much assistance
from outside to discover uranium or black coal resources. We
obviously could not by ourselves have found all the oil or
natural gas resources. This much is clear: that whatever
participation there may be required, permitted or desired in
exploration, there will be Australian control in the exploitation,
the development; and that is understood. I wish those who so
easily fall for handouts from public relations people in Australia
or from some companies in Japan would face up to the fact that the
Japanese have wondered why we have taken so long to do in our
country what they long ago always, in fact had determined to
do in their own.
QUESTION: In the areas where the Commonwealth, quite clearly,
asserts control, in the Northern Territory in the off-shore oil
region, when these leases expire, is the Labor Government going
to impose conditions that those who tender for it will have to be
Australian owned? In other words, where you do have unquestionable
control, are you going to insist upon, at this stage, 100 per cent
Australian control and ownership of exploration of our energy
resources? PRIME MINISTER: I don't think I need add anything to what I said
in Japan, handed out there and tabled in the Parliament yesterday.
QUESTION: The indications are that your Government has suffered
a severe drop in support since the election. Do you accept that
this has happened? If so, how do you account for it and what
are you going to do about it? 
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there has been some drop in our support. If
there is an election, whenever it is, we will regain it. Anybody
reading or listening to the censure motion a couple of weeks ago
will see my grounds for optimism and assertion in that respect.
QUESTION: It would not have escaped your attention, sir, that
Mr Barton has offered you membership of the Australia Party. Have
you got any observations on this? Also, can you confirm or deny
the very strong and persistent rumours that the Liberal Party has
also offered several of its leading members membership of the
Australia Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I have to answer no to both of those questions.
QUESTION: Did you discuss in Peking with ei -ther Mao Tsetung
or Chou En-lai the question of Sino-Indian relations?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: What were the discussions -what was the'-tenor of
the discussions?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to go into any detail about what
was said there. It was a general course of informing each other
of our respective attitudes over recent years and at the present
time but I don't feel free to go into any further detail on such
matters. I think we discussed every country in Asia except, thinking
over it, Iraq.
QUESTION: Can you explain why you see a need to have a senior
party official on the staff of the Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I need and welcome the best men to work for
me that I can get. I believe I have got them.
QUESTION: Your joint communique issued after your talks in
Peking suggested that Australia and China regarded all nations,
small and big, as equal and respected their rights to maintain
their territorial integrity. Well, with your Middle East policy,
one could be forgiven perhaps for believing that some nations
are more equal than others, particularly if they have oil. Do you
regard that as a fair interpretation?
PRIME MINISTER: It is not a fair interpretation, and I wouldn't
have believed that anybody covering the scene in the Australian
capital could hold that view. The Australian Government has been
neutral in the Middle East, and preceding Australian Governments
were neutral too. I am not reflecting on McMahon, Gorton, Holt
or Menzies because they were all neutral their Governments also.
The Australian Government has maintained the policy, traditional
in Australia, of neutrality in the Middle East dispute. Wc. were
in a position to be of particular effect because the Australian
ambassador to the United Nations was in the chair -in thie Security
Council during the crucial month of October an ' d I i,-) ald like to pay
tribute to him for what he did, because the final solutior, it
will be remembered, came from the non-permanent members of the
Security Council and he was instrumental very largely in bringing
about that solution. 
-6-
QUESTION: Were any of the United States bases in Australia at
North West Cape, Pine Gap or Woomera put on a normal alert prior
to the general American alert of its overseas bases? If so, were
you told and when were you told? Secondly, when all the American
overseas bases were put on a higher level than normal alert, when
were you told and was it before the NATO partners were told?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know if they were put on alert. I wasn't
told. I believe the announcement was for domestic American
consumption.
QUESTION: Both Bob Hawke and Dr Coombs have suggested that an
increase in direct taxation would help curb inflation. Are you
considering this, and do you regret that you made an election
promise that you wouldn't increase taxation?
PRIME MINISTER: I will not be drawn on-. making promises, yes or
no., on any fiscal matters. Dr Coombs, as is'well-known, did
suggest an increase in taxation as a means of curbing inflation
as far back as June or July. His advice was not accepted.
Mr Hawke's advice was not sought; it will not. be sought.
The Government makes up its mind on this matter. The President
of the Federal Executive of the Labor Party does not determine
such matters; he is not consulted in such matters; he doesn't
speak for the party on such matters; I doubt if on this matter
he speaks on behalf of the trade union movement.
QUESTION: Can you tell me why you have offered a post on your
personal staff to the former Federal secretary of your party,
Mr Mick Young?
PRIME MINISTER: I answered a previous question on this. I said
that I want on my staff, working with me, the best people available
in Australia, and I believe I have them. The combination of
Young and Whitlam was superb, and it will continue to be.
QUESTION: Many people would think it was unfortunate that you
used the term " final solution" in relation to what the United NationE
was doing. I wondered if you could say something more about what
you claim is a neutral policy. Firstly, why is it necessary for
you to so carefully refuse to condemn what was quite clearly the
Arab initiation of warfare on Israel? Secondly, I wonder if you
would answer a question about whether Australia had urged the
U~ nited States not to re-supply the Israelis with arms and
equipment when the Russians were re-supplying their allies there?
And, finally, could you tell us whether you raised with the Chinese
the question of their wholehearted support for the Palestinian
terrorist movement by way of propaganda, training and armaments? 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I discussed the question of the Middle East
in Peking. You have been told that that was so; I was asked a
question in Parliament about it yesterday. The attitude of the
Australian and the Chinese Governments is known and it is unchanged.
It was discussed; it is unchanged in each case. Now it is quite
spurious than one can come to any sound view or one can produce
any solution to the disputes in the Middle East by looking at
any one particular date. The fact is there is a situation which
has continued there for quarter of a century and there are certain
features of it which have to be solved if it is to end. One is
the question of recognition of the existence, the sovereignty,
of Israel.. One is the question of the occupation of Arab
territories by Israel. And the one which people mention least
is the Palestinian problem not just the question of Palestinian
terrorism, but of people who lived in what used to. be called
Palestine and no longer live there.
QUESTION: What about the other questions I asked you?
PRIME MINISTER: The attitude of the Australian Government was
made known before I went to Japan and China on this. I said at
question time there that there should not be supplies from
outside and that applies to both. The war would never have broken
out, it would never have continued, but for supplies from outsideby
the Soviet Union and the United States; and they both recovered
their sanity in time to save us all.
QUESTION: Some months ago you said you did not believe that the
Watergate scandal could happen in Australia, referring to the
fact that the Executive was answerable to the Parliament. Do
you believe that the machinery for mid-term elections under
parliamentary democracy would prevent such events happening in
Australia? PRIME MINISTER: I frankly don't see the link between the statement
I made some time ago and the position that you are now putting.
I don't see the link between them. What I was referring to some
months ago was the fact that I believe that the situation in
America, whereby the Head of State and of government is isolated
from the legislature and very often from the press and gatherings
like this, means that that head doesn't discern trends in public
opinion in time. I am under no illusions that questions that
you gentlemen and ladies ask me are your own inspirations, created
in isolation. It's very useful for me to know what you have in
mind. It warns me of things in time. I believe there are virtues
in the British system which save us from a position such as the
Watergate scandal.
QUESTION: Yesterday a Senate Committee was very critical of the
operations and limitations of the Government's much-vaunted Prices
Justification Tribunal. Could you tell us whether you intend to
take any action to overcome these criticisms and to make the
tribunal more effective? 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't read the Senate report on this matter.
There have been some criticisms made of the Prices Justification
Tribunal; I don't believe they are justified. I believe the
appointments we have made to the Prices Justification Tribunal,
Mr Justice Williams, President Chambers and the lay members, have
been excellent appointments and I believe the tribunal is developing
procedures which are of very great benefit to the Australian people.
There have already been many price rises projected or sought which
have then been abandoned because of the existence of this tribunal.
I admire the way the tribunal is carrying out its functions. I see
at this stage no reason at all why its statute should be altered.
If however, it is in any way defined, then, with the powers I
expect to get on 8 December we will reinforce the act so as to
buttress the tribunal. It is a very fine tribunal indeed. It
deserves our support and the support of the Australian people. We
are all very much better off because of its operations, already.
After all, it has only operated for four months; it has already
had a very salutary effect indeed.
QUESTION: You have visited almost every important capital in the
world except Moscow. Do you feel in view of the sensitivity of
relations between China and the Soviet Union, Soviet leaders might
feel justified in believing they have been left out in the cold
by the warmth of your welcome in Peking? Do you have any plans
to visit Moscow?
PRIME MINISTER: It has been brought home to me that the Soviet
Government does have some feeling that they are being neglected.
There are limitations even on the most active head of government.
I was asked earlier whether I would be visiting Europe. The capital
of the Soviet is in Europe; I expect to be visiting it together
with several otier European capital3 in the date mentioned in the
o;. o Jout next June. Perhaps it would be useful to
in-tor . tiir for you the pattern of the visits I have made this
_ ecar. T., e y Iargely dictated by geographic propinquity
or by particuJar events to which Australia would be expected to
subscribe. I first went to New Zealand; I then went to New Guinea
dnd Indonesia; I then went to the South Pacific Forum and for
various constitutional reasons to Westminster and Windsor, and
to keep the ecclesiastical balance to be completely ecumenical
I visited Rome, and on the Orthodox Good Friday, Rhodes. Then
North America because there was the Commonwealth Heads of Gcvernmen'
Meeting in Ottawa. Before that I visited Mexico the first Latin
American country ever visited by an Australian Prime Minister and
Washington and New York. I should have mentioned India just
before that. Then Japan and China. It will be seen, I believe,
that there has been regard paid to priorities of geography and
traditional associations.
QUESTION: You were reported to have sid th.-t the Chinem crow-d
that spontaneously greeted you on your arrival in Peking reacted
with rapture to the strains of Waltzing Matiidno I wonder 0. et: er
you would consider extending the sample of inii. o 1 that tho -' ria
of Census and Statistics is going to take out ' n lke Art-an
population on our National Anthem to Po-ing,. o \. hther
personally favour Advance Australia Fair? 
-9-
PRIME MINISTER: I'm only one voter in this respect. I doubt
whether I will be among the 60,000 polled in February by the
Statistician on the matter. I find it very difficult to make up
my mind between Advance Australia Fair and Waltzing Matilda.
Waltzing Matilda I would think is very much the more exciting tune
but a very great number of people seem to be worried by the words.
I don't think they understood them in China, although realising
the economic and ideological basis of the words, it would probably
have been even more rapturously received. Many people think it is
quite indecent in fact, subversive to have a song. with words
such as Waltzing Matilda. There apparently are people who, whenever
they hear God Save the Queen played, decide to sing it. Anthems
are mainly for t1e music alone, not the words, and it is possible
to create other words. There are lots of different words for
God Save the Queen, the Americans have one set and the Hohenzollerns
used to have another set; and it is the same tune.' Now what I'
said in China in the House yesterday -about Waltzing Matilda
being more rapturously received than Advance Australia Fair may be
due to one or other of two factors. The one is that when Advance
Australia Fair was played in Peking, we all stood to attention;
it would have been unseemly to cheer. That-broke out immediately
the tune finished it might have been for the tune or it might
have been for the Premier and Prime Minister. Trhe other reason
may be, of course, that when Waltzing Matilda was played in the
Great Hall of the People there were equal numbers of Chinese and
Australians present. I couldn't discern which section was more
rapturous. QUESTION: Accepting that you want the best people working for
you and accep,,; ng that you believe you have them, could I ask
you specifically what will Mr Young's role be when the brilliant
' Yt-. r-Young :~~ esi: is re cons tituted? Could you tell us
lm~ y what job will be, what his title will be, what his
u~ ary wiill hu ~ fyou can) nd, what you hope to see him achieve?
you see him as the miracle w-. orker who will recover that lost
popularity? PRIME MINISTER: I don't know how to describe the role that
Mick Young performed last year and the year before he did it
thiough. I don't know how I will describe his role from now on
but he will perform similarly " superbly" was'the word I used,
not " brilliantly".
MR OAKES: It was my word.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I will accept it if you say it is your
word, but I'm too modest to apply words like that to myself and my
closest partner. It was a great combination the best in Australia
political history for the last quarter of a century and I believe
it will prove a similarly superb combination unt'll the next House
of Representatives election when, I expe. 2t, Nick Young will bc
a Member of Parliament and, I hope, a inister. 
QUESTION: At any time did you invite either Chairman Mao or
Premier Chou En-lai to visit Australia and, if so, did either
of them accept it?
PRIME MINISTER: I answered this question in Peking and I suppose
I could read it out to you but the gist of it is this: Premier
Chou En-lai knows quite well that he would be very welcome in
Australia as he would be in any country in the world. I think
there are over a hundred pending invitations. Our invitation,
of course, is less than a year old he wouldn't have been
invited before that. But other people got in ahead. There are
some office holders in the world who can't reasonably be expected
to accept all the invitations extended to them. It's no courtesy
to press an invitation, say, on a President of the United States
or the Premier of the People's Republic of . China. They can't
be expected to accept those invitations. They would, obviously,
in each case, be very welcome. There will be visits each way
by ministers, and senior officials between China and Australia.
We have overcome those inhibitions of the last twenty-three years
that lost generation. At last, relations between Australia and
China are as warm as they should have been throughout.
QUESTION: Did you get the impression in China that the Chinese
attitude was " You come to us, we won't go to you"?
PRIME MINISTER: Not in the least. As a matter of fact, it was
a Chinese minister who visited us before an Australian minister
visited China, and there will be just as many visits each way.
The Chinese are courteous people. This is not a matter of
ideology; it is a matter of historic habit and they don't
patronize other people. k* 



If~ fak AFFAIRS FM S
M/ 166 UATIfE 8 November 1973
PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE. PEKING
Below is the transcript of the Prime Minister,
Mr Whitlam's press conference held in Peking, China, on
4 November, 1973.
.4 .1
0 Qi~ PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: You already have the
Joint Press Communique. There is one thing I can add to it.
Following the dinner the Australian delegation gave to the
Premier and the Chinese side last night, there will be discussions
about a Treaty of Nationality between the two governments. There
are two other things I should say about the questions which I will
invite you to put to me. One is, I gather it is the custom of
this country for guests not to purport to state the policies or
views of the host. Secondly, it is the custom not to detail
conversations which the Chairman has with visitors. The subjects
of the conversations have already been given to you. There is
one matter of particular importance which my colleague,
Dr Patterson, could announce to you at this stage.
DR PATTERSON: Mr Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen: As you
know Mr Crean and I have had discussions with several ministries
over the last few days. And one of the very important and
substantial matters which has been now finalised is that the
Chinese Government has agreed to purchase very large quantities
of sugar from Australia within the provisions of a long-term sugar
agreement with Australia. Quantities involved are in the vicinity
of 300,000 tons of sugar per year. The initial agreement will be
three to five years duration. Details will be the subject of
further discussions between the Australian Sugar Industry and the
China National Cereals Oil and Foodstuffs Import and Export
Corporation and the governments of China and Australia. For
some time the industry in Australia, the sugar industry in
Australia, has been anxious for China to install specialised modern
; 6k 
-2-
bulk handling facilities for the importation of sugar large
quantities of sugar and the Chinese Government is making
arrangements to install specialised modern bulk receiving
facilities for raw sugar as well as some other commodities.
Also, the Chinese Government is making arrangements to send a
team of technical people to Australia to study and inspect
Australia's bulk handling facilities which are amongst the most
modern in the world. I might say gentlemen that this agreement
will be of tremendous importance to Australia. lt is the
culmination of a series of discussions which commenced when
Mr Whitlam first came to China in 1971. We have carried it on
carried those discussions on a number of ways since that time
and the sugar industry in Australia through the C. S. R. company
who are the agents have also continued those discussions.
PRIME MINISTER: N'lay I repeat the significance of the concluding
remarks that Dr Patterson made. He inaugurated these discussions
in July 1971. They have come to a successful conclusion on his
return visit. Are there any questions to Mr Crean, Dr Patterson
or me'?
Q. Prime Minister, can I ask Dr Patterson a question?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
Q. Can you place any estimate, any value, on this agreement
with China?
DR PATTERSON: The details, as I mentioned, will be worked out
in discussions between the industry, the two industry
representatives, and the Governments. But, naturally, they will
be related to world prices. World prices at the present time
are $ 150 Australian per ton so it will be, if you take present
world prices, it is a figure somewhere around 850 million per year
over a three to five year period. But it could be, of course,
that long-term negotiations as with the Commonwealth Sugar
Agreement, that the long-term price will be a fair price to both
countries not necessarily a high price. That is it will be a fair
price, a negotiated price, as has been the practice in the
long-term sugar agreement between Australia and the Commonwealth
Sugar Agreement with Britain which, as you know, expires at the 
-3-
end of next year.
Q. Prime Minister, may I ask a question? Vie understand, while
cin Peking, you lodged a protest to the Chinese Government about
the nuclear testing in the atmosphere. Can you give us the terms
of that protest and indicate the response of the Chinese Government?
PRIME MINISTER: This subject was raised in the conversation with
Chairman Mao. As I said, details of such conversations are not
disclosed. The approach that the Australian Government has made
on this matter is well known. I reiterated it.
Q. That's with Chairman Mao. What about with the Premier? Does
the same answer apply?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. He was there. The Premier was there in the
talks with the Chairman, as also was the Assistant Foreign Minister.
Q. Was the question raised in the other talks.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
Q. Prime Minister, could you be a bit more explicit on the
Treaty of Nationality which you referred to in your opening
remarks? PRIME MINISTER: There is very little more I can say at this
Sstage. It covers the general question of what nationality people
6elong to irrespective of or dependent on their ancestry. And
there has been a confusion up until now about the doctrine of dual
nationality as asserted in respect to persons of Chinese ancestry
Ioverseas. The confusion has been largely due to the fact that
the Kuomintang Government, the Chiang Kai-shek regime always
asserted that persons of Chinese ancestry abroad remained
Chinese citizens. This is not an attitude that the Government
of the People's Republic has ever taken.
Q. The question of the Middle East. Premier Chcu raised this
Oy in private discussion with you. Did he say what he thought of
the Australian attitude of neutrality in the Middle East?
PRIME MINISTER: First question, yes. Second question, no.
We discussed the Middle East question as, I suppose, I can say we
discussed practically every matter anywhere in Asia. We stated 
-4-
our respective positions. There was no suggestion by the
Premier that Australia' s attitude should change. I heard his
attitude, he heard mine. It was one of the matters upon which
we differed.
Q. Prime Minister, did you discuss defence and, if so, can
p T you outline to us your own defence projects for the region?
PRIMVE MINISTER: We didn't discuss the question of defence at all.
The other subject, I think, is rather too wide to take up here.
Q. As a result of your talks do you feel there is any role for
SAustralia in helping to improve relations between China and the
five important South-East Asian countries in their relations with
Australia? PRIME MINISTER: I believe the example of the fruitful relations
between China and Australia will be reassuring to the ASEAN
nations. Q. Did Premier Chou repeat the request 1 believe he made to
Overseas Trade Minister, Dr Cairns a request that Australia
might be able to explain to these countries in South-East Asia
which don't at the moment recognise China, explain to them the
Chinese point of view particularly on the question of overseas
Chinese and the nationality question. Did he ask you to pass on
any messages?
PRIME MINISTER: No. However, I heard his views on all these
matters, so naturally when I discuss any such matters with the
ASEAN countries I would have in my mind the view of the Chinese
Government as I heard it directly from the Premier. But the
Premier certainly didn't seek for Australia a role of apologist
or intermediary in any way. I was very happy to hear his views
on all these matters, and he seemed interested in hearing my
views my government's views on such matters.
Q. Did Premier Chou ask you to explain the Australian position
QO on the Five Power Arrangements?
PRIME MINISTER: There wa s scarcel y any mention of -this. It was
mentioned but very briefly. 
Q. While you said Premier Chou did not ask you to become an
intermediary link with South-East Asian countries, is it your
intention to try to explain to them the Chinese view or is it just
a matter of if they raise it? Are you going to specifically go
out to try to explain China's position in the ASEA1i countries?
i'RIIEh MINISTER: I have said again and again that the Australian
Government doesn't seek or purport to be an advocate or apologist
for any other government including the Chinese Government. Very
clearly, however, in having discussions with any of the AflEAN
countries, and there will be such discussions in Australia within
the next couple of weeks and there will be in all of them within
three months. In their countries this subject would be
discussed. It would be a pretty empty discussion if such matters
were not discussed. I expect it would be discussed. The
discussion as far as I am concerned will be all the more relevant
in the light of the discussions I have had in Peking.
Q. You will feel. free to pass on Premier Chou's explanation
of the Chinese attitude?
PRINE MNITSTER: I will certainly explain the position as I
understand it. But it is not a question of passing on any
messages or views, that was not sought, and it was not
volunteered. I don't think you would expect it to be sought
or volunteered. The great advantage of talks in depth and at
length that we have been able to have this week is that there has
bc-, en an opportunity of getting a very thorough understanding of
all relevant matters.
Q. ~ eunderstand you have issued an invitation to Premier Chou
Ito come to Australia. L'as there any indication from him whether
e S~ ewould accept?
PRIME MINISTERt: The Premior knows that he would be very welcome
to the Australian people and the Australian Government. I think,
however, one must accept that there are some office bearers in
the world to whom it would be an embarrassment to press an
invitation. A man who is Premier of China or is President of
the United States cannot be expected to accept a fraction of the
t}
S 0 
-6-
invitations that he receives. There are already scores of
invitations on the Premier's plate. Obviously we would be very
happy to receive a visit from him, but it is not really courteous
to press such invitations. There will be, I would expect, quite
regular interchanges of visits between Ministers and officials or
our two governments. The great thing that has been achieved this
week is that a generation of lost contact between our two peoples
has been successfully brought to an end. We can now communicate,
in Australia, in China, between ministers and officials and
people of the two countries without any inhibitions. The lost
generation is now buried.
Q. Did you raise your idea of a regional forum and, if so, what
was the Chinese reaction?~
PRIME MINISTEF: The general idea is welcomed. Clearly, however,
it takes a little time to create such an arrangement or framework
where you still have some confusion about diplomatic relations
between countries in this region of the Western Pacific or
South-East Asia. I notice I have had a few questions but very
few questioners.
Q. Dr Patterson, about the Sugar Agreement. Will the Sugar
Agreement have a cushioning effect on the Australian Sugar
industry at the time of the ending of the Commonwealth Sugar
Agreement? DR PATTERSON: As you know, the British Commonwealth Sugar
Agreement is due to expire at the end of next year. It is the
stated intention of the British Government to phase out the
335,000 long tons which Australia sells to Britain and has sold
for a long number of years. It is hoped that that phasing out
period will be around three years. The effect of the proposed
long-term agreement between China and Australia will naturally
be well received because in the event of the loss of this
British market occurring suddenly then we would be able to phase
in the new or proposed agreement. You can see the significance
of it because it will be bigger than the United States quota
for Australia under the United States Sugar Act and the
C( c
0 
-7-
magnitude of this agreement can be guaged by the fact that the
biggest bilateral or special arrangement between Australia and
any other nation.
Q. Do you regard the Chinese Government's willingness to allow
Chinese nationals to migrate to Australia as a concession?
PRIME MINISTER: There were no arrangements hitherto, so we now
have the position where there can now be family reunion with China
as already with many other countries. You remember that this
4D~ matter was raised in the Parliament a fortnight ago by Mr Martin
Nicholls.
oc Q. How do you see the future relations between Australia and
China as a result of this visit?'
Cl PRIME MINISTER: VV'e can now expect that there will be direct and
substantial relations between China and Australia as there should
be between countries of our respective significance in this
region or, indeed, in the world. It has been a very great gap
in the relations of each country that there were no direct
relations between both of them. The fruitful relations between
China and Australia will make for fruitful relations between
China and many other countries in the region and between Australia
and many other countries in the region. It is a good rational
friendly breakthrough.
cQy Q. Could you tell us something about how the results of your
recent visit to Japan last week were appreciated here in China?
PRIME MINISTER: The significance of Japan's and Australia's
relations were well appreciated because of the sheer magnitude
of the trade between the two of us. It was understood, I think,
that Australia sold more to Japan than to any other country and
Japan sells more to Australia than to any country other than the
United States. It was accepted, therefore that relations between
Japan and Australia must become very close indeed.
Q. You said that the Middle East was one area of disagreement
between the two governments and nuclear testing was obviously
another. Can you tell us the other areas on which you disagree?
PRIME MINISTER: Bangladesh, Korea. 
-8-
Q. During your visit here I understand you met Prince Sihanouk,
the head at' the Cambodian Government in exile. Can you tell us
the purpose arnd the outcome of that discussion?
PRIPM MINISTER: While I was in Peking where Prince Sihanouk
Sresides, I welcomed the opportunity to have an exchange of views
with him. He is the acknowledged spokesman of GRUNK and FUNK.
He is the only representative of either who is known to me or to
the ambassador or to Australians in general. It was a valuable
c7~ opportunity to hear at first hand his views on the situation
in his country and in the region.
Q. It doesn't suggest any change in our recognition of the
present Lon Nol Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No, as long as the Lon Nol Government is in
possession of the capital of Cambodia and is in the United Nations
the present Australian attitude towards it will continue.
Q. How are we voting in the United Nations?
PRIME MlNISTER: We have been abstaining on the procedural issues.
Q. Will we continue to abstain?
X' PRIME MINISTER: When the question of the seating of the
Government arises wve will vote for that Government with which
we have relations. But we are abstaining on the procedural
matters. We did not oppose the inscription of the item. Our
concern in Cambodia is that the people of Cambodia should have a
government of their wish. W'e will do all we can to put an end to
the hostilities and to deter any supplies from outside. It is the
only part of Indo-China where there has not yet been a ceasefire
or an agreement or an accord. This is all the more deplorable
since, for so many years, from the Geneva accords of 1954 until
the invasion of Cambodia by and from South Viet-nam in March 1970
' Cambodia had enjoyed an undiminished peaceful identity.
Q. Mr Crean, did you have the opportunity of discussing the
world inflationary situation with the Chinese?
MCREAN: Yes. Mline have been more in the nature of watching
briefs during these procedures and the Chinese assure us they 
-9-
have not got the problem of inflation, but I think they have got
a lot of problems on their plate that I would not like to have.
Q. Did you discuss the question of territorial waters?
PRITE MINISTER: No, we didn't. This is a matter though that the
officials may well have discussed. It is obviously a matter of
very great interest to our two countries. But the Premier and I
didn't discuss it. I believe the interest which we each have are
well understood at the official level. Our ambassador has had
discussions on this matter already.
We have found this a most pleasant visit indeed and the
ambassador, who is in residence here, and all the Australian
officials have enjoyed very much the co-operation of the
Chinese authorities, I believe our visit has been all the more
pleasant and fruitful because we now have such an eminent
ambassador in residence here,. 



EMBARGO: 9.00 P. Ml.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. EG, WHITLAM, MP,,
AT THE LORD MAYOR'S BANQUET, MELBOURNE TOWN HALL,
FRIDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 1973
IT IS JUST ONE WEEK SINCE I WAS SPEAKING AT A BANQUET
IN THE GREAT HALL OF THE PEOPLE IN PEKING, Now I AM IN THE GREAT
HALL OF THE PEOPLE IN MELBOURNE. I ASSURE YOU I FEEL PERFECTLY
AT HOME IN BOTH THESE GREAT SEATS OF POWER, AMONG THE REPRESENTATIVES
OF THESE TWO POWERFUL RULING ELITES. ONE FINDS THE SAME WARMING
INFLUENCES OF FOOD AND WINE TO BRIDGE THE GREAT GAP IN IDEOLOGY.
ONE FINDS IN PEKING, IN MELBOURNE, THE SAME PERMANENCE, THE SAME
SOLIDARITY, THE SAME SELF-CONFIDENCE WHICH CHARACTERISES ALL GREAT
ESTABLISHMENTS. THE MANDARINS OF MELBOURNE ARE AT LEAST AS FAMOUS
AS THOSE OF PEKING. AND ONE INDEED FEELS SOMETHING OF AN
INTERLOPER, A MERE PRIME MINISTER AND ONE FROM SYDNEY AT THAT.
I COULDN'T HELP BUT FEEL, LAST YEAR, AS I SAT LISTENING TO MY
DISTINGUISHED PREDECESSOR, THAT A PRIME MINISTER FROM SYDNEY EVEN
A CONSERVATIVE ONE WAS NOT EXACTLY TAKEN TO THE HEARTS OF THE
MEMBERS OF THE MELBOURNE ESTABLISHMENT. ONE IS MADE VERY AWARE
PRIME MINISTERS COME AND PRIME MINISTERS GO BUT YOU GO ON FOREVER.
NEVERTHELESS, THERE HAS BEEN SINCE YOUR LAST BANQUET
A CHANGE IN AUSTRALIA'S GOVERNMENT. As I LOOK AROUND, I SEE HOW
MANFULLY YOU ARE BEARING UP UNDER THE WHIPS AND ARROWS OF OUTRAGEOUS
FORTUNE WHICH HAS PLACED THE SOCIALISTS IN CANBERRA. I MIGHT EVEN
SAY YOU LOOK AMAZINGLY PROSPEROUS AND INDEED IF I CAN BELIEVE THE
FINANCIAL PAGES AND THE ADVERTISING PAGES OF THE GREAT MELBOURI\ E
DAILIES, MOST OF YOU ARE, AND I CAN TELL YOU WITH ABSOLUTE CONFIDENCE,
THAT YOU WILL REMAIN SO AS LONG AS I REMAIN PRIME MINISTER, I DON'T
REALLY THINK ITS DIFFICULT TO LEARN TO LIVE WITH EACH OTHER, AND I
THINK YOU MIGHT EVEN COME TO ENJOY IT. 
-2-
I FOR INSTANCE, FIND I CAN LIVE WITH YOU PREMIER. I HAD
OCCASION TO SAY YESTERDAY IN REFERENCE TO MY HAVING GIVEN UP THE
FOREIGN AFFAIRS PORTFOLIO THIS WEEK THAT WE HAD GOT RIGHT THE GREAT
AREAS OF OUR INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES, WITH
JAPAN, WITH CHINA, WITH INDONESIA, INDEED, THE ONLY SIGNIFICANT
UNSETTLED AREA OF OUR DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH A HOSTILE POWER IS
THE GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND. BUT YOU PREMIER WILL EVEN COME TO
DINNER WITH ME. I KNOW HE HAS DIFFICULTY WITH SOME OF HIS
MINISTERS, BUT WHEN WE SPEAK TOGETHER, AND WHEN HIS MINISTERS SPEAK
WITH MINE, WE CAN WORK TOGETHER.
THE MOST IMPORTANT AREA OF CO-OPERATION CONCERNS THE
PLACES WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS, WHERE MOST VICTORIANS LIVE IN
THE CITIES AND CENTRES, AND IN THE AREA OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SO WELL
REPRESENiED HERE TONIGHT. WE HAVE THE BOLD SOCIAL EXPERIMENT IN
IMPROVING THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT AND OFFERING A GREATER CHOICE TO
THE PEOPLE OF VICTORIA AT ALBURY-WODONGA. WE ARE CO-OPERATING
WITH THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT, IN ITS OWN PLANS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF GEELONG AS A GROWTH CENTRE. THE PREPARATIONS ARE PROCEEDING
JOINTLY AND BOTH GOVERNMENTS HOPE WE WILL BE ABLE TO EASE THE
PROBLEM OF MELBOURNE GROWTH EARLY AND SUBSTANTIALLY, WE HAVE MADE
A GREAT DEAL OF MONEY AVAILABLE THIS YEAR FOR ACQUIRING STRATEGIC
AREAS OF LAND FOR URBAN RECREATION AND CONSERVATION AT W4ESTERN-PORT
BAY, THE MORNINGTON PENINSULA AND THE DANDENONG RANGES, WE ARE
CO-OPERATING IN ESTABLISHING A CONTINUING MAJOR PROGRAM TO RETARD
THE RISE IN RESIDENTIAL LAND PRICES IN MELBOURNE. WHEN THE
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY WE HAVE ESTABLISHED ON THE ' ATIONAL ESTATE
REPORTS, WE CONTEMPLATE IMMEDIATE ACTION IN CONSULTATION WITH
VICTORIA TO FOLLOW UP IN VIGOROUS SUPPORT OF THE STATE'S NATIONAL
TRUST AND PRIVATE CONSERVATION ORGANISATIONS, 
4 -3-
DISCUSSIONS ARE NOW WELL ADVANCED WITH THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT
AND LOCAL COUNCILS ON SPENDING TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN
THE DEPRIVED WESTERN SECTORS OF MELBOURNE, LOCAL COUNCILS HAVE
BEEN ACTIVE IN FORMING AMONG57THEMSELVES A ', ESTERN ; REGIONS COMMISSION.
11E ARE ALSO WORKING WITH THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT ON A'JOINT
STUDY ON THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR THE PROVISION
OF LOCAL SERVICES ON. A STATE-WIDE BASIS. I PERHAPS SHOULDN'IT
MENTION SO INDELICATE A SUBJECT HERE BUT WE ARE WELL ADVANCED IN
REACHING OUR GOAL OF OVERCOMING THE BACKLOG IN SEWERAGE BY 1980.
IREMEMBER WHEN I FIRST HAD THE TEMERITY TO RAISE. THIS AS A NATIONAL
ISSUE, JOHN GORTON SAID I SOUNDED LIKE A jIAYOR OR A-SHIRE PRESIDENT
RATHER THAN A NATIONAL LEADER. IDON'T KNOW IF I WAS MEANT TO BE
INSULTED, BUT I WASN'T. THE NEW GRANTS COMMISSION IS IN BEING
TO HELP MEET THE GROWING NEEDS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TO REDUCE
INEQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS,
SO THERE HAS BEEN THIS WIDE RANGE OF CO-OPERATION ON
URBAN AFFAIRS. WHAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO IS TO MOVE AWAY FROM THE
CONVENTIONAL IDEA THAT THE RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS ARE LIMITED TO THE FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIP
IN TERMS OF SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT BRINGS TO THE CONFERENCE TABLE MUCH MORE THAN ITS
CHEQUE BOOK. IT BRINGS NATIONAL ATTITUDES, A SENSE OF NATIONAL
OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES. IT BRINGS NATIONAL ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT
AND NATIONAL ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES, OF COURSE OUR TWO GOVERNMENTS
DON'T ALWAYS AGREE, BUT ALREADY IN THIS YEAR OF 1073 TII'-HAS BEEN
ESTABLISHED A NEW AND EFFECTIVE PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND
VICTORIA IN A CONCERTED THRUST TOWARDS SOLVING OR AT LEAST REDUCING
THE GREAT PROBLEMS OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT, SO CENTRAL TO THE WELLBEING
OF THE VAST MAJORITY OF OUR PEOPLE. 
-1t
I MIGHT JUST SAY THIS: ONE OF THE REASONS WHY MANY
PEOPLE, PERHAPS EVEN SOME OF YOU, FEEL DISCOMFITED BY THE PROCESS
OF CHANGE, IS JUST THAT FUNDAMENTAL FACT THAT THERE WAS NO CHANGE
FOR SO LONG, THAT THERE WAS NO CHANGE FOR 23 YEARS. IN THIS WE
WERE UNIQUE AMONG THE ENGLISH SPEAKING DEMOCRACIES. THERE HAD TO
BE CHANGE AND PROBABLY THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN MANY OF THE SAME CHANGES
MADE, PARTICULARLY ON MATTERS AFFECTING RESOURCES AND INVESTMENT
EVEN IF THE GOVERNMENT HAD NOT CHANGED LAST DECEMBER. THE SEEMING
STABILITY OF THE PAST WAS LARGELY ILLUSORY, ARTIFICIAL,
REFLECTING AN ESSENTIALLY ABNORMAL, THOUGH LONG ENDURING, POLITICAL
SITUATION. IT IS CHANGE WHICH IS NORMAL AND NATURAL IN
PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY. I THINK IF YOU ACCEPT THAT BASIC FACT,
YOU WILL FIND LIFE UNDER LABOR PREDICTABLE AND REFRESHING AND
IT MAY EVEN BE, AS I CERTAINLY FIND IT, EXCITING AND
EXHILARATING FOR US ALL AS AUSTRALIANS. 



THE SIR ROBERT GARRAN MEMORIAL ORATION
" AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT"
BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
CANBERRA, 12 7.4OVEMIBER, 1973
Let me say simply that it is a great honour to deliver the
Garran Memorial Oration in 1973, 14 years after my father delivered
the inaugural Oration. I know how deeply he felt honoured by the
invitation to inaugurate the series of lectures to honour his great
former chief. You will understand something of my feelings at this
moment when I use my father's words of 14 years ago to introduce the
1973 Oration. My father said this of Robert Garran:
" It was an exhilarating experience, for to me he was always
more than a high official, more than a skilled Parliamentary
Draftsman, more than an erudite constitutional lawyer, more
than a figure of social importance; to me, as to others,
he was a person of remarkable distinction.
" As a permanent head it was a real satisfaction and a pleasure
to discuss a problem with him. In the less complex matters,
so long as one was thoroughly prepared with the ascertainable
facts, and was able to present them concisely and in their
proper relation and proportion and indicate the contingencies
and this was what he would expect his conclusion was
unhesitating and decisive.
" In the more complex matters, where principles were involved
which required discussion, the discussion was free, subject only,
of course, to the limits of relevance; there was, on his part,
no restriction to orthodoxies or conventional thinking but a
hospitality to all ideas that might have a bearing on the problem
in hand, an enlightened weighing of pros and cons, and a firm
choice of the course to be pursued."
Those words well describe a great public servant, the
ideal public servant. They certainly described Sir Robert Garran.
It is more than perhaps filial loyalty which allows me to say that
they came aptly from their author. It is not without significance
in my own career, in my own attitude to the Public Service, to the
role of the Public Service, the duties and responsibilities of the
Public Service and to the role of Government, that I lived my boyhood
here in Canberra as the son of a great public servant among whose
colleagues were great public servants and that I am Autai'
first Prime iMinister with that particular background.
Sir Robert Garran's place in the annals of the Australian
nation is as unique as it is distinguished. 
-2-
The first ten years of his public career coincided with
and were inspired by Australia's march to nationhood, an event
in which he played an important, if secondary, role at the time,
as secretary to various committees promoting the federal movement.
Garran' s energy and creative genius were immediately
channelled into the establishment of the new nation. He was
appointed Secretary to the Attorney-General's Department, in whi h
office he served over a period of thirty-one years, and from 1910
held also the office of Solicitor-General.
A significant and lasting contribution by Sir Robert
Garran is, of course, to be found in The Annotated Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia, the authorship of which he shared
with Sir John Quick.
As one of his successors in the office of Solicitor-
General, the late Sir Kenneth Bailey, has written:-
" The work at once became a classic. Ever since, no careful
opinion on an Australian Constitutional point has been
written without seeing what " Quick and Garran" had to say
about it." Any of us who have studied the law or been involved in
public administration would, I think, agree with this view.
Garran saw the adoption of the Constitution not as an
end of a process, but as a beginning.
If Garran took justifiable pride in the work of the
Constitution, as the outcome of 10 years' work, and saw it as a
suitable basis for a national government, he nevertheless recognised
its inadequacies and saw that as time passed, as circumstances
changed, so it would be necessary for the Constitution itself to be
amended. In his posthumously published autobiography Sir Robert
remarked " that hitherto amendment of the Constitution has been
piecemeal and that something more systematic is now needed."
I shall not tonight be dealing very much with the
Constitution but I think it worth recalling the words of one who
had so much to do with its framing and its interpretation. It
is worth recalling that he had no illusions about the inadequacies
of the admittedly very great work in which he participated.
There has been a convention on the Constitution this year. There
are to be re ferendums to amend the Constitution next month. Last
week I introduced bills for three amendments and foreshadowed a
bill for a fourth amendment which will be put to the people next
year. I have to say, however, that given the experiences of the
Convention in Sydney in August, given the political difficulties
in attaining any amendment and the difficulties even of getting a
referendum for an amendment put to the people, then I have to
concede that the consummation of Sir Robert Garran's true, wise
and absolutely accurate remarks will be reached only with the
greatest difficulty. To balance that seeming pessimism, let me say
that a determined Government, a Government clear on what it wants to
do for Australia, can find means of living with the Constitution.
The Constitution imposes great limitatio ns but the Constitution is
not an alibi. 
Garran joined the Public Service in its infancy, along with
many other able men from all walks of life who were inspired by the
creation of the new nation.
He joined the service of Australia at a crucial time, for
public servants, as for politicians, at a time when the demands on
the creative capacities of all those engaged in nation-building
were very great. There are demands, similar in magnitude, pressing on us
today in the challenging environment of the Seventies.
Tonight I wish to speak principally about the role of the
Australian Public Service under a Labor administration, as that Labor
administration responds to the immense challenge imposed upon it
by the decision of the Australian people just under a year ago.
It is not always realised that Australia itself was in a unique
positio n in the English-speaking democracies. None of those other
democracies Great Britain, the United States, New Zealand, Canadahad
been for so long without a change of Government. In the United
States one would have to go back to the Republican hegemony of 24
years from the election of Lincoln to the election of Cleveland.
In Britain itself, from which we take both our Parliamentary system
and our civil service tradition, one has to go back to 1807
to the Tories under Liverpool, Canning and Wellington, from 1807
to 1832 to find a comparable period of unbroken rule by a single
party. That so ancient a parallel has been equalled only in some
of our Australian States may not be without its relevance.
However that may be, it should be recognised that our situation
when we came into government was unique in modern English-speaking
democracies, unique in the Australian National Parliament, unique
for an Australian National Government and unique for the Public
Service responsible to that Parliament and that Government. Yet
this change, unique in so many respects, coincided with and indeed
was largely created by, a desire for clear and rapid change on the
part of the Australian people. The demands upon Government,
upon administration, are greater than they have been at any time in
human history. All governments are expected to make changes and
deliver benefits with a precision and promptitude never before
expected or experienced in history. When a new government comes in
after so long an absence, those demands, those pressures are
accelerated and intensified.
I have sometimes quoted the complaint of Garran' s
co-worker and part-contemporary, Alfred Deakin, about " the
impossibility of governing with a reporter at one's elbow".
He had a lot to complain about at the same time he was complaining
he was, even as Prime Minister of Australia, the anonymous regular
correspondent and reporter for the London Morning Post. No television,
no tapes. Politicians are not so blessed today.' There can be no
doubt that in modern times the immediacy of the media itself is a
strong force generating change and sometimes irresistible pressures
for change by raising exceptionally high expectations about the
potential and performance of administrations. 
-4-
For any Government to measure up to these expectations
and to meet these pressures it was inevitable that there would be
changes in the administrative structure.
It is inevitable that political change will bring with
it administrative change in terms of modern politics. This is
not to say, at all, that our Public Service has to be politicallyorientated,
or motivated. It does not.
We as a Government were and are anxious to maintain the
fundamental tradition of a non-political Public Service in the true
sense. This is not to say that public servants will not be involved
in matters relating to politics, rather that their involvement will
be as loyal, as dedicated and as intense regardless of what
Government is in power.
Some doubtless were sceptical whether this tradition
could be maintained. Could the administrative machine that had
been controlled by our political opponents for 23 years respond
to a significant political change to a Government charged with
urgently needed reforms and impelled by a philosophy which involved
a shift from long-established positions?
No doubt the Public Service was equally anxious to see
whether we would be able to adjust effectively to the business of
government, how we would go about the task of governing.
But the significant political change does involve a shift
from long-established positions; it does require an administrative
response of a different order. It is not a difference of a political
order; the difference lies in the magnitude of the challenge.
Under this Labor Administration, the outstanding need
for change, restructuring and expansion arises from our particular
view of the role of the national government. We assert that the
national government has responsibility for a whole range of matters
which under previous Governments were deemed either to be the
responsibility of State Governments or the responsibility of no
government at all. This basic approach of ours was, I believe,
upheld by the people at the election. It is exactly one year ago
tomorrow since I delivered the Policy Speech which outlined our
program. In that speech I said:
" Before this campaign is out, I shall have completed
years as a member of Parliament. The basic foundations of
this speech lie in my very first speeches in the -Parliament,
because I have never wavered from my fundamental belief that
until the national government became involved in great matters
like schools and cities, this nation would never fulfil its
real capabilities."
And in the penultimate paragraph I said:
" We shall need the help and seek the help of the best Australians.
We shall rely of course on Australia's great Public Service, but
we shall seek and welcome the advice and co-operation from beyond
the confines of Canberra." 
These sentences do I believe encapsulate the course
that has been pursued by this Administration, in its program and
in choosing the men and women to carry out this program.
Administrative and Advisory Support for the Government
In opening the first session of Parliament on 27 February
the Governor-General said the Government saw the importance of
certain principles upon which we should base our program for
change. One of these principles was the need for Government to
have available machinery and advice to plan for the inevitable and
accelerating change now occurring in all modern communities.
The tradition of democracies based on the British model
is that elected governments have available to them a career
Public Service which is politically neutral and designed to give
administrative support and advice to whatever government may be
in office. But in addition, it has been practice to rely along
with the Service on other forms of support. One of the marks of
our first twelve months is the extension and deepening of that
kind of support to enable us to meet the challenges of office.
In broad terms, the system of support which we have
developed while in office is a blending of five elements
The Public Service, impartial, responsible
and professional
Task forces and Committees of enquiries, with
all or a large part of the membership consisting
of outside experts, highly competent in their
particular fields
Commissions and other continuing authorities,
drawing staff from inside and outside the
Service investigating and managing new areas
of Government initiatives
A new form of long term priorities advise a
" think-tank" which we have named the
Priorities Review Staff
Consultants and outside advisers for Ministers.
The Public Service
My Government took over a large and efficient Public
Service which, since its foundation at the start of the century,
has built up a reputation for efficiency and probity which
places it in the front rank of the Civil Service Systems of
western democratic countries. 6/ 
-6-
The Government was, however, elected to carry out its
declared policies and it quickly set about the task. It was not
until after the election that the leaders of the Labor
Parliamentary Party the new Ministers were able to seek the
help of the Public Service Board and others in the Public Service
on how the Service should be restructured. Some difficulties were
encountered, and to an extent these difficulties could be
attributed to some lack of understanding on the part of the
Government and the Public Service of each other's purposes and
processes. In the interests of good Government, I have since
announced that, as long as I am Prime Minister, there will be an
opportunity for pre-election discussion on the structure and the
working of Departments between Members of the Opposition and
senior officials. Naturally, these discussions will not embrace
matters of a party political nature. They will simply ensure
that whenever there is another change of Government, the changeover
as it affects the nation's administration, will take place
as smoothly as possible.
In retrospect, the quite massive changes which can be
seen as reflections of the underlying new orientation of our
policies were brought about with reasonable speed and remarkably
little friction. The changes were by no means revolutionary; they left
the system and the principles on which it is based intact, but
they were substantial and are beginning to have their effects
in achieving our purposes.
All the important changes can be seen as reflections
of the underlying new orientation of our policies. What we have
done is to re-structure departments of state to accord more with
the thrust of these policies. We have brought an emphasis in
departmental strength to accord with the emphasis in the
Government's administration. In so doing we have moved in the
direction of organising departments on a functional basis, of
distributing responsibility in groups which are as homogeneous
as possible. This has led, in part, to the amalgamation of
departments which is now in process.
I am aware that amalgamation as a process can come under
question. I am aware of the problems of size and in particular
the problems of manageability for a single minister and a single
head of department. I am aware of management problems, of staff
morale problems, and public relations problems.
But set against these problems and far outweighing them,
are the advantages of unification. There are the economies
resulting from the reduction of inter-departmental barriers
e. g. the resolution within a single department of the differences
that arise notoriously between separate and competing
departments. There are internal economies economies of scale. .7/ 
-7-
But the primary factor as I see it, determining the size
and manageability of large departments, is coherence of subject
matter. It is this coherence that has prompted many of the
structural changes that we have introduced.
Take transport. For too long, we have seen responsibility
f or transport divided between the Australian Government and the
States, without effective co-ordination between the four main arms
road, rail, air and sea. At the Australian level, we are now
moving rapidly towards the amalgamation of the Departments of
Civil Aviation and Transport.
The desirability of amalgamating the Departments of
Transport and Civil Aviation rests on the improvement which is
to be expected in the development and co-ordination of general
transportation policies, the more effective determination of
expenditure priorities and resource allocation and on the greater
ability to harmonise the totality of transport activities with
the Government's other objectives in economic and social fields.
A size problem may arise associated with air and sea navigation
systems. To meet this eventuality we intend to establish
operating agencies functioning separately from Departments.
Take Defence. We are fully aware of the importance of
a highly efficient and mobile defence force. But equally, we
are aware that there is no immediately foreseeable threat to the
security of this country. We are bringing together under the
one administration what should after all be an integrated system
of defence of our country and its interests, and in so doing, are
following the example of other countries. So here again, the
changes we have made in the administration have reflected basic
policy objectives. We are in the process of planning the amalgamation of
the Departments of Works and Housing. This amalgamation will
give us another more co-ordinated way of achieving important
policy objectives in housing and construction areas.
We are considering abolition of the Department of
Supply with transfer of its functions to Secondary Industry
and other areas.
Restructuring of the public service is also evident in
the field of social welfare. Here we have attempted to move from
the fragmented system of our predecessors to a broader concept of
caring for the total needs of an individual. To this end, we
have brought together in the remodelled Department of Social
Security many functions previously handled in other Departments.
And by stripping the Department of Health of a complicated system
of national insurance and payment to individuals, we are allowing
it to concentrate on the important problems of medicine and health,
and on health care delivery. 8/ 
7
-8-
In other areas the achievement of our objectives has
called f or the establishment of new Departments. Each of these
Departments is a viable unit, necessary for the attainment of
the Government's policy aims and new initiatives.
The greatest single area of new initiative is in the
cities the places where most Australians live. The time has
come for us to take fresh initiatives in making our cities
places where people can achieve the fullest enjoyment and self
fulfilment in living, as well as to work efficiently and without
unnecessary inconvenience. For this purpose, we established the
Department of Urban and Regional Development. This Department is
at the centre of some of the most important of our policy
initiatives. Here again, we have an example of a Department
comprehending a wide but wholly coherent subject matter.
In my Policy Speech last December, I foreshadowed the
establishment of a separate Department of Aboriginal Affairs
to have offices in each State to give the Australian Government
a genuine presence in the States. The Department of Aboriginal
Affairs is now a fact and is working to give effect to the will
of the people as expressed overwhelmingly in the 1967 referendum.
The Department of the Media will be able to work more
closely with the radio and television industry and for instance
have oversight of the legislation which regulates the industry.
Let me describe what we have done in the words of the new head
of the Department of the Media, himself a man brought from
experience in the business and television world to head our new
department. Mr. Oswin said
" Coming to a decision to form a Department of the
Media didn't mean starting everything from scratch.
A lot of its components already existed and many
of them were functioning efficiently and well, but
they were all over the place responsible to
departments with which they had little in common..."
was a matter of bringing together under a
common Ministry, Government services that were
often misplaced and regrettably, even neglected."
The Public Service has responded magnificently to the
challenges we have set it. But it would simply have been unable
to achieve all that we require in the time available. So, while
retaining it as an expanding administrative centre for all our
activities, we now have working with it in varying relationships,
or independently, many new bodies to provide specialistic
assistance to the Administration. 9/ 
There is a further question beyond that of the limits
on the professional public service to carry out all the tasks
required, in the time required. It is in Australia' s interest
and in the interest of the Public Service itself that there
should be greater mobility between business and the universities
and between the federal and state public services. For a job in
the public administration to be done competently it is not always
necessary that the appointment be for life or retirement on
reaching a certain age. Clearly, many valuable men and women
will be unwilling or unable to accept appointment on those terms.
Sometimes a specific task involved is of limited duration. The
task should not be left undone or the skills lost through
inflexibility in the Public Service structure.
Task Forces and Other Inquiries
To help us to focus quickly on the many new areas of
policy initiative, we have brought in academics and practical
men from the private sector.
First, there is the task force. In the main, the object
of the task force is to produce in a short time a report by a
person of stature in the community who is not part of the regular
Public Service. We have provided him with assistance some from
the. Public Service itself and some from our valued group of
consultants and Ministerial advisers with the object of
assembling material quickly and without the problems associated
with departmental boundaries.
The result has been a series of most helpful reports.
The concept of the task force is in the main that the leader
of it assumes responsibility for the report. The task force
helps and advises him but doesn't blunt the acuteness of his
own perceptions and the purport of his policy recommendations.
Perhaps the best known of the task forces was that led by
Dr. Coomnbs, in his investigation of the continuing expenditure
policies of the previous Government with a view to finding room
for our own higher priority programs. Another task force worked
under Mr. Rattigan, Chairman of the Tariff Board and produced the
report which led to the 25% cut in tariffs.
I believe the task force technique to be a most effective
way of producing a high quality report in a short time which
combines the skills and insights of prominent citizens with the
background and experience of the actual working of the Government
machine which officials and ministerial advisers can contribute.
Second, there is the committee of inquiry. In this area
men and women from many walks of life have joined new commissions
and committees; since we came into office, no less than 70 short
term inquiries have been appointed. To mention a few, they range
from inquiries into Aboriginal land rights, to an inquiry into
the Burdekin, into the maritime industry, into the protection of
privacy, into employment statistics, into FM radio, into
rehabilitation and compensation, into legal aid, into nursing
home fees and into the components of growth in urban centres. 
The use of specialist commissions and committees of
inquiry serves a number of valuable purposes. These include:
immediate action on a wider range of issues than would otherwise
be possible, many being issues where the electorate, having
given us a mandate, is wanting quick results;
availability of specialised skills and advice not always
required on a bng-term basis;
access to advice and information on developments and research
in industry, academic institutions, the trade union movement
and other community areas;
fostering of co-operation with, and participation by the States,
a matter of special importance in our Federal system of government;
providing a key channel of communication between Parliament
and the people.
Some might argue that some of the matters dealt with
initially in this way could properly have been dealt with by existing
departments. However, such a course would have meant an unbearable
strain on the Service because of the wide range of new matters,
many of which the Service had not been asked to deal with before.
The Service has been and is fully occupied responding
to other initiatives of the Government, as well as ensuring the
normal conduct of business.
The response by talented people of wide experience outside
the Public Service to join us in our endeavours has been quite remarkable.
I mention just a few.
Mr. Justice Woodhouse, of the New Zealand Supreme Court
came to head the Inquiry into a National Scheme of Rehabilitation
and Compensation, and his colleague Mr. Justice Meares from the
Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Mr. Justice Else-Mitchell, Professor Mathews and Mr.
G. J. Dusseldorp on Land Tenure;
Sir James Vernon and others on the Post Office Inquiry;
Mr. Justice Hope and a number of others on the Committee
of Inquiry into the National Estate;
Dr. Scotton and Dr. J. Deeble on Health Insurance;
Mr. McGarvie on Discrimination in Employment and
Occupation together with a number of others including Mr.
G. Polites from the Australian Council of Employers'
Federation and Mr. J. Petrie from the A. C. T. U.
I invite your attention to the range of the inquiries
as well as to the names of those conducting them. 
-11-
With the active co-operation of State Governments, we
have been able to secure the services of several State judges to
chair some of these committees.
In making appointments we have, we believe, succeeded
in bringing together people with relevant expertise from all
sections of the community.
Committees of Inquiry have, of course, been used in the
past. But the record shows that the system has not always been
well used I need only mention the fate of the Report of the
Committee of Economic Enquiry whose members were Sir John Crawford,
Professor Peter Karmel, Mr. Kenneth Myer and the late Mr. D. G.
Molesworth under the Chairmanship of Sir James Vernon or the McCarthy
Committee on Dairying. Not the least regrettable feature of the
treatment of the Vernon Committee report at the hands of the then
Government was that it must necessarily have reduced the willingness
of men and women of the highest qualifications, men and women with
very great demands on their time and experience, to serve in a
similar capacity. Whilst I am realistic enough to know that all
recommendations of Committees of Inquiry cannot necessarily be
adopted at least immediately our intention is a positive one.
Most reports are published and acted upon, not shelved
and forgotten. A real contribution is made to public
administration and to the development of policies acceptable to
the community. In this way we are restoring the use of inquiries to
their proper role in Government.
Commissions and Other Continuing Bodies
The willing response of the Public Service and the
efforts of task forces and other instruments of inquiry would not
in themselves have been sufficient to achieve our purposes. So we
have added greatly to the range of support which in greater or lesser
degree has always been associated with government in the field
of statutory commissions and other such authorities.
Since we have taken office, we have made decisions to
appoint no less than 25 continuing bodies to assist us in achieving
our policies. Those already at work include such diverse bodies
as the Cities Commission, the Child Care Standards Committee, the
Commission on Consumer Standards, the National Pipeline Authority,
and the National Commission on Social Welfare. Others are awaiting
the passage of legislation to enable their establishment, for
example, the Industries Assistance Commission and tne Petroleum and
Minerals Authority. The Interim Committees for the Schools
Commission and the Pre-School Commission have advanced their work
quite splendidly, while awaiting their establishment as statutory
bodies. These bodies will in part be supplied from the Public
Service. But in part they will draw to them men and women of
experience in their calling. They will be freer to operate than
the Public Service itself, though necessarily functioning within
the broad framework of government policy and administration. These
are performing a task of administration, often in new and uncharted 
-12-
areas, which will have important and positive effects on many areas of
life and activity in the community.
The Priorities Review Staff
One of the difficulties of government is to ensure
continuing challenges to think and plan more than a few months ahead.
There is a real danger that, unless there is a constant input to
government on this side, the day to day pressures will lead to
shorter and shorter term policies, to government that is reactive
rather than inspirational in quality and therefore loses its sense
of direction and purpose. We believe that the best way to maintain
an effective input of longer term thinking is to establish special
machinery for the purpose. It is true that particular Departments
will think months and years ahead and indeed the Treasury for
some time has been preparing three and five year estimates. But
that is not enough.
What we have done is to establish a new group within
the Department of the Special Minister of State which we are
calling the Priorities Review Staff. It consists of highly skilled
specialists with high academic and professional qualifications.
Its purpose is to review Government programs, not with
the object of duplicating or censoring the work of specialist
departments, but with the object of advising ministers on long-range
priorities and planning. It is based on the well-established
Priorities Review Committee headed by Lord Rothschild in Great Britain.
This venture, I believe, marks a significant step
forward in orderly national management and long-range planning. 
-13-
Ministerial Staff
As the business of government grows faster and the
range of political involvement of the people extends, Ministers
must necessarily look to more help from their own immediate
offices. It has been traditional to think of the Ministerial
Private Secretary as an efficient and experienced officer of
middle rank, capable of maintaining effective liaison with the
Department and of seeing that the Minister is where he needs
to be to keep his many commitments.
But with the present need to develop and maintain
new policy initiatives involving people outside the Department
and the authorities associated with it, we have found a need
to provide Ministers with greater help on the policy side.
I have no hesitation in saying that the help Ministers have
obtained from their offices has relieved Departments of
involvement in party political matters and has given ministers
support as they have forged ahead in their own particular fields.
In machinery terms, we have improved the quality of the
contribution made by Ministerial staff by increasing both the
numbers and the salaries paid.
Noalte e iiseilstaff have come from outside
the Public Service. There is provision in each Minister's staff
for a departmental liaison officer who remains on the departmental
establishment and undertakes duties directly connected with the
Department. This preserves an avenue for able young departmental
officers to gain valuable experience in the operations of government.
Ministers, of course, are free to choose their staff and many
of them have made personal staff positions available to career
public servants. I have, this year also arranged for substantial increases
in both the numbers and levels of staff available to the
Opposition parties. Again, in my view, this was a very necessary
change. I might point out that the Ministerial personal staff
from outside the professional Public Service have no security of
tenure. They depend wholly on the whim or fate of the Minister.
In no sense can they be said to have been obtruded into the
structure of the Public Service. They are part of the Government
in its political and personal sense and in that sense, they are
responsible to the people, their paymasters and political masters
in the same way as Ministers. 
-14-
I should further point out that this development
in no way represents a departure from the principles of the
Westminster system. Central to that system is the principle
that Ministers as individuals and the Cabinet as a whole must
exercise real control over the Public Service and accept full
responsibility for policy. In Australia, the staff of Ministers
has, for various reasons, remained far smaller and junior than
in Britain or Canada. In Britain, the Minister is supported by
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries and by Parliamentary Private
Secretaries as well as a far larger staff. The function of the
Parliamentary Under-Secretary is deemed unconstitutional in
Australia. It is a perfectly objective statement to say that
there have been notable cases in Australia in the past of a
remarkable lack of ministerial control over departments and
over policy. The lack of competent staff undoubtedly contributed
to this. The Canadian model has been descrined as " politicallvorientated
yet operationally sensitive" staff and a " non-parti'san,
operationally-orientated yet politically sensitive" department.
We have not of course adopted that model, but to the extent
that the appointment of a competent personal staff assists
ministers to exercise their proper constitutional authority
we are enhancing the basic Westminster tradition.
Implications for the Public Service
All this means that government is on the move.
I recognise that this imposes strains on the Public
Service. Perhaps there are two particular problems which I
might discuss in a little more detail in the remaining time
available. These relate to the process I have described, by
which many new people and authorities are being added to the
familiar administrative scene; and the emphasis we are placing
on open government. First, the influx of new people and new skills. During
the war years, feeling were expressed which, although more intense,
were much the same as those of which I am aware today. They
relate to the fears which permanent public servants have because
of the possibilities that their own career prospects will be
diminished, or the standards of the Service lowered, as a result
of the influx. It is true that the sweep and pace of the recent
changes have hardly been equalled in peace time in Australian
history. Though as I say this I should make the point I do not
expect the growth of the Public Service in 1973-74 to be more than
This is a figure which has been exceeded on several recent
occasions. You will all be aware of the task force I set up under
the leadership of Dr. Coombs which identified for the Government
a number of areas of spending that could be reviewed. His report
concluded: ' Existing government programs are taxing the resources
of the Australian Public Service and it is clear that
it will be subject to increasing pressure. Administrative
and management skills are important and scarce resources.
It is essential that the cost of existing and new expenditure
programs in terms of these skills be taken into account in 
Government decisions and that every effort should
be made to use such skills to the best advantage...
The Public Service Board as the primary authority on
establishment matters must be given a sensible degree
of control in seeking to establish a reasonably uniform
classification structures and to avoid the competitive
ways destructive to wage-justice and reasonable economy
in Government. The fact that the Board should recognise
special competitive elements in particular situations
does not invalidate the need for such control. This
control, with appropriate modifications to deal with
special circumstances, is relevant also to the agencies
outside the Public Service itself such as statutory
corporations.' Some of the additional staff on the payroll of the
Australian Government will merely be a transfer from other places
where, in one way or another, the taxpayer is footing the Bill;
for example Health Insurance now administered by more than
100 private bureaucracies.
The history of the war and immediate post war years
may be of some encouragement, because there is general agreement
that the Public Service today is as efficient as anywhere in
the world, and probably more efficient than most.
During the war years the size of the public service
doubled and the number of departments grew from 13 to
There was great pressure on the public service,
which did not have many of the skills required.
Various people were brought in from outside the
public service, perhaps the most notable being the late Essington
Lewis, then Chief General Manager of Broken Hill Propriety Limited,
who became Director-General of Munitions, but there were others,
including Lawrence Hartnett, another great industrialist.
New people were brought into such areas as rationing,
prices control, manpower control, credit control and censorship,
which were established under National Security Regulations.
Numerous Boards and Committees were set up also to
facilitate communications between agencies, to carry out desired
executive functions or to conduct investigations into specific
topics. Many of the people brought into the public service
in that period attained high office. To mention only some of
the now retired Permanent Heads, there were Sir Kenneth Bailey,
Sir Henry Bland, Sir Allan Brown, Sir John Crawford, Dr Coombs,
Professor Fin Crisp, Mr Ted Hook and Sir Richard Randall.
There are others among them who are still serving in high office,
including a number as Permanent Heads.
We seek more men of their calibre for the tasks of
today, for we are engaged on a new operation mercifully in
a period of peace. 
-16-
There is a new light on the hill, if I may recall
a phrase of the late Ben Chifley, and we need all the skills
we can command as we move towards it.
With the introduction of new people and new skills,
the existing Public Service is placed in a more competitive
situation both in relation to competition for higher jobs and
competition for influence in the policy making process.
I see only advantage in increased advertising of
senior Public Service positions as open to people outside the
Service, and indeed I agree with the report of the Boyer Committee
that the morale and self respect of the Public Service could
only be enhanced i-f it felt it were standing on its own feet
by force of merit rather than by restriction of competition.
I am sure, from what I have seen of it, that it can so stand.
We have not altered the traditional role of the
Public Service in the policy making process, but by greatly
increasing our sources of policy advice and by involving public
servants in our task forces and commissions, we have provided
for a meeting of minds, a re-stimulation which is coupled with
a leadership from the political level. Where this has resulted
in tension it has in the main been creative tension and that is
our object. The Public Service has not only demonstrated in
the last twelve months that it can work impartially for a
new Government after 23 years with the old, it has for the
most part shown the benefit of its inter-reaction with the
Government's other advisers and an enthusiasm for working with
others in pursuing the policies of an activist Government.
Perhaps the change in Government had its greatest Public
Service implication in relation to the Permanent Heads of
Departments. Unlike all other public servants, Permanet Heads
are appointed by the Government of the day. They have a
continuing tenure but they also have close personal dealings
with their Ministers.
Before the election there was talk of wholesale sackings;
some observers seemed to expect that we would change the Public
Service by replacing its leaders. This did not happen and at
no stage did we consider it desirable. On some occasions,
associated not only with changes of Government but with, for
example, reshuffling of portfolios in existing Governments, it
is desirable that Permanent Heads be transferred to other
Departments or other duties in the interests of good Government.
Like previous Governments, we have made some changes at the top
of the Service, but this has been done in a manner which does
not damage the tradition of an impartial Public Service.
We all tend to think of the Permanent Head as a policy
adviser. Important and glamorous as this aspect of their work
undoubtedly is, it should not be allowed to obscure the very
real responsibility that Permanent heads carry as general managers
of departments under their Ministers. 
-17-
Permanent Heads should be ever mindful of the
need for ensuring that their departments are efficiently
managed, of the need for cost-effectiveness, of their role
in ensuring that staff savings are achieved where possible,
and of the need for leadership of their departments in
such matters as ensuring that personnel are developed to
meet -emerging needs of public administration.
Open Government Greater participation in the affairs of Government by
concerned people in the community generally has been a theme
in this lecture. We want to extend this sense of participation
far beyond the use of particular individuals who have skills
currently needed. We want the Australian people to know the
facts, to know the needs, to know the choices before them.
This is really at the heart of what has been called " open
government". There come times and we recognise this when
decisions must be taken, or are better or more quickly taken,
if there is not at every stage a need for the decision makers
to discuss publicly and explain publicly what they are doing.
A balance has to be struck. I think we are striking that
balance. I myself am reporting regularly to the press and
telling them promptly of decisions that we are making.
We are tabling reports in Parliament, not just the annual reports
of statutory bodies but many papers providing useful general
information where there is a public interest and where other
interests are not compromised.
Legislation foreshadowed in my policy speech as the
Freedom of Information Act will be shortly before the Parliament.
Meanwhile, much is already being done to provide greater information
to the public, particularly by the release of various reports.
At the same time, the Government is very aware of the need to
ensure adequate privacy for the individual.
A review is in train of the legislation to remove
unreasonable restrictions on public servants which inhibit
them from discussing in public matters of public and official
interest. There will still be a proper observance of the
conventions that public servants do not justify or propagandise
policies. That is the job of Ministers. But within the
proper conventions there can be a lot done to relieve public
servants of unnecessary restriction.
We will be bringing down archives legislation which
will clarify the rules relating to access to official records
and facilitate such access. It will also greatly improve the
service that the public gets when they want to consult some
of the more ancient records.
Another aspect of the involvement of the community
generally in government is the benefit which can flow in
both directions from extended arrangements under which staff
of the Public Service spend periods in industry, commerce,
universities and the like and for people from those areas
to spend periods attached to Public Service departments. 
-18-
I quote the Fulton Committee. It had this to Aay
' Determined efforts are needed to bring about the temporary
interchange of staff with private industry and commerce,
nationalised industry and local government on a much
larger scale than hitherto. War-time experience proves
beyond doubt the value of such movement in promoting
mutual knowledge and understanding.'
At the same time, while I intend to see arrangements
developed in this area, it is only proper to note also the
warning given by the Fulton Committee that the exchanges should
take place in a professional atmosphere, fostered by the
fact that the majority of public servants expect to make a
career of their period in the Service. They should not see
themselves, or be seen, as in the prospective employment of
business, or something of the necessary confidentiality and
privacy which governments must preserve and protect will be lost.
It is a truism that we live in a changing world.
It is essential that the whole framework of public administration
in Australia be geared to respond to new initiatives of government
demanded by the electorate.
An important factor in this will be the continual
exchange of ideas and discussion of techniques between the
sectors of the economy.
The public sector, which has much to learn from the
private sector, will facilitate this.
But it needs the co-operation of the private sector,
whose interests today demand a better knowledge of the working
of government than ever before.
It may be true that the people get the government
they deserve. It is certainly true that governments get the
Public Service they deserve. The measures, decisions and approaches
I have outlined are designed to promote the efficiency, the
excellence of public administration in Australia, now and for
the future. I close as I began, with a quote from the inaugural
Sir Robert Garran Oration:
" The task before Australia is honourable, and its
efficient discharge would make for a dynamic peace;
to it all the resources, skills and energy that Australia
can command deserve to be committed. The honourable task,
however, could become majestic, and infinitely inspiring,
and the peace could become creative, deep and rich,
and enduring, if there be added what I have termed
Excellence, Excellence in all its fullness."
The pursuit of excellence is still an eminently proper
and desirable goal for Australia, her people, her public
Administration and I believe, her elected Government.
-0-o-0-



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 145
12 November 1973
WEDDING GIFT
The Governor-General and Lady Hasluck have made a
personal gift of twelve hand beaten copper sherry chalices to
Her Royal Highness The Princess Anne and Captain Mark Phillips
for their wedding next Wednesday.
The wedding gift from the Australian Government and
People of Australia to Her Royal Highness The Princess Anne
and Captain Mark Phillips consists of twelve hand beaten copper
wine chalices and twelve hand beaten copper beer mugs in inscribed
copper presentation cases made from Mount Isa copper.
The gifts were sent to the Australian High Commissioner
in London who arranged for their presentation to The Princess Anne
and Captain Phillips.
Copper plaques in the cases containing the gifts from
the Government and People of Australia re inscribed as follows:-
Presented to
Her Royal Highness The Princess Anne
and
Captain Mark Phillips
With the Good Wishes of
The Government and People of Australia
14 November 1973
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY 13TH NOVEMBER 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Well ladies and gentlemen any questions.
QUESTION: The Singapore Foreign Minister, Mr Rajaratnam said
that he wants to raise with you the question of the defence of
South East Asia and the Five Power Arrangement. He suggested
that relations between Singapore and Australia could break down
if the Five Power Arrangement collapsed. Do you see any
differences of opinion with Singapore over the defence of the
South East Asian region?
PRIME MINISTER: The Five Power Arrangements are supported by
the Australian Government, I expect that they will continue.
Any differences that there have been between Australia and
Singapore were raised by Mr Lee Kuan Yew at Ottawa early in
August, with one exception, they were all matters of differences
of view which had arisen under the McMahon or earlier Governments.
I am looking forward very much to seeing Mr Rajaratnam, I've
known him for many years. I will be happy to discuss any matter
he chooses to raise.
QUESTION: Unclear
PRIME MINISTER: The repatriation of students.
QUESTION: In your interest to have your concept of an Asian
co-operative grouping formed, would you give way on the membership
of the United States and the Soviet Union if necessary. Would
you accept their admission?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't speculate on membership as extensive
as that. I have never suggested it.
QUESTION: I would like to ask a question on Parliamentary
Privileges, particularly in view of the fact that an increasing
number of Australians will be coming before Parliamentary Committees
and being subject to these archaic laws. On the 9th of December
1971 in the House of Representatives, your said: " My own Party
is committed to the proposition that Procedures and Privileges
of Parliament, we used the term in the plural because we think
it should apply to State Parliaments as well and their committees,
should be adapted to contemporary standards of efficiency and
justice." Will you continue along this line?
PRIME MINISTER: I am committed to that proposition, because I
think I helped to frame it when it was put in the Australian Labor
Party's Platform at the Conference in mid-1971. I have already
raised many of the matters in the Platform concerning Standing
orders of the Parliament in the Standing orders Committee of the
House of Representatives. I think the Speaker is trying to arrange
a meeting of that committee this coming week. 
-2-
QUESTION: Will you raise the Privileges matter at that meeting?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not sure that I will be raising that.
offhand, one of the matters I have asked them to consider and
I asked them to consider this some months ago is procedure for
rostering ministers in one House to answer questions without
notice in the other House. As you know, this is done in the
Indian Parliament, where Ministers have to be members of Parliament,
and obviously it happens in many of those parliamentary systems
where Ministers can't be members of Parliament but are rostered
to answer questions in each House of the Parliament. That
happens in the Low Countries and in France. So I raised this
at a very early meeting of the Standing Orders Committee after
we became the Government. I forget the other matters. That
particular matter I mentioned there ' is specified in the Labor
Party's Platform.
QUESTION: Just of this privileges matter, sir, you did describe
the present privileges position as archaic in 1971, but what
are youf doing about not making it archaic?
PRIME MINISTER: As I have told you, I have raised one matter
that I can recall, one matter which I raised at the earliest
moment, a matter which is specified in the Party's Platform,
specified largely on my initiative. I believe Mr Chalmers is
referring to the fact that it is a breach it is a contempt
of Parliament for a newspaper to publish a report of a
parliamentary committee before it has been presented to the
Parliament. This is a matter which is concerning many Members
of Parliament at the moment. As the Standing Orders are at
the moment, and I believe as they always have been I think we
get it from the British too -it is a contempt of Parliament
for a newspaper ( and in this respect the position of a journalist
or an editor of a newspaper is the same as any other citizen)
it is a contempt of Parliament for the report of a parliamentary
committee to be published before the Parliament itself has
received the report from its committee.
QUESTION: Sir, would you agree to appear in a face-to-face
debate with Mr Snedden on the prices and incomes referendum?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter was raised with me at the National
Press Club Luncheon, which I attended at the invitation of
many of you, last Thursday. The suggestion was that in the week
before 8 December referendums on prices and incomes, the National
Press Club should have a luncheon to discuss those issues, as
it always does on the eve of a House of Representatives elections
and I think, the. Senate elections. The proposition was that
instead of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition
appearing separately at luncheons before the club, as happens
on the eve of elections for the House of Representatives or the
Senate, they might appear together. I said I would be happy to
do so. I made the suggestion that whoever gave an opening speechwhatever
order that was there should be a summing up in the
reverse order. Presumably, the order would be Prime Minister,
Leader of the opposition, then questions from all of you, then
Leader of the Opposition and Prime Minister summing up. 
QUESTION: Since the National Press Club has become something
of a shambles because of seven million outsiders attending it,
would you be prepared to do the same thing in a television
studio instead?
PRIME MINISTER: Let me see what happens with the National Press
Club invitation. I think I can say it was an invitation it
was certainly a suggestion to which I responded positively.
In other words I suppose, to put it in ordinary English, to which
I said yes.
QUESTION: My quest * ion is in relation to the referendum. In an
address to the Australian Electrical Manufacturers Association
in Canberra on September 17, you said that if the referendum
on prices was carried, the first move would be against land
prices, and you continued that by Christmas legislation would
be passed to stabilise land prices. Could I ask you, sir,
that in view of the time it takes for writs to be returned, is
this going to be possible and, if not, do you think the House
will be able to get up on December 6 which was proposed earlier
on? PRIME MINISTER: You have a good point there. I did say that.
Subsequently, I realised that there would have to be time for
the return of the writs or any challenges I don't think challenges
are likely but we have to await the return of the writs before
the Parliament can pass bills under the new constitutional power
conferred at the referendum. You asked me also when the Parliament
would be getting up. I doubt if the Parliament will be getting
up on 6 December. I can't be certain when the Senate will get up,
but I doubt whether the House of Representatives will get up
*. on the 6 of December.
QUESTION: Will it still be possible to get it through before
Christmas? PRIME MINISTER: The return of the writs takes longer than
Christmas. QUESTION: It is not generally known, but I hope you won't mind
it being made known, that you are a fairly learned bloke in
matters of theology, with as good a knowledge of doctrine and
Church history as any man I know who is in holy orders. Can you
tell us whether in this post-or sub-Christian country in which
we now live but above all in this post-conciliar period when
people have arrived at the idea of God which I think you arrived
at many many years ago, where we are getting to the essence of
what Christian belief is would you agree that in China there is,
in fact, a spirit of applied Christianity which is obvious
throughout all Chinese life economic, social, political and
the kind that we in this decadent, bourgeois, western democratic
state--
PRIME MINISTER: You can call me bourgeois but you are not going
to call me decadent.
QUESTION: The point I would like you to say something about,
although I realise there are more interesting political matters 
-4-
than this, is whether you would agree that there is an
extraordinary parallel between Chairman Mao's dictum " We must
be modest and prudent, avoid arrogance and rashness and serve
the people"
PRIME MINISTER: I follow that myself.
QUESTION: Well, not yourself actually, but another -' the Lord
Christ, who said 2,000 years ago, " He who shall be chiefest
among you shall be the servant of all". Would you care to give
us your thoughts on this parallel if, in fact, there is one
between Chairman Mao's somewhat lengthy thing and Jesus Christ's
somewhat pithier--
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know that I would respond to questions
on this subject to anybody other than yourself. It is about
years since we last spoke in Canberra. I want to make it
plain that I don't hold myself out as an expositor of Christian
doctriLne or ethics. I find them interesting and I wouldn't be
altogether unacquainted with them, but I do not assume the role
of explaining or propounding them. Also, you will realise
there are risks in making any comparisons between communism and
Christianity between Mao and our Lord. Nevertheless, I would
think it clear, as many of you have now had the opportunity of
observing for yourselves in China, that there is a degree of
dignity accorded to individuals whatever their calling, whatever
their age, which we do not find in countries which have been, and
still claim to be, Christian. There is a r . espect for one's
fellow man and woman to be seen in China which, I believe, is
admirable.
QUESTION: Last week in Parliament you said that you expected
that ministers would answer in the spirit of the answers which
you had given to questions. Since then in the last week
ten ministers failed to give an answer on' interdepartmental
committees in the same spirit that you did. Will you make sure
they do give an answer?
PRIME MINISTER: They have not failed to answer questions in the
spirit in which I have answered questions. I will take you back
to the position which applied before the elections. Preceding
Australian Governments, in answer to questions about what they
were doing on certain subjects, would answer: " We have established
an interdepartmental committee". After Mr McMahon became
Prime Minister, no answers were ever given to questions about what
departments were represented on those committees, when the
committees were appointed, when they had reported or when they
were expected to report. What the Labor Party in Opposition and,
not least, I myself constantly complained about was that the
Government was hiding behind interdepartmental committees. It
was using them as an alibi for failing to act or deferring action.
I have made it plain and all my ministers have also made it plain
and there has been a complete set of questions put to all of them
we have all made it plain that if any question is asked about
the membership or the timetable or the charter of an interdepartmental
committee it will be answered. 
QUESTION: Would you accept that it is difficult to ask a
question about any specific interdepartmental committee if your
ministers will not enable you to know the names of any committees
that exist?
PRIME MINISTER: No. We have frequently announced the matters that
are being considered by interdepartmental committees. I take you
back to the earliest conferences that I held with you, when I
referred to the appointment of interdepartmental committees
to consider revaluation assistance. You asked me what departments
were on them; I told you.
QUESTION: Before any mining licences are granted for uranium
mining in the Northern Territory, will local Aboriginal groups
be asked whether or not they want such mining and, secondly, if
they do want such mining will that mining be on their terms and
conditions in regard to Aboriginal equality and Aboriginal
financial return from that mining?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter is still being considered.
QUESTION: The Queensland Premier has blamed Canberra, or your
Government, for its attitude towards foreign investment rates
for the failure of a foreign group of companies to go ahead
with an aluminium smelter at Weipa. Do you accept that criticism?
PRIME MINISTER: We don't propose to down-value the Australian
dollar in order to accommodate the foreign companies interested
in a smelter at Weipa.
QUESTION: Following on from the interdepartmental committees,
I understood from what you said in the House that you would
instruct your ministers not to give the answer which they have
all given so far on interdepartmental committees that you would
instruct your ministers to tell the Leader of the Opposition, if
he asked, which interdepartmental committees each specific
minister, or each specific minister's department, was represented
on. Do I understand from this answer that this is no longer the
case? PRIME MINISTER: You are not correctly quoting what I said about
my ministers. My ministers have said precisely what I said;
they have quoted what I said. I believe I said it on 20 September.
I have repeated the gist of it now to Mr Farmer: namely, that
any questions about particular interdepartmental committees,
their composition, their charter, their timetable, will be answered;
and my ministers have done that in respect of any that have been
named. They will do it in respect of any that are named.
QUESTION: But with respect, you yourself gave an answer to
Mr Snedden which described which interdepartmental committees the
Prime Minister's Department was represented on. Your other
ministers have not. 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: No, let's be precise. I went further than the
undertaking I gave on 20 September by giving, in answer to a
further question Mr Snedden asked about which interdepartmental
committees had been established since we took office on which
we were represented, by giving him that information. He then
asked some further questions about the membership of those
committees and I answered that. But I gave no undertaking that
my ministers, or I myself, in general, would answer such questions.
The original undertaking I gave on 20 September has been followed
by my ministers. It will continue to be followed by my ministers.
They have quoted it; they follow it.
QUESTION: What progress has been made in renegotiating the
agreement on the U. S. communicationq base at North-West Cape?
Can you say when Mr Barnard will be visiting Washington for talks
on joint control of the base, and could you say whether members
of Parliament have asked to see the bases in accordance with the
terms laid down by Mr Barnard earlier this year?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Barnard will be going to the United States
in the recess.
QUESTION: If my memory serves me right, you told Mr Anthony
that decisions relating to tariffs would be announced in the
Parliament before they were announced to the Caucus.
PRIME MINISTER: No, on a matter of substance. I told Mr Chipp that.
QUESTION: But that was the gist of what you were saying?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, of course, in general.
QUESTION: It was my understanding from a Caucus briefing that
Caucus could ask to consider these matters before they went
to the Parliament. And my understanding -is that you have before
you the colour. television report of the Tariff Board and the IDC.
Could you tell me what procedures will be followed at this stage?
Will the Cabinet make the decision, then tell the Parliament,
or will it go to Caucus first?
PRIME MINISTER: The former.
QUESTION: Could you say why the Cabinet has not yet considered the
question of four weeks' annual leave for employees other than
Commonwealth employees in the Australian Capital Territory,
particularly in view of the decision of the Queensland Industrial
Commission that workers in that State should have four weeks' leave?
PRIME MINISTER: The Cabinet has considered this matter and it
believes, as appears from the Australian Labor Party platform,
that this matter should be determined by arbitration, and, as you
point out, it has since been determined by arbitration in
Queensland. 
-7-
QUESTION: Have you had time to confer with Senator Willesee on
the offer by 33 South Australian medical students to go to
Ethiopia? PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Do you know when you will-be able to confer with him?
PRIME MINISTER: I said I would have the matter looked into.
I didn't undertake to confer with Senator Willesee directly.
This was a question asked by Mr Hurford, the M. P. for Adelaide,
yesterday afternoon. I'm certain it is being acted on already.
I am certain that the department is investigating the matter
already. I hadn't heard about it bqfore Mr Hurford asked his
question without notice.
QUESTION: Figures released in a Question on Notice answered by
Mr Grassby today indicate that of 26,013 migrants who came to
Australia on assisted passages for the first six months of
this y~ ar, only 80 were from Asia. Given Mr Grassby's answer
on no applications for migration from Japan, but in the context
of the fact that there is great interest to migrate to Australia
from Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines, do you agree
with allegations that Australia's immigration policy still has
a bias in favour of whites?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no official bias on racial grounds at
all. There is an inevitably greater number-of Caucasians coming
to Australia than people of other racial origins because the
basis of the immigration program has been switched from official
recruiting to family reunion.
QUESTION: Do you give the Labor Party any chance of winning
the New South Wales State elections and, if so, by how many
seats? PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to comment on that.
QUESTION: I'm confused and a little bit disturbed by your answers
on IDCs, and I would like to ask a very brief and blunt question.
Why shouldn't your ministers tell Mr Snedden which interdepartmental
committees their officers are members of. What is the difficulty?
Is there such a vast number that it would take the Public Service
months to work it out?
PRIME MINISTER: It is just the degree of time taken up, money
spent in compiling answers to questions when there may, in fact,
be no particular point that Mr Snedden wishes to establish. If
he wants to name any committee he will be told what departments
are on it and what its terms of reference are and what date it
did report or is expected to report. 
-8-
QUESTION: Can't you agree with the point made by Mr Spigelman
of your office that it is impossible to ask questions about
committees when you don't know whether the committees exist or
not? And it is surely reasonable in the interests of open
government that people who are outside the Government should be
entitled to know what interdepartmental committees exist?
PRIME MINISTER: No; primarily, we are concerned in what
decisions Governments make and how they reach those decisions.
If there is any departmental committee which the Government sets
up, and somebody wants to know about that particular committee,
he will be told. But it has never been suggested, and I don't
propose to initiate, publishing all the interdepartmental
committees which the Government may jestablish. I have pointed out
in answers to questions by Mr Snedden that there are some matters
of international or commercial relevance where it would be quite
wrong to identify the existence of a committee or its membership.
There have never been so many reports to Parliament by bodies
advising the Government never.
QUE STION: I understood that in the early weeks of your
Government you did have inquiries made for a consolidated list
of the interdepartmental committees. Have you ever been given
that consolidated list?
PRIME MINISTER: I forget.
QUESTION: What are we going on about? I mean there are all sorts-
I don't understand, you see, all this curiosity about
interdepartmental committees. Ever since we were boys here in
Canberra there have been committees, interdepartmental, formal
And informal, and all the rest of it. Surely what matters is
what comes out in the end. What is the reason for being so
testy about it I don't think it matters two hoots.
PRIME MINISTER:. The important thing is that people ought to know
what the Government decides and why it has decided it and that has
been done to a degree that has never been done by any Australian
Government before.
QUESTION: When you were in Opposition did you find it frustrating
that you were unable to get the information that you are now
denying to Mr Snedden?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I would have been very pleased indeed to
get all the information that I now give. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE
TASMANIAN COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION1
HOBART, SUNDAY 18 NOVEMBER, 1973
I MUST CONFESS THAT IT IS A NOVEL EXPERIENCE FOR
ME TO BE INVITED TO OPEN AN INSTITUTION THAT HAS BEEN IN
EXISTENCE FOR FIVE YEARS. ICOMMEND YOUR PATIENCE AND
FORESIGHT IN WAITING SO LONG FOR THIS OPPORTUNITY.
NATURALLY I WAS DELIGHTED TO ACCEPT YOUR INVITATION
BECAUSE I KNOW THAT THIS COLLEGE, FORMALLY ESTABLISHED
IN 1968, IS AMONG THE MOST PROGRESSIVE AND COMPREHENSIVE
INSTITUTIONS OF ITS KIND IN AUSTRALIA. THE ADVANCED
EDUCATION ACT OF 1968, BY WHICH THE COLLEGE WAS ESTABLISHED1
WAS AN IMPORTANT AND FAR-SIGHTED STATUTE. IT CREATED A
COUNCIL OF ADVANCED EDUCATION IN TASMANIA WHICH ADMINISTERS
NOT ONLY THIS COLLEGE BUT THE WHOLE FIELD OF ADVANCED
EDUCATION IN THIS STATE. i e / 2 
-2-
THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE COUNCIL, SET
FORTH IN YOUR HANDBOOK, ARE CLEARLY ATTUNED TO SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC NEEDS AND THE ASPIRATIONS OF A GROWING
AND DYNAMIC COMMUNITY, I CONGRATULATE ALL THOSE WHO
HAVE WORKED TO ESTABLISH THIt COLLEGE AND LAID DOWN THE
PRACTICAL AND ENLIGHTENED PRINCIPLES ON. WHICH IT IS
CONDUCTED, I DON'T THINK THERE CAN BE ANY DOUBT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S WHOLEHEARTED COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION,
THE STRENGTH OF THAT COMMITMENT AND OUR READINESS TO
DISCHARGE IT HAVE BEEN DEMONSTRATED OVER AND OVER AGAIN,
WITHIN A FEW WEEKS OF TAKING OFFICE WE SET UP THE INTERIM
COMMITTEE FOR THE AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS COMMISSION; WITHIN A
FEW MONTHS OF ITS APPOINTMENT THE COMMITTEE PRESENTED ITS
HISTORIC REPORT; WITHIN THREE MONTHS OF RECEIVING THAT
REPORT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IN ' ITS FIRST BUDGET,
PROVIDED AN ADDITIONAL SUM OF $ 404 MILLION FOR EDUCATION IN
1973-74. THAT WAS AN INCREASE OF 92% ON LAST YEAR, THE
GREATEST SINGLE UPGRADING OF EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURES IN
OUR HISTORY, THUS WE HAVE HONOURED THE PROMISE IN MY
POLICY SPEECH A YEAR AGO THAT EDUCATION WOULD BE THE MOST
RAPIDLY GROWING SECTOR OF PUBLIC SPENDING UNDER A LABOR
GOVERNMENT, 
-3-
I HOPE I WILL NOT BE ACCUSED OF UNDUE COMPLACENCY OR
SELF-SATISFACTION IF I SAY THIS: WHATEVER ELSE MY
GOVERNMENT MAY ACHIEVE IN ITS TERM OF OFFICE, WE HAVE
MANAGED IN LESS THAN A YEAR TO SET A NEW COURSE FOR
EDUCATION IN THIS COUNTRY AND. NEW STANDARDS FOR OUR
CHILDREN'S FUTURE. THAT COURSE WILL NEVER BE REVERSED,
THOSE STANDARDS WILL NEVER BE DOWNGRADED,
THE GREAT THRUST OF OUR REFORMS SO FARHAS BEEN IN
SECONDARY EDUCATION NOT BECAUSE WE REGARD TERTIARY-EDUCATION
AS ANY LESS IMPORTANT, BUT BECAUSE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
SCHOOLING HAVE BEEN THE AREAS OF GREATEST NEED, OF MOST
PRESSING INADEQUACY AND IMPOVERISHMENT, So LET ME
REASSURE YOU FIRST ON THIS POINT: TERTIARY EDUCATION, BOTH
IN UNIVERSITIES AND INSTITUTIONS LIKE YOURS, RANKS AS HIGH
IN OUR PLANS AND AMBITIONS AS EDUCATION OF ANY OTHER KIND,
IT IS FUNDAMENTAL TO OUR PHILOSOPHY THAT THE WHOLE PROCESS
OF EDUCATION SHOULD FORM AN UNBROKEN AND EVOLVING CONTINUUM
OF INSTRUCTION AND CULTIVATION, IN WHICH ALL CHILDREN
INDEED ALL PEOPLE HAVE A FULL AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY TO
PARTICIPATE AT EVERY STAGE,
HAVING SAID THAT, LET ME MAKE ONE OTHER BROAD POINT
ABOUT THIS PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, IT IS FUNDAMENTAL
TO WHAT COLLEGES LIKE YOURS ARE ALL ABOUT, . WE BELIEVE IN WHAT
OUR OPPONENTOSP POLLIINKKEEEN TTTSOO CCAALLLL I'FORRUEEREE DDOOMM OOFF CCHHOOIICCEEI', s ,/ 4 
-4-
THAT FREEDOM, HOWEVER, MEANS SOMETHING QUITE DIFFERENT.
FOR US FROM WHAT IT MEANS FOR THEM., FOR US, FOR THE
AuSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, FREEDOM OF CHOICE MEANS THE
FREEDOM TO CHOOSE. BETWEEN METHODS AND CnIjiRSFS AND
TYPES OF EDUCATION.: IT DOESNOT MEAN A CHOICE BETWEEN
STANDARDS OR DEGREES OF EXCELLENCE BETWEEN A GOOD
EDUCATION OR A BAD ONE, BETWEEN AN EXPENSIVE EDUCATION OR
A POOR ONE. IT IS SOMETIMES SAID OF SOCIALISTS THAT WE
WANT EVERYONE TO HAVE A UNIVERSITY EDUCATION. THAT WOULD
BE AS SENSIBLE AS SUGGESTING THAT EVERY UNIVERSITY STUDENT
SHOULDSTUDY ECONOMICS. THE WHOLE POINT-OF OUR APPROACH
TO ADVANCED EDUCATION IS THAT A PLURALIST SOCIETY DEMANDS
A PLURALIST CONCEPTION OF EDUCATION. IT DEMANDS DIVERSITY.
YOU WILL REMEMBER THE INTELLECTUAL CONCE. IT PREVAILING
IN VICTORIAN ENGLAND AND IT PERSISTED WITH SURPRISING
RESILIENCE UNTIL QUITE RECENTLY THAT THERE WAS SOMETHING
INHERENTLY SUPERIOR' IN AN EDUCATION IN THE HUMANE ARTS, IN
THE CLASSICAL DISCIPLINES AS DISTINCT FROM THE. PHYSICAL
SCIENCES. AGAIN, A FEW YEARS AGO, THERE WAS'A QUITE FATUOUS
AND SNOBBISH ARGUMENT IN THIS COUNTRY ABOUT THE PROPRIETY OF
COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AWARDING DEGREES. I HOPE WE
HAVE; HEARD THE END OF SUCH ARGUMENTS. I HOPE IT WILL NEVER
AGAIN BE SUGGESTED THAT ONE KIND OF SECONDARY SCHOOL IS
SUPERIOR TO ANOTHER, OR THAT A UNIVERSITY EDUCATION IS MORE
DESIRABLE THAN ONE PROVIDED BY A COLLEGE, THE" IMPORTANT
REQUIREMENT IS THAT THE SAME STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE, OF
DEDICATION, OF MATERIAL ENDOWMENT, OF TEACHING SKILLS MUST
APPLY IN WHATEVER INSTITUTION AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSES. 
I AM INDEBTED ONCE AGAIN TO PROFESSOR KARMELo
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION
WHOSE REPORT I HAVE MENTIONED THIS AFTERNOON, FOR A
QUOTATION FROM HIS FRANK TATE MEMORIAL LECTURE DELIVERED
LAST WEEK AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE, PROFESSOR KARMEL
SAID THIS AND HE WAS SPEAKING OF THE COURSE THAT TERTIARY
EDUCATION SHOULD TAKE
" ONE WILL, GENERALLY SPEAKING, AIM TOWARDS
RODUCING A CONTINUUM OF EDUCATION OPPORTUNI'TIES,
IN DIVERSE INSTITUTIONS, OFFERING DIVERSE COURSES,
USING DIVERSE MODES OF LEARNING; AND NO DOUBT
WE WILL ATTACH DIVERSE' VALUES TO THEM...
ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE ( WILL STILL) BE IMPORTANT
FOR UNIVERSITIES AND FOR COLLEGES AND WILL SEPARATE
THEM FROM OTHER INSTITUTIONS, BUT IT DOESN'T
MEAN THAT THERE WON'T BE OTHER FORMS OF INSTITUTIONS
THAT MIGHT EMPHASISE OTHER THINGS AND MIGHT REGARD
UNIVERSITIES AS MORE BOUND UP WITH LIFE EXPERIENCES
THAN WITH LEARNING IN THE TRADITIONAL SENSE.,"
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION HELP
PROVIDE THIS ESSENTIAL ELEMENT OF DIVERSITY IN OUR EDUCATIONAL
SYSTEM. BUT THEY DO MORE THAN THAT: THEY MAKE THE WHOLE
PROCESS OF ACCESS TO TERTIARY EDUCATION MORE JUST AND EQUITABLE.
IF WE LOOK BACK ON THE LONG YEARS OF RULE BY LIBERAL-COUNTRY
PARTY GOVERNMENTS, NO ONE WILL DISPUTE THAT UNDER OUR
PREDECESSORS MORE AND MORE YOUNG PEOPLE WERE ADMITTED TO
UNIVERSITIES. 
6-
YET IT WAS ONLY IN THE EARLY DAYS OF WIDESPREAD COMMONWEALTH
SCHOLARSHIPS THAT THIS GREATER ACCESS TO TERTIARY EDUCATION
WAS BASED FAIRLY ON CONSIDERATIONS OF ACADEMIC MERIT ALONE,
AS FEES ROSE AND THE SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME CONTRACTED, A
UNIVERSITY EDUCATION DEPENDED MORE AND MORE ON THE ABILITY
TO PAY FOR IT. ISUGGEST THERE IS A SIMPLE WAY TO TEST
WHETHER GENUINE EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY. EXISTS, WE SHOULD
LOOK TO SEE WHETHER THOSE GOING ON TO HIGHER EDUCATION ARE
DRAWN FROM ALL GROUPS OF THE POPULATION IN THE SAME PROPORTION
AS EACH GROUP IS REPRESENTED IN THE POPULATION.
THE KARMEL REPORT HAS CLEARLY SHOWN THAT IN NO COUNTRY
HAS THIS IN FACT HAPPENED. WE ARE NOT ALONE IN THE SOCIALLY
DISCRIMINATING NATURE OF OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM. MANY
AUSTRALIAN STUDIES HAVE ILLUSTRATED THE GENERAL EXPERIENCE.
A TYPICAL SURVEY OF STUDENTS ENTERING FOUR PROFESSIONAL
FACULTIES IN six AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES IN 1965 AND 1967
SHOWED THAT NEARLY HALF THE STUDENTS ENTERING HIGHER EDUCATION
WERE THE CHILDREN OF PROFESSIONAL AND MANAGERIAL FATHERS, WHO
REPPFSENTEI 17.5% OF THE POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP LIKELY TO
BE FATHERS. INDUSTRIAL WORKERS REPRESENTED NEARLY 60% OF THE
POPULATION, BUT THEIR CHILDREN ACCOUNTED FOR ONLY 22.6% OF
STUDENTS ENTERING THE FOUR FACULTIES. A STUDY OF STUDENTS
ENTERING SCIENCE COURSES AT UNIVERSITIES AND DIPLOMA COURSES
IN APPLIED SCIENCES AT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION IN
AUSTRALIA IN 1969 SHOWED THAT 64% HAD FATHERS IN4 PROFESSIONAL,
MANAGERIAL OR FARM-OWNING OCCUPATIONS, ALTHOUGH THIS CATEGORY
ACCOUNTED FOR 25% OF THE MALE POPULATION; 20.2% OF THE STUDENTS
HAD FATHERS IN MANUAL OCCUPATIONS, ALTHOUGH SUCH WORKERS
ACCOUNTED FOR 59% OF THE MALE POPULATION. o o m 1 
7
PROFESSOR KARMEL' S COMMITTEE CONCLUDED: " AMONG TERTIARY
STUDENTS OF ALL KINDS, THE CHILDREN OF MANUAL W4ORKERS
ARE UNDER-REPRESENTED AND THOSE OF HIGHER STATUS FAMILIES
OVER-REPRESENTED, TO THE EXTENT THAT HIGHER EDUCATION
IS FINANCED FROM TAXES IT HAS, THUS A SOMEWHAT REGRESSIVE
EFFECT, POORER PEOPLE CONTRIBUTING TO THE COST OF EDUCATION
OF A GROUP IN WHICH THE CHILDREN OF RICHER PARENTS PREDOMINATE
AND FROM WHICH RECIPIENTS CAN EXPECT TO DRAW HIGHER THAN
AVERAGE INCOMES. IDON'T WANT IT TO BE THOUGHT FOR A MINUTE THAT WE
SEE COLLEGES AS THE PRIME RECEPTACLES FOR POORER OR LESS
AMBITIOUS STUDENTS, WHILE UNIVERSITIES CONTINUE TO CATER
FOR THE WEL. L-TO-DO. OUR PURPOSE IS TO SEE THAT ALL
INSTITUTIONS OF ADVANCED EDUCATION ARE OPEN TO THE WIDEST
RANGE OF PEOPLE. TERTIARY EDUCATION, IN WHATEVER FORM,
MUST BE AS ACCESSIBLE, AS INTEGRAL A. PART OF THE RANGE OF
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION AS EDUCATION OF ANY OTHER KIND. THIS
IS WHERE GOVERNMENTS IN THE PAST HAVE FAILED. No ONE WOULD
DENY THAT THE UNIVERSITIES HAVE VASTLY IMPROVED IN QUALITY
AND QUANTITY SINCE THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ACCEPTED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM. YET IN 1971 UNIVERSITIES REFUSED
ADMISSION To 131 PER CENT OF THE QUALIFIED APPLICANTS IN
NEW SOUTH WALES, 20 PER CENT OF THE APPLICANTS IN VICTORIA
AND 11 PER CENT IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, EIGHTY-SIX UNIVERSITY
DEPARTMENTS WERE OBLIGED TO IMPOSE ENTRY QUOTAS. ONLY ONE
STUDENT IN EVERY THREE AT UNIVERSITIES AND ONE STUDENT IN
EVERY 10 AT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION HAS RECEIVED
ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. i / 8 
-8-
THE MAJORITY OF PLACES AT TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS HAVE BEEN
OCCUPIED NOT BY THE STUDENTS BEST EQUIPPED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THEM, BUT BY THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD THE FEES.
As YOU KNOW, FROM NEXT JANUARY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL ASSUME FULL RESPONSIBILI* TY FOR THE FUNDING OF AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES. I DO NOT NEED TO EMPHASISE THE IMPORTANCE OF
THIS STEP FOR INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS THIS, OR IF I MAY SAY SO
FOR THE FUTURE OF COMMONWEALTH-STATE FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS,
OUR FIRST ACT WILL BE TO ABOLISH ALL. FEES. To DO SO WILL. COST
US $ 33 MILLION FOR THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF 1973-74 A SMALL
PROPORTION OF THE INCOME UNIVERSITIES RECEIVE, BUT A LARGE
PROPORTION OF THE INCOME OF STUDENTS AND THEIR FAMILIES.
ACCESS TO UNIVERSITY EDUCATION WILL BE ON THE BASIS OF
MERIT RATHER THAN MONEY.
AT THE SAME TIME, MY COLLEAGUE THE MINISTER FOR
EDUCATION, HAS ANNOUNCED A COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAM OF LIVING
ALLOWANCES AND OTHER BENEFITS FOR STUDENTS ENROLLED IN
APPROVED COURSES. THESE MEASURES WILL DO A GREAT DEAL MORE
TO MAKE HIGHER EDUCATION GENUINELY FREE THAN SIMPLY REPLACE
THE EXISTING COMPETITLYF_ SCHOLARSHIP SCHEMES. IN TASMANIA
THIS YEAR LESS THAN 20% OF STUDENTS IN ADVANCED EDUCATION
ARE RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER PROGRAMS INITIATED BY TIHE
PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT. NEXT YEAR, ALL AUSTRALIAN STUDENTS
WILL BE ABLE TO APPLY FOR ASSISTANCE ON THE BASIS OF NEED. ,/ 9 
-9-
LET ME MENTION SOME OF OUR OTHER MEASURES TO IMPROVE
THE STANDARDS OF HIGHER EDUCATION OTHER THAN IN UNIVERSITIES,
ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTS IN JANUARY THIS YEAR WAS TO SET UP
A COMMITTEE ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, THAT COMMITTEE
IS DUE TO REPORT IN THE FIRST HALF OF NEXT YEAR, I HOPE IT
WILL BRING AS MUCH FRESH AIR TO THE STUDY OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
AS THE SCHOOLS COMMITTEE HAS BROUGHT TO SECONDARY EDUCATION,
IT WILL TAKE ACCOUNT OF OVERALL MANPOWER POLICY AND THE NEEDS
OF INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT AND COMMERCE, ANOTHER OF OUR EARLY
INITIATIVES THIS YEAR WAS TO GRANT AN ADDITIONAL $ 5 MILLION
FOR LIBRARY MATERIALS IN ALL COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
DURING THE 1973-75 TRIENNIUM, TASMANIA'S SHARE OF THIS WILL
BE $ 135,000, NEXT, WE HAVE APPOINTED A COMMITTEE OF THE AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION TO ADVISE ON AN OPEN UNIVERSITY,
ONCE AGAIN I ACKNOWLEDGE THE ASSISTANCE OF PROFESSOR KARMEL,
WHO WILL BE THE CHAIRMAN OF THAT INQUIRY, WE HAVE ASKED THE
COMMITTEE TO SEE HOW AUSTRALIA CAN BEST EXPAND THE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR EXTRA-MURAL DEGREE COURSES OF UNIVERSITY STANDARD AND
RAISE GENERAL EDUCATIONAL LEVELS IN THE COMMUNITY,
FINALLY, WE HAVE DECIDED TO TACKLE THE REALITIES OF COST
ESCALATION IN FINANCING TERTIARY EDUCATION, IN TAKING OVER THE
FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS OF THE STATES, THE GOVERNMENT WILL, FROM
THE BEGINNING OF NEXT YEAR, PROVIDE FOR ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROVED
PROGRAMS OF EXPENDITURE, THIS WILL TAKE INTO ACCOUNT COST
VARIATIONS IN BOTH CAPITAL AND RECURRENT EXPENDITURE WHICH WERE
NOT ALLOWED WHEN THE PROGRAMS WERE ORIGINALLY ADOPTED, 
10
THIS WILL BE ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT IN TIMES OF RAPIDLY RISING
COSTS. IMIGHT MENTION HERE THAT I AM AWARE OF YOUR OWN PRESENT
DIFFICULTIES WITH RECURRENT FUNDS. MR. REECE WROTE TO ME A
FEW DAYS AGO ABOUT THIS PROBLEM. kE HAS SENT A DETAILED
STATEMENT TO THE COMMISSION ON ADVANCED EDUCATION TO SUPPORT
HIS REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDS. IASSURE YOU THAT MR. BEAZLEY
WILL BE LOOKING CLOSELY AND SYMPATHETICALLY AT YOUR NEEDS.
IBELIEVE I CAN CLAIM THAT WITHIN A YEAR OF TAKING OFFICE
THE NEW AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TRANSFORMED THE PROSPECTS
FOR EDUCATION IN THIS COUNTRY. ACROSS THE WHOLE FIELD OF
LEARNING AND INSTRUCTION PRE-SCHOOLS, PRIMARY SCHOOLS,
SECONDARY SCHOOLS, TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, UNIVERSITIES
AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION WE HAVE ACTED WITH SPEED
AND DETERMINATION TO RAISE STANDARDS AND INCREASE OPPORTUNITIES.
A LONG ERA OF NEGLECT AND IMPVERISHMENT IS AT AN END; BARRIERS
OF PRIVILEGE AND INEQUALITY ARE BEING STEADILY REMOVED. YOU KNOW
OF THE ATTEMPTS BY OUR OPPONENTS TO USE THEIR POWER IN THE SENATE
TO FRUSTRATE AND DEL. AY THIS PROCESS. THEY HAVEN'T THE COURAGE
TO BLOCK OUR REFORMS OUTRIGHT. THEY PREFER TO HINDER US BY
NIT-PICKING AND STEALTH. ITELL YOU THEY WILL NOT SUCCEED.
THEY WILL NOT SUCCEED BECAUSE THEY KNOW, AS WE KNOW, THAT THE NEW
DEAL IN EDUCATION, THE NEW VISTA OF OPPORTUNITY WE ARE OFFERING
To AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN TO ALL CHILDREN, WHATEVER THE BACKGROUNDS,
THEIR INCOMES, THEIR ENVIRONMENT HAS THE WHOLEHEARTED SUPPORTAND
ENDORSEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. IAPPLAUD THE WORK OF
THIS FINE COLLEGE AND OTHERS LIKE IT. YOU ARE AN ESSENTIAL PART
OF OUR PLANS TO RAISE THE EDUCATIONAL HORIZONS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. 



J~ tAU ST HAL I
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 148
COLOUR TELEVISION 19 November 1973
One of the first acts of the present Australian
Government was to request the Tariff Board to thoroughly
review the electronic industry as a prelude to the
introduction of colour television in Australia. It took
this action on December 7, just 5 days after assuming
office. The Liberal Government had failed to take any
action on this matter. The Board has now reported and
the Government has made its decision after consideration
of that report. As a result, Australians will now have
to pay considerably less for colour TV sets than would
have been the case under a Liberal Government.
The Government has accepted the basic thrust of
the Tariff Board Report on Consumer Electronic Equipment
and Components which recommends that the existing tariff
rates for these goods be reduced significantly. This will
provide the Australian consumer with a wider range of
cheaper electronic consumer goods, including colour
television sets. It will also' provide a basis for greater
specialisation in the relevant sections of the Australian
industry, with consequent benefits for the nation as a
whole. The Government has decided not to accept the
precise recommendations of the Tariff Board in respect of
the rate of duty which would apply. Subject to international
commitments the new rates will be 35%. The Board had
recommended 25% on most imported electronic components,
on imported made-up appliances, including monochrome
and colour TV receivers, radios, radiograms, record players
and the like. The old rates of duty were 33.75% plus
$ 37.50' on TV receivers,* 33., 75% plus $ 7.50 on radio
receivers and 33.75% plus various specific rates on
components. The adoption of the new duty rates will result
in colour TV receivers retailing for at least $ 150 less
than under the tariff pr~ oposals put forward by the
manufacturers. In order to ensure that the benefits of
the new duty rates are passed on to consumers, prices of
colour TV receivers and other electronic consumer goods
will be kept under close review and action considered as
appropriate to ensure that margins and prices are justifiable. / 12 
-2
In supporting its recommendations for a lower
rate of duty than has been accepted, the Board stated
that the level of employment in the industry would be at
least maintained, although a substantial number of persons
would change their employment. Factors contributing to
this arc the current world shortage of components, the
fact that the area of reduced protection is confined to
the consumer electronic products industry and the buoyant
economic conditions presently enjoyed. Under the
Government's decision the employment effects of the
reduction in protection are likely to be less than under
the Tariff Board's proposals. Nevertheless, the Government
has asked Departments to direct their attention to the
likely future situation in regard to employment in South
Australia, which has a narrower range of production than
New South Wales and Victoria, the other States mainly
involved in the electronics industry.
The Cabinet will introduce appropriate subsidy
assistance to maintain, at least until the Tariff Board
report on professional electronic equipment is considered
by the Government, the production in Australia of selected
electronic components which are or could be important for
their defence, telecommunications or technological
significance, e. g.
integrated circuits
discrete semi-conductors
crystals transmitting valves
certain types of capacitors,
special purpose transducers derived from
ceramic capacitors,
certain types of resistors, and
transformers, as used in. electronic equipment.
The precise list of components which might be covered by
such assistance will be determined by the Government after
further consideration of defence, telecommunications and
technological aspects. Advice would be sought from
appropriate Departments and technical authorities, e. g.
Universities and/ or consultants. The nature and extent of
any subsidy assistance would be subject to appropriate
rationalisation and restructuring being undertaken by
the industry in consultation with Government. The details
of this assistance will be determined and announced before
the end of June 1974. The future of the subsidy assistance
introduced will be reviewed at the time of consideration
of the Tariff Board's report on professional electronic
equipment. ./ 3 
Finally, Cabinet has decided that assistance will
be made available to firms and employees harmed by the
proposed tariff changes. Details of assistance and
eligibility will be announced after the completion of the
Government's general consideration of adjustment assistance
principles. If necessary, interim assistance arrangements
will be implemented. The new duties will operate on and from
November 1973. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR, EG. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO OPEN THE AUSTRALIAN HOUSING STANDARDS CONFERENCE,
LAKESIDE INTERNATIONAL HOTELL, CANBERRA,
MONDAY 19 NOVEMBER, 10973
THOSE ACQUAINTED WITH MY PERSONAL FOIBLES WILL
KNOW HOW CLOSE TO MY HEART THE SUBJECT OF YOUR CONFERENCE
HAS ALWAYS BEEN. IN THE MORE MUNDANE MATTERS OF
STATESMANSHIP THERE WERE TWO PARTICULAR HOBBY-HORSES
THAT I RODE WITH GREAT ENERGY DURING MY YEARS IN
OPPOSITION. ONE WAS SEWERAGE; THE OTHER WAS UNIFORM
HOUSING STANDARDS. I REGRET TO SAY THAT MANY PEOPLE MADE
LIGHT OF THESE MATTERS. YET BOTH OF THEM WERE CRUCIAL,
IN THEIR DIF17[ 1RFNT WAYS, TO THE BASIC LIVING STANDARDS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IS STILL
HAMPERED BY A BEWILDERING VARIETY OF LEGAL CODES AND
STANDARDS. IAM THEREFORE DELIGHTED THAT YOU HAVE ASKED
ME TO OPEN THIS IMPORTANT CONFERENCE.$ TRUST THAT, IN
A SINGULAR AND PERHAPS UNSPECTACULAR WAY, IT WILL PROVE
TO BE ONE OF THE MOST FRUITFUL AND REWARDING INITIATIVES
my GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN$ i / 2 
2
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS NOT ALONE IN ITS
PERCEPTION OF THE FOLLIES AND DANGERS OF CONFLICTING
STANDARDS AND OUTMODED PRACTICES IN ALL PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY AND ALL AREAS OF THE BUILDING INDUSTRY.
THE STATES HAVE COME GRADUALLY TO RECOGNISE THIS STATE
OF AFFAIRS. THE STERLING WORK THAT HAS RESULTED IN THE
AUSTRALIAN MODEL UNIFORM BUILDING CODE IS PROOF OF THIS,
AND I HOPE THAT CODE WILL SOON BE ADOPTED BY ALL STATES.
A FURTHER PROOF IS THE PRESENCE HERE TODAY OF THE MOST
REPRESENTATIVE GROUP OF PEOPLE IN THE HOUSING INDUSTRY
EVER GATHERED IN AUSTRALIA BUILDERS, ARCHITECTS,
PLANNERS, MATERIALS SUPPLIERS, UNIONISTS, ADMINISTRATORS,
ENGINEERS, SURVEYORS, CONTRACTORS, INSTITUTIONAL LENDERS
AND BUILDING CONTROLLERS. YOUR COLLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE AND
EXPERIENCE OF THE HOME BUILDING INDUSTRY IS UNRIVALLED.
THERE HAVE BEEN HOUSING SEMINARS AND FORUMS BEFORE,
BUT THIS CONFERENCE IS UNIQUE. YOU ARE NOT HERE SIMPLY TO
EXCHANGE VIEWS AND INFORMATION. YOU HAVE A VERY PRACTICAL
TASK BEFORE YOU. I HOPE THIS CONFERENCE WILL SUPERVISE
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW STANDARDS FOR HOUSING BASED ON
ORIGINAL RESEARCH; THAT . IT WILL DEVELOP MODERN, READILY
UNDERSTOOD NATIONAL HOME BUILDING REGULATIONS WHICH CAN BE
APPLIED AND ADMINISTERED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES.
THAT IS YOUR CHALLENGE. 
-3-
I AM HEARTENED BY THE PRESENCE HERE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT, BECAUSE IT IS THE HOUSING
DEPARTMENTS IN THE STATES AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES WHOSE FULL CO-OPERATION IS NEEDED. WE MUST
ENSURE THAT ANY NEW HOME BUILDING CODE IS A NATIONAL ONE,
A UNIVERSAL ONE, SO THAT INDUSTRY CAN OPERATE WITH THE
GREATEST EFFICIENCY AND ECONOMY, AND ORDINARY HOME BUYERS
CAN BENEFIT FROM REDUCTIONS' IN COST.
I HAVE REFERRED MANY TIMES TO THE NEED TO REDUCE
HOME BUILDING COSTS, BUT THE UNPALATABLE FACT IS THAT LATELY
WE HAVE SEEN INORDINATE INCREASES RATHER THAN REDUCTIONS.
PERHAPS THAT IS DUE TO OUR HIGH STANDARD OF LIVING AND
ADVANCING EXPECTATIONS. 14E ARE NEVER LIKELY TO SEE CHEAP
LABOUR AND CUT-THROAT COMPETITION AGAIN. WITH THE ADVENT
OF RELATIVELY FULL, AND I HOPE STABLE, EMPLOYMENT, AND THE
ADVANCE OF EDUCATION, THERE WILL BE A PROGRESSIVELY
DECLINING SUPPLY OF ON-SITE LABOUR, OF SEMI-SKILLED MEN
FOR BRICKYARDS AND TIMBER MILLS, ! IE MUST EXPECT A MORE
MECHANIZED ERA IN BUILDING LESS ON-SITE WORK AND MORE
FACTORY WORK IN WHICH GREATER UNIFORMITY AND
RATIONALISATION OF PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES WILL HELP
REDUCE COSTS. I AM TOLD THAT EVERY ONE PER CENT SAVING ( F
COSTS IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IS WORTH AT LEAST
MILLION A YEAR. / 4 
I DO NOT HAVE TO TELL BUILDERS AND SUPPLIERS
HOW DIFFERING REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS ADD SIGNIFICANTLY
TO THEIR COSTS. THEY KNOW THIS. IT IS A SUBJECT THAT
YOUR CONFERENCE WILL EXPLORE. IT IS SUFFICIENT FOR ME TO
EMPHASISE THAT SUBSTANTIAL ECONOMIES IN HOME BUILDING CAN
BE ACHIEVED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE AT OUR COMMAND. THE
BENEFITS WILL BE FELT IN THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE QUALITY OF
LIFE FOR THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE, AND NOT LEAST
FOR THOSE WITH PARTICULAR NEEDS THE ELDERLY, THE DISABLED,
ABORIGINESAND PEOPLE LIVING IN AREAS OF CLIMATIC EXTREMES.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHOLEHEARTEDLY SUPPORTS
THE OBJECTIVES OF THIS CONFERENCE. WE HAVE TAKEN THE
INITIATIVE BY ESTABLISHING AN EXPERT TECHNICAL TASK FORCE.
THIS TASK FORCE WILL INCLUDE ARCHITECTS, ENGINEERS,
QUANTITY SURVEYORS AND SOCIOLOGISTS, SUPPORTED BY TECHNICAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS OF THE NEW COMBINED DEPARTMENT
OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION.
THE MAIN OBJECTIVE OF THE TASK FORCE WILL BE TO
PREPARE A NUMBER OF GENERALLY ACCEPTABLE-MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
FOR HOME BUILDING IN AUSTRALIA, EXPRESSED AS CLEARLY AND
SIMPLY AS POSSIBLE. LET ME EMPHASISE THAT UNIFORM HOUSING
STANDARDS NEED NOT MEAN UNIFORMITY IN STYLES. EACH AUSTRALIAN
CITY HAS A DISTINCTIVE ARCHITECTURE, AND IT IS CENTRAL TO OUR
PLANS FOR NEW AUSTRALIAN CITIES THAT AUSTRALIANS SHOULD HAVE
AN AUTHENTIC CHOICE OF LOCATIONS AND STYLES. 
THE FORMULATION OF SUCH NATIONAL STANDARDS WILL INVOLVE
CLOSE CONSULTATION WITH THE STATES AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS
DIRECTLY CONCERNED. WE ARE LOOKING FOR CONSENSUS: WE
ARE NOT SEEKING TO ACCEPT A LOWEST AGREED DENOMINATOR.
WHERE NECESSARY, THE EXPERTS WILL UNDERTAKE FRESH RESEARCH
SO THAT DECISIONS CAN BE BASED ON SCIENTIFIC FINDINGS.
THE GOVERNMENT INTENDS THAT THE TASK FORCE WILL
PREPARE A SERIES OF SUPPLEMENTARY PUBLICATIONS AFTER
STUDYING CLIMATIC DIFFERENCES, DESIGN AND SITING,
SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AND FITMENTS WITHIN DWELLINGS.
THIS CONFERENMF AND ITS EXPERT COMMITTEESWILL PROVIDE
THE GUIDELINES THAT THE TASK FORCE WILL FOLLOW.
AT THE SAME TIME THE HOUSING INDUSTRY WILL BE ABLE TO
REVISE ITS THINKING IN OTHER DIRECTIONS, ESPECIALLY
IN ADOPTING NEW METRIC SIZES. AND REMEMBER ALWAYS THAT
HOUSING STANDARDS ARE NOT NEEDED MERELY TO ENSURE THAT
ONE COMPONENT FITS ANOTHER, BUT THAT MINIMUM STANDARDS
AND QUALITIES PREVAIL.
THE AIJSRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS AN IMPORTANT
RESPONSIBILITY IN BOTH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE HOUSING, WE HAVE
DIRECT RESPONSIBILITY FOR GOVERNMENT HOUSING IN THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY A~ D THC NOSYHERN TERRITORY. IF, HOWEVER,
WE CAN REDUCE THE COST OF HOUsING IN THE STATES BY RESEARCH,
BY DEVELOPMENT AND BY UNIFYING HOME BUILDING REGULATIONS, THE
TAXPAYER'S HOUSING DOLLAR CAN BE MADE TO GO FURTHER IN EACH
STATE'S WELFARE HOUSING PROGRAMS, / 6 
-6
TO TAKE ONE PRACTICAL EXAMPLE, THERE IS CLEARLY
A NEED FOR UNIFORM HOUSING STANDARDS IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ALBIJRY-WODONGA. IMAGINE THE DIFFICULTIES CREATED
AND HIGH COSTS INCURRED IF THE DIFFERENCES IN REGULATORY
REQUIREMENTS WHICH NOW EXIST ON OPPOSITE SIDES OF THE
MURRAY ARE ALLOWED TO CONTINUE. THIS IS TRUE FOR OTHER
POPULATION CENTRES NEAR STATE BORDERS. WE WANT TO ENSURE
THAT A COMPANY PRODUCING COMPONENTS OR FITTINGS IN ToowooMBA
CAN HAVE A NATION-WIDE MARKET AND SELL ITS PRODUCTS IN
PERTH AND LAUNCESTON.
A NATIONAL CONFERENCE SUCH AS THIS CAN TAKE
INITIATIVES TO SECURE TI* IS. WITH CO-OPERATIVE EFFORT
AMONG PEOPLE OF MANY DISCIPLINES, GREAT ABILITIES AND
MUCH EXPERIENCE, I AM SURE THIS CONFERENCE CAN MAKE REAL
PROGRESS IN OVERCOMING THE URGENT PROBLEMS FACING THE HOME
BUIL. DING INDUSTRY. I WISH YOU SUCCESS. IT GIVES ME
GREAT PLEASURE TO DECLARE THIS INAUGURAL MEETING OF THE
AUSTRALIAN HOUSING STANDARDS CONFERENCE OPEN. 



A. B. C. BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP,
CANBERRA, TUESDAY 20.11.73
On 8 December less , than three weeks from now you
will be voting on two questions of great importance to Australia's
future and the prosperity of each one of us. You will be voting
in two referendums to decide whether to give the Australian
Parliament the power to make laws about prices and incomes.
I want you to vote YES on both questions. If you do,
you will be giving the national Parliament and the national
Government an essential weapon to fight inflation and to help
keep prices down.
Rising prices are a problem in almost every country
in the world. Indeed, much of Australia's inflation has been
caused by inflation in larger, wealthier countries. The
Australian Government has done much to counter it. We have
introduced a Prices Justification Tribunal. We have cut tariffs.
We have revalued the dollar twice. And we have introduced a wide
range of other fiscal and m9netary measures.
Despite these efforts, the battle is not yet won.
For there is no simple magic cure for inflation especially when
the national Government is denied the full armory of economic
weapons. Don't let us fight inflation with'one arm tied behind;
. our backs. The powers we seek are essential powers. The national
SPariiaments of all comparable countries have these powers and
use them. In Australia, the States have the powers but they
have not used them. 
-2-
They have refused to refer them to the national Parliament.
We believe that if such powers are to be effective they must
be uniform, immediate and unchallengeable in their application.
Only the national Government cqn act in this way. Inflation
is a national problem which demands national answers. This
is accepted by the Governments of the. United Kingdom, the
United States, Japan, and all other western countries.
Our opponents say that the national Parliament should
not be given powers over prices and incomes. Yet in the same
breath they have called for a prices and incomes freeze. I don't
blame you for wondering just what they believe in. But you can
be quite clear about what my Government believes in. We will
not impose any overall, arbitrary freeze. Our powers, if you
grant them to us, will be used carefully, selectively, with
restraint and discrimination.
The simple truth is that the States have refused to
act together against inflation. Our opponents know, although
they will not admit it, that the largest States have refused at
a special conference and at subsequent meetings to co-operate
with the Australian Government. One Premier would not even
come to dinner with me to discuss the problem. The time has
now come for positive and decisive action. 
-3-
On 8 December you can help fight inflation by
writing the word YES in both squares on the ballot paper.
You can ensure that pension increases and the savings of people
on fixed incomes have real value. You can ensure that the new
wage today need not mean inflated prices at the supermarket
tomorrow. You can ensure . that all incotnes not just wages
will be subject to fair and equal scrutiny. You can ensure,
by voting YES, that the national Government is given every
possible weapon to fight inflation and help keep prices down.
In this way you will help to strengthen and safeguard the very
real prosperity we are now enjoying. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY 20TH NOVEMBER 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and Gentlemen there were a couple of things
that I announced about 23 hours ago after the Cabinet meeting
yesterday. I can give you a couple of others. First the appointment
to the Commonwealth Banking Corporation of Mr Cliff Dolan. His
appointment will take effect from the 24th. He is being appointed
to succeed Mr R. D. Williams Barney Williams who, whom you
remember, nas been appointed to the Australian Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission. Mr Dolan is Federal Secretary of the
Electrical Trade Union of Australia and is senior Vice-President
of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Then the matter of four
weeks recreation leave, for employees in the private sector in
the Territories. We are introducing an ordinance which will be
gazetted of course, by the appropriate minister, to apply four
weeks recreation leave for employees in the pzivate sector in the
Capital Territory; official members of the Northern Territory
Legislative Council will introduce an ordinance to make similar
provisions for private sector employees in that territory and
appropriate measures are being taken to introduce minimum periods
of recreation leave in the other nonself-governing territories;
that is Norfolk Island, Christmas Island and Cocos Island. There
is another matter I can announce to you. We have decided to
participate in the International Exposition on the Environment to
be held in Spokane, Washington, between May and October next year.
Discussions are proceeding between officials to determine the nature
and scale of Australian participation and a report is expected to
be submitted to Cabinet within the ne-xt fortnight. The exposition
has been sanctioned by the Bureau of International Expositions oF.
which Australia is now again a member and it is part of the 200thl
anniversary celebrations of American independence. The Soviet Union,
Japan, Canada, France and Mexico are participating as well as othler
countries in Europe, the Pacific area and Latin America. Are there
any questions.
QUESTION: Will you explain why and on what information or advice
the Government decided to vary the recommendation of the Tariff Board
on protection of the Australian electronics industry?
PRIME MINISTER: It was made as a result of discussion around the
Cabinet and officials were called in to advise as to the difference
this would make in money terms for the various sets.
QUESTION: Do you believe that the matters exposed by the Parliament
early today were resolved to your personal satisfaction and in the
highest traditions of the Parliament established Westminster, and
do you believe that by today's vote by the Parliament, your reaction
both within the Parliament and outside have been vindicated.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. You were able to see what happened last week. 
-2-
QUESTION: May I follow that up with one clarification in the
House this morning Sir, you said you had apologised last week
for your remarks. My understanding of it, sitting in the gallery,
that you offered to apologise
PRIME MINISTER: No. I withdrew the aside I made across the table
in response to Mr Snedden. It was an aside in each case as I
pointed out, because it was not heard by the Speaker, or the Clerk,
or any members, or in the press gallery or by pressmen who were
listening on the radio. Mr Snedden dobbed me in. I withdrew what
I said. You remember he wouldn't withdraw what he-* said.
QUESTION: Quite clear. This morning, I though however, you were
referring to the other remarks about Dr Forbes which you said
positively at one stage last week, you wouldn't withdraw, and later
you said you offered to withdraw. You haven't withdrawn your remarks.
PRIME MINISTER: I won't say yes or no. I forget what happened.
I do remember quite clearly the matter of the aside across the table,
the offensive language he used and which I capped.
QUESTION: You allowed Francis James a theological question. Now
do you permit a gastronomical question?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, which paper do you represent? He represented
a theological paper. Do you represent a church paper or do you
represent a gastronomical paper?
QUESTION: A gastonomic interest. Your....
PRIME MINISTER: I wish my gastronomical interest had the same
elegance as yours.
QUESTION: You are very critical of some people's drinking habits.
How much truth is there in the rumour that you have your own
special interest in chocolate eclairs and that these are reasonably
provided in -the Cabinet Room?
PRIME MINISTER: There are no chocolate eclairs provided in the
Cabinet room. I have my problems. And I don't want to admit any
more weaknesses than I have to. However, you have mentioned the
Cabinet and while its proceedings are secret, I can assurc you that
chocolate eclairs are not provided under this government. I do admit
that I eat during sitting hours.
QUESTION: Chocolate eclairs?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But you could tempt me.
QUESTION: From the answer you gave to Mr Haupt's question about
officials being called in to give the results bf what various rates
would be on the price of television sets, can we take it from that,
that that was the main consideration in Cabinet the price and price
( unclear) price of television sets? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: It was a very large consideration in fixing the
tariff duty. As you realise, the variation between the tariff duties
fixed by Cabinet and that recommended by the Tariff Board had very
little consequence in terms of price.
QUESTION: Sir, but what about employment effects?
PRIME MINISTER: It would reduce.... . It wasn't the only factor. It
was a very large factor. But it would mitigate any employment
effects; but I am not asserting that there would be any employment
effects. I guess you have seen the Tariff Board report now. You
have read it. And it is quite clear that there will be no fewer
people, in the Tariff Board's view, employed in manufacturing
television sets under the new duties, the reduced duties, than
there were under the old duties. The reason being quite clear:
that the cheaper the set, the more sets are going to be produced
and sold. There will be other employment aspects. For instance,
colour television requires many more people to service it, and the more
sets you sell the more people will be required to service those
sets. Furthermore, there will be more employment in the entertainment
industry, particularly in the aspects engaged in the production of
radio and television programs, if more people are able to buy sets
to pick up those radio and television programs. So there will be
no reduction in employment. The cheaper the sets the greater the
employment is likely to be. So this was considered but it was not
the main consideration, and it was not one on which the officials
were asked to calculate.
QUESTION: In the first three years after the introduction of
colour television, it can be calculated that the cost to consumers
of the Government's modification to the Tariff Board's report
will be $ 36 million. That is, one dollar for every man, woman
and child in Australia. The modifications were justified on
defence grounds. How do you reconcile this with the following
statement in the Tariff Board's report: " It would appear from
advice obtained from the Department of Defence that the Board's
recommendations would not significantly affect Australian defence
requirements." Page 22.
PRI: ME MINISTER: You have been told, I think. Anyway I will read
you what we have said on the defence aspects: " The G3overnment will
introduce appropriate subsidy assistance to maintain at least until
the Tariff Board's report on Professional Electronic Equipment is
considered by the Government." That is, the sort of equipment
that is required by Defence Departments, radio stations and
television stations. " The production in Au7, tralia of selected
electronic components which are or could be important for their
defence, telecommunications or technological significance. For
example...." and there were 10 quoted there. " The precise list of
components which might be covered by such a system, is to be
determined by the Government after further consideration of defence,
telecommunications and technological aspects. * Advice will be sought
from appropriate departments and technical authorities for instance,
universities and/ or consultants. The nature and extent of any
subsidy assistance will be subject to appropriate ratinnalisation and
re-structuring being undertaken by the industry in con siltation with
the Government. The details of this assistance are tc je determined 
-4-
and announced before the end of next June. The future of the subsidy
assistance introduced is to be reviewed-at the time of consideration
of the Tariff Board's report on Professional Electronic Equipment."
So the whole question of the defence aspects will be considered
together, you will notice, with the Tariff Board's pending report
on Professional Electronic Equipment.
QUESTION: Sir, it can also be calculated that in the first 3 years
after introduction of colour television, the Government's modification..
PRIME MINISTER: I am not endorsing or rejecting your calculations.
QUESTION: I calculate that they will reduce the sales of television
sets by 100,000
PRIME MINISTER: I am not commenting on your calculations. The
fact is that television sets will be very much cheaper for individuals
and. for the whole community now than they would have been if the
Government hadn't changed. I am not commenting on your calculations-
I am not nimble enough to do it.
QUESTION: In your statement last night on the tariff cuts you
said that the Government would take appropriate action to ensure
that the benefits were passed on to the consumers. Who will take
this action, and what do you regard is the appropriate action?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government can determine the price of imports.
And this can be done by the Prices Justification Tribunal or by
the Government after consideration by the Joint Committee on Prices
in the Parliament.
QUESTION: Sir, you have said in thte past that you are prepared to
answer questions on specific interdepartmental committees. I understand
there was an interdepartmental committee which considered the
tariff report on television. Will you tell us what it said, since
you didn't release it with the report?
PRIME MINISTER: I said that I would give the membership and the
charter and the timetable of such reports. I didn't say I would
release the reports. This matter was raised in Cabinet and Cabinet
decided not to release it. One very good reason why this or some
other inter-departmental committee reports are not release, is
that there are references to legal aspects and a Government naturally
doesn't give the legal aspects of its decision to the public.
This inter-departmental committee, as I announced in the Parliament
in answer to a question last Thursday, as I recall, in answer to
a question without notice last Thursday, because it was announced
last June. I appointed the Standing Inter-departmental Committee
on Assistance to Industries last April. The text of the letter as
an arinexure to Sir John Crawford's report on a. commission for
assistance to industries I forget the precise title that he gave
to his report that was signed by Sir John and given to the Government
and released by the Government to all members, and I think to you
Ladies -id Gentlemen, last June and theexistence of this committee,
of course as I recall, in a question without notice last Thursday,
it was also noted in an answer I gave to a question on notice by
Mr Snedden. The Interdepartmental Committee on Assistance to
Industries. The membership of it was announced where it appears in 
the Crawford Report annexure. on this occasion the SIDC comprised
representatives of the Departments of the Treasury, Secondary
Industry, Overseas Trade, Labour, Customs and Excise, Defence, Supply,
Science, the Postmaster-General, the Cities Commission the Prime
Minister and the Department of the Media, was consulted by the
committee. If anybody had asked how the committee was composed
for the consideration of the Tariff Board report on colour television
they would have got this answer.
QUESTION: I refer to your appointment of a very senior career
diplomat, Sir David Anderson, to be Ambassador in Paris. Is this
an indication that all is forgiven with. France over their nuclear
tests and supplementary to that, in that the ICJ case comes up
again next year, in what capacity will you be using the retiring
Solicitor-General and what will he be paid, to conduct our case
before the ICJ.
PRIME MINISTER: The dispute with France about her nuclear tests
continue I regret to say it is undiminished. That appears from
what Australia's representatives have said, and how they have voted
in the current United Nations General Assembly and its committee.
In other respects, relations with France are correct. The retired
Solicitor-General Mr Ellicott, will be appearing for Australia in
the International Court of Justice hearing of Australia's case
against France, arising from the breach which we allege of France's
international obligations, and in particular, the Treaty 1928. Treatyto
which we are both parties. I don't know what his fee will be.
But if I did know, I wouldn't tell you. You don't expect me to
state what fees are of individuals.
QUESTION: Back on the Tariff Board report, I am afraid. Can you
explain why the Government did not accept the Tariff Board's
recommendation of 25% duty. If you are saying that this Government
will make colour television sets cheaper than the previous Government,
why instead have you raised the duty in Cabinet to 35%. What is
the reason for this?
PRIME MINISTER: The Tariff Board report recommended that there should
be a 25% duty on electronic components excluding colour cathode
tubes, 30$ on monochrome and colour TV and 30% on radios, radiograms,
and sound recorders reproduced. It was clear that there was no
great significant difference in the cost if it was made 35% for all
of these. In particular you mention about the 25% duty recommended by
the Tariff Board on the electronic components. The advice is
that there is no substantial reason for having 25 on those particular
items and 30 on the others.
QUESTION: So everything is
PRIME MINISTER: Everything is 
-6-
QUESTION: Just on the decison making processes of the Labor Party.
Did I understand you correctly to say that Cabinet yesterday had
outside advisers in during the course of the Cabinet meeting
PRIME MINISTER: At one time.
QUESTION: Is this the first time it has ever happened.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: So it is not unusual for this to occur.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, it is unusual, but it has happened with us and
I am informed that it has happened quite often under preceding
governments. QUESTION: On on another aspect of it, Mr Whitlam, you spoke in
Cabinet last week in respect to tariff policy and the executive, the
Cabinet as opposed to Caucus. However, Caucus made other important
policy decisions which one might say were taken in the course of
very brief debate in Caucus, such as four weeks annual leave for the
private sector in the ACT and the goldmining and other mining bills.
Is there any procedure within the Labor Party's decision making
process for holding up hot issues so that they can be considered
at a more leisurely pace, or with written submissions or does
Caucus retain this right all the time to make on-the-spot decisions
about major policy issues.
PRIME MINISTER: There are Standing Committees of the Caucus, as
you know, which provide for consideration of any matters which the
Committees or the Caucus want to consider and that is what the
Standing Orders provide that there should be consideration of such
matters by the Caucus Committee. These Committees, as you know,
are composed of people who nominate themselves. Every member of
the Caucus can nominate himself for three Committees, but Standing
Orders like any Standing Orders can be suspended and they were
last week.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, could I just clarify a point on that
Caucus procedure, you said in Parliament last week that you would
not accept that Tariff matters should go to the Caucus before being
announced in Parliament or announced generally. However, back in
May on the 9th of May, there was a Caucus decision that all matters
relating to changes in Tariffs, subsidies and bounties be referred
to Caucus for a final decision. Will you take the same attitude
in relation to subsidies and bounties that you have taken in regard
to Tariffs?
PRIME MINISTER: Any matter which comes for a vote, or which can come
for a vote, in Parliament, goes to the Caucus t~ o decide its collective
attitude. I made this quite clear and there is no need for me to
clarify it further, I made it quite clear in the House when I was asked
the question on it last Thursday morning by one of the Liberal members. 
-7-
QUESTION: It was the timing, Sir, that was all. You pointed out
last Thursday in answer to that question that you would first
report to the Parliament and the Caucus later. You said that at
this Press Conference last week, that was in relation to Tariffs.
PRIME MINISTER: That was in answer to a question, I think by
Mr Maximilliam Walsh.
QUESTION: Well will the same thing apply with bounties and subsidies.
Will you first make the decision and then take it to the Caucus?
PRIME MINISTER: If they require a vote in the Parliament, I will.'
There are two things. The first is, is there a matter on which
people can speculate and which therefore should be considered by
persons who are under obligation to keep the matters confidential.
There are clear cases of that nature in respect to a budget or
most Tariff Board reports. There are some Tariff Board reports
where clearly the question of speculation can't arise or would be
too remote to be significant. Then, clearly, if any matter can
come to a vote in the Parliament, the Caucus determines its collective
attitude on those matters.
QUESTION: After you have made the announcement in public?
PRIME MINISTER: I do not need to say anything more about it.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, last week Australia was reported to
abstaining from a U. N. resolution against South Africa, and I was
wondering if you could reconcile this decision with your earlier
remarks about South Africa in particular lendingi Australia's support
to any international action to bring down the South African Government.
PRIME MINISTER: If you had the text here, I could show you where we
regarded this as being excessive. On balance, we though~ that the
resc; Lution went too far. We do not oppose, this Government does not
oppose resolutions which are substantially acceptable. That is,
wc do not oppose a resolution because there may be one small
component which we certify as unacceptable. But if you saw the full'
text you would understand why we voted in that way.
QUESTION: What is the significant part of it Prime Minister, what
do you regard as
PRIME MINISTER: Let us look at the text.
QUESTION: In the House today, Sir, you seem to have conceded that
Dr Kissinger was right, and you were wrong over the issue of whether
President Nixon had called the U. S. Military alert for domestic
American consumption. Was this a serious diplomatic error. If so,
Sir, was the error your responsibility or the responsibility of
bad advice from your Department?
PRIME MINISTER: I have got nothing to add to what I said in the
Parliament. 
-8-
QUESTION: When is Mr Barnard expected to go to Washington to
re-negotiate the relationship of the Australian Government to the
United States Government on U. S. bases in Australia and will that
involve us paying for use of bases such as North-west Cape and
will it also involve us being given a guarantee that they will never
be allowed to send signals there without our permission?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Barnard will be visiting the United States
in the recess. I think probably in January and there will be many
aspects discussed. I do not propose to endorse the aspects
that you have mentioned or reject them, or add to them.
QUESTION: This is a follow-up to my earlier question, Sir,
as I understand it, the IDC that I referred to earlier endorsed
the Tariff Board's decision and I also understand that the two
Departments which briefed Cabinet yesterday did not endorse the
Tariff Board's deicision although they were members of the IDC;
can you confirm whether that is so and can you also tell us why
the other Departments of the IDC that believed in the Tariff Board's
recommendations were not given the opportunity to brief Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: The Departments from which officers were asked to
come to Cabinet to give calculations of the effect of varying
Tariff duties were Prime Minister's, Secadary Industry and Customs
and Excise.
QUESTION: Senator Bishop is now back with us Sir, and I was
wondering whether he would remain * in Repatriation or will he go
to A. C. T. or what is the position, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I will let you know if I have anything to say
on this.
QUESTION: My question is in regard to the reported resignation
of Senator Cavanagh of Minister in charge of Government business
in the Senate. I was wondering Sir, whether you have accepted
Senator Cavanagh's resignation; if not, do you intend to accept
his resignation and thirdly Sir, do you think that Senator Murphy
should have consulted Senator Cavanagh before he moved the adjournment
on what has now turned out to be a rather eventful Wednesday night?
PRIME MINISTER: I discussed this matter this morning with the two
Senators you mention and I have not spoken to them since.
QUESTION: Sir, you have said that you have discussed these matters
with Senator Cavanagh and Senator Murphy, what was the outcome of
the discussions?
PRIME MINISTER: I have not seen them since.
QUESTION: Wasn't there an outcome at the time?
PRIME MINISTER: No. 
QUESTION: You said Sir, when Mr Johns asked what powers you would
have to impose on the prices and imports of television sets,
that you hi snmething such as your Committee in the House of
Representatives to examine import prices, now the first report of
this particular Committee has been a very mixed bag, it is a set-in
point of fact that your evaluations failed to work quite significantly
in the area of pharmaceuticals, and also in respect of timber,
perhaps they are unsure about timber so quite clearly you
really do have no powers if all you can do is report. And so, what
powers would you have and are these the sort of powers you would
hope to activate after your referendum?
PRIME MINISTER: The Parliamentary Committee, like any other
Parliamentary Committee, it has no executive powers at all. But
like nearly every Parliamentary Committee, I think everyone which
is in existence at the moment, it is composed of members from both
sides of the House or in the case like this Joint Committees of
each side of both Houses and it can make recommendations or findings
and there can be majority and minority reports and there was on the
one that you mentioned. And it is then for the Government to take
executive action in the light of the Committee's findings or
recommendations majority recommendations or the minority ones
if it likes. The difference of opinion on the imports that you
mentioned I think consisted of Mr Gorton presenting a view different
to that of his colleagues. I have not followed it in any great detail,
but he asserted that the findings were Government on one side and
Opposition on the other. It was pointed out and then Mr Gorton
acknowledged that the other Member or Members from the Oppositin
supported the Government members on this matter. Mr Gorton differed
from his opponents and his colleagues. 



, LW51AR(; U: 8.-W P: 4 THURSDAY 122 : 7ov 7 3
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, TO THE
LABOR COUNCIL OF N. S. W. TRADES HALL, SYDNEY THURSDAY 22 NOVEMBER 1973.
PRICES AND INCOMES
I welcome this opportunity to address the Labor Council
of N. S. W. on the forthcoming referendums on prices and incomes.
Your council is the largest State trade union organisation in
Australia. Clearly the attitude of the one million members of
the 110 unions affiliated with this council will play an important
part in determining the success of the referendums.
I believe it is undeniably in the interests of these
people and all of the wage and salary earners of N. S. W. that
the referendums do succeed. For what we are seeking the power
for the Australian Parliament to make laws about prices and about
incomes will enhance our abil. ity to try to ensure that the
prosperity of our nation is a reality for all our people, and not
just an illusion. Such a power will not be a cure-all but it will
add significantly to the armoury of economic weapons which we can
deploy) particularly in the fight against inflation.
No section of the community can be more aware of the
effects of inflation than the trade union movement. No section of
the community is more constantly engaged in trying to achieve a
real improvement in living standards in the face of inflation than
the trade unions. With one possible exception, it is their members
who suffer most from rising prices. That exception would probably
be pensioners and other people on low fixed incomes and the
trade union movement has always shown a vigorous concern about any
erosion of the value of their benefits and savings. / 2 
The Government has demonstrated beyond doubt its
determination to deal with the problem of inflation. Not that we
concede for a minute that the overall economic picture should be
regarded gloomily. This year we have lifted our national growth
rate to) a near record of We are enjoyingj conditions of
buoyant business prosperity. We are intent on keeping things
that way. Nevcrtheless we rus~, t recognise, and we have recognised,
that Australia, in common with the rest of the world, is undergoing
a period of hiqh inflation. Rising prices must obviously diminish
to an extent the benefits of any general prosperity, particularly
for wage and salary earners. Already we have acted by introducing
a series of carefully timed and related anti-inflationary measures.
We have established the Prices justification Tribunal. We have
cut tariffs. We have revalued the dollar twice. And other fiscal
and monetary action has been takcn when needed.
I would mention in this context our decision this we]'
to cut tariffs on television sets and other electronic equipment.
Primarily this has been done to ensure that ~ Australians do no-' L
have to pay excessive prices for colour television sets. We are
sure that Australians will be able to benefit from this decision
without any drop in the level of employment in the industry. / 3 
-3-
one measure we have not been prepared to take to counter
inflation is to create unemployment. We are not prepared to see
a return to the situation in 1972 when economic action taken by
the previous government resulted in 130,000 people being out of
work. We repudiate firmly and unchangeably such an antiquated
and harmiful approach to dealing with inflation. Indeed, within
months of coming into office, the Labor Government has reduced
unemployment as nearly as possible to acceptable limits.
I have already mentioned however, that, despite the
action we have taken to try to counter rising prices, the Australian
Government is denied a full complement of economic powers to deal
with this problem. The power to make laws about. prices and
incomes resides with the States. They have been unwilling or
unable to use effectively their power to contain prices. This
applies particularly in Victoria and Queensland, all of
which are dominated by non-labor governments. The Australian
Government has asked the States to refer their powers to it so that
national action can be taken but the three largest States have
refused co-operation.
It -is against this background that we are now taking
this question to the people in the referendums to be held on
8 December. This approach is based on the firm conviction that
inflation is a national problem which demands national answers.
All comparable countries have the powers that we are seeking.
We are asking the people to give us nothing more and nothing less
than the economic authority which the governments of these countries
command. / 4 
The trade union movement is, of course, solidly behind
us in seeking the prices power. It knows that this power wijll
provide the chance for hard-won wage and salary gains to catch
tip on price increases. It knows that it will give the elected
government the opportunity to protect the incomes and savings of
pensioners and fixed income earners. It knows that it will give
homebuyers the prospect of stabilised * costs for land and materials.
The Government does not intend to rigidly apply wideranging
price control. It will make flexibl. e and selective use
of the powers which it is seeking. However, it should have the
ability to prevent, where necessary, excessive rises in the price
of essential commodities. I am confident that with the continued
support of the trade unions and other sections of the community,
that we will be given this ability on 8 December.
T'he union movement however, is not solidl. y supporting us
in seeking the power to make laws about incomes. I know that the
fear of a number of officials is that this power might be used to
introduce a freeze on wages. I have said before, and unequivocally
I will say again, that the Australian Government has no intention
of taking such drastic action. You have more than just my pledg~ e
on that; a freeze on wages and salaries would be contrary to
the statement in the A. L. P. Platform that " good industrial relations
will be best achieved by agreement initially arrived at between
trade unions and employers." I also believe that even our opponents,
if ' they were returned to office, would be forced to recoil from such
a free2ze because of its arbitrary and heavy-handed nature. The
disruption and disharmony that this type of action would cause,
would. I believe, deter them. 
Despite this, we are all aware that the Australian
Council of Trade Unions has called upon affiliated bodies to
campaign against the incomes power. The ACTU Executive on
October decided that this proposal. is " beyond ACTU policy".
I am not suggesting that too much significance be read into the
use of the world " beyond"; but it is interesting that the
Executive did not say that the proposal is " against ACTU policy".
The substantial ground of objection by the Executive
is that " the A. C. T. U. will under no circumstances accept a wage
freeze and will actively campaign against any proposal to
implement a wage freeze in this country." I have already pointed
out that the incomes power and a wages freeze are definitely not
the same thing. You have the undertaking of the Government and
the Australian Labor Party that there will be no freeze; and you
can make the realistic assessment that any blustering inclination
towards it by our opponents would disappear if they had the chance
to consider such a move.
I do not believe that the incomes power is against the
interests of trade unions. Indeed, I would point out to you that
the ACTU Congress the supreme policy-making body of the
organisation as recently as 4 September carried without dissent
as part of its economic policy for the ensuing two years a demand
that " direct regulation over non-wage forms of incomes as a means
of ureve nting excessive increases in these incomes" be introduced. 
-6-
There is no way that any national Government could act
on this demand without the incomes power which we are seeking.
It would be a legislative nightmare although perhaps ultimately
a lawyer's delight in the courts for us to frame and seek a more
restricted power. How would we define non-wage incomes for the
purpose of an amendment to the Constitution? I do not believe
that we could achieve the necessary precision of definition. I
believe that the public would be so confused by any attempt to do
so that, in keeping with the result of so many referendums in the
past, people would play safe and reject a proposal of this kind
in favour of the status-quo.
In making my opening broadcast on the referendums on
national television on Tuesday night, I said that, if powers over
prices and incomes are to be effective, they must be uniform,
immediate and unchallengeable in their application. Even if we
were to attempt to succeed in an attempt to acquire a limited
power over incomes, that power could not be either immediate or
unchallengeable in its application.
So we are left with the proposition that, for the national
government to do anything about non-wage incomes, it must be given
the power that we are seeking now. In keeping with our attitude
towards price control, we would only apply our authority over
incomes flexibly and selectively. Even then, it would be a mistake
to regard this as a purely negative power. It would, for example,
enable us to ensure the eventual attainment of equal pay for all
women in the workforce. It would also permit the Australian
Parliament to make allowances for inflation, if necessary, by making
periodic adjustments to wages and salaries, as it is already making
periodic adjustments to pensions. 
-7-
On this last point I was amused recently when my attention
was drawn to a statement made by Mr Snedden, when he was Treasurer,
in an interview published in the " National Times" in February 1972.
He was asked about his attitude towards quarterly costs-of-living
adjustments to wages. And he said: " It's curious if you go back
to I think it was ' 53 when the adjustments were suspended, they
were doning damage at that time in a different environment. The
curious inversion now is that if you had quarterly adjustments you
would reduce the wage increase." The changing attitudes of
Mr Snedden become curiouser and curiouser! The only effective way
that he could pursue such a policy would be for the Australian
Parliament to have the power to make laws about incomes.
Aside fromL Mr Snedden's vagaries, a strong economic
argument can be made for the introduction of regular cost-of-living
adjustments to wages and salaries. The argument rests on the view
that some wage and salary demands are forced very high by the
fear that more moderate pay increases will be rendered inadequate
by rising prices. The Australian Government at present does not have
the power to introduce cost-of-living adjustments to counter this
problem. It is unable to do more than ask the Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission to do Clearl,, it would be a qreat
advaintagje to unionist!: to Le able tr; cnter , waye and salary negotiation
or award hearings with the knowledge that the Government could, if
necessary, subsequently adjust upwards any new wages or salaries
achieved through these processes, if their value was eroded by rising
prices. / 8 
I also ask you to consider the use to which income
powers have been put by the State Government in NJ. S. W. To m~ y knowledge,
no N. S. W. Government of any political complexion has used its
legislative authority to decrease or freeze wages or salaries.
In fact, any legislative action has always resulted in an improvement.
The only action to diminish pay has always been taken by the
Industrial Commission.
The general reduction in wages in N. S. W. during the
Depression was made by the Commission, for example. Then we can
look at what has happened to cost-of-living adjustments in this
State. In 1953 the Commnission followed a Commonwealth court
decision to abolish these adjustments to the bas-ic wage. Otate
legislation in 1955 reouired the restoration of the adjustments.
This legislation was abandoned in 1964 but the State basic wage was
increase sign~ ific antly by the Parliament to equate it with the
Federal basic wage. Finally, we can examine the history of the
movement towards equal pay for women. A State Industrial Corriissicn
decision failed to adopt completely a 1950 Commonwealth court
dlecision to increase the basic wage of one pound a week arid to lift
the female basic wage from 54 per cent t'-o 75 per cent of the vale
rate. Legislative action in the N. S. W. Parliament in 1956 redressed
this decision and introduced a program for the attainment of equal
pay. In short, legislative action based on. the State's incomes
power, even if it has not been used to a great extent, has been in
favour of employees for 40 years. This means that no party in office
has been prepared to use that power to reduce workers' pay. I argue
that this provides a positive indication that no party in control 9 
-9-
of the national Parliament would use an incomes power to reduce
or freeze wages and salaries.
The Australian Labor Party has gone further than giving
an unequivocal commitment on this point. Our Federal Executive
declared in October that the implementation of prices and incomes
powers " can only he successful with the direct involvement of the
trade union ntovemcnt in the formulation and aOnministration of any
policies affecting trade unionists." All overseas experience hWE
proved that policies on incomes cannot work without a broadly-based
community consensus and the co-operation of the bulk of the trade
union movement. Lny failure to achieve this cornsensus anC this
co-operation has inevitably led t~ o a failure of such pol icies
overseas. Thus there can be no question of coercing the bull of
the union movement or of the business world as we would need their
support to make any action on incomes effective. However, the
powers we seek would prevent any small recalcitrant minority from
imposing its will contrary to the consensus of the community.
My final point is that division within the labor movement,
often based on short-term considerations, has usually resulted
in the defeat of constitutional amendments put to the people by
rcferendum. Members of the labor movcment have come to regret
these earlier failures in subsequent generations. On this occasion
I hope that we can learn from our history and minimise any
disputation which might result from doubts or fears. 



EMBARGO: 6. OOPM FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1973:
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 149
23 November 1973
GRANT TO THE N. S. W. ART GALLERY
The Prime Minister today-announced that he had approved
a grant of $ 20,000 to the Art Gallery of New South Wales to
help clear its outstanding debt of $ 75,000 on the purchase of
the self-portrait by Pierre Bonnard.
The grant is conditional on the Government of New
South Wales providing the remaining $ 55,000.
The grant was recommended by the Visual Arts Board of
the Australian Council for the Arts. The Chairman of the Board,
Mr. John Baily, said that the grant was in about the same
proportion to the total purchase price as the $ 50,000 granted
recently to the National Gallery of Victoria towards the purchase
of the painting " Val d'Aosta" by J. M. W. Turner.
The Prime Minister also announced approval for a shceme
to support living Australian artists by subsidising the purchase
of their work on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
In announcing the scheme, the Prime Minister said it was
designed to encourage Australian art galleries to acquire
contemporary works, and to directly benefit practising artists.
The subsidy scheme, which would operate through the Visual
Arts Board, would be available to all public galleries and collections.
Dollar-for-dollar grants would be given only for the purchase of
works directly from the artist or from his nominated agent.
It would not apply to works bought at auction or by resale,
where there was no benefit to the artist.
Mr. Whitlam said that the scheme would provide a needed stimulus
to the purchase and display of contemporary works, on which relatively
little is spent at present. Public galleries and collections enjoying
this form of assistance will need to satisfy the Board of wide access
to their collections and of their professional competence in the
selection of works.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 7.30 PM FRIDAY 23 NOV. 1973
NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR THE ELECTIONS OF THE NATIONAL ABORIGINAL CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE
TELECAST 8.00 PM, 23 NOVEMBER 1973
Tonight I want to speak directly and personally to the
Aboriginal people of Australia. I take great pleasure in doing so.
This is the first time that an Australian Prime Minister has
addressed himself on radio and television to our Aboriginal people.
I certainly hope it will not be the last time, and that what I
have to say tonight will be heard by all Australians with a concern
for the welfare and progress of our country and its reputation
in the world. I want to tell you of a most important election that is
taking place tomorrow. Nothing like it has been held before.
All Aboriginal people in Australia are eligible to vote. You will
be voting to elect the members of the National Aboriginal
Consultative Committee. This committee the IJ. A. C. C. will have
a significant role to play in advancing the cause of Aborigines
and Torres Strait Island Australians. I hope all Aboriginals will
exercise their right and duty to take part in this historic and
democratic process.
Let me explain how the Consultative Committee was set up
and what the Government wants it to achieve. You may recall
that in my policy speech last November I said that A~ boriginals
had for too long been denied their rightful place in Australian
society and that all Australians were diminished while this was
SO. Since taking office we have done much to restore the dignity
and opportunities of Aboriginals. We have embarked on many
important reforms in education, health and vocational training.
W~ e are pledged to end racial discrimination, and we shall soon
be introducing legislation for this purpose. We have appointed
a commission to determine the best way to grant land rights to
the Aboriginal people. In accordance with the clear wish of the
people expressed in the referendum of 1967, the Australian Government
is moving to assume full responsibility from the States fo~ r the
administration of Aboriginal affairs.
Many of the things we want to do are quite new when
compared with the old assimilation policies of the past. We want
to preserve the culture of the Aboriginal people their tribal
values such as music, languages and beliefs. We regard that as
our sacred trust. / 2 
-2
Our most important objective now is to restore to
Aboriginals the power to make their own decisions about their
way of life. Already the Department of Aboriginal Affairs has
been transferring responsibility for community affairs from
Government superintendents and managers to Aboriginals themselves.
We believe the establishment of the National Aboriginal Consultative
Committee is an important part of this process. We want the
committee to be a forum for the expression of Aboriginal opinion.
We want it to allow a healthy two-way communication between
Aboriginals and the national Government.
Let me give you a few details about * the voting tomorrow.
You will be electing 41 delegates from a field of 193 candidates
who have nominated throughout Australia. The elected delegates
will be paid a salary and allowance, and we expect the committee
to meet two or three times a year. Already nearly 37,000 people
have L~ nrolled to vote. Mut let mie rettind youu that even if you
have not yet enrolled, you will still bci pcrmi-ittei to enrol
and vote at the polling booths tomorrow. For those in isolated
communities voting has been going on since last Saturday and will
continue for another week.
I am confident that this committee will work well and
achieve much. I hope all Aboriginals will seize this opportunity
to participate in its election. I should like to remind you of
some words I used earlier this year when I spoke to a meeting of
Aboriginal people in Canberra. I said this and the words
still apply " If there is one ambition my Government places above
all others, if there is one achievement for which I
hope we will be remembered, if there is one cause for
which future historians will salute us, it is this:
that the Government I lead removed a stain from our
national honour and hrruqrht Ibac: Jo~ St ice and equality
to the Aboriginal people."
Good night. 



/ 57
E?~ iBRGO: 6.00pm FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER:
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 150
23 November 1973
GRANTS TO ARTISTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced grants
to artists totalling $ 258,000. Among the 86 artists who will
benefit are Mr. Guy Grey-Smith, Mr. Roger Kemp and
Mr. Lyndon Dadswell, each of whom receives a grant of
$ 10,000. In recommending the grants, the Chairman of
the Visual Arts Board, of the Australian Council for the
Arts, Mr. John Baily, said the three artists had made,
during long careers, very significant contributions to the
art of Australia.
Mr. Baily also said that in many cases the grants
were designed to allow artists to devote an intensive period
to their creative work without the need to engage in other
employment in order to live. He said that frequently an
artist was able to give only a mere residue of time and
energy to creative work.
In some cases the grants were intended to make possible
the purchase of equipment and materials for special projects,
or allow artists to travel abroad to gain essential experience.
A list of the grants is attached.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 


EMBARGO: 6.3OPM FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1973SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P., FOR THE OPENING OF THE FIRST BIENNALE OF SYDNEY, SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE,FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1973
At last I find myself at an opening ceremony at the Sydney Opera House where I'm not left out in the cold. I hope no one will accuse me of stealing the limelight from Sir Robert Askin. He manages these affairs more lavishly than the Transfield organisation. After all, he provided a fireworks display and a Royal tour for his opening ceremony. This ceremony, I hope, will be just as memorable, for there could be no more fitting place to stage this exhibition than here in this building. The proudest possession of the city in which it stands, it is a measure of the fame that the Opera House has won for Sydney and for Australia, of the central place it holds in the hearts and imaginations of the people of this city, of its relevance to our whole artistic and cultural life, that it should be the natural location for the most important exhibition of visual arts ever assembled in this country.
I hope that will not be taken as an overstatement. I can think of no display of contemporary art in Australia more diverse in its origins, richer in what it offers, or richer in what it promises. Here are representative works from 36 leading artists in 14 nations. There can be no doubt that the Biennale of Sydney, like those of Venice, Paris, Sao Paulo, Tokyo and Mexico City, will take its place among the leading art shows in the world. It can be said today that the Opera House is no longer a local institution. We stand now on international ground. We are hosts to the artists of the world, and this first international exhibition of art may be seen as the most characteristic and fitting event of the opening season.
I welcome those who have come as ambassadors to exhibit here with Australian artists. They are doubly welcome: for the interest and pleasure they and their works will bring us, and for showing by their presence that Australia has joined a community of the highest importance and with the most admirable of aims the increase of excellence in the practice of the arts, and their widened appreciation and enjoyment by all communities.
This may not be the occasion to strike too nationalistic a note, let alone boast about the achievements of my own Government. Nevertheless, I think there are two points I should stress. One is that Australia is by no means without distinction in the fields of international art. Our artists are widely known and admired, and I recall my pleasure a few weeks ago when I heard of John Armstrong's important prize at the Biennale in Sao Paulo. The significance of exhibitions such as this is that the work of our own artists may be seen with that of equally eminent artists from overseas. The community of spirit, the humanity common to all artistic creation, may be felt and shared directly. The result must be to enrich our own artistic experience and stimulate the energies and perceptions of artists themselves. ./ 2
2
My second point concerns the responsibility of the Governments to the arts. I suppose nobody will contradict me if I remark that neither Opera houses nor large works of art come cheaply these days. The Australian Government has tried to ensure that the funds available will produce the maximum benefit to the cultural life of the country. Nothing could be more welcome in achieving this object than to have the active aid of industry and commerce: not only at the level of this impressive event, but in smaller yet immensely valuable ways.
Governments, however, have a deep and continuing responsibility. Elsewhere today I announced two notable decisions by the Australian Government. I have approved a grant of $20,000 to the Art Gallery of New South Wales to help clear its outstanding debt of $75,000 on the purchase of the self-portrait by Pierre Bonnard. This grant is conditional on the Government of NSW providing the balance. In addition, I announced grants to Australian artists totalling $258,000, which we have approved on the recommendation of the Visual Arts Board of the Australian Council for the Arts. In the same way, my Government, through the Australian Council for the Arts, is happy to be a minor partner in financing this event in collaboration with the Transfield organisation.
The works here are in every sense contemporary ones. I noticed in the catalogue a painting by David Aspden called "Some Other Blues". That struck a chord with me. Indeed to my untutored eye it bore some fleeting resemblance to our celebrated acquisition for the National Gallery. I know how distressing it must have been for many of you to see that purchase greeted in some quarters with derision and incomprehension. Quite ignorant comments were made by people who ought to know better. Do not think for a moment that I put myself forward as an authority in these matters. I merely say this: In "Blue Poles" we acquired an acknowledged masterpiece, and I am proud that we bought it. Generations of future Australians will thank Mr. Mollison and the National Gallery for what they have done. The point is that there remains an invincible element of philistinism in all societies, including our own, that exhibitions like this will help to break down. The fast that none of these works are judged, and that no prizes are awarded, reflects the fact that in the highly experimental world of modern art comparisons between individual works are difficult. There must always be a place in art for what is challenging, provocative, unconventional even baffling. Indeed it may be said that these have been the essential qualities of all true art for all time.
This Biennale is a community event. Just as one hopes that the Opera House itself will draw its audiences from the widest possible community, I like to think that events such as this will multiply and involve people of all ages and interests. This will happen, not because the Government becomes an ever more generous patron of the arts, but because the example of Mr. Belgiorno-Nettis and Mr. Salteri will be followed by others inside and outside the commercial world. I commend their efforts unreservedly. They and the Transfield organisation are to be congratulated on bringing this event the first, I hope, of many to the Australian people.



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM, QC, M. P,
TO OPEN THE INAUGURAL MEETING OF
THE NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL,
CANBERRA, P0; 4DAY 26 N0VEMBER 1973
THIS MEETING HAS ASSEMBLED TO GIVE PRACTICAL
EXPRESSION TO OUR HOPES WHATEVER GOVERNMENT WE REPRESENT,
WHATEVER PARTY WE REPRESENT THAT THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
NORTHERN REGIONS OF AUSTRALIA WILL GO FORWARD WITH SPEED,
WITH CERTAINTY, AND WITH GREAT BENEFITS FOR THE PEOPLE
OF THE NORTH AND ALL AUSTRALIANS.
THIS IS BY NO MEANS THE FIRST MEETING THIS YEAR
BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND CERTAIN STATE
GOVFRNMENTS 10 EXAMINE ISSUES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO
PARTICULAR REGIONS. THERE HAVE BEEN TALKS BETWEEN THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE VICTORIAN AND EW SOUTH
WALES GOVERNMENTS CONCERNING ALBURY-WODONGA, AND WITH
THE VICTORIAN, NEW SOUTH WALES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS CONCERNING THE MURRAY WATERAGREEMENT.
THOSE MEETINGS REACHED HIGHLY SATISFACTORY CONCLUSIONS.
I HAVE HIGH HOPES THAT THIS MEETING WILL DO LIKEWISE. ,/ 2 
-2
IT MAY BE THAT SMALLER CONFERENCES SUCH AS THISMORE
INTIMATE, MORE MANAGEABLE, MORE PURPOSEFUL
PERHAPS CAN PRODUCE QUICKER AND MORE SATISFACTORY
RESULTS THAN FULL-SCALE PREMIERS' CONFERENCES. IN
ANY CASE, I WELCOME MR. BJELKE-P-ETERSEN AND
fIR. 3IKRO. I AM GRATEFUL FOR THEIR ATTENDANCE
AT THIS INAUGURAL MEETING. IVENTURE TO SUGGEST THAT
THEY MAY DERIVE SOME REASSURANCE FROM THE FACT H
C o%-ib~ kL
AT ANY MEETING HELD HERE, IN THIS SENATE CHrtf= FTH
THE RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OF
THE STATES WILL BE AMPLY PROTECTED.
FOR AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS IN THE PAST,
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT HAS ALWAYS BEEN A SOMEWHAT REMOTE
AND PERIPHERAL CONCERN. FOR A GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA,
" THE IqORTH i MEANT ONLY A FRACTION OF THE AREA OVER
WHICH ITS RESPONSIBILITY RAN; FOR A GOVERNMENT IN
PERTH IT MEANT PERHAPS HALF ITS AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY;
FOR A GOVERNMENT IN BRISBANE OR AN ADMINISTRATION IN
DARWIN, IT MEANT NEARLY* ALL OF IT. SO I AM CONSCIOUS
OF THE FACT THAT THE GOVERNMENTS OF QUEENSLAND AND
ESTERN AUSTRALIA, AS WELL AS HAVING A GREATER NATURAL
INTEREST IN THESE REGIONS, HAVE AN ADVANTAGE OVER US IN
CANBERRA BY VIRTUE OF THEIR KNOWLEDGE OF LOCAL CONDITIONS
AND THEIR LONGER EXPERIENCE IN ADMINISTERING THE REMOTE
AREAS OF THiEIR STATES. a a 3 
-3-
N" OTHING I SAY TODAY, AND NOTHING WE ENVISAGE
THIS NEW COUNCIL DOING, SHOULD BE TAKEN AS A CRITICISM
OF THE EFFORTS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS AND NORTHERN
TERRITORY ADMINISTRATIONS IN DEVELOPING THE NORTH.
THEY HAVE DONE A GREAT DEAL. IT IS MY INTENTION,
HOWEVER, TO SEE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES, PLAYS ITS FULL PART
IN THESE ENDEAVOURS, AND THAT THE PEOPLE OF THE
NORTH HAVE THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES FOR A FULL AND
PROSPEROUS LIFE AS ALL OTHER AUSTRALIANS.. THERE
WILL BE NO MORE SECOND-CLASS CITIZENS; THERE WILL
BE NO MORE SECOND-CLASS REGIONS.
I THINK I CAN CLAIM THAT my GOVERNMENT, MORE
THAN ANY OTHER IN THE HISTORY OF FEDERAL POLITICS,
IS COMMITTED TO THE TASK AND THE CHALLENGE OF
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT. THAT COMMITMENT WAS EXPRESSED
IN MY POLICY SPEECH A YEAR AGO. IT WAS REFLECTED IN
THE DECISION ONE OF THE FIRST ADMINISTRATIVE ACTS
OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH THE DEPARTMENT
OF NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT, WHICH IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
CO-ORDINATING DEVELOPMENT IN THE AREA OF AUSTRALIA
NORTH OF THE 26TH PARALLEL. WiE BELIEVE THAT THIS
REGION RICH AS IT IS IN NATURAL RESOURCES AND
PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL POTENTIAL SHOULD RECEIVE
A RECOGNITION FROM THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT COMMENSURATE
WITH ITS CONTRIBUTION TO THE NATIONAL ECONOMY. IN ANY
ANALYSIS, THE NORTH CONTRIBUTES AS MUCH AS ANY OTHER
SECTOR OF AUSTRALIA TO OUR EARNINGS AND OUR STANDARD
OF LIVING. s s. 
-4-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALWAYS RECOGNISED
THE PROBLEMS AND DIFFICULTIES OF DEVELOPING THE NORTH
THE HIGHER COSTS OF PROJECTS IN REMOTE AND DIFFICULT
ENVIRONMENTS, THE NEED FOR SPECIAL WAGE AND OTHER
INCENTIVES TO ATTRACT WORKERS, THE HIGHER COST OF
HOUSING AND TRANSPORT, CAPITAL EQUIPMENT, BUILDINGS,
POWER, AND FERTILISERS THESE FACTORS, AND OUR
HISTORICAL PATTERN OF DEVELOPMENT, HAVE PUT SOUTHERN
AUSTRALIA IN A POSITION OF GREAT COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
OVER THE NORTH, THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE PAST DECADE
ALONE, HOWEVER, HAVE CLEARLY SHOWN US THE REAL POSSIBILITIES
OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA, THE MORE WE TAKE HOLD OF THESE
OPPORTUNITIES AND ENLARGE THE RANGE OF LIFE STYLES
OPEN TO ALL AUSTRALIANS, THE MORE WE ENRICH OUR NATIONAL
CULTURE, AUSTRALIA'S SENSE OF NATIONHOOD WILL NEVER BE
FULLY REALISED WHILE OUR POLICIES AND PRE-OCCUPATIONS
REMAIN LARGELY CONFINED TO A TRIANGLE IN THE SOUTH-EAST
OF THE CONTINENT FROM BRISBANE TO ADELAIDE AND ANOTHER
IN THE SOUTH-WEST FROM PERTH TO ALBANY,
IN MY POLICY SPEECH A YEAR AGO I SAID THIS
" LABOR'S OBJECTIVE IS TO DEVELOP THE VAST AND VALUABLE
RESOURCES OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATION AND FUTURE AUSTRALIANS IT IS IN
THE NORTH THAT THE GREAT SUGAR AND CATTLE INDUSTRIES HAVE
BEEN ESTABLISHED AND IT IS IN THE NORTH THAT AUSTRALIANS
FACE THE GREATEST CHALLENGE TO RETAIN THE OWNERSHIP OF
THE NATION'S RESOURCES AND TO BASE NEW INDUSTRIES ON
THOSE RESOURCES," 
i--
THE PURPOSE OF THIS COUNCIL IS TO DEVELOP MEASURES
DESIGNED TO PROMOTE THE DEVELOPMENT OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
AND THE WELFARE OF ITS PEOPLE, IT WILL INITIATE WHATEVER
STUDIES AND INVESTIGATIONS IT CONSIDERS NECESSARY TO
ACHIEVE THESE OBJECTIVES, THIS IS A COMPREHENSIVE MANDATE,
I GIVE AN ASSURANCE THAT IF THE POLICIES YOU AGREE UPON
REQUIRE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL SYMPATHETICALLY EXAMINE SUCH PROPOSALS
IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES,
' IY GOVERNMENT'S BROAD NATIONAL OBJECTIVES ARE NOW
GENERALLY WELL KNOWN, THEY APPLY EQUALLY TO THE NORTH,
VIE WANT STRONG AND CONTINUING ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE
NORTH AS WELL AS THE SOUTH, OUR ECONOMIC PLANNING IS
DESIGNED TO ACHIEVE GREATER AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND
PARTICIPATION IN INDUSTRY, MAXIMUM PROCESSING OF OUR
RESOURCES AND FAIR EXPORT PRICES, AT ALL TIMES DUE
ACCOUNT WILL BE TAKEN OF THE NEEDS OF CONSERVATION,
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS AND ABORIGINAL RIGHTS, I BELIEVE
THAT THESE OBJECTIVES REFLECT THE FEELINGS AND ASPIRATIONS
OF MOST AUSTRALIANS, I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT THE PURSUIT OF
THESE OBJECTIVES WILL CREATE UNDUE DIFFICULTIES FOR OUR
INDUSTRIES, INCLUDING THE MINING INDUSTRY, IT WILL,
HOWEVER, REQUIRE CO-OPERATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND
INDUSTRY IN THE PLANNING AND EXECUTION OF MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTAL PROJECTS, 
6-
THERE IS AN URGENT NEED FOR SUCH CO-OPERATION AND
PLANNING. DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN THE PAST NEW TOWNSHIPS,
RAILWAYS AND PORTS, PARTICULARLY IN THE NORTH FREQUENTLY
WENT AHEAD WITHOUT REGARD FOR OVERALL NATIONAL POLICY OR NEEDS.
WIE MUST ENSURE THAT FUTURE DEVELOPMENT IS GUIDED BY NATIONAL
AS WELL AS LOCAL CONSIDERATIONS. SUCH NATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
ARE BEHIND THE IMAGINATIVE PILBARA DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT
WHICH IS NOW THE SUBJECT OF JOINT DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN AND WESTERN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS, WE
WANT THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW REGIONAL CENTRE, WITH CHEAP
POWER, CO-ORDINATED TRANSPORT AND PORT FAC-ILITIES, TO BE
PLANNED IN A WAY THAT WILL PERMIT THE BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
OF THE RESOURCES IN THE REGION TO THE MUTUAL ADVANTAGE OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE NATION AND THE PARTICIPATING
COMMERICAL INTERESTS, MUCH THE SAME THINKING IFS BFHIND
my GOVERNMENT'S INITIATIVE IN PROVIDING FtJND. S FOR A
COMPREHENJSIVE LEVALUIOr OF THE RESOURCES OF THiL
BURDEKIN AND BOWEN B3ASINS IN QUEENSLAND.
IEMPHASISE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS NOT
PREPARED TO ALLOW THE TEMPO AND DETAIL OF NORTHERN
DEVELOPMENT TO BE DETERMINED B3Y MARKET FORCES ALONE.
IF WE WERE TO DO SO, WE WOULD PFRPETUATE THE CONDITIOS
WHICH HAVE CHARACTER ISED OUR NATPNTAL [ DEVELOPMENT OVER
THE PAST GENERATION. HISTORY MAY WELL JUDGE OUR GENERATION
HARSHLY WHEN IT IS RECALLED THAT OF OUR TOTAL
POPULATION INCREASE OF NEARLY 5 MILLION PEOPLE SINCE 1949
HAS OCCURRED IN THE CAPITAL CITIES, AND OVER 50% HAVE
SETTLED IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE ALONE. ' e o/ 1 
-7-
I AM NOT CONCERNED TODAY TO DISCUSS THE GROWING PROBLEMS
OF OUR CITIES. THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADY TAKEN CERTAIN
STEPS TO ALLEVIATE THE MORE PRESSING OF THESE PROBLEMS.
IT WOULD, HOWEVER, BE WHOLLY CONSISTENT WITH OUR
POLICIES OF URBAN RENEWAL AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW
GROWTH CENTRES IF THE TEMPO OF NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT
WERE INCREASED, AND GREATER INCENTIVES WERE PROVIDED
FOR MORE AND MORE PEOPLE TO MOVE TO THE SPARSELY
POPULATED NORTHERN REGIONS OF AUSTRALIA.
THE PURPOSE OF THIS INAUGURAL MEETING IS TO CONSIDER
THE PROCEDURES AND ARRANGEMENTS TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE
COUNCIL IN FUTURE. I HOPE THE COUNCIL WILL MEET
REGULARLY AT LEAST TWICE A YEAR IN ORDER TO AVOID
THE AD HOC APPROACH TO NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT IN THE PAST.
MY GOVERNMENT AND I WOULD EXPECT FUTURE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS WILL LOOK INCREASINGLY TO THIS COUNCIL
FOR SOUND ADVICE ON THE DEVELOPMENTAL NEEDS OF THE
NORTH. WE KNOW OF THE RESOURCES AND THE DIFFICULTIES
WELL ENOUGH. '.' IHAT ALL OUR GOVERNMENTS NEED IS DETAILED
AND EXPERT ADVICE ON HOW TO DEVELOP THOSE RESOURCES AND
OVERCOME THOSE DIFFICULTIES. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THIS
COUNCIL MARKS A NEW PHASE IN FEDERAL-STATE RELATIONS IN
A PARTICULARLY DIFFICULT AREA OF UNDOUBTED NATIONAL
IMPORTANCE. I AM CONFIDENT THAT THIS COUNCIL WILL BRING
NEW VIGOUR AND NEW IDEAS TO OUR POLICIES FOR NORTHERN
DEVELOPMENT AND MAKE A MOST SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE
PROGRESS OF OUR NATION AND THE LIVING STANDARDS OF ITS
PEOPLE. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 27 NOVEMBER, 1973
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, we were able to fit this
in this morning which, as you know, I try to do alternatively
if I can but House business usually prevents us being evenhanded
between the afternoon papers and the morning. You will be
interested in the report which I have just tabled in the House of
Representatives from Mr Terry Winter on the use that can be made
by the Australian Government of the powers which we are seeking at
the Referendum on 8 December. Mr Winter was a member of the
ACTU Executive for many years; he was appointed by the Menzies
Government to the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission. There have been several Cabinet Committee meetings
this week but only a short one of the Cabinet itself. The only
announcement that I can make now there will be some at the end
of the week is of the Defence Force Ombudsman. You will remember
that in my policy speech last November I undertook to appoint a
military ombudsman. Mr Barnard has actively pursued this undertaking
to the stage where legislation is being prepared and we expect that
it will be introduced in the autumn session next year. In
anticipation of the passage of the legislation, the Government has
decided to name the first defence force ombudsman. He will be
Mr David Hay, CBE, DSO, who, as you know, is the Permanent Head
of the Department of External Territories. He is a man of very
considerable accomplishments he is well versed in matters of
Government, had a distinguished war record with the.. 2nd AlE' from
1940-1946, anid has taken an active interest in community affairs. The
Government is confident that together with his military experience
Mr Hay wil~ l bring a very desirable blending of administrative
capacity anid balanced understanding of service life to the office.
There wil. 1 also be an Australian ombudsman whose appointment will
be announced later on. The Winter Report, that was the one I was
referring to there. To give the long title Power Over Prices
and Incomes Report to the Australian Government on Certain
Matters Relating to Power over Prices and Incomes. Mr Winter acted
as a Task Force in the same way as Dr Coombs did on the inherited
governmental commitments. Are there any questions.
QUESTION: Why was the Winter Committee kept seeing as
you are under criLticism during the referendum campaicn for not
spelling out what you will do with prices power. Why didn't you
announce that the committee was meeting and would come up with
some report?
PRIME MINISTER: It was intended all along that its report would
be published. I asked for it by the 23rd of this month, it came
to hand on that date, copies have been made, it has been tabled and
now released at the first opportunity.
QUESTION: Do you condemn the killing on the Syrian front in the
October war of 24 bound and gagged Isracd-i pf~ isoners?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know any facts on this but obviously we
condemn any breaches of what should be accepted standards of the
treatment of prisoners of war. 
QUESTION: The European countries and Japan have been pressured
by the Arab States into adopting a much harder line o'n Israel nd
in particular into demanding a complete withdrawal a unilateral
withdrawal to the 1967 borders without any guarantees as to the
future security of Israel without any guarantees of secure
borders. What is the Australian Government's position on this now?
Do we go along with the position as stated by the Europeans and
the Japanese?
PRIME MINISTER: I will not comment on your version of what the
western European countries and Japan have done on this subject. I
do not endorse your version of it; I don't refute your version
of it; I speak on behalf of the Australian Government. As I said
in answer to a question without notice this morning, the attitude
of the Australian Government is the same as that of preceding
Governments. We have supported the Gorton Government, the McMahon
Government, the present Government have all supported the proposals
made by the Security Council unanimously in 1967 in its Resolution
No. 242. The Australian Labor Party summarised that Resolution
and made it part of its Party Platform at the last Federal
Conference in Surfers Paradise in July. I will read it to you
again as I did in the House. " The situation in the Middle East
remains the greatest threat to the peace of the world. There can
be no peace until the Arab States respect and recognise Israel's
sovereignty and right to exist. Equally, there can be no peace
until Israeli forces have been withdrawn from occupied territories
to secure and recognise boundries and a just settlement of the
refugee problem is achieved".
QUESTION: How much longer can you afford the luxury of being
criticised by the Federal A. L. P. President, Mr Hawke, and in view
of his latest public criticism of you and your Government
particuldiriy on the Middle East, do you belier tjtosr stat,: rnents
are daind. ginj to the Governmen~ t's standing and do you propose to
take step,, s tc, h:,. ve him silenced by the Fec ral A. L. P. ExecW-ivr
PRIM-E MINISTPL ilt 1Ii,,-: ke i~ i tde it quite plain he has been
at pains to emphasis~ e, and I repeated this in th,-House in answer
to two questions without notice this morning, that on this subject
he is sztoaking as a private citizen. He is cxpressing personal
views. the Lcader of the Government I have to carry out the
governmen-t's policy. I have just read it to you, it happens to
be the sanie policy as our predecessors had. Australia's policy
on the M~ iddle East is bipartisan. it has been for a quarter of a
century.
QUESTION: Sir, do you honestly believe that a man in high public
office can -uddenly take off the mantle of that office and speak
for himself? Also, do you believe that foreign embassies based
i. n Canberra will accept that in their reports back to their home
offices, and do you accept the same right for yourself that you
-7ouldl speak privately?
I. RIME MINISTER: No. As head of Government'I can only speak in
av,-cordance with Government policy and it is my duty, which I try
to discharge without let up, to carry out that policy. I believe
that embassies and High Commissions in Canberra know what the
Government's policy is. 
QUESTION: It was my understanding that uranium leases in the
Northern Territory would not be renewed until the report of the
Woodward Commission was finalised and that understanding was
confirmed when you said in the House on 18 October that: " I believe
we should wait for its further report so that any legislation which
the Government puts before the Parliament will be as invulnerable
as is possible to anticipate". I now understand that a Cabinet
committee meeting yesterday decided to renew the exploration permits
in the uranium province of the Northern Territory. Could you
explain that apparent change in policy?
PRIME MINISTER: There are two matters I should point out. One is,
there is some confusion you seem to suffer it too between
leases and licences. The second is that Cabinet committees may
meet on subjects, and they are meeting on this subject, but the
decisions are made by the Cabinet. The Cabinet has not considered
this matter.
QUESTION: Do you see any need to conserve or perhaps ration
Australia's fuel supplies at this stage?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Mr Connor answered a question without notice
on this yesterday.
QUJESTION: What's the situation today regarding the Government's
efforts to solve the TAiA standoff. If it continues for any length
of time, do you have any estimates on how soon TAA will have to
stand down other staff people who may not be able to withstand
a long stoppage as well as the pilots?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't discussed this with my colleagues
since last night. I haven't discussed it for, I suppose, 14 hours
now. I would imagine that the pilots will be going back to their
duty and that they will observe safety standards without complaint
from now on.
QUESTION: Going back when?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no more information on this.
QUESTION: Could you Lcoll me what your attitude is towards the
announcemrenlt by the P~ cr t. IAt they will seek an increase of
a week in the national wage and an increase in the minimtum wage
from $ 60 to $ 702?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter has not been considered by the Government
yet, and I would make no comment until it was.
QUESTION: Having in mind that last week the Senate rejected the
motion of a joint sitting to decide where the new Parliament House
should be, has your Government made any fresh move on this?
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't discussed it. 
QUESTION: Do you think it will be decided this year before the
Parliament rises?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is most unlikely. I imagine that both
Houses will be debating other matters until they adjourn for
Christmas and I see no chance of the Government discussing this
matter with the agenda it has.
QUESTION: Have you accepted the resignation of Senator Cavanagh
as Minister in Charge of Government Business in the Senate, if not,.
do you intend to, and thirdly, so that the matter can be clarified,
who in fact is in charge of Government business?
PRIME MINISTER: I am sorry, I have no more to tell you on this.
QUESTION: Last week you were quoted as saying that you expected
that any minister who wished to challenge a decision in Cabinet
back in the Caucus would inform the Cabinet first and you
referred to two offenders. Have you done anything further about
this?
PRIME MINISTER: No. You are referring to an answer I gave to
Mr Laurie Oakes in an interview which was published in the Melbourne
Sun last Friday or Saturday. I have done no more since then.
QUESTION: Recently a staff memorandum circulated between some
departments, said that in view cf the Government's support for
the United Nations sanctions on Rhodesia that public servants and
ministers would not be able to travel to or through Rhodesia and
citizens would not be able to go to Rhodesia on official or
diplomatic passports. This has been interpreted as meaning that
public servants may not go to Rhodesia even in a private capacity,
and I understand the decision was taken when you were Foreign
Minister. I ask does this in fact mean that public servants may
not go on private visits to Rhodesia and if it does mean this, do
you think this in any way affects their civil rights as citizens?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember the details of this now, it
was some months ago. The general attitude would be that public
servants and military officers have responsibilities to the
Government which they advise or, in many cases, represent. They
cannot detach themselves from their official position.
QUESTION: Do you mean that they couldn't even get a private
passport, Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: If you want anything further on this I will have
to give you a considered reply to it, but I don't remember the
details. Public servants or military officers are not entitled to
compromise a Government. Now if you want further information, qive
me a written question and I will give you a written reply. 
QUESTION: The Arab oil producers have taken to ranking different
nations according to their friendliness and favourableness such
as the Dutch and the Japanese etc. Has the Australian Government
had any official communication about the standing of the Arab
oil producers?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe so. I haven't inquired, I haven't
been informed. There has been some speculation about why Mr Haig
visited the oil countries the Gulf States and so on. I will
take this opportunity to point out that he visited the area weeks
before the outbreak of the 18 day war and the arrangements for
his visit were made many weeks before that.
QUESTION: Are you concerned that some of your ministers are being
unnecessarily provocative at question time with the length of
their answers. I ask the question because of an aside from the
Speaker to you during Question Time in which he appeared to be
asking you to pull some of them into line and it also appeared
from the Press Gallery
PRIME MINISTER: When was this, today?
QUESTION: During Question Time. There was a comment which came
across the loud speakers, in which he said you ought to tell some
of your ministers
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember him saying this. I didn't hear
him say this?
QUESTION: It came over the earphones.
PRIME MTNISTER: I didn't hear it, I am sorry.
QUESTION: Are you concerned at all?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that ministers naturally enough. reply
-in a tendentious way sometimes to questions which are asked in a
tendentious way. Questions without notice transgress the Standing
Orders constantly. All you ladies and gentlemen would realise that
one would not be allowed to put on notice a question in the terms
which are constantly used in questions without notice. There are
some very offensive terms and implications used in questions without
notice, and there is no such offence given in the replies.
QUESTION: Mr Hawke said last night that he thought about 50 per cc'nt
of Caucus agreed with his point of view and he said that he would
also do his best he thought he had a duty to do his best to
influence people to his point of view. Do you think Mr Hawke has
a right to influence or perhaps try to organise Caucus to try and
change the Party's policy on the Middle East? 
6-
PRIME MINISTER: Any person has the right to influence opinions
of Members of Parliament. The Australian Labor Party has declared
an attitude on this matter in the terms I have just read out to
you, and all of us are bound by that until the Federal Conference
alters it. It is, I reiterate, substantially the policy which
Governments have pursued for the last quarter of a century in
Australia Australia has a bipartisan policy, a policy of
neutrality in the Middle East, and the Australian Labor Party's
Platform on this matter is a summary of the United Nations Security
Council's unanimous Resolution of 1967 No. 242. ' That resolution
provides the basis of a settlement in the Middle East and the
various interests which have to be safeguarded Israel's existence,
the Arab territories, the rights of the Palestinians, can be best
asserted and vindicated if that unanimous Resolution of six years
ago goes into operation. It is very fortunate now that there is
going to be this meeting, these negotiations in Geneva next month.
QUESTION: You have set such a cracking legislative pace that
you have hospitalised some members and caused bad backs all round
the House.
PRIME MINISTER: Bad backs are not on our side.
QUESTION: I was wondering, Sir, apart from the damage done to the
inhabitants of Parliament House, do you think this cracking pace
is damaging your image with the public and perhaps confusing them?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the cracking pace may be confusing the
public in so far as there isn't the opportunity to explain the
purpose or the details of the legislation. This year there will
be about twice as many bills passed by the Parliament as there
has been in any previous year. But when you mention the cracking
pace, this is the cracking pace of legislation. I would point
out that th-e Parliament's hours are very much more civilised. While
we are sitting more hours in the day, for instance, we are sitting
on Tuesday and Wednesdays in the morning as well as in the afternoon
and night, and we are also quite often sitting on Monday afternoon
and night when it has been very rare indeed to sit on Mondays at
all in the past. While all that is true, we don't sit beyond
11 p. m. at night, and I would like to pay tribute to Fred Daly the
Leader of the House, the fact that we have kept reasonable hours
throughout this year. I think there has only been one case when
we have sat after 11 p. m. and that was by agreement just to get
something through in the extra 2 minutes which was required to get
it through. If you look back to what has happened in previous
years as far back as I can recall ( that would mean as far back
as any of you can recall) at this time in the Spring Session we
would always be sitting well after 11 p. m. and usually after
12 midnight. Now we are keeping proper hours long hours, many
days, but bad backs haven't been caused by late, late sittings.
And since I mention this which is not only a relief for members of
Parliament, for all the staff and for all of you ladies and
gentlemen who have to report theParliament, there is also the fact
that every opportunity has been given for Private Members to raise
matters. And if they raise them by way of a motion, a vote is
taken on that motion. In previous years whenever a Private Member
moved a motion on alternate Thursday mornings no vote was ever
taken. It remained on the Notice Paper until the Parliament was
clissolved. There is no such motion still on the Notice Paper in
the House of Representatives this year. Every Private Members' 
-7-
motion has gone to debate and vote and on the intervening Thursday
mornings there has always been grievance day. So Private Members
are not being hustled or excluded. There is a terrific amount
of legislation, that's true. I-ow some of the legislation had to
be put through because Papua New Guinea is becoming self-governing
at the end of this week; some had to be put through because we
had obligations which we wanted to honour by the 25th anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on the 10th of next
month, but most of it, the great bulk of the legislation, was in
the party platform and emphasised in my policy speech on behalf
of the party last November.
QUESTION: When do you expect to finish now, first week or second
wee k?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is more likely to be the second week
but there is no definite decision made on this. You will see from
the Notice Papers that there is some substantial legislation which
ought to be got through. There again, perhaps I should say, that
there has never been under us any bill coming up for debate until
there has been an intervening Wednesday morning for the Opposition
parties to consider it and usually at least a week. Many of the
pieces of legislation have come on for debate many weeks after
they were introduced and given the minister's second reading
speech.
QUESTION: Will you guillotine the Health Bill, sir?
PRIME MINISTER: You mean the Universal Health Insurance one?
QUESTION: Mr Hayden's?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know how long the debate will take. It
is a shorter bill., a simpler and clearer bill than the legislation
which it will replace. There has been ample opportunity for
Members of Parliament to understand it because you will remember
there was the White Paper by Messrs Deeble and Scott in the autumn
session; there was the amended White Paper, the definitive one,
which Mr Hayden brought in at the beginning of this month, and
there has been debate on the Estimates of the Department of Health
and th-e Department of Social Security; there has becen a Private
Member õ Motion which was debated and voted so I shouldn't believe
there is an excessive amount of time required. It won't be
debated until next week.
QUESTION: Do you see any dangers yet to the Australianr economy'
from the Lrab boycotts on our major trading partners, and woul. d
you agree that there is a possibility of a wor~ d-uide recessor,
next year?
PRIME MINISTER: There is obviously going to be somE: 1 effect. on
Australia's trade from the fact that our major triding partners
are being hit by the energy crisis and the energy crisis has been
made more severe by the prospect, in some cases the actuality,
of Arab reduction. There has been a great deal of speculation
by economists that there is going to be some recession among the
industrialised trading nations of the world. Australia would be
more happily situated, both as regards energy sources and also
as regards prcduction and trading patterns, than most of those other
countries. 
QUESTION: Taking foreign policy apart, what do you think are
the three or four principal achievements of the Government at
the end of its first year in office?
PRIME MINISTER: The biggest one is the transformation we have
made in educational opportunities. I haven't thought out what
other ones I should mention. I would put next, I suppose, the
involvement, the direct relationship, already achieved in many
respects and now being sought to be extended, between the
national government and elected local government bodies. And
probably in that context also, I should mention the more rational
arrangements which are being made for the production and sale
of our primary products and the emphasis being taken in national
plans for urban matters in general, i. e. transport, housing,
environment, where most of the people live.
QUESTION: What do you see as your three or four biggest mistakes,
Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: You always get one of the very earliest questions,
and you were told that it was the last one. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 154
November 1973
PAPUA NEW GUINEA SELF-GOVERNMENT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, sent the following
telegram to Mr Somare to mark his country's transition to
self-government. " Tomorrow 1 December 1973 marks an historic day in the
development of Papua New Guinea when it takes its rightful place
as a self-governing country.
On behalf of the Government an all Australians I send
you, your Government and the people of Papua New Guinea our best
wishes for your future national development and prosperity.
We look forward to the continuance of friendly relations
and close co-operation between our two countries as you set out to
build a new nation."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 153
NOVEMBER 19753.
MINISTERIAL AND DEPARTMENTAL CHANGES
I have recommended certain Ministerial changes to
His Excellency the Governor-General and His Excellency today
has appointed the Honourable Les Johnson to be
Minister for Housing and Construction,
consequent upon the abolition of the
Department of Housing and the renaming of
the Department of Works as the Department
of Housing and Construction.
accepted the resignation of Senator the
Honourable Don Willesee as Special Minister
of State following rearrangement of the
Ministerial workload consequent upon
Senator Willesee's appointment as Minister
for Foreign Affairs,
Sappointed the Honourable Lionel Fo Bowen,
Postmaster-General, to be also Special
Minister of State, Mr. Bowen, in addition,
will be Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister. His Excellency has also accepted the resignation of
Senator Willesee as Vice-President of the Executive Council
and has appointed in his place the Honourable F. E. Stewart,
Minister for Tourism and Recreation, to be Vice-President
of the Executive Council.
The following administrative changes were also
approved today by the Executive Council
the Departments of Navy, Army and Air were
abolished and their functions merged with
those of the Department of Defence. / 2. 
the Department of Civil Aviation was abolished
and its functions merged with those of the
Department of Transport.
the Department of Housing was abolished and
its functions merged with the Department of
Works, renamed the Department of Housing and
Construction. the Department of External Territories was
abolished and its remaining functions
distributed to other departments.
Details of these changes will be published in the
Gazette today. With the abolition of the Departments of Housing,
Civil Aviation, Air, Army Navy and External Territories,
the associated Ministerial portfolios cease to exist,
Mr. Barnard continues as Minister for Defence, Mvir. Jones
as Minister for Transport and Mr. Morrison as Minister for
Science. Mr. Morrison will also be Minister Assisting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs in Papua New Guinea matters,
By these changes the number of departments is
reduced from 57 to 51. Other changes the abolition of the
Department of Customs and Excise and the Department of Supply
are still under consideration,
Associated with the departmental changes app roved
by the Executive Council today were formal decisions for
the abolition of Public Service positions in departments
being abolished. Staff will be transferred to corresponding
posi ions created in the departments to which functions are
being transferred. Mr. A. S. Reiher will be Permanent Head of the
Department of Housing and Construction. Mr. C. C. Halton
will be Permanent Head of the Department of Transport,
Mr. Bruce White, formerly Permanent Head of the
Department of the Army, will continue as Permanent Head
Assisting the Secretary, Department of Defence.
Mr. F. J. Green, formerly Secretary, Department of
Air, will be Special Deputy of the Permanent Head,
Department of Defence ( Ravy Office) and Special Deputy of
the Permanent Head, Department of Defence ( Air Office
Mr. J. B. R. Livermore, Acting Secretary, Department
of the Army, will be Special Deuty of the Permanent Head,
Department of Defence Army Office). 
As already announced, Mr. S. landau, formerly
Secretary, Department of the Navy, has been appointed
Minister ( Politico-Military Affairs) Australian Embassy,
Washington. It has also been announced that Mr. D. O. Hay,
formerly Secretary, Department of External Territories,
will be Defence Force Ombudsman.
It is intended that Mr. J. F. Nimmo, formerly
Secretary, Department of Housing, be appointed a Member
of the Grants Commission. It is also intended that
Mr. Nimmo be appointed a Commissioner under the Royal
Commissions Act to undertake an inquiry into the impact
of freight rates on the Tasmanian economy. 



14RESS STATEMENT NO. 153
NO: VEBER 19735
M! INISTERIAL AND DEP9ARTMENTAL CHANGES
I have recommended certain , Ministerial changes to
His Excellency the G. overnor-General a! na ils Excellency today
has Sappointed the Honourable Les Johnson to be
. Minister for Housing and Construction,
consequent upon the abolition of the
Department of Housing and the renaming of
the Department of Works as the Department
of Housing and Construction.
accepted the resignation of Senator the
Hionourable Don Willesee as Special Minister
of State following rearrangement of the
Ministerial workload consequent upon
Senator Willesee's appointment as Minister
for Foreign Affairs,
appointed the Honourable Lionel tF Bowen,
Postmaster-General, to be also Special
Minister of State. Mr, Bowen, in addition,
will be Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister. iiis Excellency has also acceped the resignation of
Senator Willesee as Vice-President of the Executive Council
and has appointed in his place the Honourable F. E. Stewart,
Minister for Tourism and Recreation, to be Vice-President
of the Executive Council.
The following administrative changes were also
approved today by the Executive Cou-ncil
Sthe Departments of Navy, Army and Air were
abolished and their functions merged with
those of the Department of Defence. / 2. 
the Department of Civil Aviation was abolished
and its functions merged with those of the
Department of Transport.
the Department of Housing was abolished and
its functions merged with the Department of
4orks, renamed the Department of Iiousing and
Construction. the Department of External Territories was
abolished and its remaining functions
distributed to other departments.
Details of these changes will be published in the
Gazette today. With the abolition of the Departments of Housing,
Civil Aviation, Air, Army Navy and External Territories,
the associated Ministerial portfolios cease to exist.
Mir. Barnard continues as Minister for Defence, Mro Jones
as Minister for Transport and Mr. Morrison as Minister for
Science. 1Mr. Morrison will also be Minister Assisting the
Miister for Foreign Affairs in Papua New Guinea matters.,
By these changes the number of departments is
reduced from 37 to 31. Other changes the abolition of the
Department of Customs and Excise and the Department of Supply
are still under consideration.
Associated with the departmental changes approved
by the Executive Council today were formal decisions for
the abolition of Public Service positions in departments
being abolished. Staff will be transferred to corresponding
posi ions created in the departments to which functions are
being transferred. Mr. A. S. Reiher will be Permanent Iead of the
Department of Housing and Construction, Mr C. C. Halton
will be Permanent Head of the Department of Transport,,
Mr. Bruce White, formerly Permanent Head of the
Department of the Army, will continue as Permanent Head
Assisting the Secretary, Department of Defence.
Mr. F. J. Green, formerly Secretary, Department of
Air, will be Special Deputy of the Permanent Head,
Department of Defence ( Navy Office) and Special Deputy of
the Permanent Ilead, Department of Defence ( Air Office
Mr. J. B. R. Livermore, Acting Secretary, Department
of the Army, will be Special Deputy o the Permanent Head,
Department of Defence Army Officeso 0../ 30 
As already announced, Mr. S. Landau, formerly
Secretary Department of the Navy, has been appointed
Minister ( Politico-Military Affairs) Australian Embassy,
Washington. It has also been announced that Mr. D. O. Hay,
formerly Secretary, Department of External ferritories,
will be Defence Force Ombudsman.
It is intended that Mr. J. F. Nimmo, formerly
Secretary, Department of Housing, be appointed a Member
of the Grants Commission. It is also intended that
Mr. Nimmo be appointed a Commissioner under the Royal
Commissions Act to undertake an inquiry into the impact
of freight rates on the Tasmanian economy. 



A A Mt
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 155
2 December 1973
DEATH OF DAVID BENGUIRON
The Prime Minister, Mr. E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
today sent the following telegram to:
" MRS GOLDA MEIR,
PRIME MINISTER OF ISRAEL
I WISH TO EXTEND MY PROFOUND SYMPATHY TO THE
GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF ISRAEL ON THE DEATH
OF MR. DAVID BENGUIRON. MR. BENGUIRON WILL
BE REMEMBERED AS THE FIRST PRIME MINISTER OF
THE RESTORED STATE OF ISRAEL, AND AS ONE OF
THE OUTSTANDING DEMOCRATIC SOCIALISTS OF OUR
GENERATION GOUGH WHITLAM"
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



THE FIRST YEAR
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. TWHITLAM, Q. C. M. P.,
ON THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT'S
FIRST YEAR OF OFFICE
( With summaries and tabulations of
legislation, reports, inquiries
and decisions.)
2 DECEMBER 1973 
THE FIRST YEAR
The first Australian Labor Government in 23 years has been
in office for just one year.
I submit this document to mark that anniversary and to bring
to the attention of the Australian people the record of that year,
to give you the evidence of promises fulfilled and reforms begun.
I include also the evidence of unwarranted obstruction by the
non-Labor forces in the Senate; their obstruction of the Government's
clear mandate from the people to get things done.
The year has been one of great industry and great purpose.
What has already been done stands in striking contrast to the record
of sloth and incompetence which characterised the decaying years
of the outgoing Government.
The program I presented to the Australian people on 13 November
1972 had three great aims. I restate them. They are:-
to promote equality
to involve the people of Australia in the
decision-making processes of our land
to liberate the talents and uplift the
horizons of the Australian people.
In pursuit of those aims we have introduced a record number of
bills into the Parliament. We have swept away anachronistic and
unnecessary relics of the past selective national service by ballot
and the death penalty in Australian territories.
We have withdrawn the last remnants of our unhappy " presence"
in Vietnam. 
3
LEGISLATION Since the 28th Parliament assembled on
27 February this year a record total of 244 bills
has been introduced, with the session still unfinished.
Never before in our history has such a wideranging,
reforming program come before the Parliament.
The nearest to it was the total of 169 bills in the year
1968, of which 157 were passed.
Of the 244 bills so far introduced and there
are more to come before the year is out 163 have already
been passed, even though the Government lacks a majority
in the Senate. There are still 68 bills before the Parliament
as the session draws to a close and possibly about 10 more
to be introduced. Thirteen bills have already been deferred or
stand rejected in the Senate. They include major bills for
reform of the electoral system.
A legislative program of the magnitude I have
described imposes an extremely heavy work-load on the
Parliament and the administration.
I pay tribute to the Public Service and to the
many distinguished Australians outside government who have
given so much of their time, energy and skills to help bring
our programs forward.
( Details of bills passed, those before the
Parliament and those rejected, deferred or
amended by the Senate, are attached in
Appendix B.) 
-2
We have introduced new policies for our cities and country
regions and in social welfare and education.
We have introduced new policies in our foreign relations,
particularly in our own region of Asia and the Pacific.
We have brnuQht new vigour and vitality to the arts.
We have tackle2 the greatest immediate problem of all
domestic inflation with resolution.
We have moved swiftly to protect Australia's natural resources
and reverse the trend to foreign ownership and control of our industries
By using special task forces of experts, consultants, commissions
and committees of inquiry, as well as the customary interdepartmental
of the Public Service, we are overhauling every f ie]. d of
government responsibility at home and abroad.
In my recent Robert Garran oration I explained how the
Government had combined these elements with the Public Service and
added F, " think tank" to advise on l~ ong-term priorities.
A total of 90 Commissions of inquiry, committees and task forces
have been at work during the year reporting to the Government.
It has been our practice and this will continue to make
public, through the Parliament and in other ways, the reports and
recommendations of these committees and inquiries.
This year 29 reports on inquiries instituted by the Government
have been tabled in Parliament and 19 statements issued on meetings
and discussions with State Governments.
This commitment to open government was a pledge we made and
a pledge we shall keep.
( A list of reports released is contained
in Appendix A) / 3 
4
THE ECONOMY In its first year the Government's over-riding consideration
has been to contain and reduce so far as a national government can
the inflationary pressures in the economy.
With the limited powers we already possess we have:-
Established a Prices Justification Tribunal
and a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Prices.
Revalued the Australian dollar twice and
reduced tariffs by 25% " across the board"
to make imports cheaper and ease domestic
demand pressures.
Used other fiscal and monetary measures to
restrain demand by mopping up liquidity and
checking capital inflow. These include some
increases in indirect taxation, an increase in
the Statutory Reserve Deposit Ratio and active
intervention by monetary authorities in the
bond market.
Introduced a Trade Practices Bill to eliminate
price rings and cartels and unwarranted pricing
arrangements.
Called a representative Industrial Peace Conference
to consider ways of securing greater industrial
peace and stability.
Established an Interim Commission for Consumer
Standards to ensure that people buying goods get
value for their money.
Introduced certain price controls in the A. C. T. as
an example to the States and to protect the
community. 
In addition, we are seeking national powers over
prices and incomes at the referendum on 8 December.
This follows the refusal of some States to refer these
powers freely to the Australian Government so that a * national
attack on inflation can be made. Valuable time has been lost
through no fault of ours.
Our referendum proposals have been opposed by the
Opposition, whose careless management of the economy during
its last term in office created most of the inflationary
problems we are tackling today.
RE SOURCES Just over a year ago I said in my policy speech:
" We are determined that the Australian people
shall be restored to their rightful place in
their own country as participants and
partners in government or the owners and
keepers of the national estate and the
nation's resources
we will put Australians back into the business
of running and owning Australia."
This pledge is well on the way to fulfilment.
The pace we are making is limited only by the road-blocks the
opposition parties are erecting in the Senate.
We are almost the last country in the world to take
steps to check the uncontrolled growth of foreign ownership of
industries and our natural resources.
Time was running out when the responsibility was passed
to us. We wasted no time. Here are some of the things we
have done: 
6
Three months after the election we decided
that all minerals would be subject to export
controls to ensure the orderly development
of the mineral industries.
We have begun to increase Australian control
over our natural resources and have set, as an
objective, full Australian ownership of uranium.
We also regard this as. a desirable objective in
development projects involving natural gas,
oil and coal.
We have closely scrutinised take-over activity
by foreign interests among Australian companies.
Nearly 500 proposed take-overs have been brought
to notice.
We have refused 19 takeovers which we considered,
on balance, to be not in the national interest;
49 ( mainly mining) have been deferred; 51 are
under consideration and 29 have lapsed.
There have been 322 cases allowed to proceed.
We have set up a Pipeline Authority which will
establish a nationwide pipeline system to
distribute petroleum, natural gas and other
hydrocarbons from the wells to the main centres
of population
We have brought legislation before the Parliament
to strengthen the Australian Industry Development
Corporation. This will allow greater Australian
participation in major enterprises ( provided the
Opposition does not block it in the Senate). / 7 
-7
We initiated a review of foreign investment
in real estate. Until this review is complete
overseas interests are being discouraged from
significant purchases for the time being, and
the Reserve Bank will not normally grant foreign
exchange approval for such purposes.
A Committee of Inquiry into the National Estate
is in progress to give advice on areas and
historic places which should be protected and
preserved as part of the Australian heritage.
We have introduced a bill to establish an
Industries Assistance Commission based on a
report by Sir John Crawford. This bill
will give industries primary and secondarythe
opportunity to present publicly a case for
Government assistance and to obtain assistance
when circumstances warrant it.
HEALTH AND WELFARE
I have said that one of our great aims was " to liberate the
talents and uplift the horizons of the Australian people."
This is possible only in a climate of personal and national
security and in a congenial environment.
As my colleague the Treasurer said when he brought down the
August Budget, " Australia was once a leader in the provision of
welfare services. It is so no longer, but this Government intends
to change that state of affairs."~
We have already done so, in a year.
New benefits, flowing from the Budget, are already relieving
the pressures on our less fortunate citizens and other benefits,
including the national health insurance scheme which is central to
our program, are well advanced. ./ 8 
-8-
Pensions have been increased all round and the first step
has been taken in the abolition of the means test over a period
of three years for residentially-qualified people of 65 years
and over. Our policy objective is to raise the pension rate
twice a year until it reaches 25% of average weekly earnings.
Welfare services of all kinds for the young,
the old, the handicapped and the neglected have been extended.
The universal national health insurance scheme, which
will give every Australian access to medical and hospital care
either free or at minimal cost, has been developed and refined
after full public debate.
It will give us one of the most advanced and comprehensive
public health schemes in the western world when it is joined with
the new programmes flowing from the work of the Sax Commission.
It will be a far better and cheaper scheme than
those we have now.
EDUCATION In our first Budget we committed $ 843 million to
education for 1973/ 74 almost double that given by our predecessors
the year before. This great thrust will be applied through existing
authorities and a new permanent Australian Schools Commission
for which legislation is before the Parliament. In the meantime
it is being directed by an Interim Committee, set up only ten days
after the election, which will continue to do the job if the
Opposition delays the creation of the Commission itself. / 9 
-9-
This program is already lifting Australian education from
the doldrums. It is giving new opportunities to young
Australians. In a month from now the Australian Government will take
over full financial responsibility for tertiary education.
Fees will be abolished and increased living allowances will be
paid to students who need them. Teaching scholarships have been
trebled. Aid will be available to all schools, without distinction,
on a " needs" basis.
This and much else was part of this year's Budget commitment
to education. ( Details of new social welfare benefits
and education provisions are in
Appendix E.)
CITIES We came to office determined to make our cities decent
places to live in and to develop new regions for a growing population.
We have set up the new departments of Urban and Regional
Development and Environment and Conservation. We have a Cities
Commission. All have been active.
In October we signed an agreement between the-Australian,
New South Wales and Victorian Governments for the development of
Albury-Wodonga as the first of our planned regional centres. 
-11-
HUMAN RIGHTS This Government is committed to taking all possible
legislative and administrative action to prevent discrimination
on the grounds of colour, race, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin,
property, birth or other status.
We have made this commitment clear in regard to our
Aboriginal citizens. We have eliminated all racial implications
from our immigration policies.
We have made it clear to other Governments by our
early decision six days after the election to exclude raciallyselected
sporting teams from Australia.
We are pledged to appoint an ombudsman. We have already
appointed an ombudsman for the armed services.
In a wider context, we have enshrined these principles
in legislation. Two complementary bills one on Human Rights
and the other on Racial Discrimination are now before the
Parliament. WOMEN The Australian Government is able, and therefore bound,
to remove or reduce many aspects of legal, social, educational,
and economic discrimination against women. We are trying to do so.
In June this year the Government ratified a basic ILO
Convention on discrimination in employment and occupation which
will be of benefit to women. It is also committed to ratify the
ILO Convention on equal pay for women.
The Human Rights Bill which has been introduced is
a further step in the direction of reducing discrimination. 
10
We have offered to the States financial assistance totalling
$ 136 million for the establishment of 12 growth centres, for land
acquisitions in urban areas and for aid in upgrading urban public
transport systems and reducing the sewerage back-log in major urban
areas. We signed a new Housing Agreement with the States which will,
in particular, provide for increased advances over the next five
years at low rates of interest for the provision of welfare
housing.
ABORIGINES For too long, to the nation's shame, the Australian Aboriginals
were denied their basic rights. This we are correcting with the
utmost despatch.
We established a separate Ministry to deal with all matters
affecting Aboriginals.
A National Aboriginal Consultative Committee, elected by the
Aboriginals themselves, will act as an advisory body for the
Government. We have almost doubled, to $ 117 million, the Budget provision
for Aboriginal advancement in 1973/ 74.
We have accepted the recommendations of the first report of
the Aboriginal Land Rights Commission and made new provisions for
education, health, housing and employment opportunities for
Aboriginals. The Government has also decided to assume direct responsibility
for Aboriginal affairs in all States and is negotiating with the
States to this end. / 11 
12
The Government has made a review of employment conditions in the
Australian Public Service. As a result all positions in the Service are
to be open equally to men and women applicants. Advertisements of
vacancies and the placement of staff are to be changed to avoiOd the
possibility of selection on the basis of sex.
The age limits for permanent appointments have been lifted from
all but a very few designations.
Further funds were allocated in the Budget for training and
retraining schemes for women.
The possibility of creating more permanent part-time emrlovment is
being studied and various trial schemes of fl~ exible working hours are
being introduced.
Maternity leave provisions for Government employees have been
extended tc 12 weeks on full pay and a further 40 weeks unpaid without
risk to continuity of service or status.
A cowpleLelv new benefit, the Supporting Mothers's Penefit, has
been introduced. This benefit is payable to unmarried mothers includlinoy
Oeserted de facto wives and de facto wives of Prisoners, to married
women not living with their husbands, and to wives who have been
separated for other reasons, * provided they have the care of their
children. Any woman receiving this support is eligible to participate
in the training scheme for widow pensioners.
one of the first decisions of the Covernment was to remove the
s&amp; 1es tax on oral contraceptives and place them on the pharmaceutical.
benefits list. Prompt action has also been taken in the allocation of
grants for family planning.
Extensive grants have been made available both for research into
child care and for the construction and operation of child care centres.
The Pre-Schools Commission is shortly to recommend measures which
the Government should adopt to ensure that child care and pre-school
centres be provided for below school acre children. 11 
13
CULTURE AND LEISURE
In culture and leisure, which are inseparable from a literate
and healthy society, we have opened up new horizons for Australians.
Our financial aid to the Arts has been doubled in a year to
$ 14 million. For the first time artists and writers have a new
security of income and a new incentive to exercise their creative
talents. We have enlarged and reformed the Australian Council for the
Arts, which will be established as a statutory body, with its
autonomous boards, to be known as the Australia Council.
We have given a new direction to tourism, with an emphasis on
youth and an encouragement to " Go See Australia".
We are giving direct help to the States for the preservation
of historic sites and settlements which will attract tourists.
We have committed funds to the development of recreational
and sporting acitivities.
No national Government before has given such leadership in
these matters so vital to the intellectual life and leisure of
the nation.
FOREIGN POLICY AND DEFENCE
I believe that in a year we have demonstrated a new independence
in our foreign relations, strengthened old friendships and forged
new ones. We have recognised China and made significant new trading
arrangements for wheat and sugar. / 13 
-14-
We have opened up new areas of co-operation with Japan
and initiated NARA a treaty of friendship which our predecessors
refused to negotiate.
We have told our Asian neighbours of our aspirations
for a regional association to enable us to share with all
nations in South-East Asia, including China, hopes and ambitions
for progess and prosperity.
We have re-affirmed our friendship with our nearest
neighbour, Indonesia.
We have re-affirmed our traditional friendship with
Britain and the United States, unimpared by the independence
of our policy and the steps we have taken in our region.
We have taken action against French nuclear testing
in the Pacific before the International Court at the Hague.
We have, in full understanding, and by mutual consent,
changed the Royal Style and Titles so that Her Majesty the Queen,
when she is here, is Queen of Australia.
In defence, the Australian Government has shaped its
pIicy to the realities of the day, the honouring of its pledges
ai-I the piOuh'so" of a better deal for those in the Armed forces;
Where all are Pow Vo] uiite, r.
We have brought in a new deal for servicemen in pay,
conditions and retirement benefits, a Defence Forces Ombudsman
was appointed last week to deal with individual grievances.
We have announced in accordaice with our election
undertaking the withdrawal of our forces from Singapore,
including all combat elements in the Anzuk Brigade. These will
return to Australia early next year.
Arrangements have also been made for the Minister for
Defence to have discussions with the United States Government on
the future management and control of U. S. bases and joint facilities
in Australia. We have acted to streamline the workings of defence
administration by merging the defence group of service department;
into a single Defence department. / 14 
I am confident our armed forces are now being more
efficiently and effectively organised and will continue to
serve this country well.
In foreign policy and on defence we have honoured,
and will continue to honour all our treaties, arrangements
and obligations.
CONCLUSION This first year is complete. We, as a Government,
have done much. We have kept to our pledges and our program.
I believe what has been done in a year has not
been matched before.
But there is much yet to be done. We will carry on
with the same vigour and the same confidence.
We believe the Australian public will judge us
fairly on a record second to none and on an election mandate
on its way to fulfilment.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
APPENDIX A
28 February
March
3 April
11 April
2 May
2 May
17 May
24 May May May May
31 May
21 August
21 August
22 August REPORTS TABLED IN PARLIAMENT ON
INQUIRIES INSTITUTED BY THE
PRESENT GOVERNMENT
Report by Mr Justice Moore on the
Inquiry into Steel Price Increases
proposed by B. H. P. and A. I. S.
Bilingual Education in Schools in
Aboriginal Communitiess in the
Northern Territory. ( Requested by
Minister for Education on Z2.1.73)
Report on Employment Problems in
the Port of Portland
Components of the growth of
Australia's Major Urban Centres
Report of the Health Insuraince
Planning Committee
Report from the Academy of Science
on the Biological Effects of
Nuclear Explosion Fall-out.
( Request from Prime Minister
12.2.73)
Biological Effects of Nuclear
Explosion Fall-out. ( Meeting
between Australian/ French
scientists, Canberra 7-9.5.73)
Interim Report of the Australian
Council for the Arts. ( Request
from Prime Minister 23.1.73)
The Role, Scope and Development of
Recreation in Australia prepared
by Professor John Bloomfield
Interim Report of the Australian
Schools Commission
Report from the National Hospitals
and Health Services Commission
Interim Committee
A. C. T. Education Authority
Assessment Panel on
Review of Previous Government's
Programs Possible Ways of Increasing Irports
Aboriginal Land Rights Commission Tabled By
Mr Whitlam
Mr Beazley
Mr Cameron
Mr Uren
Mr Hayder
Mr Whitlam
Mr Whitlam
Mr Whitlam
Mr Stewart
Mr Beazley
Dr Everingham
Mr Beazley
Mr Crean
Mr Crean
Mr Bryant 
22 August
29 August
11 October
16 October
22 October
24 October
24 October November Summary of discussions at meeting of
Ministers responsible for recreation
held on 7 June 1973
Transcript of conference of Ministers
responsible for immigration held at
Brisbane on 11 May 1973
Transcript of minutes of meeting of
Australian Water Resources Council
held on 27 July 1973
Record of decisions of Tourist Ministers
Council held on 9 and 10 July 1973
Communique relating to Ministerial
Council Meeting on Land Commissions
held on 22 October
* Report of conference of Australian
Education Council held on 14 and
June 1973
* Summary of resolutions and recommendations
of Australian Forestry Council
meeting held on 8 June 1973
* Statement regarding meeting of
Australian Government and State
Government Ministers concerning
export of kangaroo products held on
9 March 1973 Mr Stewart
Mr Grassby
Dr Cass
Mr Stewart
Mr Uren
Mr Beazley
Dr Patterson
Dr Cass 
-2-
Immipration Advisory Council Committee on Comraunity Relations
Immigration Task Forces ( All States)( P~ eports tabled 29.0.739
10.10.73, 15.11.73)
Institutions of Tertiary Education in Sydney, 1iclbourne, Alburyf
Vodong4 Location, 1-ature and ') ovelopmeiit of Gleport ta. bled-
3.5.73)
Lake Peddar Inquiry ( In-rterim R~ eport tabled 13.9.73)
National Commission on Social Welfare ( Report tabled 30.8.73)
National Estate Committee of Inquiry
National Ro p itals and Health Services Commission Interim
Commrittee ('. cport tabled 30.5.73)
National Population Inquiry ( as e:: tended on 4 1L1arch 1973)
National ' Uhabilita-bion and Conocnsation Schieme Committee of
1 acuiry
National Superannuation Committee of Inquiry
Nursing, H{ omes Fees Review Committees of Inquiry ( All States)
Open 0iiversity inquiry
Pilbara4 Study
Poverty Inquiry
Protection Commission TICuiry re formation of ( Now named
Industries Assistance % Commission ( Crawford Report)) ( ilcport
tabled1 27.9.73)
Recreation in Australia the R~ ole, Scope and Development of
( Report tabled 25.5.73)
Review of Previous Government's Programs (*. 1eport tabled 21.30.73)
2ivcr ii1urcay Commission " Uorking larty
Social Security/ W. elfare Advisory Council on
Steel2Price Inquiry into proposed increases ( iteport tabled
Superannuation pensions Cormnonwealth Inquiry into adjustments
after retirement ( ex-tended terms of reference) ( R~ eport tabled
10.4.73)
Technical and Further Education Australian Committee
Urban Centre Component-of he1 growth of ( Report tabled 11.4 .7)
Urban Land Tenure Comm-iission of Inquiry into 0 */ 4 
APPENDIX A Cont....
COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY, COMMITTEES,
TASK FORCES REPORTING TO THE
GOVER) MENT
A. THOSE INSTITUTED BEFORE 31 MAY 1973
Aboriginal Land Iights Commission ( First report tabled 22,8.73)
Aboriginal Languages in Schools Advisory Group on Teaching
( Report tabled 15o4.73)
Adelaide Airport Advisory Committee
A. C. T. Education Authority Assessment Panel on ( Report tabled
31.5.73)
A. C. T. and Nvew South Vales Impact of growth of Canberra
Aircraft Industry Working Group
Australian Council for the Arts ( iReport tabled 8.11.73)
Australian Post Office Commission of Inquiry
Australian Pre-schools Committee
Australian Schools Conrmission Interim Committee ( Report tabled
30.5.73)
Biological Effects of Iuclear iEplosion Fall-out Academy of
Science ( Report tabled 2.5.73)
Biological Effects of Nuclear Explosion Fall-out Meeting between
Australian and French Scientists ( Report tabled 17.5.73)
Citizen Iilitary Forces Committee of Inquiry
Child Care Standards Committee
Child Care Research Advisory Committee
Computerisation of Criminal Data Committee
Computorisation of Legal Data Committee
Education for Community Recreation Workers
Employment Problems in the Port of Portland ( Report tabled 3.4.73)
Employment Statistics Committee of Inquiry
Health Insurance Planning Committee ( Report tabled. 2.5.73)
Homeless lien and iomen Vorking Party on / 2 
B. THOSE INSTITUTD APTS. 31 MAY 1973
A. C. T. Health Commission
Australian Ionising ladiation Advisory Council
Burdekin Project Cor. mittoe
Commission of Inquiry into the Earitine Industry
Committee on Devclopment of Outdoor recretion
Committee of Inquiry into Govurnuont -rocuremont Policy
Committee of Inquiry into the rrotection of Privacy
Committee of Inquiry into workloads in Defence and Research
3stablishments
Committee of . efercnco for Defence Forces Pay
Committee on National Uniformc Safety Code for Australian
Government nmplormcit
Comnittee on Possible vcys of increasing imports ( oport tabled
Consultation with Young People
Consumer Affairs Council ( 2elated to A. C. T.)
Emergency kiousiL1g ommittce
Evaluation Study of Operation and Effectiveness of the Aboriginal
Secondary Grants Scheme
Financial Ieeds for training teachers for special education
in tertiary institutions
Financial support for approved private teachers college
Government Industry Panel on Cherries
Housing Standards Committee
Inquiry into Certain aspects of Stevedoring Industry
-Inquiry into Aboriginal/ Police Relations
Inquiry into Employment in the Building Industry
Inquiry into Technical Education in the A. C. T.
Inquiry into the Implications of Establishing Frequency
Modulation Radio Broadcasting in Australia
Inquiry into the prices of certain commodities and services in
the A. C. T. and Northern Territory
Interim Coimission on Consumer Standards
Interim Committee on the Production of Pharmaceutical Products
Interim Executive of the Australian Health Insurance Commission
Interim Primary Schools Libraries Committee 
4
Legal Aid Review Committee
Medical Fees Tribunal
Molongo Parkway Inquiry
National Committee on Discrimination in Employment and
Occupations
Possible development in Australian universities of studies in
linguistics, including Aboriginal linguistics
Possible steps to encourage studies in Australian universities
of the languages and cultures of people who represent a
significant component of Australia's migrant intake
Review Panel on Land Allocations to Builders
Royal Commission into Petroleum and Petroleum Products
Second Interim Committee for the Schools Commission
Task Force on Land Tenures
The Interim Board for the Proposed Belconnen Mall Authority
West Australian Airport Advisory Committee
Working Party on Nursing Homes Fees
Working Party on the Environmental Implications of the Woodchip
Industry and the Softwood Forestry Program
Workshop on Aboriginal Health Services and Aboriginal Health
Workers 
STATEMENTS, ETC., ARISING FROM MEETING
BETWEEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT STATE
GOVERNMENT MINISTERS Tabled by
1 March
6 March
13 March March
27 March
3 April
11 April
17 May
31 May
22 August
22 August Communique of meetings between Prime
minister and Premiers of New South Wales
and Victoria at Albury-Wodonga on
January 1973
Statement made on 2 March 1973 following
meeting between', Prime Minister and
Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria
and South Australia concerning River
Murray and River Murray Commission
Comnmunique and Points of Agreement of
the Ministerial Council Meeting
concerning Albury-Wodonga ( Aspects of
Development and Decentralisation)
Statement regarding meeting on
February 1973 between Minister for
Housing and Victorian counterpart on
proposed Commonwealth-State Housing
Agreement Statements made with regard to the
Australian Transport Advisory Council
meeting in Hobart on 16 February 1973
Meetings of Australian and State
Labour Ministers on 23 February 1973
in Melbourne
Components of the Growth of Australia's
Major Urban Centres
Proceedings of Conferences between
Australian and State Ministers for
Housing ( Canberra, 23 March 1973 and
April 1973)
Conference of Australian Government
and State Ministers with Responsibilities
for Wildlife Conservation ( Melbourne,
9 March 1973)
Transcript of conference of Australian
Government and State Ministers held at
Canberra on 10 May 1973
Communiques relating to meetings of
Ministerial Council established to
oversight the growth of the Albury-
Wodoniga areas held on 9 March, 23 May
and 4 July 1973 Prime Minister
Prime Minister
Mr Uren
Mr Johnson
Mr Jones
Mr Cameron
Mr Uren
Mr Johnson
Dr Cass
Prime Minister
Mr Uren 
22 August
29 August August
12 September
13 September
27 September
27 September October
8 November
13 November November
27 November Commonwealth Bureau of Roads on
Effects of stopping freeway
Construction in State Capital Cities
Immigration Task Forces ( New South Wales,
Victoria and Queensland)
National Commission on Social Welfare
Proposal for Australian Companies and
Securities Legislation-Report by
Prof. Loss
Lake Pedder Inquiry
Protection Commission-Inquiry re
formation of
A review of Public Transport Investment
Proposals for the Australian Capital
Cities 1973-4 Bureau of Transport
Economics Migrant Task Force Committee
Wc; lern Australia
. vt~ ra, tan Council for the Arts
, ilil, re ) ort on the future workings
U10 Council and its Boards
: a Lional Estate Principles and Policies
Siilinission to the task force ( by the
Department of Urban and Regional.
Development) Migrant Task Force Committee
South Australia
The Report on Prices and Incomes by
Mr T. C. Winter Mr Uren
Mr Grassby
Mr Hayden
Senator Murphy
Dr Cass
Mr Whitlam
Mr Jones
Mr Grassby
Mr Whitlam
Mr Uren
Mr Grassby
Mr Whitlam
NOTE: A number of other reports have been
presented but as they are pursuance to
legislation, they are not included in this
list. Nor have reports from Parliamentary
Committees been listed. 
APPENDIX B
LEGISLATIVE RECORD TO 28 NOVEMBER 1973
A. STATISTICS OF GOVERNMENT BILLS 1973 1972 1971
Number of Bills brought before the
Parliament 242 146 148
Number of Bills passed by the Parliament 158 139 137
E3. BILLS REJECTED BY THE SENATE TO 28 NOVEMBER 1973
Nine Bills were rejected by the Senate:
* Commonwealth Electoral Bill ( No. 2) 1973
* Conciliation and Arbitration Bill 1973
* Senate ( Representation of Territories) Bill 1973
* Representation Bill 1973
* Commonwealth Electoral Bill ( No. 2) 1973*
* Lands Acquisition ( Australian Capital Territory) Bill 1973
* Senate ( Representation of Territories) Bill 1973*
* Representation Bill 1973*
* Seas and Submerged Lands ( Royalty on Minerals) Bill 1973
( Those defeated a second time are marked with an asterisk)
C. BILLS DEFERRED BY THE SENATE TO 28 NOVEMBER 1973
Trade Practices Bill 1973
* Sales Tax ( Exemptions and Classifications) Bill ( No. 2)
Australian Industry Development Corporation Bill 1973
National Investment Fund Bill 1973 
APPENDIX C
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION BILLS
1. Constitution Alteration ( Prices) Bill to amend
the Constitution to enable the Australian Parliament
to control prices.
2. Constitution Alteration ( Incomes) Bill to amend the
Constitution to enable the Australian Parliament to
legislate with respect to incomes.
3. Constitution Alteration ( Simultaneous Elections)
Bill to provide for simultaneous elections of the
Senate and the House of lepresentatives.
4. Constitution Alteration ( Democratic Elections) Bill
to establish electorates in each State in vhich the
number of people is, as nearly as practicable, the same,
and to enable State Houses of Parliament to be elected
directly by the people.
Constitution Alteration ( Local Government Bodies) Bill
to make funds available direct to local government, both
by way of grants and by loans at lower interest rates.
6. Constitution Alteration ( Mode of Altering the Constitution)
Dill to facilitate alterations to the Constitution.
In addition, the Government has foreshadowed the
introduction of a Bill to amend the Constitution to permit
the Australian Parliament to refer matters to any State
Parliament or Parliaments and to permit any State Parliament or
Parliaments to refer matters to the Australian Parliament with
identical provisions concerning terms and conditions, duration
or revocation. 
APPENDIX D
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
A. DEPARTMENTS ABOLISHED, ABSORBED OR RE-NAMED
Air
Army Civil Aviation
Education and Science
Environment, Aborigines and the Arts
External Territories
Housing Interior
Labour and National Service
National Development
Navy Shipping and Transport
Social Services
Trade and Industry
Works
B. DEPARTMENTS CREATED
Aboriginal Affairs
Capital Territory
Education Environment and Conservation
Housing and Construction
Labour Media Minerals and Energy
Northern Development
Northern Territory
Overseas Trade
Science Secondary Industry
Services and Property
Social Security
Special Minister of State
Tourism and Recreation
Transport Urban and Regional Development 
APPENDIX E
INITIATIVES IN EDUCATION
MAJOR INITIATIVES
ELit., 1ji-hToflnt of Interim Committee for Australian Schools Commission.
Acceptance of recommendations of Interim Committee for Schools
Commission for $ 660 million program-of assistance to schools
for 1974 and 1975.
Establishinent of Australian Pre-Schools Committee
Australian Government to assume financial responsibility for
Tertiary Education.
1ncreaSe--of 92% in expenditure on Education in 1973/ 74 Budget.
Abolition of fees in tertiary Education Institutions.
Provision of $ 188 million for Teacher Education during current
triennium.
New non-competitive means tested living allowances for all
tertiary students.
Means tested allowances for children in last two years of secondary
school. million for pre-school education and $ 8 million for construction
and operation of child care centres.
Establishment of Technical and Further Education Committee.
Extension of Aboriginal Secondary Grants Scheme.
Assistance for Education of Isolated Children.
OTHER INITIATIVES
Library Grant of $ 5 million to Colleges of Advanced Education.
Increases in Commonwealth Teaching Scholarships.
Special Scholarships for Pre-School Teachers.,
Training of Dental Therapists in New Zealand.
Increase in number of training college places for dental therapists.
Additional places for training of Social Workers.
Extra $ 10 million to States for Capital expenditure for Technical
Education. 
$ 3 million for assistance to destitute tertiary students.
Child Care Standards Committee established.
Establishment of Advisory Committee on Child Care Research.
Increases in salaries for academic staff in Universities and C. A. E.' s.
Establishment of Curriculum Development Centre.
Establisihmnt of Education Research Institute.
Study of Education of Servicemens children.
Expansion of Post-graduate awards scheme.
Post-Graduate School of Management to be established.
Funds for emergency classroom accommodation for migrant children's
education.
Improvements in Apprenticeship Schemes.
Establishment of A. C. T. Schools Authority.
Investigation of proposals to finance private teachers colleges.
Inquiry into A. C. T. Technical Education.
Evaluation Study of Aboriginal Secondary Grants Scheme. 
THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT'S WELFARE PEPOPMS
SOCIAL SECURITY
BENEFIT SNEDDEN BUDGET CREAN BUDFT
1972 Q173
Age and Invalid Pension
Standard ( single) rate 20. n0 23. n0*
Married rate ( combined) 3^. 50 40.50*
Widows' Pension
Class A 20.00 23.00*
Classes B and C 17.25 23.00*
Each dependent child 4.50 5.00
Unemployment Short-term,
Sickness and Special Benefit
Single Adult 17.00 23.00*
Married person with dependent spouse 25.00 40.50*
Each dependent child A. 50 5.00
Long-term Sickness Benefit
Single adult 20.00 23. nn*
Married person with dependent spouse 2P. 00 40.50*
Each dependent child 4.50
Supporting Mother's Benefit r
Pension as for Class A Widow Nil+ 23. n
Each dependent child Nil 5. n00
Vother's Allowance Nil 4.00
Double Orphan's Pension
To guardian of a child both of whose
parents are deceased, or where one
deceased and whereabouts of other
parent unknown Nil 10.00
All payments to be increased next Autumn.
Previously Australian Government reimbursed States for half
cost of this support of deserted wives, wives of prisoners
and other women with children but with no male breadwinner
after 6 months elapsed from event which aualifies.
At present support provided after 6 months negotiations
proceeding to assume responsibility from States for whole
period. It is planned to effect the take-over from the lQ74
Budget.
NOTE: The above list is restricted to Social Security benefits
for which there is personal benefit payment. 
BENEFITS REPATRIATION SNEDDEN BUDGET
1972 CREAN BUDGET
1973
War Pensions
Special rate ( T PI)
Intermediate rate
General rate ( 100%)
War widows' pension
Domestic allowance
Service Pensions
Single rate
Married rate ( combined)
Each dependent child 48.00 34.00 14.00 20.00 8.50 55.60 38.80 19.00 23.00 9.50
20.00 34.50 4.50 23.00 40.50 5.00
I 
APPENDIX F
TEXT OF TREATIES ETC.
PRfEENTED TO THE PfARifAMENT
3 April : United Kingdom/ Australian Trade Agreementletters
exchanged during the process of
termination of the Agreement.
4 April : International Cocoa Agreement 1972
May : Convention 131 concerning minimum wage fixing
adopted by the Interna~ tional Labour Conference
at its 54th session.
22 May : Convention 111 concerning the abolishment of
discrimination in employment and occupation
adopted by the International Labour Conference
in 1958.
29 May : Treaties to which Australia has become a party
by signature:
1. Agreement between the Government of Australia
and the Government of Malaysia relating to
Air Services, signed at Sydney on 4-October 1972.
2. Exchange of Notes between the Government of
Australia and the Government of the Uinited
Kingdom constituting an Agreement concerning
the establishmrent of a station to monitor
comnDliance with the Partial Test Ban Treaty,
signed at Canberra on 31 October 1972.
3. Agreement betwseen Australia and the Netherlands
concerning old Dutch Shipwrec] zs, signed at
The Hague on 6 November, 1972.
4. Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation
Financial Agreement 1973 drawn up at Ottawa
on 24 November 1972 and signed for Australia
at London on 30 Ma~ rch 1973.
Agreement Terminating the Commonwealth
Telec ommunications Organisation Financial
Agreement of 1969, drawn up at Ottawa on
24 November 1972 and signed for Australia a. t
London on 30 Ma-? rch 1973.
Agreement which has been signed by Australia and.
which will enter into force after Notes have been
exchanged by the signatories:
6. Trade Agreement between the Government of Australia
and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia,
signed at Canberra on 14 November 1972.. t 
Treaties in relation to which Australia has
deposited instruments of ratification:
7. Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. The Treaty was opened for signature
at London, Washington and Moscow on 1 July
1968. Australia. signed the Treaty on 27
February 1970. The instruments of ratification
were deposited for Australia at London,
Washington and Moscow on 23 January 1973.
8. Treaty on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of
Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons of Mass
Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor
and in the Subsoil Thereof. The treaty was
opened for signature at London, Washington
and Moscow on 11 February 1971 and signed for
Australia on that date. The instruments of
ratification were deposited for Australia at
London, Washington and Moscow on 23 January 1973.
9o Amendment to Article 61 of the Charter of the
United Nations. The amendment was adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on
December 1971. Australia deposited its
instrument of ratification on 13 November 1972.
Protocol amending Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs drawn up at Geneva on 25 March 1972.
Australia signed and deposited its instrument
of ratification on 22 November 1972.
11. Convention concerning Freedom of Association and
Protection of the Right to Organise ( ILO
Convention No. 87), adopted at San Francisco on
17 June 1948. Australia deposited its instrument
of ratification on 28 February 1973.
12. Convention concerning the Application of the
Principles of the Right to Organise and to Bargain
Collectively ( ILO Convention No. 98), adopted at
Geneva on 8 June 1949. Australia deposited its
instrument of ratification on 28 February 1973.
Statute to which Australia has become a party by
accession:
13. Statute of the International Institute for the
Unification of Private International Law, drawn
up Pt Rome on 15 March 1940 and acceded to by
Australia on 21 March 1973.
Convention and Treaties to which . Australia is
considering becoming a party by ratification:
14. Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
( Biological) Z'nd Toxin Weapons and on their
Destruction, open for signature dt London, Moscow
and Washington on 28 September 1971 and signed
for Australia on 10 April 1972. 
Treaty between Australia and the Republic of
Austria concerning Extradition, signed at
Canberra on 29 March 1973.
16. Treaty between Australia and Sweden concerning
Extradition, signed at Stockholm on 20 March
1973.
17. Agreement between Australia and Indonesia
concerning Certain Bouindaries between Papua
New Guinea a~ nd Indonesia, signed at Jakprta
on 12 February 1973.
Oct : Treaties to which Australia has become a party
by signature:
1. Agreement establishing the South Pncific Bureau
for Economic Co-operation, signed at Apia on
17 April 1973.
2. Exchange of Letters constituting an Agreement
between Australia and New Zealand on Rates and
Mprgins of Preference, signed at Cnnberra and
Wellington on 7 May 1973.
3. Protocol relating to Mil. k Fat, drawn up at Geneva
on 2 April 1973 and signed for Australia on
11 May 1973.
4. Exchange of Notes between Australia and Laos
constituting a further Amendment to the
Agreement of 24 December 1963 concerning the
Foreign Exchange Operations Fund for Laos,
signed at Vientiano on 1 June 1973.
Protocol to Amend the Agreement on North Atlantic
Ocean Sta tions signed at Paris on 25 Feb~ rua-) ry 1954
and amended on 13 May 1970. The Protocol was
opened for signature at Montreal on 1 December
1972 and signed for Australia on 4 July 1973.
6. Trade Agreement between Australia,,. nd the People's
Republic of China, signed Pt Canberra on 24 July
1973.
7. Exchange of Notes between Australia and the
United States of America, constituting an
Agreement Extending the Agreement of 16 October
1968 relating to Scientific and Technical Cooperation,
signed it Washington on 30 July
1973.
8. Exchange of Notes between Australia and the
United Sta-tes of America constituting an
Agreement concerning the Launching of seven
Acrobee Rockets, signed at Ca-nberra on
18 September 1973. 
Agreement and Conventions to which Australia hrs
become a party by accession:
9. Agreement relating to Refugee Seamen drawn up
at The Hague on 23 November 1957 and acceded to
by Australia on 18 April 1973.
Convention on Nomenclature for the Classification
of Goods in Customs Tariffs signed at Brussels
on 15 December 1950 and Protocol of Amendment
signed at Brussels on 1 July 1955. Australia
acceded to the Convention and Protocol of
Amendment on 18 April 1973.
11. Convention relating to International Exhibitions
signed at P. ris on 22 November 1928, and amended
by the Protocols of 10 May 1948, 16 November 1966
and 30 November 1972. Australia acceded to the
Convention as amended by the 1948 and 1966
Protocols on 6 September 1973 and to the 1972
Protocol on 7 September 1973.
Convention and Covenants to which Australia is
considering becoming a party by ratification:
12. Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, drawn up at
Washington on 3 M. rch 1973 and signed for
Australia on 21 Seltember 1973.
13. International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, opened for signature at New
York on 19 December 1966 nnd signed for Australia
on 18 December 1972.
14. International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, opened for signature at New York on
19 December 1966 and signed for Australia on
18 December 1972.
7-



TEXT OF TELEGRAM SENT TO ALL PREMIERS
BY THE PRIME MINISTER 3/ 12/ 73
My dear Premier, You will remember that on 30th May last I tabled the'
report by the Interim Committee for the Australian Schools Commission
and that on 12th June I cabled you that my Government had decided
to accept the educational programs and financial recommendations of
the Committee for 1974 and 1975. Although the consequential legislation
was passed by the House of Representatives there is some doubt whether
it will be passed by the Senate this year.
Your planning for the amount of funds available during
the first quarter of 1974 should at this stage make contingency
provision for this situation. The Australian Government understands
that your education authorities will have entered into commitments
on the basis of our earlier assurances and it is our intention to give
you the maximum flexibility to honour those commitments during the
first quarter of next year. There might however be no statutory
authority for the amounts promised for recurrent grants to state
schools, for disadvantaged schools, for special education, for primary
school libraries and for our joint programs of librarian training,
of special education teacher training, of teacher development and of
special projects. There might be no extra amounts available for
your general capital program or for secondary school libraries unless
you can find flexibility within the existing legislation providing
grants for science laboratories, secondary libraries and capital
expenditure. The secondary libraries and science laboratories programs
are limited by statute to their specific purposes and the capital grants
are required by statute to apply 70% of the aggregate of payments to
facilities in addition to and not in replacement of existing facilities
at Government schools. These statutes provide for maximum expenditure
during the 1973/ 74 financial year for general capital works and science
laboratories and during calendar year 1974 for libraries. In order to
give your planning the maximum flexibility, we would be willing to
accelerate in the first q'uarter the total amount of payments which
would otherwise be made under these statutes during 1974. Furthermore
we would be willing to release your Government from its obligation,
which is not specifically provided for in the statutes to use these
funds in addition to state funds, i. e. you could use the maximum
available in this quarter under the three specific statutes currently
in force and divert your own expenditures on such projects to other
expenditure. ./ 2 
2
On a strict calculation, the maximum accelerated amount
we could grant for Government schools in the first quarter of
1974 under existing statutes would be New South Wales $ 14.3m,
Victoria $ 13.7m, Queensland $ 4.5m, South Australia $ 0.8m, Western
Australia $ 3.5m, Tasmania $ 1.2m, Total $ 38.0m. This would
compare on the basis of a calculation of one eighth, i. e. the
first quarter of our proposed two year program, with the following
amounts New South Wales $ 22m, Victoria $ 18m, Queensland $ 8.2m,
South Australia $ 6.5m, Western Australia $ 4.5m, Tasmania $ 1.8a.
Total: $ 61.0m. I realise that the alternative we are considering
represents a crisis for your education system. Under the circumstances
I feel it is necessary to advise you of our present thinking so
that you can at least begin planning for the contingency I have
mentioned. SGN. E. G. WHITLAM
3 DECEMBER 1973
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO': 7.15 p. m.
Monday 3rd December 73
INTERVIEW BY MIKE WILLESEE ON " CURRENT AFFAIR" WITH THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, CANBERRA,
MONDAY, 3RD DECEMBER, 1973
WILLESEE: Welcome to " Current Affair" and on the occasion of
the first birthday of the first Labor Government in 23 years we
are privileged to welcome to a " Current Affair" the Prime Minister,
Mr Whitlam. Mr Whitlam, it's not unusual on these occasions to
talk about the worst mistake that you may have made or the
Government may have made....
PRIME MINISTER: I think that was your punchline last time I
was with you six months ago.
WILLESEE: Not unkindly I hope but I wonder whether on this
occasion you may not be now in the middle of your biggest mistakethe
referendum?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Are you serious about the incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: It wasn't forced upon you?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Do you wholeheartedly support it?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Would you like to give the Liberal/ Country Party Government
the power to control or even freeze incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe, that whoever the people elect as a
Government should be able to pass laws about incomes. I don't
believe a Liberal Government would venture to freeze them.
WILLESEE: Are you happy to give a Liberal/ Country Party Government
that chance?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: And that is precisely what you are doing?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, of course, it is. When you alter the
constitution at a referendum, you are giving the authority to
whoever is elected as a Government in the future. My party, in the
past, has sometimes opposed referendums; it has been wrong.
WILLESEE: Are you putting yourself wholeheartedly behind a measure
which the Labor Party is only half-hearted about and the trade
union movement doesn't want? Does that disturb you?.
PRIME MINISTER: The trade union movement is half-hearted about it,
they're divided about, the Labor Party supports it.
WILLE SEE: Wholeheartedly? 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: But you know that there are many Labor men, members of
your own Caucus, who don't like it?,
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: You don't accept that?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There are some who wculdn't be as enthusiastic
as others, but the Labor Party is supporting it.
WILLESEE: Do you agree thaL a victory iii the incomes proposal
is very unlikely?
PRIMP. MINISTER: It will be much more difficult than on prices.
WILLESEE: In fact, unlikely?
PRIME MINISTER: May be. May be.
WILLESEE: Would you also agree that it would suit your purposes
to win on prices and lose on incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I would prefer to win both. I have always
followed the line that whoever constituted the Australian Government
ought to be able to pass l. aws on such subjects always.
WILLESEE: And you are still convinced that you need this power
that you could not hiave done it with the co-operation of the States?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course ycu couldn't. There are no matters of
national economic management that you can do with the States. Look
at all the matters taxation, value of the currency, credit,
tariffs, all those things have to be done on a national basis
and everybody accepts that. It just happens, that in Australia,
the national Government can't pass laws on prices or incomes th(.
only country in the world where that's the case.
WILLESEE: So this referendum is not in any way a mistake?
PRIM4E MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Do you concede there have been mistakes made in economic
management over the past twelve months?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose there have been some, but there have been
some very great successes in economic management too.
WILLESEE: What about economic promises that you have failed to keep.
Particularly with the Budget?
PRIME MINISTER: What are you thinking of?
WILLESEE: Of indirect taxes. You said that you wouldn't increase
indirect taxes.
PRIME MINISTER: I said direct taxes.
WILLESEE: You also said indirect? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so.
WILLESEE: On September 18 on a " Current Affair" you said, no
you wouldn't. You also said you wouldn't increase company taxes
because they were high enough.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I did that well they are income taxes.
Income taxes on individuals and on companies. I did say, in my
policy speech, that they didn't need to go up.
WILLESEE: On indirect taxes, your party even went so far in the
It's Time brochures to talk about the evils and unfairness of
indirect taxes such as taxes cn cigarettes?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember ever saying it myself.
WILLESEE: You don't feel that you....
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't. This has never been raised in the
Parliament. I don't think we were breaking any promise not to
raise taxes on cigarettes.
WILLESEE: It doesn't make it wrong or right though?
PRIME MINISTER: No, quite, but you are putting something to me and
you discovered it or revivied it. This is not an issue.
t, . LSE;: On perhaps a more substantive matter, didn't you promise
tIa-It defence spending would be 5 p: er cent of your gross Budget?
PRIME MINISTER: There was discussion along these lines back in 1971.
WILLESEE: And it's about 2.9 per cent, I think.
PRIME MINISTER: I forget the precise percentages. But, after all,
the military situation in our area has completely changed in the last
two years. Does that mean that we have been wedded to the degree
of expenditure which was considered appropriate thcn? No, well let'-,;
be realistic about these matters. After all, since those things
wvere discussed, over two years ago, there has been detente between
America and China and America has gotoutl of Indo-China. This is
rather a different situation.
WILLESEE: Does this mean that all promises are subjected to
instances that may occur later?
PRIME MINISTER: Where there have been such great changes in the
situation you shouldn't rigidly adhere to something which is no longe; 1
relevant. It would be quite wasteful to continue the percentage
of military expenditure this year which might have been considered
appropriate over two years ago.
WILLESEE: On personal income tax, you certainly did keep your promise
not to raise it?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course I did.
WILLESEE: But people like Dr Coomnbs and Mr Havike say that it was
a mistake? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Who is right?
PRIME MINISTER: I am. The Cabinet is.
WILLESEE: Is it because it was a Cabinet decision, you're right
or are you sure that in economic terms....?
PRIME MINISTER: They happen to be the same. The revenue from
income tax this year has gone up iabout 26 per cent.
WILLESEE: That's larqely due to inflation, isn't it?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, and national growth.
WILLESEE: Don't you think it is unfair to lower income groups to
not increase or restructure the income tax?
PRIME MINISTER: It is unfair not to restructure income tax schedules.
We are in the prccess of doing it.
WILLESEE: How do you feel about Mr Hawke disagreeing with you on
a point like that?
PRIME MINISTER: He is entitled to express his view, but my colleagues
and I were not persuaced.
WILLESEE: As far as you are concerned, he seems to be doing it more
and more?
PRIME MTNISTEPI: There is one othr issue.
WILLESEE: Do you think he doesn't like you much?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no reason to think that. We get on very
well together when we are together.
WILLESEE: How long since you have been together?
PRIME MINISTER: About a month. He has been overseas in the meantime
and so have I.
WILLESEE: And he has been back for a couple of days talking about
a very important issue. He hasn't tried to contact you?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: The words which have been exchanged between you not
directly haven't been very flatterijq.
PRIME MINISTER: What do you mean the words.
WILLESEE: For example, after you talked about him not representing
the Labor Party or the trade union movement on the question of taxes,
he replied by calling you petulant and gratuitous.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. 
WILLESEE: How do you react to that?
PRIME MINISTER: I keep my cool. I don't reply in kind.
WILLESEE: I think he thought he was replying in king?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't use those words, or anything like them.
WILLESEE: On our program the other night he said that he couldn't
repeat the words on television that you had used.
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't use any words on television.
WILLESEE: No, he said that you talked to some pressmen and he
couldn't repeat the words on television.
PRIME MINISTER: This is gossip.
WILLESEE: How concerned are you about these apparent personal
attacks both ways in fact?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't accept from what you said then that therf:--
would be a personal attack.
1W'ILLESEE: When he talks about your Middle East policy.
PRIME MINISTER: The party's Middle East policy.
NIILLESEE-Yes, you spearhead that policy?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course I moved the resolution and it was
overwhelmingly carried. I don't think anyone opposed it.
WILLESEE: Mr Hawke says it is an unintelligent policy. Do you
suggest that the Government might
PRIME MINISTER: Now on this, Mr Hawke is at pains to emphasise
that he speaks purely in a personal. sense.
WILLESEE: How can he do this as President of the Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I don't know, but I merely repeat
that I am expressing the party's policy in this matter. The party's
policy enuciated as recently as last July. T ' here are no political
differences in the national Parliament on the Middle East, there
hasn't been for the last quarter of a century.
WILLESEE: If you are standing by party policy and your Federal
President is not, what are you going to do about it?
PRIME MINISTER: He says that he is speaking as an individual.
WILLESEE: Well how can he, he really can't can he?
PRIME MINISTER: I have answered that. before haven't I.
WILLESEE: Well, what would you like to do about it?
PRIME MINISTER: I adhere to party policy. 
-6-
WILLESEE: He is being devisive isn't he?
PRIME MINISTER: He is speaking as an individual.
WILLESEE: But he's still President of the A. L. P. and talking on
a most important matter of policy?
PRIME MINISTER: This is going back a fair bit, isn't it?
WILLESEE: Yes, but you would remember it.
PRIME MINISTER: I am following party policy, and I support it too.
WILLESEE: Would you like to see Mr Hawke in Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Would you support his entry into Par] iami-nnt?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Would you see an early rise....
PRIME MINISTER: I have tried to get him into Parliament since 1963.
WILLESEE: Are you trying as hard now as you tried before?
PRIME MINISTER: I will help him whenever he wants to get in.
WILLESEE: Do you think he would go straight into the ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's likely.
WILLESEE: As likely as Mr Young?
PRIME MINISTER: Perhaps more likely. Are you trying to help
Mr Hawke get into a ministry or Mr Young, you know that question
like this don't help either.
WILLESEE: They've got to get into Parliament first though haven't
they? Just a last point on Mr Hawke. I suppose his language was
strongest out of all his attacks on your Cabinet decision on the
new Sydney airport at Galston an act of political imbecility
I think he said. Was it?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Was it irresponsible to ecide on Galston the way you did?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Is it true that you just .: at around and picked one out
of political expediency?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: But you didn't have a proper inquiry into the site before
you made a decision did you? 
PRIME MINISTER: Yes we did.
WILLESEE: Is that available?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Has it been made public?
PRIME MINISTER: It will be.
WILLESEE: When?
PRIME MINISTER: There are further ones which have been sought and
will be made public. Now let's get some practicality on this. The
cheapest and quickest way to get adequate airport facilities in
Sydney is to extend the Mascot runway into Botany Bay. This would
be a very difficult political thing to do. The Liberals realise
that because they won't endorse a proposal either, either the State
Liberals or the federal Liberals, so whatever site is suggested
will. immediately be attacked. But nobody is prepared, at this
stage, to endorse the quickest and cheapest proposal.
WILLESEE: In other words, do you agree that it was political
expediency at least in as much as you....
PR. IME MINISTER: Not to have Mascot may be said to have been
political exp-ediency but it is also political expediency to which
everybody in the federal Parliament falls prey, because nobody
is prep,-, recl at this stage to urge the doubling of the runways into
Potarny Day at Mascot. Let's be practical about it; dorn't criticise
the Labor Government for refusing to do something that the Liberal
Government refused to do and that the Liberal Opposition refuses
to advocate, and that the State-Liberal Government refuses to
advocate. WILLESEE: You hardly sound convincing about Galston not being a
mistake. It was a mistake wasn't it?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
VWILLESEE: It was a political mistake?
PRIME MINISTER: Was it?
WILLESEE: It would seem so from the Paramatta by-election?
PRIME MINISTER: Why do you think we lost only on that? It didn't
help in Paramatta, that's true.
WI! LESEE: And you are not prepared to concede that it might have
been a mistake....
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that if we had postponed the
decision, I doubt very much whether we would have won Paramatta.
WILLESEE: Why not?
PRIME MINISTER: Why should we, we never have. 
-8-
WILLESEE: Twelve months ago now you went within a few votes of gettinq
that seat?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WITLL Sf-J I nu you arce satisfied with your p.;: forLiances as ca
Government since?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Do you believe......( unclear) a change in Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course it is.
WILLESEE: Well why would you expect then that you would lose such
a close seat?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that the circumstances at the time
made it easy to win it. Why do you think that Mr Bowen chose that
stage to retire?
WILLESEE: I don't know why he chose to retire. Are you reflecting
on your own personal popularity at that stage?
PFIME MINISTER: No.
WJLLFSEE Looking at the Labor performance generally, Open Covernment
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WLLESEE: There has been a lot of criticism that you have failed
t-. o supply one of the things you talked about most open governricnt.
How do you react to that criticism?
PRIME MINISTER: Well it would be a completely wrong assertion.
There has never been a Government which has allowed the public to
participate in decision and which has informed the public cf
' ccisons to such a great degree.
WILLESEE: Is that sufficient?
PRIME iIINISTER: Certainly. I mean we are infinitely better
because they would just not do these things we've done them, we've
started them.
WTLLESEE: But at your weekly press conference which does indicate
open government, you so often decline to answer questions or cut
interviewers off?
PRIME MINISTER: No, that's not true. Everybody gets one question,
and that takes about half an hour and that's fair enough.
WILLESEE: But you indicate, no more on that, or I don't want to
answer something on that. 
-9-
PRIME MINISTER: Obviously I will not discuss possible changes in
say the value of the currency or an imposition to taxation, i. e.
anyone who askes a question on those subjects knows quite well
he won't get an answer. He may think it's smart to ask me because
then some people might think superficially that I'm not being
forthcoming, that I am being cagey. But, in fact, no Prime Minister,
no minister, would answer a question on things like that and they
know it. And there is another matter where, of course, I will not
answer questions and that is on installations which other countries
have in this country and which they want to keep secret because it
is not our secret alone.
WILLESEE: But you weren't saying that last year, nor was Mr Barnard.
PRIME MINISTER: We were, we were.
WILLESEE: I thought Mr Barnard, in particular, was saying that
these questions should be answered?
PRIME MINISTER: He has. On the very first day that the new
Parliament sat he told the Australian people through the Parliament
all that it was open for Australia to say and also a great deal in
which we persuaded the Americans to agree to our saying. Now
this was the very first day we sat. The things which it was quite
absurd to supress we have released or we are authorised by our allies
to release. But the things which we are not authorised to release,
of course, we won't, and we never said we would.
WILLESEE: In general terms, not just defencc matters, would you
be prepared to say
PRIME MINISTER: In defence and fisccil matters. Obviously one doesn't
comment because it can produce speculation.
WILLESEE: Looking at the whole spectrum of government, would you be
prepared to say that you are satisfied with the level of open
government? PRIME MINISTER: With the progress which has Leen made, yes. But
there is a limit to what you can get through. For instance, we haven't
yet been able to pass the ombudsman legislation or to pass the
freedom of information legislation. The sheer weight of the
legislation program has prevented us doing it this year. But
we are preparing it.
WILLESEE: Looking at the hindrances and other obstacles that you
have had to overcome during the year, is CF. ucus the biggest?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Caucus is a hindrance to you.... 
PRIME MINISTER: No, not at all, of course it's not. The weekly
or more frequent meeting of all Labor members of the Parliament is
one of the great sources of the Labor Party's strength. Because
if people know that if they elect a Labor member to represent
them in the federal Parliament he will have a full regular
opportunity to participate in the decisions of the Government, if it
is a Labor Government, or the decisions that an Opposition takes if
it is a Labor Opposition. That is,* if the people elect a member of
Parliam~ ent who will be sharing the responsibility, he just won't be
on the outside not even looking in, as happens with any Liberal
backbencher or Country Party backbencher.
WILLESEE: Wel. haven't you often been embarrassed by Caucus when
it reverses Cabinet decisions?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Are you happy about that?
PRIME MINISTER: They' are entitled to do it.
WILLESEE: Are you happy about it?
PRIME MINISTER: Sometimes I have been, sometimes I am not.
WILLESEE: Do you support the principle of Caucus being able to
review a Cabinet decision and change it?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course. I not only support it, I advocate it.
I believe that a Labor Government is a much better government than
a Liberal Government because you get more people involved in the
decisions. But let's put thi s in perspective: I suppose there might
be half a dozen certainly no more decisions which the Caucus
has over-ruled a decision by the Cabinet. Cabinet decisions this
year are well over a thousand in number, so it is a mighty small
percentage. WILLESEE: You are minimising the obstacle the Caucus could be, but
recently you threatened to resign if Caucus insisted on having a
say on the tariff matter.
PRIME MINISTER: If they insisted on seeing a Tariff Board Report
before the decision was made and announced on the report. Yes, I
did, it's the same as if Cauicus were to say we want the Budget, we
want to know what's in the Budget before it is published.
WIILLESEE: So you don't support all the power that Caucus would like
to take to itself?
PRIME MINISTER: Caucus doesn't want to take that power to itself.
Your saying that there was a great deal of lobbying and, naturally,
therefore, public reaction to the Tariff Board inquiry into colour
television. Caucus, last Wednesday, approved of that decision no
news, I don't think there was a thing in the paper about it. They
approved it, there was no longer any drama about it.
WILLESEE: Yes, but hadn't you taken the sting out of the drama by
your previous action? You virtually resolved the conflict with a
successful threat? 
-11-
PRIME MINISTER: No, I didn't. It only had to be stated for people,
and there were very few who ever contemplated that Caucus should
see Tariff Board reports which might have financial advantages or
disadvantages to people in the community before the reports were
considered by Cabinet and Cabinet had made and announced the
decision. There would be very grave mischief, as everybody sees,
if people who are not sworn to secrecy ministers and public service
advisers are sworn to secrecy but if people who were not sworn to
secrecy were consulted when there was likely to be a change in the
interest rate or a change in the value of the currency, or changes
in taxes or changes in tariffs. In cases like that, obviously,
the decisions must be made by people who are sworn to secrecy. Now,
Caucus accepts that. What you are referring to is a Caucus
impediment in some way is a notice of motion that was moved. It
hadn't been considered by Caucus. I was asked a question in Parliament
by a Liberal and I gave the only answer that any minister could give.
WILLESEE: Caucus is certainly the impediment to your ability to
speak with absolute confidence because you can be overruled and so
is the Federal Conference of the Labor Party. Do you ever get sick
of the aparatus of the Labor Party to be able to second-guess you?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I've sponsored; I've also secured a very
great number of changes in the procedures of the Federal Conference
and the Caucus, and I'm very happy the way they work. I usen't to be,
but after all there have been changes since those days.
VIILLESEE: Do you think there is any national difference between your
style of Prime Ministership which some see as a Presidential style
and the inherent democracy of the Labor Party?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: None at all?
PRIME MINISTER: The Labor Party believes in representative governme~' nt
and there have to be some people or groups of people that are
chosen to carry out some jobs. You can't have a public meeting
deciding everything. You can't have all the memrbers of the Labor Party
in Australia deciding everything. The whole system of representative
government depends on people being able to chose their representatives
f: or certain jobs. And in some cases, the Prime Minister would be
the representative. To give you an instance: if you are going to
suggest somebody as Governor-General, the Prime Minister presumably
has the principal and even the sole job on that. There are others
where a ministry does it; there are others where the Caucus docs it.
WILLESEE: The Labor Party has a lot of natural characteristics
un. derstood particularly by Labor men. Do you . think one of them could
he a dislike of leaders who threaten to resign?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: You have done it three times now, I think.
PRIME MINISTER: When was the last time? Years ago, and the systerm
has changed since then hasn't it.
WILLESEE: No, the last time was on the tariffs? 
-12-
PRIME MINISTER: Well this is entirely hypothetical, as I was asked
what would happen on the basis of newspaper reports of this
notice of motion which had been given.
WILLESEE: Was this really hypothetical, I thought it was a real
threat? PRIME MINISTER: No, it was a notice of motion.
WILLESEE: Well, there have been two other occasions a few years
ago and more recently on the U. S. Bases. That was within the last
twelve months, was it not?
PRIME MINISTER: Where was there a threat to resign, to use your
own words there?
WILLESEE: I am not aware that it was a public threat but do you
deny that....
PRIME MINISTER: I am not sure of any such threat I am using your
terms. This is all very dramatic but I don't think you remember
WILLESEE: But you were pushed to reveal certain details about,
I forget the exact installations, omega may have been included,
U. S. installations.
PRIME MINISTER: Omega is not here.
WILLESEE: Arny U. S. installations? Do you deny that there was
ever conflict between you and the party over that?
PRIME MINISTER: There was never a proposal. You are assuming
what my reaction would be if some proposal were carried. I don't
even remember a proposal being made.
WILLESEE: H1ow much of a handicap has it been to have inexperienced
ministers who haven't been accustomed to a hard and long workload.
How difficult has that been?
PRIME MINISTER: It is true that most of the ministers have had to
work in a different way to the way they had worked previously.
WILLESEE: I'm not suggesting a fault?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I know, I know you're not. This is not one
of the questions in the mistake syndrome which you said was to be
the purpose of the interview.
People have to work differently obviously as ministers to
the way they workoce in many cases for many years in Parliament in
Opposition. WILLESFF: Even physically you have had three ministers collapse. 
-13-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there has been a very heavy workload. This is
partly, of course, because we have been a very diligent Parliament
this year. There have been more bills passed than in any previous
year and of course, there are very very many more bills which have
to be introduced or which will still have to be debated this year.
It is a record legislative year in the history of this country.
WILLESEE: Are you thinking of a reshuffle in the ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: You don't have one planned?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: On the union movement, I suppose the most outstanding
difference between this government's last year and the record now
is that you siad there would be fewer strikes than in the previous
year. PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Now, the only figure I have seen are from January to
August and there were more strikes.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes I think that is probably right.
WILLESEE: How did you make such a mistake?
PRIME MIU" ISTER: Obviously there is more likelihood of strikes
when there is full employment and there is full employment now.
We have produced it. Last year there... . The other thing is
WILLESEE: And you anticipate....
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, that is right. There is another factor.
Most of the strikes in Australia, the ones which have inconvenienced
the public, have come through disputes between the State Liberal
Government and their employees and I think there can be no doubt
that in some of these cases the Liberal Governments have been quite
provocative. WILLESEE: Are you satisfied with the support you have had from the
union movement?
PRIME MINISTER: No, not entirely. I think that some cf the unions
in New South Wales in recent weeks or months were quite unhelpful.
WILLESEE: At one stage when you were taking . about inflation you
said you had an assurance from Mr Hawke that the unions would show
restraint in seeking further wage increases. Mr Hawke has denied
that. PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: How disappointed did that make you?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I thought I understood him quite clearly
but apparently he changed his mind, or I hadn't understood him. 
-14-
WILLESEE: Which do you believe?
PRIME MINISTER: The former.
WILLESEE: Have you had enough of Mr Hawke?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, but I think you have asked enough questions
on this subject.
WILLESEE: It is very important though, as well as being the trade
union leader he is the party's President and there is an obvious
conflict between the two of you.
PRIME MINISTER: On the Middle East.
WILLESEE: On that matter of assuranres from a personal conversation?
PRIME MINISTER: The only instances are these referendums the, one
on prices. Now, the union movement had differences of opinion on
this.
WILLESEE: Can I ask one last question on Mr Hawke?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, you are entitled to.
WILLESEE: Is he an impediment to you enjoying better relations with
the union movement.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: Despite conversations like....
PRIME MINISTER: Let's get this straight. Mr Hawke gives interviews
in a more frequent and informal manner than I am able to do, but you
ask me whether I want him in the Parliament. I said yes. I also
ought to take the opportunity to say, in the last. elections and in
the next elections, whenever they come, he will be a most effective
campaigner. Now don't get these things out ef proportion. There
are two instances where you have quoted a difference of opinion. In
one of them he is stressing that he speaks as &amp; n individual.
WILLESEE: And you have also said that you don't know how he can do
that as President of the Labor Party?
PRIME MINISTER: Well how many times do I have to answer that.
WILLESEE: No, but I thought you were
PRIME MINISTER: No, I wasn't. The answer is the same no matter
how often you ask it.
WILLESEE: Yes, I need reassurance sometimes.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. You have become very uncertain-apparently?
Wff14 t t; yes. FHave you becomc more uncertain after twelve months,
Prime Miii; ter"
PRIME MINISTER: Most people would allege the opposite. 
WILLESEE: What do you think?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't think I had.
WILLESEE: Looking at your Government's relations with the business
community, do you think your report card could be marked " room
for improvement"?
PRIME MINISTER: We would never, clearly, get top marks from many
people in the business community.
WILLESEE: Well I don't think you have got 50 out of 100 at this
stage, let alone top marks.
PRIME MINISTER: I am not very surprised at that the report card
that they make. But afterall, the people that have criticised us
most in the business community scarcely have very much public
support. We have been criticised very much by many of the overseas
mining interests. Now, there is no doubt that something had to be
done about the growing overseas control of our mineral resources.
We've done it; we have therefore offended many people. There is
no doubt in my mind that it needed to be done and the public are glad
we have done it and the public expects us to go on doing it more.
WILLESEE: But when you go so far as to say that you want 100 per cent
ownership by Australian sources of all our fuel sources, that must
create uncertainty and even fear in a lot of industries.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
WILLESEE: They don't know when you are going to do it and how you
are going to do it?
PRIME MINISTER: There was a lot of surprise, a lot of pressure and
so on a few weeks or months ago on this issue but there can be no
question now about the public support there is for what we have
been trying to do to secure Australia's energy resources. It is
quite absurd that companies should be given licences or leases by
State Governments to explore resources which we may need very much
ourselves, or to explore those resources at prices which are less
than our customers would be prepared to pay. Now, these people,
they were not pleased with what we did I can understand they were
not pleasexdwith what we did but there can be no doubt that it was
necessary in the public interest.
WILLESEE: Yes, but you have still left a lot of uncertainty around?
PRIME MINISTER: No, we haven't. We have been quite clear and
quite consistent and we haven't been deflected from our duty, our
purpose, by the criticism by overseas companies.
WILLESEE: After your first twelve months, you now face a position
where you may have to go to the polls again soon potentially
you face a double dissolution.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: If the Senate knocks back either of those two major
proposals, health insurance or schools, will you certainly go to the
people or is there room for compromise on either issue? 
-16-
PRIME MINISTER: Only one of these matters has been debated so far
in the Parliament, that's the Commonwealth Assistance to Schools on
a Needs Basis. There was a vote in the House of Representatives
on it. But the Liberals, the Country Party, the have in( L
yet made up their mind what they will do about it in the Senate.
Well let' s wait to see what they do about it there.
WILLESEE: Is there room for compromise?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, let's wait and see what they do. Clearly
the matter they put to a vote in the House of Representatives we
couldn't be expected to accept because we had proved to the people
in the 1969 elections and the elections last year too, and there
can be no question that we are commuitted, and the public expects,
that Commonwealth assistance to schools should be on a needs basis.
And then the other thing you mentioned about universal health
insurance that also has been put to the people in the 1969 and 1972
elections. There can be no doubt that they expect us to do something
about it. But this hasn't been debated in the Parliament yet, andi
the bills only came in last Thursday night.
WILLESEE: And you don't realise the possibility of some room for
ma nouevr e?
PRIME MINISTER: I will wait to see what is done in the Senate on
these r~ atters.
WILLESEE: Finally, Prime Minister, looking at you personally, I amn
sure you would be most surprised if I didn't ask a question about
to quote that friend of yours againt. Petulant, arrogrant and
as some other critics see it, a quick, cruel tongue.
PRIME MINISTER: I would be very surprised if you didn't ask chat.
WILLESEE: Well let me add to the question. It ranges from
Paul Hasluck and the glass of water to witless men up to the
Dr Forbes incident.
PRIME MINISTER: Now, how many years ago were these, how many years?
WILLESEE: I agree fully that they were few and far between, but
they are a most notable characteristic of your career?
PRIME MINISTER: Now, don't you assert, don't Vou insinuate that
there is any stress between the Governor-General and me. There is
not. We were both in error thent, we both realise it and it would
be better if you wouldn't always bring that. out of the dossier.
It doesn't suit him and it doesn't suit me, and it was years ago.
WILLESEE: I accept that they were gr-nerally few and far between.
PRIME MINISTER: About the witless men. The witless men quote was
nine years ago.
WILLESEE: It was 1967.
PRIME MINISOTER: No, it wao 1966, 1966 or 1965. Whatever it was, it was
years ago and the structure of the party has altered since then. 
-17-
WILLESEE: It doesn't matter.... it is a long time ago.
PRIME MINISTER: And it might have been a necessary way to get
change. There may be suggestions that change could have been
achieved without what I said then, but that is conjecture, the
fact is that change did come about.
WILLESEE: I don't wish to question you about any one incident, the
fact is that in any portrait of the Whitlam career those points
will always stand out and people tend to judge you accordingly.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: As if this trait of yours is damaging.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Well, every time I go on an interview with
you, you'll go through this and a couple of other incidents so I
suppose.... ( unclear)
WILLESEE: But you must realise, with respect, Prime Minister,
the last one was the incident with Dr Forbes in the House.
PRIME MINISTER: You were not there on the Wednesday night or on
the Thursday morning.
WILLESEE: No, but I have spoken to a lot of people who were.
PRIME MINISTER: And they told you how Dr Forbes behaved on Wednesday
night?
WILLESEE: Alright, if I was interviewing Dr Forbes I would ask
him about his behaviour.
PRIME MINISTER: But, I mean, were you told how he behaved on
Wednesday night?
WILLESEE: I think that is unfair of you because....
PRIME MINISTER: Well isn't it a necessary preliminary?
WILLESEE: Well, aren't you justifying what you did?
PRIME MINISTER: The fact was that Dr Forbes did behave excessively,
intemperately on Wednesday night and everybody in the Chamber
realises that.
WILLESEE: Are you satisfied that whatever he did justified your
reaction and your....?
PRIME MINISTER: What do you mean my reaction?
WILLESEE: Your unparliamentary language?
PRIME MINISTER: What unparliamentary language?
WILLESEE: You said: " It's what he has or had or put in his guts
that rooted him". 
18-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, and there was one person who heard that,
Mr Snedden. Hansard didn't hear it, the Speaker didn't, the clerks
didn't, it wasn't on radio, nobody heard it in the gallery, and
Mr Snedden thought that it would be good politics to dob me in.
WILLESEE: Was it wise of you to say it?
PRIME MINISTER: No, of course it wasn't, but I didn't think he
would dob me in. It was a quite aside across the table.
WILLESEE: Does that justify it?
PRIME MINISTER: Well he said something before that which when it
came to light the Speaker said he would have required him to withdraw
if he had heard it. The fact is that he said something which only
I heard, I replied in a way that only he heard, then he decided to
dob me in. Nobody in the Chamber or outside it heard it.
WILLESEE: You have accused me of raising it, but really I think
you must accept that you did with the Dr Forbes incident or
certainly.... PRIME MINISTER: Those words you have quoted, of course, shouldn't,
be used in Parliament and they were not heard in the Parliament,
and Billy Snedden mentioned them so that theY~ would be recorded.
WILLESEE: Well let's presume....
PRIME MINIISTER: I withdrew them too, as of course I would have
had to, once....
WILLESEE: Are you....
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Let's presume we have another interview in twelve months
time, and I hope we
PRIME MINISTER: On another channel?
WILLESEE: It will be another channel?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
WILLESEE: Do you think we would have to talk * About this again or
do you think....
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect that you would go through the
catalogue again.
WILLESEE: I would prefer not to go through it again if there was
nothing between now and then. Do you think that's likely?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect there would be nothing between now
and then. I would expect that you would raise it, but I would still
enjoy appearing with you.
WILLESEE: Two more questions. Have you suffered any disillusionment
in the last twelve months, personally? 
-19-
PRIME MINISTER: No more than any politican who has been around
for a long time suffers.
WILLESEE: But this is different, this is the year you have bcn
Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: On balance, I would say that I have been les:.
disillusioned this year than in any of the previous 20 years
I'd had in Parliament. Yes, it has been a very satisfying anc,
fulfilling period in my life.
WILLESEE: Lut isolating your expectations of the Prime Ministership,
has there been disillusionment in that?
PRIME MINISTER: In some areas we have been able to do much more,
mucL, quicker than I would have hoped. In others, we haven't been
able to go as far.
WILLESEE: Are we going to see a different Gough Whitlam next year?
PR&amp; F MINISTER: I guess he is a developing personality.
WILLESEE: Which way do you think he is developing?
PRIME MINISTER: Improving all the time, going from strength to
strength. WILIESFE. Well. the best Foreign Minister, is he also the
best Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: HIe was the besit Foreign Mirister ( or a generatio.
is what he said.
WILLESEE: And the best Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: For a generation. And you are the best interviewer
for a generation.
WILLESEE: That's very kind of you to say that. Thanks for talking
with us and I hope to see you again in ainother twelve months. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIISTER
MR, E. G. WHITLAM, MP.,
AT THE UNVEILING OF THE EUREKA FLAG,
BALLARAT FINE ART GALLERY,
BALLARAT, 3 DECEMBER
1973
NO DOUBT MY OPPONENTS WOULD SAY THAT THE CHIEF LESSON
OF EUREKA IS A SIMPLE ONE: THE GOVERNMENT WAS NO MORE POPULAR
WITH MINING INTERESTS IN THE MID-NINETEENTH CENTURY THAN THE
PRESEN4T GOVERNMENT IS TODAY. NEVERTHELESS, I HAVE ALWAYS THOUGHT
IT AN AUSPICIOUS COINCIDENCE THAT THE ELECTION OF THE FIRST
NATIONAL LABOR GOVERNM4ENT FOR 23 YEARS SHOULD HAVE OCCURRED,
ALMOST TO THE DAY, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE EUREKA STOCKADE.
NOT THAT MY PARTY CLAIMS ANY MONOPOLY OF PATRIOTIC SENTIMENT,
ANY EXCLUSIVE AFFINITY WITH THE SYMBOLS OF AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.,
EUREKA HAD LITTLE OR NOTHING TO DO. WITH THE FORMULATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY. IT HAD LITTLE OR NOTHING TO DO WITH
THE GREAT MOVEMENT FOR FEDERATION THE MOVEMENT THAT CAME
TO FRUITION HALF A CENTURY AFTER EUREKA IN THE EMERGENCE OF
AN AUSTRALIAN NATION. YET WE IN THE LABOR PARTY'-WOULD
BE LESS THAN HUMAN IF WE DID NOT SEE IN THE EVENTS OF EUREKA
SAD AND REMOTE AND ISOLATED AS THEY WERE A SYMBOL OF THE PRIDE
THE INDEPENDENCE OF SPIRIT, THE DEMOCRATIC TRADITIONS AND THE
STRONG NATIONALIST ASPIRATIONS FOR WHICH LABOR HAS ALWAYS STOOD,.
AND WITH WHICH THE NEW GOVERNMENT IS ESPECIALLY IDENTIFIED. 
-2-
I HOPE YOU WILL FORGIVE ME FOR STRIKING THIS PARTISAN
NOTE, IT IS A TRUISM, PERHAPS, THAT THE IMPORTANCE OF AN
HISTORICAL EVENT LIES NOT IN WHAT HAPPENED BUT IN WHAT
LATER GENERATIONS BELIEVE TO HAVE HAPPENED, ON THAT SCORE,
THERE CAN BE NO DOUBT OF EUREKA'S IMPORTANCE TO THE LABOR
PARTY AND TO AUSTRALIA, HISTORY IS A PROCESS OF COLLECTIVE
REMEMBRANCE; AND BEYOND QUESTION THE EVENTS OF 3 DECEMBER
1854 PERSIST IN THE MEMORY AND CONSCIOUSNESS OF OUR PEOPLE
IN THE WORDS OF ONE WRITER AS " THE PIONEER AND SUPREME
AUSTRALIAN EVENT IN THE SPECTACULAR SENSE," DR, EVATT, A GREAT
STATESMAN AND A PERCEPTIVE HISTORIAN, WENT SO FAR AS TO DECLARE
THAT " AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRACY WAS BORN AT EUREKA", I ACCEPT THAT
JUDGEMENT, AND HERE, IN THE CITY AND BIRTHPLACE OF EUREKA,
I PROCLAIM THE CENTRAL AND ENDURING RELEVANCE OF THOSE EVENTS
TO OUR OWN DAY, TO THE GREAT REFORMS IN OUR NATIONAL LIFE AND
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS ON WHICH THIS COUNTRY IS EMBARKED, AND
THE CREATION OF THE MORE JUST AND HUMANE SOCIETY TO WHICH MY
GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED,
YOU'HEAR MUCH THESE DAYS OF THE " NEW NATIONALISM"
OF ALL THE SLOGANS APPLIED TO MY GOVERNMENT, I THINK IT IS THE
ONLY ONE OF WHICH I CANNOT CLAIM THE AUTHORSHIP, LIKE A GREAT
NUMBER OF THINGS, IT WAS INVENTED BY THE PRESS, YET I AM HAPPY
TO ADOPT AND AFFIRM IT, THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE WHO SEE SOMETHING
SINISTER OR THREATENING IN THE IDEA OF A " NEW NATIONALISM" SOME
DISTURBANCE TO OUR WAY OF LIFE, THE OVERTURNING OF RECEIVED IDEAS
AND SETTLED TRADITIONS, THE BREAKING OFF OF OLD FRIENDSHIPS,
THAT IS NOT WHAT WE INTEND THE NEW NATIONALISM TO MEAN, 
-3-
RATHER THAN DISCARD OUR AUTHENTIC TRADITIONS, WE WANT
TO RESTORE AND INVIGORATE THEM. RATHER THAN BREAK OFF OLD
FRIENDSHIPS, WE WANT TO FORM NEW. ONES FRIENDSHIPS THAT WILL
ENHANCE OUR NAME AND REPUTATION IN THE WORLD AS A GOOD FRIEND,
A CONCERNED AND HELPFUL PARTNER IN OUR REGION AND BEYOND.
RATHER THAN OVERTURN THE TRUE VALUES OF AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY,
WE WANT TO RESURRECT AND FOSTER THOSE VALUES. THE LABOR PARTY,
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, HAS NEVER HAD ANY DOUBT ABOUT WHAT
THOSE VALUES WERE. THEY WERE, IN TRUTH, IDENTIFIED AND PROCLAIMED
AT EUREKA JUSTICE, FREEDOM, INDEPENDENCE,
FRATERNITY, THE INSTINCT FOR FAIR PLAY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE. EGALITARIANISM BY WHATEVER NAME
WE CALL IT IS AT THE HEART OF\ AUSTRALIAN TRADITION.
INTANGIBLE AS THESE VALUES ARE, THEY HAVE A VERY REAL
MEANING FOR THE LABOR PARTY, THEY ARE CLEARLY EXPRESSED IN THE
PLATFORM OF THE PARTY AND IN THE POLICIES OF THE GOVERNMENT.
ANYONE READING THE PLATFORM WILL BE STRUCK BY THE EMPHASIS
ON " AUSTRALIA", THE " AUSTRALIAN NATION", ON NATIONAL GOALS AND
ASPIRATIONS, ALONE AMONG'THE PARTIES WE AFFIRM THE SUPREMACY
OF AUSTRALIAN SOVEREIGNTY OVER THE WHOLE NATION AND ITS
TERRITORIES. ANYONE WHO HAS STUDIED THE RECORD OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ACHIEVEMENTS SINCE COMING TO OFFICE WILL RECOGNISE THIS NATIONALIST
SENTIMENT AS THE GREAT BINDING THEME OF ALL OUR MAJOR DECISIONS
AND INITIATIVES. I I, 
-4
AS A PHILOSOPHY, A MODUS LIVEIADI FOR THE NEW GOVERNMENT,
THE / INEW NATIONALISM If BRINGS TOGETHER A GREAT NUMBER OF DIVERSE
STRANDS AND ATTITUDES AND AMBITIONS. IT MEANS,
THE GREATEST POSSIBLE MEASURE OF AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OVER OUR
INDUSTRIES AND RESOURCES. IT MEANS AN INDEPENDENT FOREIGN
POLICY NOT ONE WITHOUT ALLIES, BUT ONE WITHOUT OBSESSIONS,
WITHOUT DISTORTIONS, WITHOUT SUBJECTION TO THE IDEOLOGIES OR
FOLLIES OF OTHER POWERS. IT MEANS THE CREATION OF A ROBUST AND
THRIVING ECONOMY BY WHICH THE TALENTS AND SKILLS OF ALL AUSTRALIANS
CAN BE FULFILLED. IT MEANS STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPING
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES, INCLUDING RURAL INDUSTRIES, TO. MAKE.
THEM MORE RESILIENT AND COMPETITIVE IN A CHANGING
WORLD. IT MEANS THE FULLEST PARTICIPATION OF AUSTRALIANS IN
DECISIONS INVOLVING THEIR OWN DESTINY. IT MEANS THE PRESERVATION
OF THE NATIONAL ESTATE OUR HISTORIC BUILDINGS, AND NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT. IT MEANS THE PROTECTION OF ABORIGINAL CULTURE
AND TRADITIONS AS THE ORIGINAL AND MOST AUTHENTIC EXPRESSION OF
AN AUSTRALIAN IDENTITY. IT MEANS THE CULTIVATION OF VITALITY AND
CREATIVENESS IN THE ARTS, IN ORDER TO IMPART To AUSTRALIAN LIFE
A VIGOROUS AND DISTINCTIVE INTELLECTUAL IMPETUS.
THERE IS NOTHING COARSE OR INTOLERANT OR XENOPHOBIC
ABOUT THIS KIND OF NATIONALISM. IT DOES NOT MEAN CLOSING OUR SOCIETY
TO BENEFICIAL IDEAS FROM ABROAD. AN AUTHENTIC AUSTRALIANSIM
CAN READILY ACCOMMODATE FOREIGN INFLUENCES AND FOREIGN CULTURES,
JUST AS WE HAVE PROSPERED FROM THE POST-WAR PROGRAM OF IMMIGRATION.
THEY WERE MIGRANTS, AFTER ALL IRISH, EUROPEAN, AMERICAN WHO
PROVIDED THE BACKBONE OF THE EUREKA RISING, NOR DO I CARE FOR
THE ARGUMENT THAT A " tNEW NATIONALISM' IS OUTMODED OR EVEN DANGEROUS
IN A WORLD THAT HAS SUFFERED TOO MUCH FROM NATIONALISTIC HATREDS
AND PASSIONS AND STRIVES ONLY FOR PEACE AND SECURITY BASED ON 
INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING, NO GOVERNMENT IS MORE COMMITTED THAN
MINE TO INTERNATIONALISM IN THIS HIGHEST SENSE, YET IF WE LOOK
AT THE NATIONS, EXCLUDING THE MAJOR POWERS, THAT HAVE ADVANCED
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION THE MOST INDIA, CANADA, THE
SCANDANAVIAN COUNTRIES WE FIND THEY ARE NATIONS WITH A SECURE
AND DISTINCTIVE NATIONAL IDENTITY OF THEIR OWN, ECHOES AND
SHADOWS, SATELLITES AND VASSALS ARE NOT FORCES FOR PEACE AND
CO-OPERATION: THEY ARE MORE LIKELY TO BE THE FIRST VICTIMS
WHEN PEACE AND CO-OPERATION ARE OVERTHROWN,
DURING THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN LAST YEAR, I ANNOUNCED THAT
A LABOR GOVERNMENT WOULD OFFICIALLY PROCLAIM A NEW AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL ANTHEM, THIS YEAR A COMPETITION WAS HELD TO SEE IF
ANYONE COULD PRODUCE BETTER WORDS AND MUSIC THAN THE SONGS
WE HAVE ALREADY, THE INTERESTING THING ABOUT THAT EXERCISE WAS
NOT THE QUALITY OF THE ENTRIES THERE ARE VERY FEW PEOPLE WHO
CAN COMPOSE GOOD WORDS AND MUSIC BUT THE QUANTITY, THERE WERE
MORE THAN 1300 ANTHEMS, GIVEN THE DIFFICULTIES INVOLVED, THAT
WAS A CONSIDERABLE AND HEARTENING RESPONSE, THERE IS NO DOUBT
IN MY MIND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WANT A NATIONAL ANTHEM
OF THEIR OWN AN ANTHEM THAT TRULY REFLECTS THE CHARACTER AND
TRADITIONS OF OUR PEOPLE, NEXT YEAR WE SHALL HAVE SUCH AN ANTHEM,
THERE IS NOTHING EXCESSIVE. OR JINGOISTIC INTHE PROPuSITION THAT
AUSTRALIA SHOULD NO LONGER BE WILLING TO SHARE A NATIONAL ANTHEM
WITH ANOTHER COUNTRY, 
6-
I CONGRATULATE THOSE WHO HAVE PRESERVED AND RESTORED
THIS HISTORIC FLAG, IT IS FITTING THAT IT SHOULD REMAIN HERE IN
BALLARAT, IN THIS GALLERY, AS A-' RELIC OF EUREKA. OUR PAST IS
DEFICIENT IN TURBULENT EVENTS, IN THE CIVIL CONVULSIONS AND
UPHEAVALS THAT PROVIDE FOR OLDER CIVILISATIONS A FOCUS FOR
NATIONALISTIC FERVOUR AND POPULAR EMOTION, THOSE SYMBOLS AND
RITUALS WE HAVE, LIKE OUR PARLIAMENTARY AND CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM
ITSELF, DERIVE FROM A QUIESCENT COLONIAL PAST. I AM NOT ONE TO
ARGUE, AS SOME ROMANTICS DO, THAT TRUE NATIONHOOD MUST SPRING
FROM THE AGONY AND SUFFERING ENDURED BY FORMER GENERATIONS.
YET IS IN THE NATURE OF THINGS THAT AN EVENT LIKE EUREKA
WITH ALL ITS ASSOCIATIONS, WITH ALL ITS POTENT SYMBOLISM,, WILL
ACQUIRE AN AURA OF EXCITMENT AND ROMANCE, AND STIR THE IMAGINATION
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE.
DR. JOHNSON REMARKED THAT PATRIOTISM IS THE LAST REFUGE
OF A SCOUNDREL. HE WAS WELL AWARE THAT PATRIOTISM CAN BE CARRIED
TO EXTREMES, AND THAT NATIONALISM CAN BE CARRIED TO EXCESS.
THERE IS NEVERTHELESS A KIND OF NATIONALISM THAT EVERY COUNTRY
NEEDS. IT IS A BENIGN AND CONSTRUCTIVE NATIONALISM. IT HAS TO DO
WITH SELF-CONFIDENCE, WITH MATURITY, WITH ORIGINALITY, WITH
INDEPENDENCE, OF MIND. IF AUSTRALIA IS TO REMAIN IN THE
FOREFRONT OF NATIONS, IF TO RESIST T HE TEMPTATION TO BE
A SECOND-RATE OR IMITATIVE SOCIETY, '-IF . DETERMINED TO BE A
TRUE SOURCE OF POWER AND IDEAS IN THE WORLD,,
AGENEROUS AND TOLERANT AS A itj1J
RESPECTED FOR OUR GENEROSITY AND TOLERANCE, THEN
IBELIEVE THAT SOMETHING LIKE THE " NEW NATIONALISM" MUST PLAY A
PART IN OUR GOVERNMENT AND IN THE LIVES OF US ALL. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 4 DECEMBER 1973
QUESTION: Prime Minister, the Director of General Motors yesterday
said that his company believed that Australian equity in General
Motors Australia would reduce the quality of its product. Would you
agree that this policy of not allowing Australian equity conflicts
with the thrust of the Government's policy. Why have previous
Governments refused General Motors Corporation of America permission
to sell shares in Australia? Will you reverse this policy if equity
in General Motors Australia is not forthcoming and do you agree
that there should be only three car makers in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not responsible for the policy of previous
Governments. The Australian Government has asked the Tariff Board
to report on the general overall position of the motor car industry.
General Motors will be one of the companies, the present ones, giving
evidence before the Tariff Board. I think one can well wait until
the Tariff Board report comes to hand about all these features.
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen: There are a few things that
perhaps I should say myself first.
You will already have been told, I believe, that the
Federal German Chancellor, Herr Willy Brandt, has accepted our
invitation to visit Australia. The date of the visit will be decided
next year. I have a press statement on this subject. This is the
most significant visit from Europe since President Saragat visited
us in September 1967. It is of very great gratification and
significance to this country and our region.
There were quite a number of decisions that the Cabinet
made yesterday. We have decided to appoint a Committee of Inquiry on
Retraining. The terms of reference will be into the role that
training should play in an active manpower policy, the extent to which
opportunities for training and retraining should be provided or
improved, the broad methods of training and retraining that should
be used, the methods of selecting respective trainees and of
allocating trainees to prospective employers, the rationalisation
of existing schemes of training and retraining and the level of
allowances that should be paid to trainees, and the question of
taxation in relation to such allowances. The Chairman of the committee
will be Professor Donald Cochrane of Monash and the other members
will be Mr Pat Clancy, Secretary of the Building Workers! Industrial
Union, and Mr E. Donoghue, Proprietor of Donoghub Furniture Pty Ltd.
Mr Jock Nelson has been appointed Administrator of the Northern
Territory. Mr William Worth has been appointed as the Australian
Commissioner-General for the International Exposition on the
Environment which, as I told you a week ago, we have decided to
participate in at Spokane in Washington State between May and
October next year. Mr Worth has already been Deputy Commissioner-
General at Expo ' 67 in Montreal and Expo ' 70 in Osaka. 
-2-
Then there are some decisions concerning tertiary education.
We have approved the establishment of a university at Campbelltown
and a university at Albury-Wodonga. The Minister for Education is
arranging for the Universities Commission to undertake discussions
with the appropriate authorities in New South Wales with a view to
determining the way in which these universities might be constituted
and with the Victorian authorities also as regarding Albury-Wodonga
and developing proposals for special funds being made available during
the remainder of this triennium should that prove necessary.
The Government has decided to provide a new medical school
at the University of Newcastle and another at the James Cook
University of North Queensland and to expand a number of existing
medical schools as recommended in the report of the Committee
on Medical Schools. The position of a medical school at Wollongong
University and at the A. N. U. in Canberra is still being discussed.
The Government has decided to provide funds to support
departments of or courses in community practice in medical schools
of universities seeking to establish such programs in conjunction
with community health centres supported or approved by the Interim
Committee of the Hospitals and Health Services Commission. The funds
for these departments or courses in community practice will be of
the order of $ 35,000 in the first year of operation and $ 75,000 in
the second and subsequent years and $ 50,000 to provide teaching
accommodation in each community health centre where such a centre
is to be used in conjunction with a medical school. Also on hospitals,
we have included in the 1973/ 74 Civil Works program proposals for
Concord Repatriation Hospital. We have also approved the construction
of a new hospital at Tennant Creek at a preliminary estimated cost
of million. Then there are some matters concerning Canberra. We have
considered the joint planning study carried out by officers of the
Australian and New South Wales Governments about the growth of
Canberra and the lands adjacent to the present borders of the
Aiustralian Capital Territory. The Government has authorised
Miv Uren, the Minister for Urban and Regional Development and
Mr Bryant, the Minister for the Capital Territory to enter into further
discussions with the New South Wales Government. These discussions
could explore the basis on which agreement may be reached on land
acquisition and development for urban and associated purposes, for
lanid acquisition for environmental protection purposes, including
appropriate funding and cost recovery arrangements.
The Government has decided to call tenders for the
consjtruction of the Googong Dam to supply water for the Australian
Capita. Territory and Queanbeyan. The Minister for Urban and Regional
Development is to confer with the New South Wales Government about
the pollution of all waters downstream from Captains Flat and is
arranging a meeting with the New South Wales representative. 
-3-
Then about turtles. On 24 August I asked Senator Willesee,
who was then the Special Minister of State, to arrange for expert
studies into ecological and commercial aspects of the turtle farming
projects being conducted in Northern Australia in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Island communities. Reports by Professors A. F. Carr
and A. R. Main and Mr L. F. Smart have been presented and it is
proposed to table them probably tomorrow, I thought they would be
tabled today but we have been unable to get the reports to the
Premiers of Queensland and Western Australia in time, so we expect
they will be tabled tomorrow. I have, however, telegraphed our
decision to the Premiers so I can now read it to you. As a matter
of fact, a great number of the decisions I have been reading to you
have concerned the States and I had to wait until we telegraphed
those decisions to the Premiers who will have them by now. The
Government has approved continuation of the turtle industry as a pilot
experimental project in which research is emphasised. as recommended
by Professors Carr and Main, to determine the feasibility of
developing the industry on the lines described by Mr Smart.
The Government has authorised the Attorney-. General,
Senator Murphy, to introduce a Family Law Bill. As with the
Matrimonial Causes Bill 1959, it has been decided that this bill will
be dealt with as a Government measure for the procedural purpose only
of bringing the measure to a vote. All Government members will be
entitled to a free vote and to move such amendments as they see fit.
The bill will deal not only with matters upon which the Australian
Parliament has already made laws but it will also deal with matters
which under the Constitution can be the subject of legislation passed
by the Australian Parliament but which hitherto has been dealt with
by State Parliaments. In particular deserted wives and children's
legislation and married women's property legislation. The legislation,
of course, will be sent to the Premiers as I have telegraphed them.
Now, some matters of meat and drink. We have directed the
Bureau of Agricultural Economics to investigate the costs involved
in the marketing of cattle, sheep and pig meat with special reference
to the composition of the margin between the prices paid to primary
producers for animals slaughtered and the retail prices paid by
consumers for their meat products. The wholesale prices of meat have
been dropping but the retail prices don't(-seem to have been dropping
proportionately, so the BAE is to inquire in~ to the situation.
Then, brandy. I expect that this week we will be tabling
-the Tariff Board report on brandy. The Minister for Primary Industry
and the Minister for Secondary Industry will establish a body to
report to them on means of absorbing grape surpluses arising before
any longer term restructuring or adjustment programs can be implemented.
We expect this body to submit its first report by the middle of
February. The new harvest, of course, is due ifi March. The whole
difficulty of the brandy industry is that we produce more grapes for
this purpose than we can absorb in thE -rocessed form. 
-4-
Mr Hayden, the Minister for Social Security, will be giving
you a statement about Social Services legislation. There is another
item which I might mention. Pending legislation being introduced
and passed the Government has approved pensions being paid as an
act uf grace to people overseas who are in extreme hardship and who
have lived 30 years in Australia and have left Australia after reaching
age pension age or were within five years of reaching age pension
age at the time of departure. These resident's requirements will be
waived where permanent incapacity or widowhood occurred in Australia.
Following on the decisions we announced a week ago concerning
the mining licences and leases in the Northern Territory, the
Government has decided to create a National Park in the Northern
Territory to be called the Kakadu National Park. It will comprise
1450 square miles; it is to be gazetted along the original boundaries
suggested by the Planning Committee for it. The position of uranium
mining interests inside the Park will be reviewed in the light of this
decision. This represents a major breakthrough in conservation in
Australia. The park is one of truly international significance. It
will become one of the great National Parks of the world. The Government
will also be considering making further additions to it. It is as an
important part of the National Estate as the Great Barrier Reef and
Ayers Rock; it contains a wide diversity of important parts of the
National Estate including sites of great importance to the Aboriginal
I-eople and some significant wetlands. Conservation interests regard
Kakadu National Park as of importance at least equal to that of
La1 e Pedder. In this case, only the Australian Government is involved.
B3y acting irt this way the Australian Government is demonstrating to
t~ e Australian people that within its own territories, within its own
jurisdiction, it is taking its responsibilities in conservation
sQriously. The Government agreed to amend the Navigation Act to require
ships to lodge voyage plans and subsequent position reports.
Are there any questions.
QUESTION: This morning Senator Cavanagh announced tbat he decided
tO dismiss Senator Georges from the Board of the main turtle compan~ y.
14ere you consulted in..
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Cavanagh is responsible here, he was asked a
quiestion and he answered it. I was asked a question and I answered
16 too. I have no further matters to say on this. It is the Minister's
responsibility. QUESTION: I understand the Director of the Rhodesian Information
Centie, Mr Bradley, expected to leave Australia around December 13.
Does the Australian Government intend to allow a new director to
enter Australia to replace him?
PRIME MINISTER: Allow me to consider the situation when I see the
passport. Quite clearly, I would think, the Australian Government
would do nothing to promote this illegal activity.
QUESTION: Can I clear up one point on the turtles. Was it a Cabinet
decision to reinstate Dr Bustard on the project? 
PRIME MINISTER: Dr Bustard has never been mentioned in Cabinet.
QUESTION: Was it a Cabinet decision
PRIME MINISTER: Now Senator Cavanagh has answered questions on this
matter. He has answered all these questions.
QUESTION: Was it his decision?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, it is his responsibility and he is well
able to fulfil it.
QUESTION: When you spoke of the Northern Territory uranium leases, he
mentioned a decision a week ago on mining leases in the Northern
Territory. I may have forgotten it, but I don't remember any decision
that you publicly made on it.
PRIME MINISTER: I thought that Dr Patterson had made an announcement
later.
QUESTION: No sir.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh well, I thank you for correcting me.
QUESTION: Can I now ask....
PRIME MINISTER: Well, no leave I will not be making any
statement on it.
QUESTION: It has been reported that the South Australian Branch of
the A. L. P. is doing nothing and the W. A. Branch is doing virtually
nothing in support of the prices and incomes referendum, and if
this is so, do you think they are acting contrary to the decision
of the Federal Executive and do you think their reported lack of
action would seriously jeopardise a successful YES vote on Saturday?
PRIME MINISTER: I only go on what is in the newspapers here. I am
surprised if the reports are true because I believe they would be
going against the letter and certainly the spirit of the Federal
Executive decision on this matter. The Federal members in South
Australia are, I know, taking steps themselves to see that the case
for a YES vote in both the prices referendum and the incomes referendum
is put properly to the people of South Australia. I, myself, have
been in touch at first hand, as you know, in the last few days with
both the Queensland Branch and the New South Wales Branch of the Labor
Party and both are pursuing an active campaign in support of both
the prices referendum and the incomes referendum. I haven't been
in direct touch with the other branches for some time. I am visiting
Perth next Friday.
QUESTION: Would the Government suppor't an amendment moved by the
Liberal Party in the Senate to the State Grants ( Schools) Bill which
added $ 5 million to the Government's projected 694 million dollars
cost in order to continue per capita grants to those schools which
will lose out on the present needs policy which the Government is
proposing? 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no -amendment moved by any of the
Opposition parties in the Senate to the State Grants ( Schools) Bill
which was passed by the House of Representatives a week ago. The bill
will come up for debate in the Senate I suspect this week. Obviously
the Government will consider any amendment or amendments which any
Opposition party or parties move in the Senate when it or they is
or are moved. I only have to go on the newspapers as to who speaks
on behalf of the opposition in these matters. I gather that there
is some dispute as to whether Senator Rae is the Opposition spokesman
on education or the Liberal Party spokesman on education and whether
he is the spokesman in the whole Parliament or just in the Senate.
I don't know whether Mr Malcolm Fraser is the spokesman for the
Liberal Party in the whole Parliament or in the House of Representatives
alone. He assumes many mantles and going by what you gentlemen
report, his activities as self-appointed spokesman at least in
education and labour and foreign policy has cuased some distress to
his colleagues who have been nominated by the Leader of the Opposition
or have nominated themselves to these respective posts. It is all too
confusing. I have no doubt a personal explanation will be sought
tomorrow.
QUESTION: Do you personally support the Karmel Committee's
recommendation that per capita grants to A, B and C category schools
shoiuld be phased out over two years?
PATME MINISTER: I support the Government's decision on this matter.
Thc Karmel Committee unanimously recommended a program for upgrading
Schools on the basis of needs by grants by the Australian Parliament
for the scholastic years 1974 and 1975. It had this to say about
Category A schools: " Category A schools' . or perhaps I suppose
you will recall that the general objective of the Karmel Committee
wa 5 to sac that all schools in Australia should, in six years, by
1970, achieve a minimum standard of instruction and accommodation
and equipment that is by 1979 and it set targets for that purpose
fLor the Government schools and the non-government schools and it
cat. Qqorized the non-government schools A to H. It had this to
" Category A schools already use a volume of resources that well
Qxceeds tL-he 1979 targets; and the Committee believes that Government
assistance to these schools cannot be justified." I would agree as
an individual with that finding and the Governmenit agrees with that
f~ ndilc. The Committee proceeded: " However all schools are presently
recevingc $ 62 per annum per primary pupil and $ 104 per annum per
secondary pupil. The Committee feels that the sudden termination of
financial aid on six months' notice could place some schools within
c~ tegory A in temporary difficult-,". I interpose there because you
w ilt remiember that tche report of the Committee was made at the end
o~ f last-may. " Hfence the gradual phasing out of assistance over 1974
and 1.975 is recoiainded, This implies that in 1976 schools whose
resource falls in category A should receive no general recurrent
assistance". Now the Government believes that in view of the findings
of the 1Yarmel Commaittee the unanimous finding of the Karmel
Cenw'iittee, this committee drawn from all types of schools in Australia
that Government assistance to category A schools cannot be justified.
Trhe Government believes that in view of that finding by the Committee,
we-didn't believe that we could justify the additional expenditure
involved in paying these category A schools these amounts during
1974 and 1975. You will notice that this finding was made the
sudden termination of financial aid on six months' notice is it
was, in fact, a bit more than six montbs' notice. 
COMMENT: Seven months.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes but the schools don't open until February do
they? It would have been eight months'notice really wouldn't it?..
" Could place some schools within category A in temporary difficulties.
There has been quite a deal of reassessment by the Karmel Committee
of the schools which it originally placed in category A. A great
number of those schools have now been placed in lowerly categories
and accordingly would continue under the Government's decision to
receive the amounts that the Karmel Committee unanimously recommended.
Now I would imagine that now there would be no schools which, in the
Karmel Committee's view, would be in temporary difficulty if they
did not receive those amounts in 1974 and 1975.
QUESTION: Is your rejection of that recommendation quite irreversible?
PRIME MINISTER: I have already answered a question about this on
the basis that there might be amendments moved in the Senate.
QUESTION: Is it irreversible?
PRIME MINISTER: I said that we would consider any amendm ents moved
in the Senate when they are moved.
QUESTION: Your announcement of the appointment of an Administrator
to the Northern Territory after such a long time without one where
there was a fairly easy devolution of power to the Secretary of the
Department of the Northern Territory which you created. In view of
the fact that there is no longer a Northern Territory administration,
what was the need to complicate the administration of the territory
by appointing Mr Nelson to this largely redundant and archaic post
up there?
PRIME MINISTER: The position is not archaic or redundant until some
of the Acts covering the Northern Territory are amended. The Government
is committed to proposing some form augmented form of self-government
for the Northern Territory before the end of 1974. You will remember
that the Party discussed this at the Federal Conference in Surfers
Paradise in July. I haven't got the platform with me but I am pretty
sure I correctly state it that the Government is committed to
introduce a form of augmented self-government in the Northern Territory
by the end of 1974. Until the amendments have been made to the Act
covering the Northern Territory there are still responsibilities falling
to the Administrator. He is named in those Acts, and there can be
something inappropriate or embarrassing in the Secretary of the
Department of the Northern Territory purporting to disallow or suggest
amendments to ordinances passed by the Legislative Council of the
Northern Territory. Furthermore, it wouldn't bq proper to reserve all
ordinances to the Governor-General. We could use that device, but it
is more appropriate to have an Administrator performing the functions
which the statutes still impose on a p :-son holding such a position.
I would expect that Mr Nelson will hold the position until the end of
next year.
QUESTION: Does the Government intend to bring the States Grants
( Schools) Bill to a vzt*-c in the Senate this session of Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, certainly. 
-8-
QUESTION: If the Senate votes to defeat Clause 66 in the Bill, will
the Government then reconsider the Bill in the House of
Representatives during this session of Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect the Government would not accept the
continuation of the 1972 legislation. Clause 66 of the States Grants
( Schools) Bill 1973 repeals the operation of the States Grants ( Schools)
Bill 1972 in respect of the next four scholastic years 1974, 1975,
1976 and 1977. In the House of Representatives you will remember
that Mr Malcolm Fraser, the only Opposition member to speak on the
clause, urged the defeat of that repealing clause in the Bill and all
the members of the Opposition in the House of Representatives at
the time voted to defeat to delete Clause 66. Obviously the
effect would have been and Mr Fraser expressed the objective of
retaining the 1972 legislation. Now the 1972 legislation proceeds on
a completely different basis and philosphy to the 1973 legislation.
The 1972 legislation made no provision for Government schools and it
made the same provision per pupil of all non-government schools whether
they were in category A, B, C, D, E, F, G. or H. The 1973 bill which
the Government introduced and which the House of Representatives
passed and which the Senate is to consider this week, makes provision
for Government schools; it makes varied provision graduated provision
for non-government schools according to their needs. The total
provision in the 1973 Bill is three times that in the 1972 Bill.
The Government quite clearly would not accept the continuation of the
1972 Act. However, the Senate would have to agree to the repeal of
tile 1972 Act. The Government would not accept the 1973 Bill without
thQ repeal the deletion of the 1972 Act.
QULESTION: There would be no point in taking it back to the Reps
thiS session if the Senate did not agree to vote for Clause 66?
F2i'E MINISTER: It would depend, of course, on the form in which the
dealt with the Bill. It might move amendments or purport to.
There is, of course, clearly the question whether the Senate could
ca. a-ry an amendment which increased expenditure because expenditure
cannot be above the amount which the Governor-General asks by his
snessage to each House. The Senate might, however, make a request.
NDcbviously, one waits to see what form any motion in the Senate takes,
QUJESTION: If the Senate rejects Clause 66, that's it for this session
' ariiament, is it?
PRIME MINISTER: Well there again one has to wait to see if there are
any other motions that the Senate carries in respect to the StateF
GF6. nts ( Schools Bill 1973. But even if the only thing it does is to
doiete Clause 66, i. e. continue the 1972 Act, even if that is all it
dioes, it will have to come back to the House of * Representatives to
see if the House accepted the Bill as so amended.
QUESTION: This session or next session?
PRIME MINISTER: Well it depends on what days we are sitting. I would
expect the Senate would decide that matter this week, and in those
circuinstances, the House of Representatives can consider it this
week or next.
QUESTION: If the Senate makes a request for an amendment will you
consider that well let's put it this way: Before you consider it will
they have to repeal Section 66 of the present Schools Bill? 
A -9-
PRIME MINISTER: It is not for me to suggest amendments or requests in
the Senate. It is really up to the various personalities in the
Liberal Party and each House and various opposition parties to sort
this matter out for themselves. But it would be quite easy, I image,
for the Senate to carry motions or requests quite irrespective of
Clause 66. Clause 66, may I repeat, deletes or repeals last year's
Act in its operation for the next four scholastic years.
QUESTION: What I am asking is will you consider.... is it a proposition,
a condition, to consider any request that they pass Section 66 for the
repeal of the existing legislation. Is that a pre-condition before
you will consider any request from the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I have made it quite clear on this. I don't
believe the Government would accept the continuation of the per capita
grants the same payment per pupil for the richest, best endowed,
best staffed, best equipped, best housed schools in-Australia as for
the poorest. I don't believe that we would accept such a proposition.
I don't believe the Australian people would accept such a proposition.
After all, the proposal that Australian Government assistance for
non-government schools should be allocated on the basis of needs as
examined and recommended by an expert body was put to the people at
the House of Representatives elections in 1969 and again at the
House of Representatives elections in 1972. There can not have been
a more thoroughly discussed proposal by any Government.
QUESTION: It was reported this week that an English predecessor
of yours is now on a Government pension of $ 23 a week. Do you see any
inconsistency in the policy of your Government in gradually
alleviating the means test on pensions but now applying it to school
students? PRIME MINISTER: There is this is one of the oldest furphies
and cliches in controversy, the idea that there is now some parallel
between the grants which the Australian Government makes to assist
s.; iools and the payments it makes to retired people. Now there is no
similarity between I mean you are a newcomer to these conferences
but I don't think anybody has put this up at such a gathering for
years there is no means test applied to the parents of school pupils;
there is, in fact, an assessment of the school itself. What services,
what facilities does the school provide, and that is capable of
computation and a highly skilled committee has made a computation
of this before the end of last May and nobody has cavilled at their
computation. The people have done their suu.. s afresh, they have
looked at it afresh. Now, you do mention the case of a former
Prime Minister, who has sought and receiv-d. the * age pension. * He~ is
perfectly entitled to do so and retired Prime Ministers in Britain
and Canada have received age pensions for years.
QUESTION: I don't quarrel with that case, but it just seems to me
that there are two cases of means tes' Policy.
PRIME MINISTER: I still can't see the comparison.
Laurie Oakes from the Sun, Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER: I have been waiting and this is the last.
OAK( ES: I am not going to ask whether you have read any good books
lately. Mr Hamer.... 
PRIME MINISTER: I have read books on excellent subjects.
QUESTION: Mr Hamer said today that he would like a national conference
on the energy crisis. Could we have your reaction to that suggestion?
PRIME MINISTER: The matter is well in hand. I have mentioned this
before and Mr Connor has answered questions on it already. My
ministers and I have the whole question under constant surveillance
and if there is any matter where the State Governments need to assist,
and there might be such matters in the field of distribution, then
we would very promptly do so. We would welcome their co-operation in
any such matters. But the question of importation of oil and petrol
is not a matter for State Governments it never has been it is
a matter for the Australian Government and I would take the opportunity
to repeat that Australia is more fortunately situated than most
countries in respect to energy resources and also the importation of
those resources where we are not self-sufficient.
QUESTION: In the light of the reported threats against Mr Hawke and
his family, has any Commonwealth authority been instructed to
investigate and report the existence of Arab activeness in Australia
and the degree of their activities?
PRIME MINISTER: The usual procedures are in operation and have been
both before and after the reports which you have quoted. Gentlemen,
i don't encourage questions on these matters as you know. Every
body in public life is aware of these matters and deprecates the
dScussicn of them. My predecessors did, I shall. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 156
DECEMBER 1973
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY THE FEDERAL GERMAN CHANCELLOR
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that the
Federal German Chancellor, Herr Willy Brandt, had accepted his
invitation to visit Australia. A date for the visit would be
decided next year. I
Mr Whitlam said that a visit to Australia by Herr Brandt
would give the greatest pleasure to the Australian Government
and people. It would bring particular satisfaction to the
large and important German-born community in Australia and to the
many other Australians of German descent whose families have
contributed greatly to Australia's development. All Australians,
Mr Whitlam said, would share in the warmth of the welcome to the
Federal Chancellor.
Mr Whitlam said that the visit by Herr Brandt would be the
first visit to Australia by a leading West European statesman
since the visit of President Saragat of Italy in September 1967.
Mr Whitlam said Herr Brandt's visit would be an opportunity
to show that Europe, of which West Germany was a most important
member, has a positive and constructive role to play in the Asian
and Pacific region. Europe would find that its active interest
in Asia and the Pacific would be reciprocated by the countries
of the area and would be a considerable contribution towards the
peace and development of the region.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 6. pni 7/ 12/ 73
1_, AL! SiHAXL L
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 157
7 DECEMBER 1973
GRANTS TO FILM MAKERS, ETC.
The Chairman of the Film and Television Board of the
Australian Council for the Arts, Mr Phillip Adamis, announced
today that the Prime Minister had approved grants totalling
$ 102,660 to a variety of film and television artists.
These include grants for two projects dealing with
aborigines, a grant to enable inmates of Parramatta gaol to
study script writing and one to help revive a publication
devoted to film making.
Both the Melbourne and the Sydney Film-makers Co-operatives
received grants.
This brings the year's total film and television grants
approved by the Prime Minister to $ 583,480.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
LIST OF GRANTS
SCRIPT DEVELOPMENT AD RESEARCH
DAVID BAZER. To develop a screenplay from the novel, Salute to the Great
McCarthy. $ 3800
GEORGE PUGH. To develop an outline to treatment stage. $ 200
MONA BRAND. To enable the applicant to work with a script supervisor to write
the screen play of either Christmas Goose or The Ghost of Grey Gables. $ 1450
RON BUMNEY. To enable the applicant to develop a script to screen play stage
either Impossible Burden or another script of his own choice. $ 600
GEOFFREY PORTVANN. To enable the applicant and writer Ron Harrison to develop
a screen play from the stage play Father Dear Come Over Here. $ 1834
GEORGE DICK. To research and write the treatment of a TV pilot for a proposed
series of six 30 min. episodes. $ 465
BEWICK HACK. Script development and research br an historical and educational
film based on Lawrence Hargreaves. $ 600
RALPH MARSDEN. To develop a script outline to treatment stage. $ 450
JOIIH POOLEY. To develop a script outline to treatment stage. $ 400
DANIEL HUGHES. To develop a script outline to treatment stage. $ 400
PARRAMATTA GAOL ( The Harris Bush Drama Society). To enable a professional
script editor ( Harold Lander) to work regularly with a group of writers in
the gaol over a period of 30 weeks. $ 2000
TILM AND TELEVISION PRODUCTTON
GEOFFREY BARDON. To make a 30 min. documentary studying aboriginal artists of
Papunya Aboriginal settlement via Alice Springs. $ 5000
IETER DRUMMOID. To make a film about the Nomads, a tribe of Aborigines of the
Pilbarra region of ! North-lest Australia, who are mining successfully for tin.
$ 6563 ( Interest free loan)
MICHAEL PRICE. To make a 15 min. film which looks at the activities of groups
and organisations demanding a greater control over their daily lives. $ 2000
JOHNI HUGHES. To make a 30 min. film on the subject of racism in Australian
society. $ 2500
GEIERAL PRODUCTION
JOIH BIRD. To cover the cost of processing, inter-nogative and workprint of
camera footage shot by the McCubbin-Bonython Expedition. $ 476
EDIE VAN DER MADDEN. To enable a sound track to be put on a 23 rin. animated
film Alladin. $ 6372 ( Interest free loan)
CINEMA PAPERS. To assist with the first issu, of a new film publication called
Cinema Papers. $ 11600 ($ 10000 grant, $ 1600 interest free loan)
THE ARTS COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA ( Victoria). To assist with the presentation of
Australian films on a tour of Victoria. $ 2000 ( Guarantee against loss)
WARWICK ROBBINS. The Film and Television Board and the Film and Television
School wish to jointly assist the applicant on a study tour of overseas community
access video centroe. c2500 
AUSTRALIAN FILM IINSTITUTE. For video research and instruction to Ungarie School,
NSW and community by S Varga and J Kirk. $ 700
AUSTRALIAN! FILM INSTITUTE. For undertaking modifications on vidoo equipment
through Swinburne College of Technology for use in community access video
situations. $ 1250
AUSTRALIAN FILM INSTITUTE ( Research on overseas films for the Vincent Library).
For research on overseas films for use as reference by the Vincent Library: by
Albie Thorns and Barrett Hodsdon. $ 400
AUSTRALIAN FILM INSTITUTE. For assistance to the Melbourne Film-makers' Cooperative
in leasing and renovating promises for the exhibition of films and
allied facilities. The interest-free loan is to be repaid within three years.
$ 19000 ($ 14000 grant, $ 5000 interest-free loan).
SYDNEY FILMMAKERS' CO-OPERATIVE. For assistance to the Sydney Filmmakers'
Co-operative for administrative costs, salaries, theatre rental and advertising,
$ 15000
T! E FILM SECPLdTARIAT. Payment to the Film Secretariat for the services of a
librarian for collating references to Australian film productions and allied
materials for the George Lugg Library. $ 4000
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR CHILDRLIIS FILMS AND TELEVISION. For the purchase and
distribution of prints of overseas childrens' films. $ 10000
PATRICIA CLARE. For development of a script for an animated story film. $ 1050 



JAUSiX AIAAg
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 159
December 1973
ANNUAL LEAVE
The Australian Government has decided to introduce
legislation to provide for the payment of an annual leave loading
to all its employees of the Australian Government. I
The legislation which will be introduced to the Parliament
next year will provide for the payment of a loading of an amount
equal to average weekly earnings of all adult male wage and salary
earners as disclosed by the Statistician for the September quarter
immediately preceding the accrual of such leave.
It will apply to leave accruing on or after 1 January 1974.
The legislation will not seek to cover leave accruing in
1973. However, when the various Public Service Unions' claims on
annual leave loadings come before the Arbitrator, the Government will
indicate that it would raise no objections to an interim settlement
in respect of leave accruing on or after 1 January 1973 on the
following basis:
An annual leave loading of 17 per cent of the
employees salary at date of accrual, for the
period of leave accrued at that date, subject
to the total bonus payment not exceeding the
equivalent of the average weekly earnings figure
for the September quarter of the preceding year,
or alternatively, the * shift loading which the
employee would have received had he been on annual
leave if such shift loading exceeds the leave bonus.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



~' 0
1_), AUSTRAL IA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 158
DECEMBER 1973
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL: PARIS CONFERENCE ON ABOLITION
OF TORTURE.
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, sent the
following message to the Secretary-General, Amnesty International:
" The Australian Government strongly supports the objectives
of Amnesty International in its campaign soeeking-the abolition
of torture and the observance of International Humanitarian Law.
The Government regards acts of torture as breaches of basic
human rights and infringements of personal dignity that should
be condemned in all circumstances. The development and
observance of international law which abolishes all forms of
torture is an objective which should be supported by all States
in the interests of humanity.
The Government is determined to take action at every
practicable opportunity to promote the development of all aspects
of International Humanitarian Law."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME M1INISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C., o
FOR THE UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATION HUMAN RIGHTS DAY, AIN. US,
CANBERRA, 10 DECEMBER, 1973*
TODAY IS THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ADOPTION OF THE
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE UNITED NATIONS1
THAT DECLARATION HAS COME TO BE RECOGNISED AS ONE OF
THE GREAT ENLIGHTENED EVENTS IN MODERN HISTORY. ITS ANNIVERSARY
MARKS THE BEGINNING OF AN EQUALLY HOPEFUL AND ENLIGHTENED
MOVEMENT, FOR THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY HAS ALSO DECIDED TO LAUNCH
ON THIS DAY A DECADE FOR ACTION TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL
DISCRItINATION. IT IS IN THE CONTEXT OF THESE TWO GREAT
ACHIEVEMENTS THE CELEBRATION OF ONE HISTORIC ERA AND THE
INAUGUR~ ATION OF ANOTHER THAT I WISH TO SPEAK TO YOU OF
AUSTRALIA ' S PART IN FURTHERING THE CAUSE OF HUMAN RIGHTS FOR
THE WORLD'IS PEOPLE.
IT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR ME, IN DOING SO, TO POINT TO
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE POLITICAL PARTIES ON THIS ISSUE. I HOPE
YOU WILL UNDERSTAND MY PURPOSE IN DOING SO~ I HAVE NO WISH
TO BE OVERTLY PARTISAN, BUT I CANNOT EXPLAIN THE POLICIES OF
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT WITHOUT DRAWING ATTENTION TO THOSE OF
OUR PREDECESSORS. IT WILL BE SEEN, IN MANY CASES, I BELIEVE,
THAT THE RECORD OF OUR PREDECESSORS WAS ONE OF NEGLIGENCE AND
INACTION, AND IN THIS CRUCIAL AREA OF FOREIGN POLICY, NEGLIGENCE
AND INACTION CANNOT BE TOLERATED. THE STRUGGLE FOR UNIVERSAL
HUMAN RIGHTS IS A PROTRACTED AND PERHAPS AN UNENDING STRUGGLE. 
-2-
THERE IS RARELY A TIME IN WORLD AFFAIRS WHEN SOME NEW THREAT
TO HUMAN RIGHTS SOME NEW OPPRESSION, SOME NEW FORM OF DEPOTISM
IS NOT ABROAD, GOVERNMENTS HAVE A CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO DO
ALL IN THEIR POWER TO PROMOTE RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS, No
COUNTRY HAS A GREATER OBLIGATION IN THIS REGARD THAN AUSTRALIA,
A MEDIUM POWER ENJOYING CLOSE AND CORDIAL RELATIONS WITH MANY
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES WITH DIFFERENT POLITICAL'SYSTEMS1
IT IS A FUNDAMENTAL OBJFCTIVE OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT TO
ENSURE THAT AUSTRALIA'S POLICIES ARE SOUNDLY BASED ON RESPECT
FOR, AND ON THE PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT OF, CIVIL LIBERTIES
AND BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS, , WE BELIEVE THAT POLICIES AND ATTITUDES
TO HUMAN RIGHTS CANNOT BE SEPARATED FROM ACTION AGAINST THE EVILS
OF DISCRIMINATION IN ANY FORM, INCLUDING DISCRIMINATION BASED ON
RACE, OUR POLICIES AND ACTIONS OVER THE PAST-YEAR HAVE BEEN
DELIBERATELY DESIGNED TO GET AWAY FROM THE TENTATIVE AND DILATORY
ATTITUDES OF THE PAST, THE RECORD OF OUR PREDECESSORS WAS MARKED
BY A LACK OF ANY SENSE OF INITIATIVE IN THE PROMOTION AND
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN OUR OWN COMMUNITY AND IN THE WORLD
AT LARGE, THEY WERE HALF-HEARTED IN RESPONDING TO THE WORK OF
THE UNITED NATIONS, AND THEIR LACK OF ENTHUSIASM WAS USUALLY
MATCHED IN THE RESPONSE OF THE STATES. 
0 -3-
LET ME GIVE A TYPICAL EXAMPLE. AS A RESULT OF AN
OBLIGATION ARISING FROM THE 1946 AMENDMENTS TO THE
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION CONSTITUTION, THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN 1947 INSTITUTED AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE. OF THE
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE DEPARTMENTS OF LABOUR TO CARRY OUT AN
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE WHOLE RANGE OF LABOUR MATTERS AROUND APRIL
OF EACH YEAR. THIS MACHINERY WAS IN EXISTENCE THROUGHOUT THETERM
OF OFFICE OF OUR PREDECESSORS BUT IT WAS ONLY WHEN THE
PRESENT GOVERNMENT CAME TO POWER THAT THE MINISTER FOR LABOUR,
MR. CLYDE CAMERON, TOOK THE INITIATIVE TO USE THIS MACHINERY
TO GIVE ACTIVE ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE RATIFICATION AND APPLICATION
OF I. L. O. CONVENTIONS. " MR. CAMERON HAS MOVED QUICKLY TO' ESTABLISH
CONSULTATIVE MACHINERY WITH THE STATES AT MINISTERIAL, PERMANENT
HEAD, AND TECHNICAL OFFICER LEVEL TO DETERMINE AN ORDER* OF
ORIORITY FOR THE CONSIDERATION OF CONVENTIONS AND TO ENSURE THAT
ACTION 15 TAKEN ON THESE CONVENTIONS REGARDED AS REQUIRING
URGENT OUR PREDECESSORS MADE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM A FARCE BY
USING IT AS AN EXCUSE TO JUSTIFY ITS OWN INACTION. THEY DID
LITTLE OR NOTHING TO STIMULATE ACTION ON THE PART OF THE STATES.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY AVOIDED THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES IN RESPECT OF
I. L. O. CONVENTION No. 100 EQUAL REMUNERATION, 19511 BY HIDING
BEHIND THE CHANGES OF MINDS ON THE PART OF TWO OF THE STATES
TOWARDS RATIFICATION AND THE UNWILLINGNESS OF THE OTHER
TO AGREE TO RATIFICATION. IT IS TRUE THAT BECAUSE OF THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM AUSTRALIA IS AT A DISADVANTAGE IN BEING FACED
WITH UNNECESSARILY COMPLICATED PROCEDURES FOR GIVING EFFECT
TO INTERNATIONAL LEGAL INSTRUMENTS. THESE DEFICIENC* IES IN OUR 
-4-
SYSTEM SHOULD NOT BE ALLOWED TO BESMIRCH AND AFFRONT AUSTRALIA'S
IMAGE. OUR GOVERNMENT HAS ACCORDINGLY FOUND IT NECESSARY TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE B( TERNAL AFFAIRS POWER IN THE CONSTITUTION
TO GIVE EFFECT 70TO OUR INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS.
To MY MIND, THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION IS ONE OF THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT AND ENLIGHTENED ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE UNITED
NATIONS. THE CELEBRATION OF THIS ANNIVERSARY AFFORDS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT TO RE-DEDICATE ITSELF TO THE
PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA; THE ASSOCIATION
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY WITH THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
DATES FROM THE DRAFTING OF THE DOCUMENT IN WHICH DR. EVATT,
AS MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL TOOK A
CLOSE PERSONAL INTEREST. HE WAS PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
WHEN THE DECLARATION WAS ADOPTED. HE SAID ON THAT OCCASION
THAT THE DOCUMENT " WAS BACKED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE BODY OF
OPINION OF THE UNITED NATIONS AS A WHOLE AND MILLIONS OF PEOPLE,
MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN ALL OVER THE WORLD WOULD TURN TO IT FOR
HELP, GUIDANCE AND INSPIRATION." THROUGHOUT MY PARLIAMENTARY
CAREER I HAVE TAKEN A KEEN PERSONAL INTEREST IN ALL ASPECTS
OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND IN PARTICULAR IN THE PROGRESS MADE BY
AUSTRALIA TOWARDS RATIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
AGREEMENTS. 
ONE OF MY EARLIEST ACTIONS AS PRIME MINISTER WAS TO INITIATE
AN EXAMINATION OF ALL THE INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS'CONCERNED
WITH HUMAN RIGHTS TO DETERMINE THE ACTION WE SHOULD BE TAKING
TO GIVE EFFECT rO THEM. WE SIGNED THE TWO'UNITED NATIONS HUMAN
RIGHTS COVENANTS ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS AND ON ECONOMIC,
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS ON 18 DECEMBER 19721* THE COVENANTS
COMPLEMENT EACH OTHER AND WERE ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
IN 1966. IT IS THE INTENTION OF THE GOVERNMENT TO PROCEED TO
SIMULTANEOUS RATIFICATION OF THEM AS SOON AS ENABLING LEGISLATION
HAS BEEN PASSED BY PARLIAMENT.
THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION IS A FOCUS OF ATTENTION FOR
THE ASPIRATIONS OF ALL NATIONS AND PEOPLES CONCERNED WITH BASIC
RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS. THOUGH THE DECLARATION HAS INFLUENCED THE
LEGAL STANDARDS OF OTHER COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD IN SUCH
DOCUMENTS AS THE CANADIAN BILL OF RIGHTS., 1960, AND THE BASIC
LAW OF THE GERMAN FEDERAL REPUBLIC, 1949, EXISTING LAWS IN
AUSTRALIA HAVE NOT ADEQUATELY PROTECTED THE RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS
OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS SET OUT IN THE DECLARATION. THjE GOVERNMENT
IS ACTING TO CORRECT THIS SITUATION. ON 21 NOVEMBER T: hE ATTORNEY--
GEN4ERAL, SENATOR LIONEL MURPHY, INTRODUCED INTO THE PARLIAMENT,
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL 1973 AND THE RACIAL DiSCRIMINATIPH BILL-1973,
BOTH BILLS ARE DESIGNED TO EXTEND AND SAFEGUARD THE RIGHTS ANiD
FREEDOMS OF EVERY AUSTRALIAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH INTERNATIONAL
STANDARDS. 
-6-
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL WILL GUARANTEE THAT EVERYONE
IS ENTITLED TO THE EQUAL PROTECTION OF THE LAW AND TO CERTAIN
BASIC RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS, INCLUDING THE FREEDOM OF THOUGHT,
CONSCIENCE AND RELIGION; FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION; FREEDOM OF
PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION; FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT; THE
RIGHT TO VOTE AND TO EXERCISE PUBLIC FUNCTIONS ON-A BASIS OF
EQUALITY; THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY; FREEDOM FROM ARBITRARY ARREST
AND DETENTION; THE RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL; AND FREEDOM FROM
CRUEL OR DEGRADING TREATEMENT OR PUNISHMENT. To SAFEGUARD THE
PROTECTION OF THESE RIGHTS, THE BILL ESTABLISHES THE OFFICE OF
A HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONER. HIS TASK WILL BE TO EXAMINE ANY
BREACHES OF INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY IN THIS COUNTRY AND WHERE NECESSARY
TO BRING LEGAL ACTION TO ENSURE THAT THE LAW WITH REGARD TO
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS IS ENFORCED.
MANY AUSTRALIANS TAKE THE EXISTENCE OF THESE RIGHTS FOR
GRANTED. THEY HAVE NOT APPRECIATED THE NEED FOR ACTION TO
ENSURE THAT THE RIGHTS ARE PROTECTED AND GUARANTEED WITH THE
FULL FORCE OF LAW. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL IS
THAT IT WILL MAKE THESE BASIC RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS LEGALLY
ENFORCEABLE IN AUSTRALIA. THE. INDIVIDUAL WILL BE ABLE, THROUGH
THE COURTS, TO INSIST UPON HIS RIGHTS. 
0 -7-
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL ALSO SEEKS APPROVAL FOR RATIFICATION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN
( 1952). AUSTRALIA HAS NOT PREVIOUSLY BECOME A PARTY TO THIS
CONVENTION BECAUSE THERE ARE STATUTORY LIMITATIONS AND
DISCRIMINATORY ASPECTS OF VARIOUS STATE LAWS IN AUSTRALIA WHICH
DO NOT COMPLY WITH ITS PROVISIONS1 THE ABILITY OF THE
GOVERNMENT TO RATIFY THIS CONVENTION WILL BE A MAJOR STEP
FORWARD IN PROMOTING THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN THROUGHOUT OUR COMMUNITY
ON EQUAL TERMS WITH MEN WIT7HOUT ANY-DISCRIMINATION8
THE FIRST ARTICLE OF -1-1L UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS PROCLAIMS THAT " ALL HUMAN BEINGS ARE BORN FREE AND EQUAL
IN DIGNITY AND RIGHTS", ARTICLE 2 STATES THAT " EVERYONE IS
ENTITLED TO THE RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS SET OUT IN THE DECLARATION
WITHOUT DISTINCTION OF ANY KINDo INCLUDING DISCRIMINATION ON THE
GROUNDS OF RACE, COLOUR OR NATIONAL ORIGIN" THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ELABORATED ON THESE ARTICLES WHEN, IN 1965, j IT ADOPTED AN
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION. THE CONVENTION RECOGNISES THAT ANY
DOCTRINE OF SUPERIORITY BASED ON RACIAL DIFFERENCE IS FUNDAMENTALLY
FALSE, MORALLY INDEFENSIBLE AND WITHOUT ANY SOCIAL JUSTIFICATION.
SEVENTY-FIVE COUNTRIES HAVE SO FAR BECOME PARTIES TO THE
CONVENTION ON WHICH OUR RACIAL DISCRIMINATION BILL IS BASED.
As PROVIDED UNDER CLAUSE 6, AUSTRALIA WILL RAT'IFY THE
CONVENTION AS SOON AS THE BILL IS APPROVED. 
-8-
THE PASSAGE OF THIS BILL AND THE RATIFICATION OF THE
CONVENTION WILL BE AMONG THE MOST IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTION,
WHICH AUSTRALIA CAN MAKE TO THE INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN TO
ELIMINATE RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE DECADE BEING INAUGURATED
TODAY. THE GOVERNMENT IS ALREADY WELL PLACED TO PARTICIPATE
POSITIVELY IN THE INTERNATIONAL DECADE BY THE STAND WE HAVE
TAKEN IN THE UNITED NATIONS IN FORCEFULLY CONDEMNING ALL FORMS
OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND BY OUR VOTES CONDEMNING THE POLICIES
AND PRACTICES OF APARTHEID AND COLONIALISM.
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL AND THE RACIAL DISCRIMINATION BILL
ARE OF SPECIAL INTEREST AND RELEVANCE TO ALL SECTIONS OF OUR
COMMUNITY, PARTICULARLY OUR ABORIGINAL AND MIGRANT COMMUNITIES
WHO HAVE SUFFERED VARIOUS FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION. THE BILLS
ARE AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE GOVERNMENT'S EFFORT TO ENSURE THAT
THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA AND THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MIGRATED TO THIS COUNTRY ARE TRULY EQUAL BEFORE THE LAW AND ARE
ABLE TO PARTICIPATE IN AUSTRALIAN LIFE ON EQUAL TERMS WITH THE
REST OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY. THE BILLS COMPLEMENT THE
POLICIES WHICH WE ARE ENDEAVOURING TO PURSUE IN ESTABLISHING
ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS AND IMPROVING THE GENERAL WELL-BEING OF
THE ABORIGINAL COMMUNITY. 
-9-
A MAJOR STEP FORWARD IN HUMAN RIGHTS WAS THE DECLARATION
BY THE GOVERNMENT THIS YEAR OF A NATIONAL POLICY To ELIMINATE
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION. MR. CAMERON
ANNOUNCED THIS POLICY IN A STATEMENT IN THE PARLIAMENT IN MAY
CONCERNING THE ACTION BEING TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT TO RATIFY
THE TUL. O. CONVENTION No. 111 ON DISCRIMINATION ( EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION) 1958, AUSTRALIA RATIFIED'THIS CONVENTION ON
JUNE. THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY TO ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION HAS THE SUPPORT OF ALL STATE GOVERNMENTS,
MAJOR EMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS AND T HE TRADE UNIONS. THE GOVERNMENT
HAS ESTABLISHED COMMITTEES ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT AND
OCCUPATION AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL AND IN ALL STATES. STEPS HAVE
ALREADY BEEN TAKEN TO LAUNCH A NATION-WIDE EDUCATION CAMPAIGN
AIMED AT INFLUENCING COMMUNITY ATTITUDES IN ORDER TO REMOVE
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES IN EMPLOYMENT.
A MAJOR ROLE OF THE COMMITTEES IS TO INVESTIGATE
COMPLAINTS OF DISCRIMINATION AND TO DEAL WITH THEM EFFECTIVELy.
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EmPLOYMENT AND
OCCUPATION HAS THE SPECIAL FUNCTION OF ADVISING THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL
EDUCATION PUBLICITY CAMPAI6 N TO PROMOTE REAL EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNI r
IN EMPLOYMENT. 
THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA OWE A
CONSIDERABLE DEBT TO THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
FOR ITS WORK IN DEVELOPING POSITIVE POLICIES WHICH PAY FULL
RESPECT TO HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE FIELDS OF EMPLOYMENT AND
OCCUPATION. IN ADDITION TO THE CONVENTION ON DISCRIMINATION
( EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION) AUSTRALIA HAS ALSO RATIFIED TWO
OTHER IMPORTANT HUMAN RIGHTS CONVENT. IONS OF THE I... DURING
THE YEAR: CONVENTION NO. 87 FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT To0 ORGANISE, 1948;
CONVENTION No 98 RIGHT XPORGANISE AND
COLLECTIVE WAGAINING, 14
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOW CLOSE TO FULFILLING ITS* OBJECTIVE
OF RATIFYING ALL THE 11L. O. CONVENTIONS IN THE FIELD OF HOiMAN
RIGHTS. THERE REMAIN OUTSTANDING CONVENTION No. 100 EQUAL
REMUNERAT ION, 1951, AND CONVENTION No. 107 PROTECTION AND
INTEGRATION OF INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL POPULATIONS, 1957. THE
GOVERNMENT IS GiVING PRIORITY ATTENTION TO THE RATIFICATION OF
THESE TWO CONVENTIONS.
THE FURTHER ACTION WHICH THE GOVERNMENT IS ABLE TO TAKE
IN REGARD TO THE RATIFICATION OF I. L. O, CONVENTION No. 100
WILL DEPEND UPON THE CONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL WAGE CASE
WHICH WILL SOON COME BEFORE THE AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION AND
ARBITRATION COMMISSION, CONVENTION No. 107 IS CLOSELY CONNECTED
WITH THE QUESTION OF ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS WHICH IS CURRENTLY
THE SUBJECT OF STUDY BY THE COMMISSION HEADED BY MR. JUSTICE
A. E. WOODWARD. THE WOODWARD COMMISSION HAS COMMENTED IN ITS 
PRELIMINARY REPORT THAT IT IS IMPORTANT THAT NO ACTION BE TAKEN
TO PREJUDICE EVENTUAL AUSTRALIAN RATIFICATION OF CONVENTION No,
107 WHICH EMPHASISES THE RECOGNITION OF THE RIGHT TO OWNERSHIP BY
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES OF THE LANDS THEY TRADITIONALLY OCCUPY.
THE GOVERNMENT IS ALSO AIMING IN THE NEAR FUTURE TO
MAKE FURTHER ADVANCES IN BRINGING WORK STA NDARDS. IN AUSTRALIA
UP TO THE HIGHEST INTERNATIONAL, INDUSTRIAL AND SOCIAL LEVELS,
THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR IS CONSULTING WITH THREE STATE GOVERNMENTS
ABOUT THE REMOVAL OF HINDRANCES To AUSTRALIAN RATIFICATION OF
CONVENTION No. 81, LABOUR INSPECTION,$ 1946. CON* SULTATIONS ARE
ALSO CONTINUING BETWEEN-OFFICERS OF AUSTRALIAN AND STATE,
DEPARTMENTS TO DETERMINE WHAT STEPS MIGHT BE NEEDED TO -INTRODUCE
LEGISLATION IN AUSTRALIA TO COMPLY WITH CONVENTION No. 135,
PROTECTION AND FACILITIES AFFORDED TO WORKERS REPRESENTATIVES, 1971,
WHICH CAME INTO FORCE ON 30 JUNE THIS YEAR, AND ON CONVENTION No.
119 GUARDING OF MACHINERY, 1963,
I AM ALSO PLEASED TO BE ABLE TO ANNOUNCE TODAY THAT THE
GOVERNMENT HAS NOW COMPLETED ALL THE NECESSARY PROCEDURES TO ENABLE
US TO RATIFY IMMEDIATELY THE CONVENTION RELATING TO THE STATUS
OF STATELESS PERSONS 1954, THE CONVENTION ON THE REDUCTION OF
STATELESSNESS 1961, THE PROTOCOL RELATING TO THE STATUS OF
REFUGEES 1966, AND THE PROTOCOL RELATING To REFUGEE SEAMEN 1973. 
-12-
AUSTRALIA ACCEDED TO THE CONVENTION ON THE STATUS
OF REFUGEES IN 1954. ON 18 APRIL THIS YEAR THE GOVERNMENT
RATIFIED THE 1957 HAGUE AGREEMENT RELATING To REFUGEE SEAMEN,
WHICH HAD COME INTO FORCE IN 1961. THE GOVERNMENT IS ALSO TAKING
ACTION IN REGARD TO THE PROTOCOL RELATING TO THE 1960 UNESCO
CONVENTION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION IN EDUCATION WHICH AUSTRALIA
RATIFIED ON 29 NOVEMBER 1966. THE GOVERNMENT HAS INSTITUTED
ACTION TO DETERMINE WHETHER AUSTRALIA S HOULD ACCEDE TO THE 1962
PROTOCOL TO THIS CONVENTION, THE PRINCIPAL PURPOSE OF WHICH IS TO
ESTABLISH MACHINERY TO DEAL WITH VIOLATIONS OF THE CONVENTION,
THE INTRODUCTION OF LEGISLATION AND THE RATIFICATION OF
UNITED NATIONS AND I. L. O. AND UNESCO CONVENTIONS HAS BEEN
ACCOMPANIED BY VIGOROUS GOVERNMENT ACTION IN OTHER FIELDS
AFFECTING THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF EVERYONE WHO LIVES IN AUSTRALIA,
THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN ACTIVE IN PROMOTING EQUAL
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN AND IN IMPROVING THEIR
CONDITIONS OF WORK. IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE THE GOVERNMENT
HAS SET STANDARDS FOR OTHER EMPLOYERS TO FOLLOW, FOR EXAMPLE,
THE PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDES EQUAL PAY FOR WOMEN AND HAS RECENTLY
EXTENDED THE PROVISIONS FOR MATERNITY LEAVE TO 12 WEEKS PAID
LEAVE. TO ENABLE WOMEN TO PURSUE THEIR CAREERS IN A CONTINUOUS
FASHION AND MAKE A GREATER CONTRIBUTION TO THE LABOUR FORCE,
THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD IS CURRENTLY EXAMINING ASPECTS OF PARTTIME
EMPLOYMENT IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE. 
-13-
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT IN THE AREA OF WOMEN'S
EMPLOYMENT INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING MEASURES:
SUCCESSFUL INTERVENTION IN DECEMBER 1972 IN
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION'TO HAVE ESTABLISHED
THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE,
CONSULTATIONS WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE LED TO MOST
STATES AGREEING TO THIS PRINCIPLE.
THE PROVISION OF TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN
WISHING TO ENTER OR RE-ENTER THE LABOUR FORCE AFTER
A PERIOD OF DOMESTIC RESPONSIBILITY. THIS IS'PROVIDED
UNDER THE EMPLOYMENT TRAINING SCHEME FOR WOMEN
ADMINISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR.
THE RANGE OF BENEFITS PROVIDED UNDER THIS SCHEME
IS CURRENTLY BEING EXAMINED WITH A VIEW TO
FACILITATING FURTHER THE ENTRY OF WOMEN TO THE
LABOUR FORCE AND IMPROVING THFIR EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES1 PROVISION FOR ALLEGATIONS OF DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT ON THE GROUNDS OF SEX. TO BE INVESTIGATED
THROUGH THE SETTING UP OF COMMITTEES ON DISCRIMINATION
IN EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION, 
-1LV
THROUGH ITS IMMIGRATION PROGRAM, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
ACTED TO REMOVE ANY SUGGESTION OF DISCRIMINATION ON GROUNDS
OF RACE, COLOUR OR NATIONALITY.
UNDER THE REVISED POLICY, ALL PEOPLE WHO CAN MEET
SELECTION CRITERIA ARE ELIGIBLE EQUALLY FOR SETTLEMENT IN AUSTRALIA.
THE MAIN EMPHASIS OF THE PROGRAM IS NOW ON FAMILY ' REUNION AND
THE NATIONAL NEED. AUSTRALIA'S CITIZENSHIP LEGISLATION HAS
BEEN AMENDED SO THAT IT NOW APPLIES WITHOUT DISCRIMINATION TO
PEOPLE FROM ALL COUNTRIES. VISITOR VISA REQUIREMENT S ALSO HAVE
BEEN STREAMLINED TO PROMOTE INTERCHANGE AND GOODWILL BETWEEN
AUSTRALIA AND OTHER COUNTRIES. 1A NATIONAL COMMUNITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE AND TASK FORCES IN THE STATES HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED
TO ENQUIRE INTO ALL ASPECTS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST MIGRANTS.
IN THE LIGHT OF THESE AND OTHER ENQUIRIES, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
CONTINUE TO TAKE WHATEVER ACTION IS NECESSARY TO END
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
IN THE SHORT SPACE OF TWELVE MONTHS, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
TRANSFORMED AUSTRALIA'S INTERNATIONAL REPUTATION SO THAT OUR,
COUNTRY HAS ONCE AGAIN ASSUMED ITS RIGHTFUL PLACE IN THE VANGUARD
OF COUNTRIES PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND IN INSISTING ON THE HIGHEST
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS IN. EMPLOYMENT AND IN INDUSTRY. My
COLLEAGUES IN THE MINISTRY HAVE CO-OPERATED WITH ENTHUSIASM AND
IMAGINATION TO HELP ME MAKE 1973 THE MOST PRODUCTIVE YEAR OF
ACHIEVEMENT WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS EVER HAD IN THESE VITAL FIELDS.
WE HAVE DEMONSTRATED OUR SINCERITY IN FULFILLING OUR COMMITMENTS
TO BRING ABOUT GREAT IMPROVEMENTS IN THE BASIC RIGHTS OF
AUSTRALIANS. 
THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO FACED SQUARELY THE FUNDAMENTAL
ISSUE OF MATCHING THE POLICIES AND ACTIONS WE ADOPT AT HOME
WITH FHOSE WE PURSUE ABROAD$
WE HAVE SHOWN BY THE STAND WE HAVE TAKEN, PARTICULARLY
IN THE UNITED NATIONS, THAT AUSTRALIA'S POLICIES ARE FIRMLY
BASED ON HUMANITARIAN PRINCIPLES OF RACIAL EQUALITY, MUTUAL
RESPECT AND THE ELIMINATION OF THE EVILS OF POVERTY,. ILLITERACY,
DISCRIMINATION AND COLONIALISM.
AL'STRALIA PAYS TRIBUTE TODAY TO THE CONTINUING CONTRIBUTION
OF THE LNII. ED NATIONS IN PROMOTING UNIVERSAL RESPECT FOR, AND
OBSERVANCE OF, FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS AND HUMAN RIGHTS,
ON 20 APRIL 1972 IN A DEBATE IN THE HOUSE ON RACIAL
PREJUDICE AND VIOLENCE I SAID THAT IN 1968, HUMAN RIGHTS YEAR,
AND IN 1971, THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR ACTION TO COMBAT
I\ ACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, THE UNITED NATIONS QUOTED THE
CONVENTIONS WHICH AUSTRALIA HAD NOT IMPLEMENTED. ON THAT
OCCASION I OBSERVED THAT WE HAD NOT IMPROVED OUR RECORD. BY
OUR ACTIONS THIS YEAR THE GOVERNMENT HAS ENSURED THAT AUSTRALIA'S
NATIONAL IMAGE WILL NEVER AGAIN BE AFFRONTED BY A POOR RECORD
OF ACHIEVEMENT IN GIVING EFFECT TO INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
TREATIES, 
-16-
I HOPE I MAY BE. FORGIVEN FOR CONCLUDING ON A PERSONAL
NOTE BY RECALLING THAT MY FATHER', H. FE, WHITLAM, CONTRIBUTED
TO THE WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS IN'THE HUMAN RIGHTS FIELD
AS AUSTRALIA'S REPRESENTATIVE AT THE 6TH SESSION OF THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION IN 1950 AND AT THE 10TH SESSION IN 1954,
HE ALSO ACTED AS A CONSULTANT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEYGENERAL
FOR SEVERAL YEARS ON HUMAN RIGHTS MATTERS, WHEN HE
DELIVERED THE FIRST SIR ROBERT GARRAN ORATION IN 1959, HE
REFERRED TO THE GENERAL OBLIGATION AND RESPONSIBILITY OF
AUSTRALIA " TO SHARE IN THE TASK OF SECURING HIGHER STANDARDS
AND BETTER LIVING CONDITIONS, NOT ALONE FOR HER PEOPLE, BUT FOR
PEOPLE IN OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD" HE SAID:
" THE FOUNDATION FOR THAT OBLIGATION AND RESPONSIBILITY
WAS LAID WHEN, IN THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS,. AUSTRALIA,
IN COMPANY WITH OTHER NATIONS, REAFFIRMED HER FAITH IN THE
DIGNITY AND WORTH OF THE HUMAN PERSON AND EXPRESSED HER
DETERMINATION TO PROMOTE SOCIAL PROGPESS AND BETTER
STANDARDS OF LIFE IN LARGER FREEDOM, AND LATER, WHEN SHE
SUBSCRIBED TO THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS,
ARTICLE 1 OF WHICH SETS FORTH THAT ALL-HUMAN BEINGS ARE
FREE AND EQUALIN DIGNITY AND RIGHTS, THAT THEY ARE ENDOWED
WITH REASON AND CONSCIENCE AND SHOULD ACT TOWARDS ONE
ANOTHER IN A SPIRIT OF BROTHERHOOD, I" 



EMBARGO: 6. OOPM TUESDAY 11 DECEMBER Press Statement No. 160
11 December 1973
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS THEATRE GRANTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today approved grants of
$ 47,490 recommended by the Theatre Board of the Australian Council
for the Arts. The grants go to all States and cover drama and
dance development and training, and youth activities.
The Theatre Board in recommending the grants, said that the
emphasis in these grants was on training and development in the
smaller companies, and with the smaller forms of assistance which
would be crucial to a company or an individual.
Details of the grants are as follows:-
DRAMA DEVELOPMENT: Community Theatre Company, N. S. W. For a tour of Blithe Spirit
to Orange, Bankstown and Canberra. $ 500
Canberra Repertory Society. Professional services for
productions. $ 900
Arts Council of Australia ( Qld. Division). Professional services
of a director to produce The Slaughter of St. Teresa's Day in
1974 at Charleville for the Charleville Players. $ 900
DRAMA TRAINING: Ctd Tote Theatre Company, N. S. W. Traineeship program for
resident director. $ 5,310
Theatre 62, S. A. For a set designer to work and study in
design, painting and props department of Melbourne Theatre
Company. $ 960
Brendon Lunney, N. S. W. Fares and expenses to work as a
trainee administrator at the Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theatre
and the American National Playwright's Conference. $ 1,600. / 2 
-2
Australian Performing Group ( Pram Factory), Victoria. Fees for
training Pram. Factory actors in movement, mime and dance and to
prepare a pantomime production. $ 1,440.
Queensland Theatre Company, Old. To engage a trainee administrator
for one year. $ 4,500
Roger Leach, N. S. W. For final year studies at the Central School of
Speech and Drama, London. $ 2,702
DRAMA YOUTH:
New Theatre, N. S. W. Assistance with a year's program of workshops in
drama, folk dancing and puppetry. $ 2,702
Children's Arena Theatre, Vic. Half the salary of an Executive
Director for one year. $ 3,000
Little Patch Theatre, S. A. Professional service and rehearsal fee for
actor/ musicians to act as presenters of a puppet program for primary
school children. $ 660
Ensemble Ptoductions, N. S. W. To continue schools lecture/ demonstration
program. DANCE DEVELOPMENT:
Kolobok Dance Co. Vic. To produce two new ballets for four performances
at the Union Theatre, University of Melbourne. $ 1,364
Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust. Professional services for a
tutor to conduct a series of workshops in contemporary dance in Adelaide,
Perth, Sydney, Brisbane, Melbourne, Darwin and Launceston. $ 1,947
Dance Concert, N. S. W. To assist with productions of Troika Wedding
and Hungarian Suite. $ 1,750
Esperance Youth Ballet Co. W. A. Salary for resident teacher. $ 2,500
Perth City Ballet, W. A. To conduct a choreographic seminar. $ 1,320
Spanish Theatre Society, Vic. Towards cost of first term activity.
$ 4,000
Margaret Barr Dance-Drama Group, N. S. W. To assist with taking the
group's program to Canberra and Armidale. $ 461
New Dance Theatre, N. S. W. To assist with salaries of dancers. $ 400
Ballet Theatre of W. A. To assist with a season in the Octagon
Theatre for a two day season in November 1973. $ 275
National Theatre at the Playhouse, W. A. Fares and salary for an
assistant administrator to September 1974. $ 6,070
Melbourne Theatre Company. For a trainee director. $ 1,125
Kolobok Dance Co. Choreographers' fee to produce a suite of
Greek Dances. $ 260
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY 11 DECEMBER 1973
PRIME MINISTER: There were a couple of appointments made in this
last quarter of an hour by the Executive Council. Mr Jack Neary, MBE,
is to be the Vice-Chairman of the Broadcasting Control Board.
Mrs Anne Lowery a member of the Metric Conversion Board. There were
several other decisions made by Cabinet-yesterday which individual
ministers have already announced. There is one which falls to
me, it concerns the GATT Anti-Dumiping Code. You will recall on the
7th November, Australia announced its intention to accede to the
GATT Anti-Dumping Code. New legislation is required to enable
accession, and the Government called for a report from Sir John Crawford
and Mr Rattigan on what proceduires should be established on the
imposition of dumping duties in the light of the time limitations
imposed by the Code. This report has been received and Cabinet
has accepted its recommendation. The legislation will provide that
the Minister for Customs and Excise may impose a dumping duty on any
goods which he is satisfied are being dumped in Australia or are
causing or threatening material injury to established domestic
industry or are materially retarding the establishment of a domestic
industry. If he requires independent advice, he may refer any such
matter to the Industries Assistance Commission for inquiry and report.
Provision will also be made for appeals to the Commission against
the Minister's decision on a dumping complaint.
Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Could you give us the details of the deal that you propose
to do on education the dcoal I understand was discussed by Caucus
this morning?
PRIME MINISTER: There was a meeting of Caucus this morning to discuss
the general contingencies on the education legislation. Now I haven't
got the full text, of course, of the resolution but in general it is
in these terms: The Government wants the Schools Commissicn
legislation to go through. It also insists on the general principle
which was recommended by the Karmel Committee that there should be
a reduction in 1974 on the amount which is to be paid per pupil to
non-government schools in the highest categories and a further
reduction in 1975. You mention a deal. I think there have been
discussions between a Country Party former minister and also the
Acting Minister for Eduction, and there may be further discussions.
I also gather there might have been discussions between the Leader
of the Country Party and the Leader of the Liberal Party. I forget
which is now the blue-tailed fly or not. Was that an accurate
report of the conversation?
COMMENT: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: And you vouch for its accuracy?
COMMENT: I vouch for its accuracy.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there seems to be no doubt as to the
authenticity of the reaction that it suggests. I mentioned the
recommendations of the Karmel Committee in this respect and perhaps
I should remind you what it said. 
-2-
" The Committee believes that there are some non-government schools
for which no case can be made on an overall relative needs basis
for this type of Commonwealth support, i. e. equal per capita grants."
That's on page 7. Now on page 71 of the report there are three passaq( es
which I think I should read to you setting out its recoimnendations.
" The Committee judged that uniform per capita grants would be an
expensive way of bringing about acceptable standards in all schools
and would unduly delay their attainment. The Committee believes
that Government aid cannot be justified in maintaining or raising
standards beyond those which publicly supported schools can hope to
achieve by the end of the decade. Category A schools already use a
volume of resources that well exceeds the 1979 target, and the
committee believes that Government assistance to these schools cannot
be justified." You will remember that the amendments or requests
made by the Senate was that in 1974 and 1975 there should be a
minimum per capita grant to all non-government schools of the amount
which was paid in 1973 under the 1972 legislation $ 62 per primary
pupil, $ 104 per secondary pupil. And against that for Category A
schools, the Karmel Committee recommended $ 40 and $ 65 next year,
and $ 35 the year after; Category B schools, $ 45 and $ 65 in
each year; Category C schools, $ 60 and $ 90 in each of those years.
Now the Government regards it as basic that there should be a reduction
in 1974 and a further reduction in 1975 for those schools whose
educational resources are and by 1979 at the end of the 6 year period,
would still be above the resources available in Government schools
and the rest the bulk of the non-government schools.
QUESTION: The Government's legislation for the Schools Grants
Bill cut out all grants to Category A schools as of the end of this
year. Can I just clarify if tha Opposition agrees to pass the
Schools Commissrion Bill uniended in the Senate, would the Government
consider restoring the phising out of the grants to Category A schools
under the Schoolt Gran~ s 14glflation?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, it would consider that.
QUESTION: I thought the Caucus had inade a prop~ osition?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I have given you the general principles. The
Government wants the Schools Commission to be enacted. That has been
nut to the people in 1969 and it has been put again in 1972. There
Is no question that this is a principle to which we are committed,
which the public exptects and the Commission is along the lines of
the Education Commission set up by our predecessors, the Universities
Commission and the Commission on Advanced Education. It seems
reasonable to have one on schools again. I also stated the general
at1-titude of the Government that for those schools whose educational
resources are above, and by 1979 it will still be above, the resources
in the Government and the bulk of the non-government schools, there
should be a reduction in 1974 and a further reduction in 1975.
QUESTION: How widespread do you believe the practices in industry
of paying an extra week annual leave? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: In the metal industries it is now universal, and it
has been applied in several of the State Public Services. If you
want the details I can give them to you afterwards. I can't remember
precisely which State Public Services apply an annual leave loading,
some already do, and I can't remember precisely in which States
Arbitration Tribunals have made such a provision for ev~ ryhno' ltheir
awards. Queensland within the last mcoritAñ, i. kIt: u) accnsland
Industrial Commission, it made provisions for an annual leave loading
for everybody under State awards, and I * believe in the metal
industries under Commonwealth awards there is provision for an annual
leave loading. You are asking me that question because of the
Government's decision relating to Australian Government employees.
QUESTION: You don't feel that the Commonwealth is too early in
setting a pace for this?
PRIME MINISTER: In some respects such as the metal trades matters
and this covers a great number of people say in the Department of
supply facilitieswe are well behind. People in private employment
are already getting it and people doing the same job in Australiani
Government employment are not getting it.
QUESTION: What sort of Budget will Le required for the Petroleum and
Minerals Authority in order that it can do its job effectively?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Connorin introducing the Bill for the Petroleum
and Minerals Authority, said that at least 50 million dollars a year
would be available to the authority to prospect for petroleum and
minerals in Australia. That is the amount of money which has been
paid by the Australian Government on behalf of the taxpayers for
exploration of oil and minerals up to this stage. The manner in
which the Australian Government subsidy will be paid for oil and
mineral exploration will be changed from subsidising companies
very largely overseas companies Australians who subqcribe often
did so as a form of tax dodge. It will be changed from that method
to expenditure by the Petroleum and Minerals Authority.
QUESTION: After Saturday's referenda defeat, do you still intend -o
go ahead with your four referendum proposals when the next Senat.:
Election is held?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Three of those proposals, of courselwere put
ijt the policy speech and are in the party platform. Another, the
one concerning votes for referendums in the two territories and
also requiring a majority not only over the whole of Australia but
just in three States instead of the present four that flows from,
I think, universal suggestions which have been made for many years
past. Then there will be a fifth bill for a referendum put, I suspect,
when we assemble next year. That is, the one which we are discussing
with the States to make it easier for the Australian Parliament to
refer matters which are in its exclusive jurisdiction to the State
Parliaments as well, of course, as to make greater provision for the
present section of the Constitution which says that the-State
Parliaments can refer matters which are in their exclusive jurisdiction
to the Australian Parliament.
QUESTION: Will you agree to participate in a Conference with the
States on prices and incomes as proposed by the Premiers of New South
Wales and Victoria? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: I know nothing of this proposal except what I hear
on the A. B. C. and, of course, I am inclined to believe it must be
authentic for that reason, and also in the newspapers but I have
received no communication from any of the Premiers on this subject.
If it is a matter concerning prices and incomes they don't have to
wait on any Australian Government initiative to get together. They
have the power, still. They are able to meet whenever they wish
to discuss it because there is very little that we can contribute to
the exercise of any such power. We cando it for the Northern
Territory and the Capital Territory but that's all.
QUESTION: On that subject, have you heard at all from the South
Australian Government in reference to its offer to give you power
over prices and incomes on a trial basis?
PRIME MINISTER: That offer has been repeated, I gather, but it
has been open for quite some time. You will remember that at the
Constitutional Convention in Sydney in the first week of September,
I raised this * very matter and I said that we would be happy to have a
reference by the States to the Australian Parliament of the power
to pass laws with respect to prices, and I said if they preferred,
then that could be done just, say, for a year or a period of years.
I pointed out that any such reference, in order to be effective,
would have to be made by at least the two larger States, New South
Wal'es and Victoria, because they produce so many of the basic
commodities which effect prices not only in their States but in
the four 5-malier States which import tho~ se basic commodities from
Sydney, Melbourne, Goolong, Rewccistle and Wollongong. There is no
difficulty, of course, as I poitiled out at the time, it could have
been done within a week of getting those references made by the
New South Wales and Victorian Parliaments because the Government in
each case has a majority ini the Legislative Council as well as in
the Legislative Assembly. Now the three smaller States which have
Labor Governments do not have a majority in the Legislative Council
of those States. It may well be that a Bill referring prices pow; crs
to the Australian Parliament would go through those Legislative
Councils if the large States, New South Wales and Victoria, were under
Liberal Governments, to refer those matters to the Australian Parliament.
I don't know quite what the attitude of Queensland would be, because
9ueensland's Premier is sui generis. He is not Labor, he is not
Liberal, and I gather, again reading the papers, although I don't
think the A. B. C. veiltures to say so, that he wouldn't attend any
conference that was sought by Liberal Premiers.
QUESTION: Just on the eduction grants matter again. What degreewhat
rate of phasing out would be acceptable to Caucus in relation
to Category A schools? Would the rate of phasing out that is
recommended in the Karmel Report be acceptable to the Government?
I-ave you received any offer of any form from the Liberal Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I have not spoken to any member of the Opposition
Parties on this at all. Mr Bowen has spoken to one Country Party
former minister, but that's all T know. I want to see'what the
proposals were. There must be a reduction as I say in 1974 and a
further one in 1975 for those schools which, as the Karmel Committee
said, can't justify Government assistance at the present scale or
at all in their view. 
QUESTION: I understand you told the Caucus this morning that you
had no intention of being a lame duck Prime Minister. You also spoke
of the necessity of demonstrating that you had the respect of the
people to preserve the international standing of the Government.
PRIME MINISTER: I wish I could say it as well as you can.
QUESTION: Do you think the international standing of the Government is
at risk at the moment, and could you tell us what you mean by you
have no intention of being a lame duck Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: What I mean is this: I see no point in being in
office if one can't achieve things. Obviously anybody in this job
enjoys it but there is no point in just enjoying the prestige
if one can't deliver the goods, and there can't be any subject on
which the Government relied so much to become a Government as some
of the matters which the Senate is delaying at the moment; such as
schools and health and trade practices and overseas control.
Australian control of our resources, equal opportunity for Australians,
were quite basic to what we proposed for the people in 1969 and again
in 1972, and it is, I believe, essential that we be able to carry out
some of those things which we undertook to do.
QUESTION: Have those referenda results harmed your electoral
prospects at all?
PRIME MNIdSTER: No, I don't think referendum results can be equated
in any way with PlecLion results. There is, of course, one
particular thing which W1ould distingjuish an election campaign,
particularly for the House ofL" Representatives, where the results
determine who is the Government, and that is we are positive
or constructive in what we would put as we have been in what we
have put. Pure negativism~ may be sufficed to beat a referendum. It
won't, I believe, these days suffice to make an Opposition into a
Government. QUESTION: I understand that there is a D Notice Committee mepf-1ng
today. PRIME MINISTER: That is right.
QUESTION: What is your personal opinion on D Notices? Do they
need to be revised or are they alright. I gather you have carried
on the same D Notice system as the previous administration?
PRIME MINISTER: We are reviewing the system as you know, that's why
y,-ur bosses are here in Canberra today talkinq well, when I say
your bosses, I mean your editors. I don't say their bosses are
here, but your editors are here and they are conferring with some
of my colleagues and I am taking them to dinner tonight. We will
have the long spoons. I dare say D Notices will be mentioned.
The D Notice system operates through the media.
QUESTION:. But with Government quidarice?
PRIME MINISTER: Co-operation. There is no law which governs the
D Notice system and as some of you know quite well, you can defy
the D Notice system. The only sanction, if you defy the D Notice
system, would be that you wouldn't get information your newspapers, 
-6-
stations, wouldn't get information from the Government if you broke
an arrangement which you made with the Government about the subjects
concerned, but there is no criminal sanctions involved at all.
There is no law broken, it is purely a matter of understanding or
honour, if you like, between the medium and Government departments.
QUESTION: But you lay down what is covered by a D Notice?
PRIME MINISTER: It can only be done by agreement. The Government
can' t say to any newspaper or station " you will not publish this".
It can't, there is no law which enables it to say so. The only
arrangement is a voluntary one between the medium and the department.
QUESTION: You spoke a moment ago of your desire to keep achieving
your policies. In view of the negative history of referendums,
do you think you have really any chance of getting these next
ones through at the Senate elections?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. I believe that we have too easily accepted
the fact that the people won't modernise the Australian Constitution.
It is a grossly inadequate Constitution. But the best efforts
of the Government and the editorial writers for those newspapers
whose editorials are read, all went to no avail last Saturday. Every
editorial on the subject in the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald
and the Canberra Times and the Financial Review and the Murdoch
papers were all in favour. They agreed with us for once, yet it
wasn't sufficient. See, there was no referendum between 1951 when
Mr Menzies lost his only ref eiendum and 1967 when Mr Holt won one
and lost one. In the J. 940s there were several referendums put,
Mr Curtin lost one in 1944, MZ Chif icy lost two and won one in 1946
and he lost one in 1948 and then in 1937 Mr Lyons lost two. But I
think the last one to be carried before that was in 1928. I think we
ought to be more diligent and regular in enabling the people to
modernise the Constitution. I think if you face up to the facts
and do it regularly they are more likely to accept the procedure
which the Constitution itself laid down. There is no other way
you can alter the Constituion. Every Parliament in Australia,
State and Australian Parliaments, could agree and you would still need
a Bill to go through the Australian Parliament or at least twice
go through the House of Representatives and the people to approve that
bill at a referendum. That is the only way we can alter the
arrangement.
QUESTION: Can you tell us when the dispute between Mr Uren and the
NCDC will be resolved and....
PRIME MINISTER: May be today.
QUESTION: You will recall that the McMahon Government set up an
independent research group at the A. N. U. to study all aspects of
Federal/ State financial relations. We have heard nothing about it
since. Can I ask you whether your Government is still financing
the project, have you received any progress reports on its work and
will you act on any reccmivendations that come forward? 
-7
PRIME MINISTER: I stress that it is not just Commonwealth/ State
financial relations. I was very insistent in questions at the time
and it was accepted that it should also cover local government
finances. In the last week I called for a report on this very matter.
I have got it up on my table at the moment. There have been some
articles written but not yet, I think, published in some learned
journals. It is doing some work. I can't say at this stage one
can see fruits of it, but I am pressing them to do something about it
because the idea is a good one. We do need to have academics
investigating constantly the question of Commonwealth and State and
Civic finances and their interaction. Up until now the only time
anything has ever been done is to get some Task Force to look into
it such as the Coombs report into Commonwealth expenditure. I have,
several times, advocated that the State Governments ought to have a
similar Task Force or Task Forces looking into their expenditure. You
always hear about the Australian Government's expenditure but in fact
State Government expenditure rises almost as much, and in fact our
expenditure has risen this year largely because of additional funds
we have earmarked for expenditure by the States.
QUESTION: policy says that in the public interest the
Commonwealth should act positively in the Arbitration Commission
to gjet an extra week's loading for workers at holiday time. I understand
that yesterday in Cabinet you urged caution in proceeding with
that through the Arbitration Court. When will the Commonwealth now
enact that part of A. L. P. policy now that the Cabinet has decided to
legislate to enact. that part about public servants getting the
loading?
PRIME MIFIS1' ER: We can't enact an~ ythingj. Wle haven't got the power
aO~ Ir incomes except for our own employees or people in the territories,
So we can't enact any such proV'ision. What can happen is that the
Avaatralian Government or dtate Governments too for that. matter can
appear they can intervene in proceedings before the Australian
Can~ ciliation and Arbitration Cou'mii7sion where this matter or any
athcr mratter are the subject a lot of c.-laims by registered
organisations of employee-s. The fact that the Australian Government
is hntroducing a hill for this wcmi-ld have an influence, I expect,
an The Commission. Earlier at thi conference, I pointed out that
the Commission had already accepted and provided for the principle
ofan annual leave loading in the metal trades award. It is for,
th~ is reason that people in that area who are Australian Government
LompJoyees, had approacheO t. he Pulhie Snrvice Arbitrator. This will be
in a bill which we will introdciue in the autumn session. I don't
know at this stage whether the Opposition parties will oppose it or not.
We believe that basic matters of Government policy such as this
con~ cerning Australian Government employees should take the form of
ie. jislation. As things stand at the moment Australian Government
employees can apply to the Public Service Arbitrator for them. They
have. Under our legislation, the people in the highest brackets will,
in fact, get less than they are likely to get, ihan they are seeking,
before the Arbitrator at present.
QUESTION: Will you intervene in other cases and will you extend it
to the other Commonwealth employees..
rEIME MINISTER: I did overloo: ' ra Mr Barron has asked me. This
was never discussed in Cabinet yesterday. There was no discussion
on any matter pending before the Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission. The discussion centered solely on the projected legislation. 



MIN4I STER IAL STATEMi41T
BY THE PRIME M1HSTER
MRa E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
HOUSE OF REPRESENITATIVES,
THURSDAY 13 DECEMBER 197.3
WE HAVE COME TO THE END OF A MOMENTOUS AND MEMORABLE
YEAR IN THE LIFE OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT. JUST OVER
12 MONTHS AGO THE FIRST NATIONAL LABOR GOVERNMENT IN
23 YEARS WAS ELECTED TO OFFICE. THAT IN ITSELF WAS AN
EVENT OF HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE. IHATEVER THE POLICIES OR
ACTIONS OF THE NEW ADMINISTRATION, A CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT
AFTER SUCH A PROTRACTED INTERVAL OF CONSERVATIVE RULE WAS
BOUND TO BRING NEW IDEAS AND FRESH DIRECTIONS TO OUR
NATIONAL LIFE, TO CHALLENGE OLD ASSUMPTIONS AND STALE
HABITS OF MIND, TO INVIGORATE THE WHOLE CLIMATE OF POLITICAL
DEBATE IN THIS COUNTRY. SO IT HAS PROVED. FOR ALL OF US
IN THIS PARLIAMENT IT HAS BEEN A UNJIQUELY ARDUOUS AND EXACTING
YEAR. FOR MY COLLEAGUES IN THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IT HAS !; EEN
A YEAR OF IMMENSE EXCITEMENlT AND UNREMITTING ACTIVITY.
FOR THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FOR THIS COUNTRY.-IT HAS BEEN
A YEAR OF PROGRESS AND REFORM ON A SCALE UNMATCHED IN THE
RECORDS OF THIS FEDERATION. v 1 2 
-2
I HOPE THOSE WORDS WILL N'OT BE TAKEN AS AN EMPTY BOAST.
I iELIEVE THE RECORD OF THE 6OVERNMENT SPEAKS FOR ITSELF.
ANYONE WHO STUDIES THAT RECORD IMPARTIALLY AS I NOW INVITE
THE HOUSE TO DO WILL ACCEPT THE EVIDENCE OF A PRODIGIOUS
LEGISLATIVE ACHIEVEMENT. TODAY I WANT-TO BRING TOGETHER
THE MAIN ELEMENTS OF THAT ACHIEVEMENT AND IDENTIFY THE
CONSISTENT PHILOSOPHY -THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES THAT
LIE BEHIND ALL WE HAVE DONE AND ALL WE HAVE ATTEMPTED TO DO.
I REMIND THE HOUSE OF THIS: NOTHING WE HAVE DONE IN THESE
EVENTFUL MONTHS CAN BE SAID TO HAVE BEEN UNEXPECTED OR
UNPREDICTABLE. OUR POLICIES WERE FORMULATED OVER MANY YEARS.
THE MOST IMPORTAN'T OF THEM WERE PUT TO THE PEOPLE NOT ONCE,
BUT TWICE. WE HAVE DONE NOTHING THAT WE DID NOT PROMISE TO
DO, WE HAVE iJONE WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE CHARGED US TO DO
WHEN THEY CONFERRED UPON US THEIR MANDATE IN LECEMBER LAST YEAR.
MY POLICY SPEECH FOR THE LAST ELECTIONS STANDS, UNQUALIFIED
AND UNDIMINISHED, AS THE RECORD OF THIS GOVERNMENT'IS ACTIVITIES
IN THE PAST YEAR AND ITS MANIFLE3TO FOR THIE YEARS TO COME.
I DO NOT PRETEND THAT THE YEAR HAS 3EEN PLAIN SAILING.
OF COURSE IT HAS NOT. THERE IS MUCH IN OUR PROGRAM THAT WE
HAVE YET TO ACCOMPLISH;~ MANY OF OUR PLANS ARE STILL IN THEIR
FORMATIVE OR EMj3RYOWIC STAGES. THIERE IS MUCH, REGRETTABLY,
THAT WE HAVE BEEN PREVENTED FROM DOING OR jARINGING TO FRUITION.
IF THE YEAR HAS REVEALED CLEARLY THE NATURE AND PURPOSES OF THE
GOVERNMENT, IT HAS ALSO REVEALED EVEN MORE NAKEDLY, MORE
UNMISTAK( ABLY THE NATURE AND PURPOSES OF THE OPPOSIKfON. i o/ 3 
I SHALL GIVE THE HOUSE PRESENTLY THE DETAILED EVIDENCE
OF THE SENATE'S OESTRUCTION. I DCUBT WHETHER AiY OF
US CAN RECALL AN OPPOSITION THAT HAS iEHAVED WITH SUCM
RECKLESS AND IRRESPONSILLE INDIFFERENCE TO THE PEOPLE' S
WILL, WE HAVE SEEN IN THE SENATE A PATTERN. OF FLATANT
OBSTRUCTION, OF FLAGRANT DEFIANCE OF A POPULAR MANDATE
CONFERRED FY THE PEOPLE ON AN ELECTED GOVERNMENT. WE HAVE
TOO OFTEN SEEN IN THIS HOUSE A PATTERN OF ROWDINESS, OF DELAY,
OF UNRULINESS, OF PERSISTENT ATTEMPTS TO BAIT THE CHAIR Ah-D
FRUSTRATE THE BUSINESS OF THE PARLIAMENT, WE HAVE
CONTENDED WITH DINOSAURS IN ONE PLACE AND SCHOOLPOYS IN
THE OTHER. YET BY LONG HOURS AND HARD WORK WE HAVE DEALT
WITH AN UNPRECEDENTED VOLUME OF BUSINESS IN THIS PARLIAMENT.
SOME IDEA OF TIHE SCALE OF OUR LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM WILL
BE SEEN FROM THE STATISTICS OF LILLS PASSED AND INTRODUCED.
SINCE THE 28TH PARLIAMENT ASSEMLED ON 27 FEPRUARY A TOTAL OF
253 BILLS HAVE BEEN INTRODUCED. THAT FIGURE SURPASSES ALL
RECORDS. THE NEAREST APPROACH TO IT WAS 1b9 " ILLS IN 1968,.
THE PARLIAMENT HAS PASSED 203 OF THE EILLS INTRODUCED THIS YLR,
THE SIZE OF THAT ACCOMPLISHMENT l'ILL IE SEEN MORE CLEARLY FROM
THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PAGES OF LEGISLATION DEALT WITH BY TiE
PARLIAMENT IN EACH OF THE PAST SIX YEARS. IN 1968EXCLUDING
CUSTOMS TARIFF SCHEDULES, THE PARLIAMEhT PASSED 775 PAGES
OF LEGISLATION. THERE ARE q81 PAGES IN 19Q, 660 PAGES
IN 1970; 872 PAGES IN 1971, AND 707 PAGES IN 1972.
THIS YEAR THE BILLS INTRODUCED CONTAINED MORE THAN 2200 PAGES,
ROUGHLY THREE TIMES THE TOTAL LAST YEAR, I KNOW WHAT A HEAVY
BURDEN THAT WORK HAS IMPOSED ON MEMBERS AND I AM GRATEFUL FOR
THE WAY THEY HAVE BORNE IT. 
-4-
THERE ARE OTHER WAYS THAT WE CAN MEASURE THE VOLUME
OF PARLIAMENT4RY AND GOVERNMENT ACTIVITY. SINCE FEBRUARY THIS
YEAR 39 REPORTS ON INQUIRIES INSTITUTED BY THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN
PRESENTED TO THE PARLIAMENT, NOT INCLUDING REPORTS FROM
PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEES OR REPORTS OF INQUIRIES INSTITUTED BY
THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT. THERE HAVE BEEN' 19. STATEMENTS AND
COMMUNIQUES TABLED ON MEETINGS AND DISCUSSIONS WITH STATE
GOVERNMENTS. SIX CONSTITUTION ALTERATION BILLS HAVE BEEN PRESENTED
TO THE PARLIAMENT, THE TEXTS OF 39 TREATIES AND AGREEMENTS WITH
OTHER COUNTRIES HAVE BEEN PRESENTED. BETWEEN JANUARY AND NOVEMBER
THIS YEAR THE CABINET ITSELF MADE A TOTAL OF 1675 DECISIONS,
WHATEVER MAY BE THOUGHT OF THIS GOVERNMENT, NOT EVEN ITS WORST
ENEMIES CAN CLAIM IT HAS BEEN IDLE.
GREAT AS OUR LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM HAS BEEN, THE
GOVERNMENT HAS NEVER CURTAILED OR DISRUPTED THE SMOOTH
PROCEEDINGS OF THE HOUSE OR TRESPASSED ON THE RIGHTS OF MEMBERS.
INDEED, THE RECORD WILL SHOW THAT THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A YEAR
WHEN PRIVATE MEMBERS HAVE HAD MORE OPPORTUNITY TO RAISE MATTERS
IN THE HOUSE AND HAVE THEM DEBATED FULLY. THE HOUSE HAS SAT
FOR A TOTAL OF 908 HOURS UP TO LUNCHTIME TODAY. THE GREATEST
NUMBER OF SITTING HOURS IN ONE YEAR FOR MORE THAN HALF A CENTURY.
AMONG THE PARLIAMENTS OF THE WORLD, ONLY THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE HOUSE OF COMMONS OF. CANADA HAVE SAT
FOR LONGER HOURS THIS YEAR. 
YET WE HAVE ONLY SAT ONCE AFTER 11 PM. THE EXHAUSTING
FARCE OF SITTING INTO THE SMALL HOURS, ITS INTOI. ERABLE TOLL
ON THE EFFICIENCY AND DIGNITY OF THE PARLIAMENT. HAS-. IEEN
ABOLISHED. WE HAVE ALLOWED 70 DEBATES ON THE ADJOURNME'T
THE GREATEST NUMBER ON RECORD. WE HAVE NEVER ONCE CURTAILED
OR SUSPENDED DEPATE ON GE1NERAL BUSINESS, AND EVERYMATTER
RAISED BY A PRIVATE MEMBER HAS BEEN DEBATED AND. VOTED UPON.
THE GREAT THEME OF OUR LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM HAS BEEN
ONE OF. REFORM AND RENOVATION. WE RECOGNISED FROM THE BEGINNING
THAT THE REFORMS WE WERE SEEKING FOR AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY
FOR A MORE JUST AND HUMANE AUSTRALIANI SOCIETY WOULD BE
POSSIBLE ONLY THROUGH REFORMS IN TIJE STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT
ITSELF. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN THE ORGANISATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE WERE ESSENTIAL TO PROVIDE THE
ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM.
THAT WAS OUR FIRST TASK. WE SET ABOUT IT WITH VIGOUR
AND DETERMINATION. WE CREATED NEW DEPARTMENTS OF URBAN AND
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, ABORIGINAt. AFFAIRS, ENVIRONMENT AND
CONSERVATION, TOURISM AND RECREATION, MINERALS AND ENERGY
AND THE MEDIA TO ADMINISTER I4IOLE AREAS OF POLICY THAT
HAD BEEN NEGLECTED OR DOWNGRADED IN THE PAST, OUR PROGRAM
DID NOT MEAN SIMPLY A NEW EMPHASIS HERE OR A LITTLE EXTRA
MONEY THERE. IT MEANT A NEW AND RADICAL ASSESSMENT OF OUR
SOCIAL PRIORITIES AND GOALS. TO HAVE WORKED WITHIN THE
ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK OF OUR PREDECESSORS WOULD HAVE MEANT,
IN LARGE MEASURE, ACCEPTING THE VALUES AND PRIORITIES OF OUR
PREDFCES ORS. 4E WERE r'.! OT PREPARED TO DO SO. 
-6-
OUR ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES WERE MADE IN TWO STAGES,
THE FIRST STAGE WAS TO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF DEPARTMENTS
FROM 27 TO 37. QUALIFIED EXPERTS FROM OUTSIDE THE PUBLIC
SERVICE WERE BROUGHT IN AT THE HIGHEST LEVEL. I MENTION
A FEW MR. JAMES OSWIN IN THE DEPARTMENT OF. THE MEDIA,
DR. DON MCMICHAEL IN THE NEW DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT
AND CONSERVATION; fMRS. MARIE COLEMAN AS HEAD OF. THE NEW
AUSTRALIAN COMMISSION ON SOCIAL WELFAREI MR. CHARLES
ALTON IN THE AMALGAMATED DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT.
AT THE SAME TIME WE FOUND IT POSSIBLE TO INCREASE EFFICIENCY
AND EFFECT ECONOMIES BY MERGIIIG SOME DEPARTMENTS AND
REDUCING THE FUNCTIONS OF OTHERS. THUS, IN THE SECOND STAGE
OF OUR ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS, l" E REDUCED THE NUMBER OF
DEPARTMENTS FROM 37 TO 31. WE MERGED THE SERVICE DEPARTMENTS
WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFEMC-. AND CIVIL AVIATION WITi4 TRANSPORT.
WE COMBINED THE DEPARTMENTS OF HOUSING AND WORKS AS A SIJNGLE
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION. THE DEPARTMENT OF
EXTERNAL TERRITORIES WAS ABOLISHED. I COMMEND UNRESERVEDLY
THE AUSTRALIAN PUBL. IC SERVICE FOR THE PROMPT AND EFFICIENT
WAY IT HAS ADAPTED TO THESE CHANGES. THE PUBLIC SERVICE
HAS RESPONDED TO THE GOVERNMENI'T'S HEAVY DEMANDS WITH
IMMENSE PROFESSIONAL SKILL AND DEDICATION. / 7 
7
OUR CHANGES AND REFORMS, HOWEVER, DID NOT END WITH
THE RESTRUCTURING OF GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS. qE HAVE ARMED
THE ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINE WITH NEW FUNCTIONS AND ORGANISATIONS
TO DEAL WITH THE INCREASINGLY COMPLEX AND DIFFICULT PROILEMS
OF PLANNING FOR THE NEEDS OF A GROPING INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY.
SOME OF THE ORGANISATIONS HAVE BEE; GIVEN PERMAIENT
STATUTORY FORM, SUCH AS THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, THE SOCIAL
'.' ELFARE COMMITTEE, THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL AND THE
PIPELINE AUTHORITY; OTHERS HAVE HAD. THEIR STATUTORY
CHARTER UTTERLY TRANSFORMED, SUCH AS THE CRAINTS COMMISSIOl,
THE CITIES COMMISSION AND THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION.
IN ADDITION SPECIAL TASK FORCES HAVE BEEN SET UP TO DEAL WITH
SPECIFIC AREAS OF POLICY AND PLANNING. 10 FEVER THAN 01
COMMISSIONS OR COMMITTEES OF INCUIRY WERE ESTALLISHED
THIS YEAR. THE BEST KI! OIl OF THEM, PERHAPS, l" AS THE 00, M1lS
TASK FORCE, WHICH REPORTED TO US ON THE PREVIOUS GOVERNME-; T'S
EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS AND RECOMMENDED ECONOMIES It! THEM.
iO0 OTHER GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA HAS APPLIED SUCH A SEARCHING
SCRUTINY TO THE EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC MONEY. IN ADDITION,
MINISTERS HAVE DRAWN ON THE SERVICES OF CONSULTANTS AND
OUTSIDE ADVISERS. ' VE HAVE ESTABLISHED A ! WHOLLY NEW INSTRUMENT
TO PROVIDE LONG-TERM ADVICL ON PUBLIC PRIORITIES A
" THINK TANK' WHICH WE HAVE NAMED THE PRIORITIES PEVIE-l STAFF.
I BELIEVE WE CAN NOW CLAIM THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNME T IS
EQUIPPED WITH THE MOST MODERN, EXPERT AND COMPREHENSIVE
ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY EVER SEEN IN AUSTRALIA. ,/ I 
I WANT TO SUMMARISE FOR HOHOURABLE MEiBERS THE MAIN
LEGISLATION AND POLICY DECISIONS THE GOVERNMENT HAS INITIATED
IN THE PAST YEAR. LET ME DEAL WITH Tl ' O BASIC PRINCIPLES COMMON
TO ALL OUR PROGRAMS. THE TWO GREAT AND GUIDING THEMES OF
THIS % VERNMENT HAVE BEEN THE PROMOTION OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
FOR OUR PEOPLE AND THE PROMOTION OF AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND
CONTROL OF OUR INDUSTRIES ANID RESOURCES.
4E ALONE HAVE PROCLAIMED ArND FOUGHT FOR THE RIGHT OF
AUSTRALIANS TO PARTICIPATE TO THE FULLEST POSSIFLE EXTENT IN
THEIR OWN INDUSTRIES. i,' E ALONE HAVE PROCLAIMED AND FOUGHT FOR
TIE RIGHT OF AUSTRALIANS TO OV'N AND CONTROL THE PRECIOUS
RESOURCES OF THIS CONTINENT. IS THERE ANYTHING STRANGE OR
UNNATURAL ABOUT THESE RIGHTS? HOW OFTEN DID
WE HEAR THEM EXPRESSED OR ARTICULATED UNDER OUR PREDECESSORS?
HotO OFTEN DID OUR PREDECESSORS TAKE FIRM OR DECISIVE ACTION
TO SAFEGUARD THEM? ' iE SEEK FOR THE AUSTRAL. IAN PEOPLE A GREATER
PARTICIPATION IN THE DESTINY OF THIS COUNTRY. 1dE SEEK FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES TO SHARE IN THAT DESTINY
AND TO LIVE THEIR LIVES WITH THE HIGHEST MEASURE OF MATERIAL
SECURITY AND lELL-IBEING AND 1" 1T! THE HIGHEST MEASURE OF
INTELLECTUAL AND SPIRITUAL FULFILMENT. 
9-
WHEN I SPEAK OF EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY I AM NOT THINKING
SIMPLY OF THE REMOVAL OF POVERTY OR THE REDRESS OF OBVIOUS
INJUSTICES SUCH AS THOSE IN EDUCATION OR HEALTH. THE EVIDENCE
OF UNEQUAL OPPORTUNITY IS TO BE FOUND AT ALL LEVELS, IN ALL
AREAS OF SOCIETY. WE ARE PLEDGED, FOR EXAMPLE, TO GIVE GREATER
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY TO WOMEN, WHO HAVE LONG BEEN DISADVANTAGEDOFTEN
IN SUBTLE AND HIDDEN WAYS IN A MALE-ORIE* NTED. SOCIETY.
No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THE WELFARE OF'WOMEN AND I
DO NOT MEAN SIMPLY WOMEN IN NEED OR WOMEN IN OBVIO US HARDSHIP.
SIMILARLY, WE ARE PLEDGED. TO GIVE EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY TO
ABORIGINALS;-NO GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THE ABORIGINALS
OF THIS COUNTRY. FOR THE FIRST TIME THEY ARE REPRESENTED
IN AN ELECTED CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL WHICH CAN DEAL DIRECTLY WITH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. AGAIN, WE ARE PLEDGED TO GIVE EQUAL
OPPORTUNITIES TO MIGRANTS; NO GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR
MIGRANTS. THESE ARE NOT IDLE OR PIOUS ASSERTIONS. THE
EVIDENCE OF ALL WE HAVE DONE IS ABUNDANT AND MANIFEST IN THE
RECORDS OF THIS ADMINISTRATION. IT WILL STAND, PROUD A'ND
UNCHALLENGED, IN THE STATUTES OF THIS COUNTRY.
N~ O ONE DISPUTES THAT WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR EDUCATION
IS PRODIGIOUS IN SCALE AND REVOLUTIONARY IN CONCEPTION.
WE HAVE INCREASED FEDERAL SPE1NDING ON EDUCATION BY WELL OVER
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED AN EXPERT AND INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
COMMISSION TO BRING SANITY AND JUSTICE TO THE WHOLE PROCESS
OF ASSISTANCE TO PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS. WE HAVE
GIVEN A NEW DEAL TO THE CHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA. IT IS HERE
THAT THE FORCE AND SINCERITY OF OUR COMMITMENT TO EQUAL. OPPORTUNITY
IS MOST CLEARLYSEEN AND READILY TESTED. IT -IS A TEST ALSO
FOR OUR OPPONENTS. 
10
IT IS A TEST THAT MOST OF THEM HAVE FAILED, HOW STRIKING
IT IS, HOW REVEALING, HOW SALUTARY A LESSON FOR THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE, THAT THE TWO AREAS OF GOVERNMENT POLICY MOST
FUNDAMENTAL TO THE PEOPLE'S NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS EDUCATION
AND HEALTH ARE THE VERY AREAS WHERE OUR OPPONENTS HAVE
RESISTED OUR REFORMS WITH THE GREATEST DETERMINATION,
NOTHING REVEALS MORE CLEARLY THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN . US
THE GOVERNMENT'S FORTHRIGHT COMMITMENT TO EQUALITY,
THE OPPOSITION'S REARGUARD DEFENCE OF INEQUALITY AND
PRIVILEGE. I ASK THE HOUSE TO EXAMINE IN DETAIL THE RECORD OF
THE OPPOSITION, HERE AND IN THE SENATE. LET US LOOK AT THE
BILLS TiEY HAVE BLOCKED AND DELAYED AND FRUSTRATED AND
AMENDED. LET US LOOK FOR THE COMMON THEME IN ALL THEIR
OBSTRUCTIVE TACTICS. THE OPPOSITION MAY LACK A COMMON
VOICE, BUT IT IS NOT WITHOUT A COMMON CAUSE. THAT CAUSE
IS THE DEFENCE OF VESTED INTERESTS. / 11 
11
MIND YOU, I CONFESS THAT I SOMETIMES FIND IT
DIFFICULT TO TELL WHICH OF THEIR SPOKESMAN, THEIR LEADERS,
SHOULD BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY. THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
WOULD AGREE THAT THERE ARE MORE BLUE-TAILED FLIES IN THE
SENATE THAN HERE. -ON ONE VERY IMPORTANT MEASURE BEFORE
THIS PARLIAMENT THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE BILL' ' THE COUNTRY
PARTY VOTED AGAINST THE LEGISLATION WHILE THE. LIBERAL. PARTY
SUPPORTED IT. ON THE QUESTION OF GRANTS TO SCHOOLS, THE
LIBERAL PARTY VOTED AGAINST THE MEASURE WHILE THE CbUNTRY
PARTY SUPPORTED IT. VIE WILL BE FORGIVEN FOR FEELING SOME
CONFUSION. IN THE PAST YEAR THE SENATE HAS REJECTED 13 B. ILLS,
DEFERRED ANOTHER 10 OF WHICH SIX REMAIN SHELVED, AND AMENDED
21. I LIST THE 13 BILLS IT HAS REJECTED UP TILL TODAY:
COMMONWEALTH ELECTORAL TWO BILLS; CONCILIATION AND
ARBITRATION:-REPRESENTATION TWO BILLS; SENATE ( REPRESENTATION
OF TERRITORIES) TWO BILLS; LANDS ACQUISITION ( AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY): SEAS AND SULDMERGED LANDS ( ROYALTY ON M1INERALS);
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION ( DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS); CONSTITUTION
ALTERATION ( LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES); HEALTH INSURANCE;
AND HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION. IN DEFENCE OF THEIR
WEALTHY FRIENDS AND VESTED INTERESTS, THEY HAVE REJECTED THE
DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL ELECTORATES; THEY HAVE BLOCKED
ATTEMPTS TO DEMOCRATISE AND MODERNISE THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT:
THEY HAVE DENIED REPRESENTATION IN4 THE SENATE TO THE PEOPLE
OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND THE AUSTRALIAN CAPTIAL TERRITORY; 
1?
THEY HAVE SOUGHT TO DENY TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS
TO NAFIONAL REVENUES AND BORROWINGS; THEY HAVE PRESERVED
FOR FOREIGN MINING INTERESTS THE RIGHT TO EXPLOIT OUR
OFF-SHORE RESOURCES; THEY HAVE PRESERVED THE INEQUITY,
INH~(. IHCYAND INJUSTICE OF AN ANTIQUATED HEALTH SCHEME.
BY SHELVING THE TRADE PFACT~ cEs-BILL THEY HAVE
LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO MONOPOLIES AND BIG CORPORATIONS TO
FIX PRICES, ORGANISE CARTELS AND EXPLOIT THE AUSTRALIAN CONSUJMER,
13Y SHELVING THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELO0PMENT CORPORATION
jtll.. TIHEY HAVE BLOCKED THE MOST EFFECTI\ VE INSTRUMENT FOR
ASTRALIAN CONTROL OF OUIR INDUSTRIES AND DEV'ELOPING
NEW IN! DUSTRIES. THiEY HA\ VE LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO FOREIGN
ThOF'VERS AND FOREIGN EXPLOITATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONomY.
YFT F OR ALL. THE LEGISLATION I HAVL IHiONDTHE GOVERNMEINT
H~ WA CLEAR iAN V) A'i IUfRUll TijE * A'S~ filA LAN PEOPLE.
ISOMEI[ lIES HEAR IT SAID THAT THiL GcOvLRNMENf l's
00 ft! G TOO MUCH, THAT WE OUGHT T0 SLOW DOWN. Tm S I S AN
ARG( JM-EN\ T THAT COMES EAS IL. Y ANDt NATURALLY FROM CONS~ ERVAT IV\ E.
I FJCTIT IPfLJE[ CT IT BFCAUISE THE TASK 13EFORE 115:-tS
f'TIA. L. A GREAT AND FORMIDABLE TAC; K.. BECAUISE MUCH THAIr COULD
HAVE BEEN ACHIEVED THIS YEAR STILL REMAINS TO BE ACHIEVED,
RiCAUS11 A NATION THAT HAS WAITED 23 YEARS TO SEE ES E'O17-1AL
AND VERDUE SOCIAL REFORMS CA\ NNOT BE FXPECTi-D TO WAITr Ain,
L. 0NG E TIHE GOVERNMENT IS PROUD OF ITS RECORDS WE HAVE
A0005I) UNEMPLOYMENT AND RESTORED A HEALTHY RATE OF FC0N. 10HIC
GROWTH. AUSTRALIA HAS A NEW STRENGTH AND CONFIDENCE AT HOME
AND) A NEW RESPFCT ABROAD. 14E ARE NO LONGER A CIPHER OR A
SATrELLI TE IN V! ORLD AFFAIRS. WE ARE NO LONGER STAMPED WITH THE / 13 
13
TAINT OF RACISM. WE ARE NO LONGER A COLONIAL POWER. WE
ARE NO LONGER OUT OF STEP WITH THE WORLD'S PROGRESSIVE
AND ENLIGHTENED MOVEMENTS TOWARDS FREEDOM, DISARMAMENT AND
CO-OPERATION. WE ARE NO LONGER IN THRALL TO BOGIES AND
OBSESSIONS IN OUR RELATIONS WITH CHINA OR THE GREAT POWERS.
WE HAVE STRENGTHENED OLD FRIENDSHIPS AND ESTABLISHED NEW ONES.
IN NO FIELD IN ITS FIRST YEAR OF OFFICE HAS MY
GOVERNMENT SO PROFOUNDLY, SO BENEFICIALLY, AND LET ME
BE QUITE CLEAR SO SUCCESSFULLY ESTABLISHED NEW PERSPECTIVES
AS. IN AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN POLICIES. THAT THIS HAS BEEN SO
WAS FIRST OF ALL THE RESULT OF THE BITTER DISTORTIONS INTO
WHICH OUR PREDECESSORS HAD FORCED AUSTRALIA'S POLICIES, THE
INJUSTICES THEY DID TO THE GREAT MASS OF DECENT AUSTRALIANS
IN A SHORT-SIGHTED PURSUIT OF POLICIES AS UGLY AS THEY WERE
OUTDATED, AS NARROWLY CONCEIVED AS THEY WERE EQUIVOCAL.
IF ANYTHING CAME TO AN END ON DECEMBER 2 THE ANNIVERSARY OF
AUSTERLITZ LAST YEAR IT WAS THE DEMEANING OF AUSTRALIA IN
THE EYES OF THE WORLD AS THE COUNTRY OUR PREDECESSORS HAD
REPRESENTED IT TO BE: INSIGNIFICANT, RACIST, MILITARIST,
SYCOPHANTIC, A TIMID AND UNWORTHY CREATURE OF THE GREAT POWERS
TO WHOM IT HAD SURRENDERED ITS IDENTITY, AUSTRALIA IS NO
LONGER THOUGHT OF IN THOSE WAYS: IF I TAKE PRIDE IN THAT IT
IS BECAUSE I BELIEVE THAT THE UGLY AUSTRALIA OF THE PAST DID
AN UNFORGIVABLE VIOLENCE TO THE WAY IN WHICH ORDINARY
AUSTRALIANS. THOUGHT OF THEMSELVES, AND TO THE WAY THEY HOPED
THEIR GOVERNMENT WOULD ACT IN ITS DEALINGS WITH THE REST OF THE
WORLD. 
THERE HAVE BEEN GREAT CHANGES. HlY GOVERNMENT
IS UNEQUIVOCAL IN ITS BELIEF IN THE EQUALITY OF MEN OF ALL
RACES: WE HAVE PROCLAIMED THAT BELIEF AND HAVE CON'SISTENTLY
ACTED) IN ACCORDANCE WITH IT. My GoVEIRNMENT BELIEVES THE WAR
IN VIETNAM WAS A BITTER DISASTER, THE END RESULT OF THE
SQUANDERING OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR PEACE PRESENTED TWO DECADES
AGO. lI! E SHALL HAVE NO MORE VIETNAMS, AND WE SHALL-DO ALL IN
OUR POWER TO PROMOTE THE FORCES FOR PEACE IN OUR REGION AND
THE WORLD. ABOVE ALL my GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IN THOUE ABIDING
VIRTUES IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY WHICH HAVE GIVEN US A
DISTINCTIVE NATIONHOOD, THE BELIEF IN FRATERNITY AND INDEPENDENCE,
THE INSTINCT FOR FAIR PLAY, JUSTICE AND FREEDOM THAT EUREKA
SIGNIFIES. IT IS THOSE VIRTUES WHICH AUSTRALIA' S FOREIGN
POLICIES HAVE SOUGHT TO EMBODY OVER THE LAST YEAR: IT is
THAT INDEFE: NDENCE WHICH my GOVERNMENT HAS CELEBRATED AND REVIVED.
IN SPITE OF MANY CHANGES CERTAIN THINGS ABIDE:
AIUSTRALIA'S INTERESTS HAVE NOT CHANGED, ONLY THE WAY IN WHICH
MOST AUSTRALIANS PERCEIVE THEM. THE GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS ITS
BASIC RESPONSIBILITY TO CREATE FOR THE PEOPLE OF AuSTRALIA A
SECURE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THEY CAN MAINTAIN AND DEVELOP THEIR
i, ELFARE FREE FROM FEAR, THREATS OR ARTIFICIAL CONSTRAINTS
WHETHER INTERNALLY OR EXTERNALLY INSPIRED OR CONTRIVED. THAT
TASK WILL BE MORE READILY PURSUED, MORE EASILY ATTAINABLE
FROM NOW ON THAN WAS EVER POSSIBLE BEFORE. THE-* GOVERNMENT
RECOGNISES THAT NO SOCIETY CAN PROGRESS IF IT RESTS ONLY ON THE
ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE PAST. IBELIEVE WE HAVE REACHED A MORE
SANE AND EQUITABLE BALANCE WITH THE COUNTRIES OF IMPORTANCE TO
US IN THE WO0k~ i ' iHAN A'l AN'i TIMlE IN THlE PAST, BUT IT IS OF THE
NATURE OF OUR TASK THAT IT CONTINUES WITH ITS IMPORTANCE
UNDIMINISHED. ILI L 
15
I INVITE THE HOUSE AND THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE TO
COMPARE THIS GOVERNMENT WITH ITS PREDECESSOR, TO COMPARE THIS
GOVERNMENT WITH THE TIRED, RESENTFUL, NAGGING AND SQUABBLING
RABBLE WHO OPPOSE US IN THIS PARLIAMENT. WHO CAN-DOUBT THE
IMPORTANCE AND THE URGENCY OF ALL WE SEEK TO'DO, THE IDEALISM
OF OUR MOTIVES, THE RELEVANCE OF OUR RLFORMS TO A BETTER AND MORE
SECURE AND PROSPEROUS LIFE FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS? ' WHO CAN DOUBT
THE TRIVIALITY, THE SELF-SEEKING BITTERNESS, THE PETTY
METHODS OF OBSTRUCTION AND REACTION THAT MOTIVATE OUR OPPONENTS?
WHO CAN DOUBT THAT AUSTRALIA IS NOW MORE RESPECTED AND ADMIRED
IN THE WORLD-BY ITS FRIENDS AN4D NEIGHBOURS? WHO CAN DOUBT
THAT THERE IS A NEW SPIRIT OF ACTIVITY, OF EXCITEMENT, OF
ADVENTURE IN OUR LIVES?
WE DO NOT REGARD THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS COUNTRYAS
OUR OPPONENTS REGARD IT AS A DIVINE RIGHT, A PRIVILEGE
THAT IS OURS TO ENJOY IN PF-Ri-LTUIY. WE REGARD IT AS A TRUST
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. ' VE SEE NO POINT IN ACCEPTING THAT
TRUST IF WE ARE UNABLE TO DISCHARGE IT FULLY AND WHOLEHEARTEDLY,
I GIVE THIS ASSURANCE TO THE I-ARLIAMENT AND THE PEOPLE: WE , IiLL
CARRY ON WITH OUR TASK, WE WILL NOT SHIRK OUR REFPONSIBILITIES.
WE W1JLL CONTIN'UE TO W~ ORK: &amp; OikA" MORE JUJ i AND PROSPERO~ US AND
ENLIGHTENED NATION. IN THIS FIRST YEAR OF THE LABCR GOVERNMENT
WE HAVE MADE GREAT AND LASTING PROGRESS TOWARDS OUR GOALS,
I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT ANY OF THE MAJOR REFORMS'WE HAVE ACHIEVED
WILL EVER BE REVERSED OR ABANDONED. AFTER ALL THE CARPING AND
NIGGLING, BACKING AND FILLING BY THE OPPOSITION, THE CHANGES
WE HAVE MADE WILL REMAIN LIKE ALL GREAT LABOR LEGISLATIONPERMANENT
LANDMARKS IN OUR HISTORY. THE YEAR AHEAD WILL BE / 1 F 
16
ANOTHER YEAR OF PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT. I AM CONFIDElTI
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WHEN NEXT THEY ARE ASKED TO
CHOOSE BETWEEN THE ALTERNATIVES BEFORE THEM WILL ENDORSE
OUR RECORD AND RENEW OUR MANDATE, 



EMBARGO: 10.00 am Friday 14th
December
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 159
14 December 1973
JOINT PRESS STATEMEFNT LlY THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE MINISTER FOR
FRItMARY I14DUSTRY
RURAL POLICY
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, and the Minister for
Primary Industry, Senator K. S. Wriedt, today announced the Australian
Government's decision to hold an inquiry into all aspects of rural
policy in Australia. The inquiry will be conducted by a working
group consisting of:
Sir John Crawford, formerly Secretary of the Department
of Trade and Director of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics;
Dr S. F. Harris, Deputy Secretary, Department of Overseas Trade
and formerly Director of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics;
Prof. F. H. Gruen, Consultant to the Prime Minister's Department
and Professor of Economics at the Australian National University;
Mr N. D. Honan, Director, Bureau of Agricultural Economics.
Dr Harris will be convenor for the group.
Sir John Crawford's membership is on the basis that he will
give what help to the group that his earlier commitments will allow.
His unmatched qualities and background in the field of rural policy
will however be available to the group.
The working group will be able to draw on the resources
-of the Departmtent of Primary Industry, the Bureau of Agricultural
Economics, Department of Overseas Trade, the Bureau of Census and
Statistics and other Government offices during its examination. The
Group will welcome submissions from farm organisations, other interested
bodies and the public. Submissions should be directed through the
Secretary, Department of Primary Industry.
In making the announcement, Senator Wriedt and the Prime
Minister emphasised that the decision to call for an inquiry was
based on two major considerations. First, there was not place in the
economy for a rural policy that was not both equitable for primary 
-2-
producers and economically sound. Second, there has been no
Government sponsored report on overall rural policy since the
publication of " Agricultural Production: Aims and Policies" by the
former Department of Commerce and Agriculture in 1952, over 20 years
ago. The present Government wishes to avoid ad hoc decisions
that might appear to some to be politically attractive at the time,
but which in fact might offer no long term security or real benefits
to the genuine primary producer. The Government needed a basis of
expert advice on which to formulate economically sound and socially
equitable measures that would help the resident farm family.
It also saw a need for a rural policy that recognised
that large and important sections of the rural community are not
themselves engaged in farming although the prosperity of many did
depend on the health of the primary industries.
The working group would draft, for consideration by the
Government, a " Green Paper" on Rural Policy, incorporating aspescts
from present Australian Government policies such as selective
decentralisation, conservation, rural reconstruction and long-term
international commodity agreements. It would also attempt to integrate
these and other factors into a set of principles upon which future
policies could be built.
It is anticipated that the Green Paper will be published
by Government authority but without formal approval. In that form,
it would be debated in Cabinet, in Parliament, and in the community
generally particularly in the rural sector. These debates will
assist the Australian Government to create a more viable rural
sector in the Australian economy.
The Australian Government anticipates receiving the working
group's report by April 1974.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



AUS 1IALIA,,-
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEP1J2NT NO. 162
17 December 1973
NEW DATA SYSTEM
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today the
appointment of a Committee to inquire into the development of
a new integrated statistical information system to operate
among departments concerned with the fields of social, welfare
and economic programs.
The committee will report on the general principles
and administrative arrangements that would be necessary for the
operation of such a system.
It will report by 30 -March next year.
Mr. Whitlam said to implement the Government's program
a greater knowledge of statistics involved in these key areas
was necessary. Greater co-ordination among departments was also
needed. The new more uniform and up-dated system would also
be of great assistance to private business and injustry.
A more efficient and better organised data gathering system
was necessary to achieve these aims. Because the committee
had been asked to advise on the principles and administrative
arrangements of a new system, its members were chosen for
their knowledge of the Government's policies, experience in
public administration and their technical expertise, Mr. Whitlam
said. The members of the committee are:
Professor L. F. Crisp
Chairman
Mr. B. Brogan,
Consultant to the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet
Mr. K. L. Brown,
President of the Printing and Allied Trades Employers
Federation 
-2-
Mr. R. Jolly,
Australian Council of Trade Unions a
Professor C. F. Wallace,
Department of Information Science, Monash University
A summary statement of the general considerations which
have led the Government to review its information needs in related
areas of social and economic policy has been prepared for the
information and guidance of the committee. A copy is attached.
The Prime Minister said that, although it was not intended
that the committee should conduct a public inquiry, it would receive
written submissions until 15 February 1974. The submissions should
be forwarded to the committee's chairman, Professor L. F. Crisp,
through the Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department. Since
the committee's report will be concerned with the general principles
and administrative arLangements that would enable close integration
of the Government's data systems, submissions ' hould be limited to
these matters, Mr. Whitlam said.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEM. ENT NO. 165
19 December 1973
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
that all reports of the new Industries Assistance Commission
which would not cause damaging speculation would be made public
as soon as they were printed. The new Industries Assistance
Commission will come into operation on 1 January. The Prime
' l1inister also said that he would honour his promise that the
Government should deal with reports from the Commission within
3 months of the Government receiving the reports. This would
eliminate the excessive delays which industries suffered under
the previous Government when in some cases Tariff Board reports
were not dealt w. 4th for periods greater than a year. l. n
undertaking to make public as many reports as possible, as
soon as possible, Mr. Whitlam said the Government had decided
to ask the Commission to indicate in each report whether its
release would be likely to cause speculation. Only in special
cases such as those involving negotiations with State
Governments. would action by the Australian Government in.
dealing with reports from the Commission be delayed, M4r. Whitlam
said. Mr. WAhitlam. announced the names of the seven
Commissioners appointed to the Industries Assistance Commission.
The Chairman will be Mr. G. A. Rattigan, Chairman of the Tariff
Board. The other Commissioners will be Messrs. D. J. Pekin,
N. y. Watson, R. Boyer, G. Johnson, C. Conron and D. McBride.
Mr. Watson's appointment extends to June 1974.
He will be appointed to the temporary Advisory Authority from
1 January and will remain with the Industries Assistance
Commission only until inquiries commenced by the division
of the Tariff Board of wh:; ch he is the presiding member are
completed. 
-2-
Mr. Whitlam said the Industries Assistance
Commission Act provided for the appointment of associate
Commissioners to help with Commission inquiries. Appointments
of associate Commissioners would be made as future needs arose.
Members of the Tariff Board who are not being appointed as
members of the Commission, have been offered appointment
as associate Commissioners for the remaining period of their
terms as members of the Board.
Mr. Whitlam said that the new Industries
Assistance Commission would cover not only manufacturing
industry as the Tariff Board did, but would advise this and
future Governments on assistance for industries in all sectors
of the economy. He believed that as far: as possible, the
processes whereby public policies were determined should be
open to public scrutiny. In the interests of open government, Mr.
Whitlam stressed there should be the widest participation
in the public inquiries conducted by the Commission.
There should also, when possible, be full and informed public
discussion of the Commission's report D the Government. 



EMBARGO: 7.30 20 DECEMBER 1973
NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER
DECEMBER, 1973
Good Evening. The other day I spoke in the national Parliament about
the results and achievements of the Government which you, the
Australian people, elected to office just over A ye'ar ago.:
Tonight I want to report to you briefly on some of the things we
have done, some of the things we have attempted to do, and some
of the things we want to achieve in the year ahead.
It has been a year of great and growing prosperity for
Australia. You will remember that 1972, the year before Labor
came to power, was a year of unemployment, under-use of capacity and
poor economic growth. In 12 months we have restored full employment
and boosted our growth rate from 2 per cent to 6 per cent.
Our overseas reserves are strong. Gross domestic product, consumer
spending, retail sales and capital expenditure hay e all moved ahead.
There has never been a time when prospects for our rural industries
were as bright as they are now.
I don't want you to think for a minute that we are
indifferent to the inflationary pressures on the economy some
of these we inherited, some are imported from-other countries
suffering from this worldwide inflationary problem. We have taken
a whole series of bold and overdue measures against inflation,
including two revaluations and a big cut in tariffs. If we had left
things the way they were, inflation would be much higher than it
is now. Our Prices Justification Tribunal is working and working
well. I think you will be encouraged, as I was, by the evidence of
the latest consumer price index, which shows that the increases in
food prices in the past two months have been the lowest of the year.
The fight against inflation will go on. I simply ask you to remember
that inflation is partly the result of a booming economy an
economy that in many ways is the envy of the world.
Let me mention some of the achievements of the past year
in which my colleagues and I take immense pride. One of them is
education. I think we can claim to have given a new deal to the'
children of Australia. We have nearly doubled the funds for
education. We have appointed an independent and expnrt Schools
Commission to ensure that those funds are spent where they are
most needed. Our opponents well, some of our opponents
recognised the great importance of our proposals, and our
legislation was passed as Parliament was about to rise. I am glad
to say that government and non-government schools alike can now
plan confidently ahead on the basis of the greatly increased funds
authorised by the Parliament. 
-2-
We have taken action in other fields of education as
well. From tne beginning of next year all fees at universities
will be abolished. One of our targets in the year ahead will be
to set in train for pre-school edacation what we have already don;
for primary, secondary and tertiary education. we want a pre-school
education for every Australian child.
You will see that the great theme common to all our reforms
as it is in education is the promotion of equal opportunity.
That has been Che theme behind the enormous strides we have made
in social security, in our support for equal pay, in all we have
done for the Aboriginal people, for migrants, and in our plans for
a national superannuation scheme fur ail Australians. This year
we took the first big step in abolishing the means test. We lifted
pensions and introduced new benefits for greait numbers of people
in need. We have tried, as best we can, to pass our legislation
for a health insurance scheme that will cover everyone in the
community. Remember, there are something like one million
Australians who are not protected by the present scheme, for whom
illness is a real and ever-present threat. I believea nation
as rich as ours, a people as fair-minded as ours, can afford to
correct this injustice.
Next year we shall be pressing ahead with our plan to
establish efficient community health centres thrcughout Australia,
and set up a schemei~ to provide compensation and rehabilitation for
those who are sick or injured. We shall continue our efforts,
already Wvell advanced, to improve our cities and upgrade the
standards of urban transport. We shall embark on our plan for
up-to-date child-care centres for every mother who needs them,
or wants them. We shall make sure that building societies, hire
purchase companie3 and other financial institutions not just banksof
fer fair and reasonable interest rates to home buyers and
consumers. Much of the machinery for these reforms the expert
inquiries, the statutory commissions have been established.
Soon, I believe, every Australian will begin to feel the lasting
benefit of what we have done this year.
I am proud of a Government that in the space of a year
has abolished conscription, done away with the death penalty in the
territories and the services, revitalised Government support for the
arts, given votes to 18-year old citizens and moved vigorously t~ o
protect the environment. We have ended oar tragic involvement
in Vietnam. We have remove~ d the hateful stamip of acism from
Australia's reputation abroad. We have established a more mature
and independent relati~ onship with our friends in Britain and the
United States. We have formed a new aind fruitful understanding
with China instead oZ pretending that China does not exist.
We are about to negotiate a firm and lasting treaty of friendship
with Japan. 
There is one other great theme in all we have done.
That is: to preserve Australian ownership of our important
industries, to safeguard Australian control of our precious
resources. All of us have seen or read of the consequences,
in other western countries, of the current energy shortage.
All of us know of the great economic uncertainties facing many
developed nations throughout the world. In this climate of
uncertainty Australia has much to be thankful for. My Government
in its plans for the Australian Industry Development Corporation,
for the Petroleum and Minerals Authority which we aim to establish
next year has moved swiftly to safeguard our known resources
and to search for new resources which will remain under Australian
control. This is the Government's great task for the years ahead.
It is a task to which our whole philosophy is directed and attuned.
In the development of our country, in the preservation of its great
and increasing prosperity, we shall place the interests of
Australia and Australians above all else. We believe Australians
should own our country's resources.
The past year has been a busy year, a hectic. year. We
have done much, because there was much that we had to do. We have
had our successes, our setbacks, our difficulties, and naturally
enough our mistakes. But there can be no doubt about the great
scope of our achievement or the importance of our plans for a
greater Australia. It is in that spirit of confidence that I wish
you all a happy Christmas, and trust that 1974 will bring peace and
growing good fortune to all of us, and to all our families. 



E6MB. AOGOO: P M FRIDAY 21 DECEMBErR 1973 Press Statement No. 166
21 December 1973
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTSGRANTS
FOR CRAFTSMEN
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, has approved grants
totalling $ 199,481 for the crafts.
The grants, which cover all States, were recommended
by the Crafts Board of the Australian Council for the Arts.
The Chairman of the Crafts Board, Mrs. Marea Gazzard,
said that the grants were an expression of the Government's
interest in the crafts as a means of enriching the quality
of life for a broad range of people.
Mrs. Gazzard said that the growth of the crafts in
recent years has been remarkable, especially in the involvement
of young people, who found satisfaction in the use of traditional
skills as an alternative to a mechanized way of life.
On the other hand, good craftsmanship was the basis of
good industrial design, which was vital to Australia's
export industry. other countries had invested heavily in
building design skills, and Australia was just beginning to
realise their potential.
Among the grants is one of $ 6,000 to Greg Smallman of
Newcastle, a classical guitar maker. Formerly a motor
mechanic, his concert guitars have been described by leading
musical authorities as " equal to the best in the world".
Working under difficulties including a lack of air-conditioning
for his small workshop, he has nevertheless produced instruments
eagerly sought by leading players. one of his guitars will be
presented to Alirio Diaz, the celebrated concert guitarist, when
he tours Australia in February.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
EMBARGO: 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 167
31 December 1973
NEW YEAR MESSAGE
I wish all Australians a happy and prosperous year
in 1974. The year just ending began o-n a note of great hope for
Australia and her region with the signing of a ceasef ire in
Vietnam and a withdrawal of Australian and American forces from
Indo-China. Relations between the major powers have continued
to improve, despite some outbreaks which were temporarily beyond
their control. The New Year, however, brings with it risks and
challenges of a different kind and on a different scale. The
industrial nations of the West our friends in the United States,
Europe, Britain and Japan face an energy crisis that has already
significantly affected their economic prospects and traditional
standards and habits of living. The energy shortage will be the
paramount concern, the over-riding reality, for the world's
statesmen in the year ahead.
Australia is immensely fortunate that she has been able
to-avoid internally at least the worst effects of the energy
shortage. It would be foolish to pretend however that we can isolate
ourselve ' s completely or indefinately from its effects. There are
bound to be problems of readjustment for us.
The Australian people now have a Government committed
firmly to maximum Australian ownership and control of olir preuious
resources of minerals and energy. We will never allow these
resources to pass further into overseas hands. We are committed,
through our plans for a Petroleum and Minerals Authority, to
undertake a massive search for new resources which the Australian
people will control. Once we are assured of our own energy
req-airements we will be a generous and dependable supplier to our
customers overseas. I am confident that 1974 will bring even greater progress
and prosperity to Australians.
Our important plans for education, health and the cities
will go forward. We will give special priority to tie care of the
very young and the old those who have not yet entered school and
those who have ceased to work. 
-2-
Our efforts for a more just society at home, for
greater equality of opportunity for all Australians, will
equip us better for the task of working to redress the massive
inequalities and injustices in the world at large not least
in our own region.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT
PRICE INCREASES BY
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN'S PTY. LIMITED
AND
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN'S SALES PTY. LIMITED
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HONOURABLE E. G. WI{ ITLki, M. P.
In accordance with the Prices Justification
Act 1973 1 have today been notified by General
Motors-Holden's Pty. Limited and G * eneral Notors-iolde.'.
Sales Pty. Limited that they propose to increase the
prices of H-olden, Statesman and Torana motor vehicles
and their optional equipment by an overall weighted
average of 4.6 per cent as from 16 January 1974.-
The. companies have provided a tabulation of
the recommended retail prices for these products,
which is attached to this statement and may be
inspected at the offices of the Prices Justification
Tribunal, 10 Queens Road, South Melbourne or
Westfield Towers, 100 William Street, Sydney.
The proposed average increase corresponds
to the increase that the Prices Justification Tribunal
considered would be justified as from 7 January 1974
in its report dated 21 December 1973.
4 January 1974 
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN'S PTY. LIMITED
AND
GENERAL iMOTORS-IHOLDEN'S SALES PTY. LIMITED
RECOMMENDED RETAIL PRICES ( INCLUDING SALES TAX)
EFFECTIVE 16TH JANUARY. 1974
HOLDEN PASSENGER L
6 CYLINDER
SEDANS 80169 Belmon
80369 81169 RECOMMENDED RETAIL PRICE
3150 3261 3796
t
Kingswood Premier
STATION SEDANS
80135 Belmont
80335 Kingswood
81135 Premier
COUPES 80337 81137 3380 3491 4066
Monaro Monaro LS 3481 3986
8 CILINDER
SEDANS 80269 Lelmont
80469 Kingswood
81269 Premier
STATION SEDANS
80235 Belmont
80435 Kingswood
81235 Prcnier * 1 V
3390 3506
3896 3620 3746 4176
I 
HOLDEN PASSENGER RECOMMENDED rZTAIL PRICE
8 CYLINDER
COUPES 80437 81237 80837 81837 80469 XV4
80469 XW8 Monaro Monaro Monaro Monaro Monaro Monaro LS GT3 GTS 350
CTS 4-Door
GTS 350 4-Door
STATESMAN PASSENGER
6 CYLINDER
SEDANS. 81569 8 CYLINDER
SEDANS 81669 81469 Statesman Custom
Statesman Custom
Statesman De Ville
TORANA SERIES
4 CYLINDFR
SEDANS 82211 82411 82469 1300 1300 1300 Standard 2-Door
DeLuxe L-Door
DeLuxe 4-Door
6 CYLINDER
SEDANS 82311 82369 82569 82911 2850 2850 2850 3300 ' S'
' S'
tSL' ' GTR' 2-Door
4-Door
4-Door
2-Door 3726 4106 4196 5226 4106 5136 4256 4406 5456 2340 2630 2760 2960 3130 3290 3? 20 
RECOMMENDED RETAIL PRICE
HOLDEN LIGHT CONERCIAL
-6 CYLINDER Chassis and Cab
Belmont Panel Van
Belmont Utility
Kingswood Utility 2750 2900 2850 2970
8 CYLINDER Chassis and Cab
Belmont Panel Van
Belmont Utility
Kingswood Utility 2970
3130 3080 3200
80160 80170
" 80.80
80380 F
I It A
80260 80270 80280 80480 



0 I PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 170
11 January 1974
AUSTRALIAN GOVERINMENT OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE IN
N. S. W. AND QUEENSLAND FLOODS
The Prime Minister today expressed the Australian Government's
concern about the damage and the personal distress being suffered by
people in Iew South Wales and Queensland as a result of the floods in
these States. The Prime Minister said that the defence services are
co-operating with the State Civil Defence and emergency services in
providing assistance and that any requests for assistance submitted
by the Premiers of New South Wales and Queensland will be most
sympathetically and promptly considered.
The Prime Minister has informed the Premiers that the
Australian Government is prepared to join with the State Governments
of New South W~ ales and Queensland in providing financial assistance
on a dollar for dollar basis in the normal way for financing schemes
for the relief of personal hardship and distress-in the affected areas.
Expenditure covered by the Australian Government's offer could
include the provision of emergency food, clothing and accommodation,
essential repairs to houses and the repair and replacement of essential
items of furniture and personal effects of those in needy circumstances
as a result of the floods.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
11 January 1974 



NOTES FOR A SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT A D
CIVIC LUNCH CASINO-MONDAY 14 JANUARY 1974
I WOULD LIKE TO THANK MR. ANTHONY FOR'INTRODUCING
ME. I HAVE OBSERVED WITH INTEREST IN THE LAST WEERKTHE MOVES
FOR HIS PARTY TO MERGE WITH ANOTHER SMALLER GROUP INTO WHAT
IS BEING TERMED THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE. THESE MOVES HAVE THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF SEEING THE SECOND NATIONAL ALLIANCE . TO COME
ON TO THE POLITICAL SCENE IN AUSTRALIA. ' THOSE TWO WORDS COULD
EASILY HAVE BEEN USED TO DESCRIBE THE LABOR PARTY FOR MANY
YEARS, FOR THE LABOR PARTY HAS BEEN THE ONLY POLITICAL
ORGANISATION IN AUSTRALIA WHICH CAN TRULY CLAIM TO REPRESENT
AN ALLIANCE OF ALL OUR NATIONAL INTERESTS. iR
IT IS NOT A SECTION!_-PARTY. IT HAS ALWAYS
" PRESEiTED PEOPLE THROUG'Ij. V OUR NATION AND NOT JUST THOSE
' HO LIVE IN PART OF If. IT IS NEITHER A CITY PARTY ALONE NOR
' IRRAL PARTY ALONE, IT . EPF.: CLNTS BOTH SECTIONS OF OUR
0 COUNTRY, NOR IS IT SIMPLY A WORKING-CLASS PARTY, TO BE SURE
' TS FOUNDATIONS LIE IN THE NEEDS OF WORKING MEN AND WE WILL
S ALWAYS BE DEDICATED TO PRESERVING THEIR INTERESTS, BUT IT iS
.' IJST AS MUCH CONCERNED WITH THE NEEDS OF OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
CO23IMUNITY, . I MAKE THIS POINT BECAUSE I FEEL THERE HAS BEEN SOME
-! DENCY, INEVITABLY PROMOTED BY OUR OPPONENTS, TO BRAND THE
) R PARTY AS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY,. THE TRUTH IS WE ARE
"' Di \ TED TO THE CREATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SELF-SUFFICIENT,
: OS'pROUS AND FFcir; ' ST iNiiDS ' RIES
4' ' l l 
I S. 0' A
TO ACHIEVE. THIS AIM WE ARE STRIVING TO IMPROVE THE DOMESTIC
MARKET FOR. PRIMARY PRODUCE, TO CONSOLIDATE EXISTING EXPORT
S MARKETS AND TO CREATE NEW MARKETS. ' I BELIEVE THAT THE LAST
. YEAR HAS. UNDOUBTEDLY BEEN A SUCCESSFUL ONE IN THOSE TERMS.
. CONTRARY-TO WHAT THE PREACHERS OFTHE RURAL-DOOMSDAY MIGHT.
S SAY, PRIMARY INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA GENERALLY IS EXTREMELY
BUOYANT. AT PRESENT. LET US LOOK FOR EVIDENCE OF THIS.. ASSERTION
THE. FIGURES FOR FARM INCOME IN AUSTRALIA. IN THE THREE
YEARS ENDED 1969/ 70 . FARM INCOME AVERAGED ABOUT $ 1,050 M,
" A YEAR. . THE ONSET OF DROUGHT AND DECLINING PRICES CAUSED
FARM INCOME TO DROP TO $ 885 M. IN 1970/ 71 AND MANY PRODUCERS
FACED SERIOUS FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES. THOSE PROBLEMS HAVE
BY AND LARGE BEEN COMPLETELY REVERSED AND THE CURRENT ESTIMATE
i! FARM INCOME FOR 1973/ 74 IS $ 2,885 M. MORE THAN THREE TIMES
AS GREPT AS IN 1970/ 71 AND WELL OVER DOUBLE THE AVERAGE INCOME
FOR THE THREE YEARS BEFORE THEN.
A SIMILAR PATTERN OF IMPROVEMENT CAN BE SEEN BY
EXAMINING THE'FIGURES FOR EXPORTS OF RURAL ORIGIN, IN 1971/ 72
AUSTRALIA EARNED $ 2,419.3 M. FROM THESE EXPORTS. IT IS
ESTIMATED THAT IN 1973/ 74 THEY WILL BE WORTH .$ 3874.4 M.
A VERY HEALTHY IMPROVEMENT. INDEED.
ONE OF THE INDUSTRIES WHICH HAS BENEFITED PARTICULARLY
' OM THE RESURGENCE OF OUR RURAL AREAS IS THE MEAT INDUSTRY, WHICH
SATTRACTING INCREASING SUPPORT IN THIS, AREA. PRODUCTION OF
BEEF AND VEAL HAS GROWN AND EXPORTS HAVE ALSO INCREASED QUITE
,; 1AMitTICALLY. AUSTRALIA EXPORTED 339,000 TONNES OF BEEF AND
VEAL IN 1970/ 71'. THIS GREW TO 585,000 TONNES IN 1972/ 73 AND
CURRENT ESTIMATES ARE THAT WE WILL EXPORT 658,000 TONNES IN 
-3-
1973/ 74 ALMOST A DOUBLING OF OUR EXPORT MARKET-IN THREE
YEARS. ONE-INDUSTRY OF, CONCERN TO THE PEOPLE OF THIS
AREA THE DAIRY INDUSTRY-HAS FACED CONTINUING PROBLEMS$
I AM AWARE* THAT. OUR DECISION TO PHASE OUT THE DAIRY BOUNTY
HAS AROUSED CRITICISM AMONG DAIRYING INTERESTS. HOWEVER,
I WOULD EMPHASISE THAT THIS DECISION IS IN-LINE WITH THE
GOVERNMENT'S CONVICTION THAT THE EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC
FUNDS SHOULD BE PURPOSEFUL. IN OUR VIEW THE DAIRY BOUNTY
HAD CEASED TO BE PURPOSEFUL. DESPITE THE OUTLAY OF $ 770 M.
OVER THE YEARS THE BOUNTY HAD NOT CONTRIBUTED TO SOLVING
THE INDUSTRY'S MAJOR PROBLEM THAT OF ADJUSTING FARM
PRODUCTION TO REALISTIC LOCAL. AND OVERSEAS MARKET DEMAND.
AS A WT.'! RE MEASURE THE BOUNTY PROVED INEFFECTIVE BECAUSE
IE BULI CF -I , ENT TO THE LARGER AND WEALTHIER PRODUCERS
WHO NEEDED IT LEAST, IT HAD ALSO BECOME BUILT INTO THE
PRICE OF LAND AND OTHER DA! RY INPUTS AND-ADDED TO PRODUCTION
COSTS. EVEN BEFORE THE BUDGET, THE DEPUTY CHIEF OF THE
DAIRYING DIVISION OF THE VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
HAD ARGUED THAT ANY BENEFITS FARMERS HAD RECEIVED FROM THE
D ONTY HAD LONG BEEN CANCELLED OUT BY UNREALISTIC LAND
PRICES AND OTHER CAPITAL GAINS. 4/
a 
WE HAVE DECIDED TO GET AWAY FROM AN OPEN-ENDED
COMMITMENT. TO THE BOUNTY, WHICH IS LEAVING THE FUNDAMENTAL
PROBLEMS OF THE INDUSTRY UNSOLVED4 AND TO PROVIDE MONEY TO
STABILISE THE INDUSTRY SO THAT IT CAN STAND ON ITS OWN
FEET. WE WILL DO THIS BY INDUSTRY ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE
AND WE HAVE UNDERTAKEN TO DEVELOP, ADJUSTMENT. PROPOSALS IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE INDUSTRY. EXTENSIVE CONSULTATION
HAS GONE ON ALMOST CONTINUOUSLY SINCE AUGUST AND OFFICERS
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY HAVE VISITED'ABOUT
FORTY GROUPS IN ALL STATES INCLUDING THE NORTH COAST REGION.
THEY HAVE CONSULTED, AMONG OTHERS, THE CASINO CO-OPERATIVE
DAIRY SOCIETY LIMITED, NORCO CO-OPERATIVE LIMITED, THE
KYOGLE RURAL RE-CONSTRUCTION COMMITTEE, . THE NEW SOUTH WALES.
) AIRY FARMERS ASSOCIATION AND THE NEW SOUTH WALES DAIRY
, io; J ;:--iOlTY. SIMULTi,; LEOUSLY MANY WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
h; AVE BEEi ' rlADE AND THE 0', O:: OMf OF ALL OF THIS IS THAT NEARLY
.100 SEPARATE , SUGGES: IOiS HAVE COME FROM'INDUSTRY SOURCES ANi;
STATE AIITHORITIES. ' TEY COVER THE POSSIBLE BROADENIiG OF
THE EXISTING-MARGiNAL DAIRY FARM RE-CONSTRUCTION SCHEME AND
A HUiMBER OF PROPOSALS FOR ACTION AT BOTH FARM AND FACTORY
LEVEL. THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS NOW GIVING TOP
" RTORITY TO ANALYSING AND ASSESSING THE'MERITS OF THESE
PROPOSALS AND THE POSSIBLE COSTS: IT iS DOING THIS IN THE
. GHT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S WISH THAT ADJUSTMENT EXPENDITURE
IVE A POSITIVE RESULT IN THE INTERESTS OF THE : INDUSThRY 
'-I-Tg1irtEa rn-A n. r N 7PT FO
OF THE DAIRY INDUSTRY, rO3R 2-XAMkuL,, W F
~%~ OTONNES FOR 19y/ 3// 4.* J OULD ADD THA1T
* WAS MADE BEFORF TIM C'f
OF CHEDDAR CHEESE FROMt AUSTRALIA IN THE FIRST TI1RFr
I.-. P
i I N% GIR EfY ) I E* 1Nw. MAY . r 0
* BuslNV.---SmAN -IN NOVEMBER: T-t, Fn! 2. Fij.
Ml. KEP LiNDEE'.; Vl 311
N l Al. A N 1 PROMOTE'PROPOSALS FOR T-HE GUIDANCE AND" ASSISTMJCF
OF SMALL BUSINESS. Ai-ANOTHER LEVEL THEL PRsE ~ OEN~. I
* IRST 1To TAkE. POSI TIVE AND DECISIVE., ACT. ION -TO PROMOTE
DECENTRAL I-SAT ION IN AUSTRALIA. PLAN'MI Ni FOR THE CriA. 6
OF A NEW GROWTH CENTRE AT ALBURY-WODONGI I S W'DY
ADVANCED, AND WE AIMTO MAKEJ~ HIS THE PROTOTYPE FOR OTHER
GROWH CNTRs. * DECENTRALISATIO N HAS LONG -TREU E AOt
X N THIS COUNTRY4 1973 SAtl 14. GINNIIG OF TPE 7-1RST
REALLY CONCRETE PROPOSALS TO D-SUVILIhING ABOUT IT. 116/ 
-6-
THE POINT I HAVE TRIED TO STRESS IN MY REMARKS
SO FAR IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, AS ANY GOVERNMENT
MUST, RECOGNISES THE VITAL IMPORYANCE OF OUR RURAL AREAS
FOR THE WHOLE NATION. IN KEEPING WITH THIS RECOGNITION,
THE GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED IN DECEMBER THAT IT WOULD HOLD AN
INQUIRY INTO ALL ASPECTS OF RURAL POLICY IN AUSTRALIA, THE
INOIJIRY, TO BE CONDUCTED BY A WORKING GROUP, WILL RESULT IN
THE FIRST GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED REPORT ON OVERALL RURAL
POLICYISINCE THE PUBLICATION OF " AGRICUILTURAL PRODUCTION:
AIMS AND POLICIES" BYTHE FORMER DEPARTMENT'OF COMMERCE AND
AGRICULTURE IN 1952,0 OVER 20 YEARS AGO. A MAJOR BASIS FOR
THE INQUIRY IS THE GOVERNMENT'S VIEW THAT TH'ERE IS NO PLACE
IN THE ECONOMY FOR A RURAL POLICY THAT IS NOT,-BOTH EQLJITAI3LE,
FOR PRIMARY PRODUCERS AND ECONOMICALLY' SOHIIND
IN ANNOUNCING THE INQUIRY, THE MINISTER FOR
PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR 107! ' QIFflT, ANV; V\ X THF
GOVERNMENT WISHES TO AVOID AD HOC DECIINS THAT MIGHT
APPEAR TO SOME TO BE POL41TICALLY ATTRCTIV.. AT THE TIME,.
BUT WHICH IN FACT MIGHT OFF7 NO L. ONG WmR Sr-CUtRXT\' OR
REAL BENEFITS TO -THE GENIJINE *. PR. I. MARY. PRODUCER.. THE
GO~ li. NI FEflriD A BASIS mTPRY ON 1V ! C1 TO
rOFMULAYF Fcop. jyc'iCAlA' soig.!) Ndl A. ovv OIUTAi_
AlSO S! WI A NFF-D Flflr A PITPAI, fl', 7L'\ 7 P7nO I : T THAT
ANT) I f, 1, f jCfT ' i 7 7YA1NT'. CO% UN I YY ARE
OF MANY' DID 1PEPNfl( i1?: O ' I Ti! PfIMA'Y 1" DUSTRIES, ., 71 
* THE WORKE'" G GRO;' P VILL DRiu r, ' FOR CONS! flERATIO 1^ V TL: E
CG* O " E~ iqMFN!, A " CRE Oiv, iIP OL 1CY, IN.*: ORPORAJINU
ASPECTS FRO . M PRE-NT AuSTRALJAIJ GO % fRNMET. P% LI CIES SUCH
AA~ 3 SKLECTIVF ) PEC -' TRAi. IS -TTh) N. ( hSRY O RURAL
RECO14STRUCTION AND LONG-' TERM INTe~ illTIONAL COiWM( DITY
AGR--t-MENTS,-WWI A? SO~ ATTE1FT ' 1' 0 IN-ERi' THESE A 4D
OTH -R fJkCTORS INTO A SF-f OF PRiINCIPL5 -jPON WHIC~ l FUTUr
v,' ROLICiE-q., C0ULD BE BUILT. EEXPECT TO PUBLISH THE
R A P E R BY GOVERNM-FT, AUTt-QRIT V BtLI9 liTHLUT FORlAl-
V APP16' IN THAT FORMJ IT WOULD B; DEBATE, IN' CABINET,
I m~. LAMY ANI) IN THE COM1L'IRT" V CE4AI
wM/ VTICtPiARLY V-1 TiE PURAL SECTOR, IHLSE .1DEBATES WILL
GOVERNMENrT* o CREATE A MORE VIABLE RURAL
' LC7' OR " IN THE AUSTRALAN .' 1CONONY, WE HJPE TO R~ ECEIVETHE
W'UTK1NG GRCUP S REPO'? 1 L. Y
34 I
3.3 ATHE OTHER~ SUBJIECr h HL I WIULL ! LIKL 70 TALK
A 0U 1 TO DA Y 13" FS'. ECALLV A PRuK: IATE FCR A LUN tGIVEN
BY APJUOICIPAL COUNCIL -THAT ISo IE ' oOVLRNMENT S PLANS
FOR JNjEC'TYNG NEW LIFE INTO, AND CREATING NE4~ POSSIBILITIES
FOftLdtAL GOV NMEA'T IN AUSTRALIA, I HAVE TALKED FOR
SOME. YEARS ABOUT THE NEED FOR PROPER RECOGNITION TO BE
GL. YdJTO, THE ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. IT IS THE ARM
OF GOYCRNMENT. WHICH IS CLOSEST TO PEOPLE AND WHICH AFFECTS
SQMANY ASPECTS OF THEIR DAILY LIVES, 9 8 
i GAVE il SPECH ENTXTLED " IHE FmU: eR
AlUSTRALIAN-FEDERALISM" IN NOVEMAER .1. AND-I t! i.;
HAI I S'JTO SAY:
1ie Fil'TURE oF. AUSTRALIANJIEDERALISM
DEPENDSFA MORE UPON MURCtA~ 1S~~
. UPON, THE COMMONWEALTH-wR. 1H~ S'TATES.
~ FEDERALISM -ISTHREATENED-NOT', Y THE.
DRIFTlOF . POW'E FROM STATE CAPITALS TO
CANBERRA BUT BY THE' STATES IMPOSING-UPON.
MUNICIPALITIES FUNCTIONS WHICH.' ARE BPYOND.
THEIR MEAS. IT iS'NOT THE -C6MOWELH.
BUT THE S) TATES WHICH MUST RESIST OR FEAR'
. A REASSESSMENT OF FUNCTIONS -IN OUR.
FEDEPR kT~* No FOR THE STATES TREAT
lJN CI PA,. I T IES E VFc MOPE FRUSALLY THAN
K O.-I LOi E . BL K~ 1" -0
. N\ PIrJT&gt; YNTO A. PPL. ICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE BY RE61 ONAL.
' C A KFN Eb LAl fA.( l
I L b U ) iATL 3 UNiDE SEC
0o . 1' T-T lJD THE
LOCA GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS CONCERN't'iD. 
-9-
IT IS HOPED THAT AmPLICATIINS BY REGIONAL ORGA~ i'qSA* TIChs
WILL BEGIN 10 BE RECE! VED AND CONSIDERED EARLY THIS YEAR.
ADDITIONALLY, UmWE A THE, AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN,
THr-RE W. dLL BE AVAIABLE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUvHORITIES
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO ENABLE THEM MORE EFFECTIVELY TO
PROVIDE WELFARE AND HEALTH SERVICES TO THEIR COMMUNITIESS
THESE ACTIOJS DIRECTED TO BENEFIT LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE
BEEN TAKEN ALONGSIDE A RANGE OF OTHER MEASURES DESIGNED
TG " EMEDY) IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES AND THEIR
AUTHORITIESj SERIOUS DEFICIENCIES WHICH HAVE EXISTED IN
PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES. NEW OR ENLARGED
5 OUI P BUDGET FCR 1973/ 714, FOR EDUCATION.
C K2; N? SEWERAGE SERVTCES
.' NT . A* ENMt ' EME NT , ' PPA ' ROTN IT CENP. FES ARE
L. I&gt; j~ C CF OCP'-3V: N
o*! N FLUNC-T16.4S I HA tIC'f
r&gt; fi~ i... E c ~ 0T7. 0 W 2 ARE P~) C
-H I S YEAR, TO EMPUVER ' HE IUJSTRALIAN GOVERIm rcr LC'
f' 3NL: I L AND AT SAME TICI~
LnAiE ilTT ;' ro; I 2 TA C JNAW ASSISTANCE DIRECT ' a'X'
LOCAL q-0 
AT PRESENT, THE LOCAL. GOVERNMENT'AUTHORITIES RAISE
LOAN FUNDS '~ iTHEMSELVES -SUBJECT TO A'." GENTLEMEN's AGREEMENT
R~ EACHED BETWEEN.' THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE STATES IN 1936-or
. THEY . OBTAIN LOAN FUNDS FROM"' THE STATES.-UNDER THIS SYSTEM,
THEIR INDEBTEDNES. S HAS WORSENED DRAMATICALLY OVER THE YFAIR%
IN! JUNE 1947, THE TOTAL OUTSTANDING DEBT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES WAS ABOUT 140 MILLION DOLLARS. By JUNE 1971, THE
PEBT HAD RISEN TO 3730 MILLION DOLLARS MORE THAN 129 TIM1Fz-
AS GR2%-ATil AS THE DEBTB 24 YEARS EARLIER, THE RATE OF ! NICREASl-
OF THE TOTAL OUTSTANDING DEBT OF STATE GOV/ ERNMENTS IN THE SAME
PERIOD WAS ONLY HALF AS GREAT.
THE COST OF SERVICING THEIR BorROWE73 ALSO D~
HEAVIL. Y OKI THE BUDGETS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHOTWi-S.-o'V . l
I F -L-' P77 P. A\ MENT. S DY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHlOR! TIE-V! ILL Not. BE
' VLN TO ABOUT .12 PER CENT OF THEIR REVENUESLL N 1-L:) E S T
rAVNTSPLUS CAPITAL REPAYMEN~ TS AMOUNTED TO OU 1
ii2LARS IN 1970/ 71 AND WERE EOUJX\ AI. 7-. T TO 00,1W7 Y LLLJ
OF REVENUES. THIS SITUATION COMES ABOUT IlM ASE OF A Fi\' NAI
AGREEMENT REACHED BETWEEN THE COMMvONWELTwH AND THE STATES IN
1927 AND DEVELOPED BY THE " GENTLEMEN'S AGREEMENT" NINE YEARS
LATER. TH EP E IS NO QIJ) E STiO 0T [ Tl7 ? 7 : 1 7
WERE BEING DECIDED UPON NOW THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAV'E
BEEN TREATED DIFFERENTLY. IT WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN IGNORED
AS 1T WA õ THEMI AND IT VIOULD CERTAINLY 11AVE BEEN GIVEN A PLACE
ON THE LOAN COUNCIl. WHICH LAtRGELY IDE-TERM* IES LOCAL GO\' ERM[ NT' s
LOAN--RA7S1116 ABILITY. .11/ 
If IS ABSURD THAT, WHILE ARfRANGEM, T-'. i[ r
LS1bLI. jjijFOR BORROWINGS BY STATE ( W0VERINMENTS fO BE UNEI) A~ r; I
i iERif 1EHAll-f 1CAL GOVE: RNMENT AUTHORITIES ARE LAkGELY -rV
l0 fEfND FOR THEMSELVES IN THE CAPITAL MARKETS. WITH THF
*' ILLTYAND SOPHISi ICATION OF-THFSE (. 1, ARKEIS,, THEY
ARE fiANDICAtPf'Eii AS BORROWERS. ITIS ONL-Y COMMONSENSE THAT
P JSTRALIAN GJOVERNMENIf WITH [ rs SUPERIOR CAPixCITY A
BORROI,. EkR, SHOULD UNDERTAKE BORROWINGS ON THEIR BEHALF.
DESPIT THEIR COMMONSENSE NATURE; I WAS REBUFFED
WHEN I PUT TWO NEW PROPOSALS TO REMEDY THIS SITUATION AT A
MEETiNu WITH Tki HEADS 6F 6G0vERNVhJIT OF THE STATE.', IN~ OufOBER.
SJG~ ECETHAT ELECTED LOCAL. GOVERNMENTS SHOULD HAVE BOTH
AvCrT(&gt; iJJ VOT7 J, T~ l. . T) 2N L ALi'~ 3 0 PROPOSED YHAT
-ftE AUS'TF Li/:(' " OVERNMEVT i:!; vPOWERE--; O FRRW Or': i3lCHiJ
OF E-LL&gt;. 1* L-D L; V: j. i.( v. rNu'T il E MEL-TING WAS AB3ORTIVE. Ti
11-Oft ' 11-1S REI% r lWE rP'OU ~ rL. 1TC IM P'' E A1
VIE W1. 1. NOT BE Ii 1' G T i ;" FERTEN ID1111, T a
I ~ Ifdl CAI SV ST ENU i A4 -1 . 1 E : i~ J
a i v0. A: i~ L DINEL S AND THE1~ Si:, V. CI!, b'S If
1 L LV Z; . JV A1.
FOR THCOMMUNITrIES IT 5ERVES1 
Iii IS 13E(: OfES EXT RI hMF1 t. I 1-11" 1-4' AN~ ) 1 r
IN WHICH THE GoVERNMENT BEIJ. 1rVFS LO. f\ GMIFflMFT SHO1JMP WWIAl
K~ GROLE. INI THE NATION' S iI~ FY
ITS El FC( T1fl OFFIC1ILS AND) Pr-RN!\ NMENT OFFICFRS ARE CONSTANTLY
FMGAGFI)) IN iDhAL. IHGW UlIT OC1Al.. PnOrB IMS, THEY ARF IN A PFRFFCT 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATMENT NO. 171
16 JANUARY 1974
CONSTITUTIONAL COMMITTEE
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, said that
Standing Committee appointed by resolution of the Constitutional
Convention to consider in detail the matters raised at the Convention
in relation to the financial provisions of the Constitution, the powers
of Governments to manage the economy and the place of Local Governmrent
under the Constitution, had met in Canberra today.
The meeting commenced under the Chairmanship of
Senator Greenwood, but Senator Greenwood advised the meeting that
the Prime Minister, who had been unable to attend the first meeting
of the Committee, was willing to accept the Chairmanship of the
Committee, and he accordingly resigned his position in favour of the
Prime Minister, who was unanimously elected to the Chair. Mr Holding,
who had been elected Deputy Chairman at the Melbourne meeting, also
resigned and nominated Senator Greenwood, who was unanimously elected
as Deputy Chairman of the Standing Committee.
Standing Committee consists of:
Mr E. G. Whitlam and Senator I. J. Greenwood ( Federal Parliament),
Sir Robert Askin and Mr P. D. Hills Mr R. J. Hamer and
Mr A. C. Holding ( Victoria), Sir Gordon Chalk and Mr J. W. Houston
( Queensland), Mr D. A. Dunstan and Dr B. C. Eastick ( South Australia)
Mr A. D. Taylor and Sir Charles Court ( Western Australia)
Mr R. Mather and Mr C. B. M. Fenton ( Tasmania), Mr J. H. Pead
and Cr F. A. Rogers and Ald Clem Jones ( Local Government).
All members of the Committee were represented except
Mr P. D. Hills of N. S. W. Sir Robert Askin was represented by the
Hon. E. A. Willis, Minister for Education, New South Wales.
The Committee considered reports from the four working
parties appointed at the last meeting, and gave directions t1-o the
working parties as to the areas in which they should concentrate
their studies with a view to a report being given to the Executive
Committee before April 30th of this year.
CANBERRAJ~. A. C. T. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M, P.,
TO THE 46TH ANNUAL WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SUMMER SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA FRIDAY 18 JANUARY 1974
A SOCIAL SERVICE APPROACH TO HEALTH
LAST MONDAY I WAS ABLE TO TELL A NATIONAL CONVENTION OF
TEACHERS OF MY SPECIAL SATISFACTION AT THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE FIELD OF EDUCATION IN THE LAST YEAR.
IDESCRIBED HOW IT HAD TAKEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS NEARLY 100-YEARS
TO ESTABLISH THE PRINCIPLE THAT EDUCATION IS A NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
I OUTLINED HOW THE RESULT OF THE FAILURE TO ACCEPT THIS PRINCIPLE
HAD BEEN " ITO ENTRENCH PRIVILEGE AND WIDEN STILL FURTHER THE
INEQUALITIES'IN THE EDUCATION SYSTEM" THE MAJOR BATTLE OVER THIS
ISSUE WAS WON LAST YEAR WITH THE CREATION OF A NEW CHARTER FOR THE
CHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA AND THE PROVISION OF THE ESSENTIAL FUNDS AND
MACHINERY TO IMPLEMENT IT.
THAT SPEECH COULD HAVE BEEN EASILY ENTITLED " A SOCIAL
SERVICE APPROACH To EDUCATION". FOR THE ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT OF A
SOCIAL SERVICE APPROACH TO ANY ASPECT OF OUR SOCIETY MUST BE TO
OFFSET PRIVILEGE AND MINIMISE INEQUALITIES. IT MUST BE TO IDENTIFY
AREAS OF DISADVANTAGE AND DISABILITY AND STRIVE TO IMPROVE AND
REMEDY THEM. I AM PROUD OF THE IRREVOCABLE FIRST STEPS WE HAVE TAKEN
TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS IN EDUCATION. I AM CONFIDENT THAT WE CAN
PRESS ON SUCCESSFULLY WITH THE GREAT TASK THAT LIES AHEAD OF US.
v s e/ 2 
-b V
UNHAPPILY I CAi4NOT SPEAK TO YOU TODAY( ABOUT AuSTRALIA0S
HEALTH SYSTEM WITH THE SAME DEGREE OF PRIDE AND CONFIDENCE. WE CAN
BE PLEASED WITH THE PROGRESS THAT HAS BEEN POSSIBLE IN THE LAST YEAR.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE THE FIRST MOVES TO IMPROVE OUR
HOSPITALS AND OTHER HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES; THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH.-
DR EVERINGHAM, TOLD YOU OF THESE ADVANCES ON WEDNESDAY. WE AHAVE1
HOWEVER, BEEN THWARTED IN OUR ATTEMPTS TO ACHIEVZE SOME OF OUR MOST
IMPORTANT OBJECTIVES.
THE RESULT IS THAT THE PROVISION OF HEALT H'CARE IN AUSTRALIA
IS STILL CHARACTERISED BY THE ENTRENCHMENT OF* PRIVILEGE AND BY
INEQUALITY. Too MANY AUSTRALIANS MORE THAN A MRLLIONI IN FACT -HAVE
NO FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGAINST THE HIGH COST OF ILLNESS AND INJURY.
Too MANY AUSTRALIANS PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO LIVE AWAY FROM THE
CENTRES OF OUR MAJOR CITIES -HAVE INADEQUATE ACCESS TO HIGH QUALITY
HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL SERVICES. Too MANY AUSTRALIANS SUFFER FROM
A SYSTEM WHICH MAKES IT CHEAPER FOR A WEALTHY MAN TO INSURE H= IMSELF
AGAINST MEDICAL CHARGES THAN IT IS FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT WEALTHY.
IHAVE JUST MENTIONED THAT MORE THAN ONE MILLION AUSTRALIANS
ARE UNPROTECTED AGAINST HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL CHARGES. OUR OPPONENTS
HAVE FREQUENTLY TRIED TO DENY THAT ESTIMATE. THEY HAVE MADE THEIR
DENIALS SO THAT THEY CAN PRETEND. THAT IT IS POSSIBLE TO OVERCOME THE
DEFICIENCIES OF OUR PRESENT HEALTH SYSTEM BY MINOR IMPROVEMENTS@
ON THE 8TH JANUARY THE AUSTRALIAm BUREAU OF STATISTICS A BODY WHOSE
OBJECTIVITY I PRESUME WOULD NOT BE CHALLENGED PUBLISHED A REPORT
ON A SURVEY WHICH GIVES THE LIE 1* O OUR OPPONENTS'I ASSERTIONS. a e3 
-3-
-THE BUREAU CONDUCTED A SURVEY WHICH COVERED ABOUT 30,000 DWELLINGS
IN ALL STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
TERRITORY TO DETERMINE HOW MANY PEOPLE AGED 15 AND OVER WERE COVERED
BY HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL EXPENDITURE ASSISTANCE SCHEMES THAT IS
PEOPLE COVERED EITHER BY CONTRIBUTQRY HEALTH FUNDS OR B. Y NONCONTRIBUTORY
SCHEMES, INCLUDING THE PENSIONER MEDICAL SERVICE, FREE
COVER OF PERSONS ON UNEMPLOYMENT OR SICKNESS BENEFITS AND THE LIKE.
THE SURVEY DID NOT INCLUDE SERVICEMEN BECAUSE OF THE FREE HEALTH
SERVICES THAT ARE PROVIDED'FOR-THEM.
THE REPORT SHOWED THAT ONLY 86.5 PER CENT OF THE PEOPLE
SURVEYED WERE COVERED BY AN ASSISTANCE SCHEME. IN OTHER* WORDSi.
13.5 PER CENT OF THESE AUSTRALIANS WERE UNPROTECTED. EVEN ALLOWI1NG
FOR THE PARTIAL PROTECTION AFFORDED TO QUEENSLANDERS BY THE FREE
PUBLIC HOSPITAL SYSTEM IN THAT STATE, MORE THAN 10 PER CENT OF THESE
AUSTRALIANS WERE DEVOID OF HEALTH PAYMENT COVERAGE. To USE OBSOLUTE
FIGURES, THE REPORT ESTIMATES THAT 1.225,000 AUSTRALIANS AGED
AND OVER WERE NOT PROTECTED. IF WE BEAR IN MIND THAT NEARLY
PER CENT OF AUSTRALIANS ARE AGED UNDER 15, WE-CAN CONFIDENTLY
ESTIMATE THAT WELL OVER 1h MILLION AUSTRALIANS ARE NOT COVERED FOR
THE COST OF HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL TREATMENT. 
-4-
WHO ARE THESE PEOPLE? THE BUREAU'S REPORT CONTAINS FIGURES
WHICH THROW UP SOME INTERESTING ANSWERS TO THIS QUESTION, MIGRANTS
HAVE LESS PROTECTION THAN PEOPLE BORN IN AUSTRALIA, AND AMONG
MIGRANTS, THE WORST OFF ARE THOSE WHO HAVE NOT * BEEN IN AUSTRALIA
FOR VERY LONG; AND SOME MIGRANT GROUPS FARE LESS WELL THAN OTHERS,
THE FIGURES ALSO INDICATE A DISPARITY BETWEEN INCOME GROUPS; LOW
INCOME EARNERS ARE LESS LIKELY TO BE PROTECTED THAN THE WEALTHY,
IN OTHER WORDS, THE CLASSIC PATTERN OF INEQUALITY AND. ENTRENCHEMENT
OF PRIVILEGE WHICH ANY SOCIAL SECURITY APPROACH MUST CONTEND WITH
IS TO BE FOUND IN OUR HEALTH SYSTEM,
SOME OF THE FIGURES THAT INDICATE THESE CONCLUSIONS ARE
WORTH QUOTING. ONLY 83,3 PER CENT OF PEOPLE BORN OUTSIDE AUSTRALIA
WERE COVERED, COMAPRED WITH 87,6 PER CENT OF THOSE BORN IN
AUSTRALIA, OF PEOPLE WHO ARRIVED IN AUSTRALIA BETWEEN JANUARY 1971
AND AUGUST 1972, WHEN THE SURVEY WAS CONDUCTED, ONLY 68 PER CENT
WERE COVERED, OF THOSE WHO ARRIVED BETWEEN 1967 AND 1970 THE FIGURE
IS 77,2 PER CENT, MORE THAN 53,000 GREEK MIGRANTS OR 37.5 PER CENT
WERE UNPROTECTED: ABOUT 52,000 ITALIAN MIGRANTS OR 19.1 PER CENT
WERE WITHOUT COVERAGE, IF A GREEK MIGRANT ARRIVED IN AUSTRALIA
BETWEEN 1967 AND 1970 THERE WAS ONLY A 1O PER CENT CHANCE THAT HE
HAD BENEFITED FROM HEALTH EXPENDITURE ASSISTANCE SCHEME, 
NOW LET US TURN TO THE DISADVANTAGES BETWEEN VA-,, 6US ! NCOME
GROUPS. THE REPORT ESTIMATES THAT 92.4 PER CENT OF PROFESSIONAL,
TECHNICAL AND RELATED WORKERS AND 91.5 PER CENT. OF ADMINISTRATIVEO
EXECUTIVE AND MANAGERIAL WORKERS BENEFITED FROM ASSISTANCE SCHEMES.
IN CONTRAST, THESE BENEFITS APPLY-' TO ONLY 68.7 PER CENT OF SOME
GROUPS OF LABOURERS, 78.7 PER CENT OF OTHER GROUPS OF LABOURERS1
TRADESMEN, AND PRODUCTION PROCESS WORKERS, 7717 PER CENT Or-CONSTRUCTION
WORKERS AND 81.5 PER CENT OF MINERS, QUARRYMEN AND RELATED WORKERSI
PEOPLE IN RURAL INDUSTRIES ALSO SUFFER BY COMPARISON WITH OTHER
AUSTRALIANS; ONLY 82.9 PER CENT OF FARMERS, FISHERMEN, TIMBER
GETTERS AND THE LIKE ARE PROTECTED.
IT IS ABSURD THAT IN A COUNTRY AS WEALTHY AS OURS
DISCRIMINATION OF THIS KIND.-AGAINST NEW ARRIVALS'AND LOW INCOME
EARNERS SHOULD EXIST. THOMAS JEFFERSON SAID IN 1787 THAT " WITHOUT
HEALTH THERE IS NO HAPPINESS. AN ATTENTION TO HEAL-7H, THEN, SHOULD
TAKE THE PLACE OF EVERY OTHER PROJECT" IT SEEMS THAT AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS HAVE BEEN PREPARED TO CONDONE A GREATER MEASURE OF
UNHAPPINESS AMONG OUR DISADVANTAGED THAN AMONG THOSE WHO DERIVE* SO
MANY OTHER BENEFITS FROM OUR SOCIETY$
AUSTRALIA'S PRESENT PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE SYSTEM IS
CLEARLY TO BLAME FOR THIS SITUATION. DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE ARE
DISCOURAGED FROM BELONGING TO PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS BECAUSE
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THEM ARE IN NO WAY RELATED TO A PERSON IS ABILITY
TO PAY; CONTRIBUTIONS INVOLVE FLAT RATES OF PAYMENT. IN FACT, THERE
IS DISCRIMINATION IN REVERSE BECAUSE OF OUR SYSTEM OF TAX DEDUCTIONS$
9 t s/ 6 
-6-
A TAX DEDUCTION IS WORTH MORE TO A HIGH-INCOME EARNER THAN TO
SOMEONE ON A LOWER INCOME. THUS, WHEN THE HIGH-INCOME EARNER CLAIMS
A TAX DEDUCTION FOR A HEALTH FUND CONTRIBUTION HE GAINS MORE FROM IT
THAN DOES A POORER MAN. THIS MEANS HIS HEALTH INSURANCE ENDS UP
BEING CHEAPER. FOR EXAMPLE, IN NEW SOUTH WALES A MAN WITH A WIFE
AND TWO CHILDREN ON ABOUT $ 70 A WEEK PAYS $ 81-A YEAR IN PUBLIC WARD
HOSPITAL COVERAGE AND MEDICAL INSURANCE AFTER TAX CONCESSIONS.
HOWEVE~ R, A MAN WITH THE SAME NUMBER OF DEPENDANTS ON $ 400 A WEEK
ONLY PAYS $ 54I FOR MEDICAL INSURANCE AND ER. LYAIE WARD COVERAGE AFTER
HE HAS GAINED HIS TAX CONCESSIONS0 AND TO REPEAT A. POINT I HAVE
OFTEN MADE IN THIS CONTEXT, IPAY LESS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE THAN
DOES MY CAR DRIVER.
TO ADD TO THIS INJUSTICE, A PERSON WHO CANNOT AFFORD
HEALTH INSURANCE OR WHO DOES NOT QUALIFY FOR ANY ASSISTANCE SCHEME
SUFFERS A FURTHER PENALTY. FOR THE COMMONWEALTH SUBSIDIES FOR MEDI. CAL
CHARGES ARE ONLY PAID TO PEOPLE WHO ARE INSURED AND, IF THE UNINSURlED
PERSON GOES INTO HOSPITAL, HE ATTRACTS A PALTRY SUBSIDY OF 80 CENTS
A DAY FOR HIS ACCOMMODATION. CLEARLY, PAST GOVERNMENT PRACTICE HAS
BEEN TO TRY TO FORCE PEOPLE INTO JOINING PRIVATE THE SO-CALLED
/ IVOLUNTARY" 1 HEALTH INSURANCE FUNDS WHETHER THEY FIND THE RATES
EXCESSIVE OR NOT. 17 
I THE PRESENT HEALTH SCHEME HAS OTHER SUBSTANTIAL DEFICIENCIES
APART FROM INJUSTICE AND INEQUALITY, IT HAS ONLY BEEN SAVED FROM
SERIOUS FINANCIAL TROUBLE BY MASSIVE GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES. SUBSIDIES
FOR MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL BENEFITS ROSE FROM $ 80,000,000 IN 1969 TO
$ 200,000,000 IN 1972, IF WE LOOK AT TOTAL AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL COSTS,
WE FIND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAID FOR ABOUT 54 PER CENT
DIRECTLY AND INDIRECTLY ( THROUGH TAXATION) IN 1969, IN 1972-73 THE
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTED 68 PER CENT. ABOUT $ 203,000,000 WAS PAID
BY DIRECT SUBSIDY AND $ 61,000,000 AS TAXATION CONCESSIONS, THIS MEANS
THAT TWO DOLLARS IN EVERY THREE EARNED BY DOCTORS. COMES FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THE PRESENT SCHEME HAS ALSO BECOME UNNECESSARILY EXPENSIVE
AND WASTEFUL, LARGE SUMS OF MONEY ARE KEPT USELESSLY IDLE IN THE
RESERVE HOLDINGS OF THE PRIVATE FUNDS; IN 1971-72 THEY AMOUNTED TO
$ 124,000,000 OR THE EQUIVALENT OF 42 PER CENT OF THAT YEAR'S
CONTRIBUTIONS, THERE IS UNNECESSARY DUPLICATION OF SERVICES BECAUSE
OF THE EXISTENCE OF 81 MEDICAL AND' 90 HOSPITAL INSURANCE ORGANISATIONS
OPERATING THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, COMPETITION FOR MEMBERS, WASTEFUL
ADVERTISING AND COMMISSION RATES ALL CONTRIBUTE TO UNDULY HIGH
OPERATING COSTS FOR THESE FUNDS, AT PRESENT THESE COSTS ACCOUNT FOR
AN AVERAGE OF ABOUT 11 PER CENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS FOR ALL FUNDS AND
AN AVERAGE OF 15 PER CENT FOR MEDICAL FUNDS, 
-8-
THE FAILINGS OF AUSTRALIA' S HEALTH SYSTEM ARE NOT, OF COURSE,
CONFINED TO INSURANCE. GRAVE INADEQUACIES HAVE DEVELOPED IN THE
PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES. AGAIN WE FIND THE SPECTRE OF
INEQUALITY ARISES, FACILITIES HAVE NOT KEPT PACE WITH CHANGES IN
THE NATURE OF OUR SOCIETY, HOSPITALS, DOCTORS AND OTHER SERVICES
ARE SPREAD UNEVENLY AND UNFAIRLY, THERE IS * A TENDENCY FOR DOCTORS
TO LIVE IN MORE AFFLUENT SUBURBS BECAUSE OF THEIR FINANCIAL ABILITY
TO DO so, AND THERE HAS BEEN A TENDENCY FOR HOSPITALS TO BE
LOCATED NEAR WHERE DOCTORS LIVE AND PRACTICE. MY COLLEAGUE THE
MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY MR BILL HAYDEN, HAS POINTED OUT THAT
IN SYDNEY, FOR EXAMPLE, THE CITY'S SEVEN TEACHING HOSPITALS ARE
LOCATED WITHIN AN EIGHT-MILE RADIUS OF THE G. P. O. AND FIVE OF THEM
ARE WITHIN A FOUR-MILE RADIUS. YET THE GREAT MAJORITY OF SYDNEY'S
POPULATION LIVES A CONSIDERABLE DISTANCE OUTSIDE THESE PARAMETERS.
IT IS OBVI-OUSLY WRONG TO DEPRIVE MOST OF A CITY'S POPULATION OF
READY ACCESS TO THE BEST HOSPITAL FACILITIES.
THE MAJOR PROBLEM, HOWEVER, WHICH CONFRONTS US IN THIS
FIELD IS THE GROWING COST OF HEALTH SERVICES. AT PRESENT THEY COST
AUSTRALIA MORE THAN $ 2,000,000,000 OR ABOUT 5.3 PER CENT OF GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT. BUT THEIR COST IS INCREASING DRAMATICALLY WHEN
COMPARED WITH THE COST OF OTHER SERVICES. HEALTH SERVICES ARE
ENORMOUSLY DEMANDING IN TERMS OF MANPOWER. THE SORT OF LABOUR~ SAVINGS
THAT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE IN OTHER INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN ATTAINED.
16/ 9 
-9-
* FOR EXAMPLE, THE SELLING OF GROCERIES AND ALLIED COMMODITIES HAS
BEEN REVOLUTIONISED IN RECENT YEARS BY THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUPERMARKETS,
WHICH OVERALL ARE LESS DEMANDING OF LABOUR THAN THE TYPE OF STORES
THAT THEY HAVE TO A GREAT EXTENT REPLACED. THAT SORT OF MANPOWER
RATIONALISATION HAS NOT BEEN POSSIBLE WITH HEALTH SERVICES,
PARTICULARLY AS COMMUNITY EXPECTATIONS HAVE RISEN AND AS NEW AND
MORE COMPLICATED MEDICAL PROCEDURES HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED. THE RESULT
IS THAT IT HAS BEEN ESTIMATED THAT, AT THE PRESENT RATE, HEALTH
COSTS WILL DOUBLE EVERY FIVE OR SIX YEARS IN AUSTRALIA, ACCORDING
TO THIS ESTIMATE, OUR EXPENDITURE ON HEALTH SERVICES COULD BE MORE
THAN 12 PER CENT OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT BY THE YE* AR 2000 ONLY
26 YEARS FROM NOW. THAT IS, IF NOTHING IS DONE TO ENSURE GREATER
EFFICIENCY IN OUR HEALTH SPENDING.
ICAN DEMONSTRATE THE PROBLEM THAT CONFRONTS GOVERNMENTS
AND CITIZENS ALIKE BY ANALYSING THE CURRENT PLIGHT OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS HERE IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA. THE OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS IN THIS STATE IN 1974-75 ARE EXPECTED TO BE MORE THAN
DOUBLE THE COSTS IN 1970-71 WHEN THE LAST INCREASE IN FEES OCCURRED;
THEY ARE EXPECTED TO RISE FROM $ 46 MILLION TO NEARLY $ 95 MILLION.
THE SHARE OF THE COSTS THAT COMES FROM STATE GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES IS
EXPECTED TO RISE IN THE SAME PERIOD FROM 59 PER CENT To 67 PER CENT.
THIS TREND CAN ONLY BE ARRESTED BY A LARGE INCREASE IN PUBLIC
HOSPITAL FEES OR BY GREATER ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
SIGNIFICANTLY GREATER ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD
FLOW FROM THE FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS UNDER OUR PROPOSED HEALTH
INSURANCE PROGRAM. OUR OPPONENTS IN THE SENATE, HOWEVER, WERE ABLE
TO USE THEIR NUMBERS IN DECEMBER TO HINDER THIS HAPPENING. 
THERE CAN BE NO QUESTION THAT TWO THINGS NEED TO HAPPEN
TO CONTROL THESE TRENDS AND ACHIEVE THE GREATER EFFICIENCY AND GREATER
EQUALITY THAT ARE NEEDED IN THE PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN
AUSTRALI'A. WE MUST ACCEPT THE NEED FOR NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR
HEALTH, AS IN EDUCATION, AND WE -MUST OVERHAUL OUR HEALTH INSURANCE
SCHEME. THE HISTORY OF MOVES TOWARDS NATI'ONAL RESPONSIBILITY IN
HEALTH IS A RECENT ONE. AN AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION, CARRIED
BY REFERENDUM IN 1946, GAVE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THE POWER TO
PROVIDE FOR / IPHARMACEUTICAL, SICKNESS AND HOSPITAL BENEFITS, ( AND)
MEDICAL AND DENTAL SERVICES . HOWEVER, SINCE THEN THE BENEFITS OF
COMMONWEALTH INVOLVEMENT HAVE LARGELY BEEN FELT IN THE AREA OF MEDICAL
AND PHARMACEUTICAL COSTS. THE MEDICAL BENEFIT SCHEME STARTED IN
19C53 AND I HAVE ALREADY POINTED OUT HOW COMMONWEALTH SUBSIDIES
UNDER IT HAVE GROWN DRAMATICALLY, IN NO SMALL PART DUE TO ITS
INEFFICIENCIES. A PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS ACT WAS PASSED BY THE
NATIONAL PARLIAMENT IN 1947. THIS ACT HAD LITTLE SUCCESS AND WAS
SUBSEQUENTLY AMENDED UNTIL THE INTRODUCTION OF THE PRESENT FORM OF
THE PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS SCHEME UNDER THE NATIONAL HEALTH ACT
IN 1959. THE TOTAL COST OF PROVIDING BENEFITS UNDER THIS SCHEME,
INCLUDING PATIENT CONTRIBUTIONS ON PRESCRIPTIONS, WAS $ 226.3 MILLION
IN 1972-73. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS INDEED ACCEPTED A NATIONAL
RESPONSIBILITY IN BOTH THE MEDICAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL AREA ALTHOUGH
WHETHER ITS MONEY HAS BEEN WELL SPENT IS ANOTHER MATTER. / 11 
-11-
THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN HOSPITALS
IS IN SHARP CONTRAST WITH THE EXPERIENCE IN OTHER AREAS. THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED THE HOSPITALS BENEFITS ACT IN 19145 AND THIS
PROVIDED A BENEFIT OF 60 CENTS A DAY FOR ALL HOSPITAL PATIENTS.
THIS FIGURE MIGHT SEEM LAUGHABLE NOW, BUT AT THE TIME THE AVERAGE
WE COST IN AUSTRALIA WAS ONLY $ 1.40 A DAY. THUS THIS INITIAL
COMMITMENT AMOUNJTED To 43 PER CENT OF DAILY OPERATING COSTS IN
HOSPITALS. THE LIBERAL/ COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT REPLACED THE LABOR
SCHEME WITH THE PRESENT HOSPITAL BENEFIT SCHEME IN 1952. THIS
PROVIDED A COMMONWEALTH SUBSIDY OF 80 CENTS A, DAY PLUS 140 CENTS A
DAY FOR INSURED PATIENTS. STILL, IN THE CONTEXT OF THE TIME., THIS
WAS A SUBSTANTIAL SUBSIDY.
CONTRARY TO WHAT ONE MIGHT EXPECT, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT' S INVOLVEMENT IN PAYING FOR THE RUNNING OF HOSPITALS
HAS SUBSTANTIALLY DECLINED SINCE THEN. IT NOW PAYS A SUBSIDY OF
ONLY $ 2 A DAY FOR HOSPITAL PATIENTS, ALTHOUGH THERE ARE NATURALLY
PTHER BENEFITS WHICH DERIVE FROM TAXATION CONCESSIONS. IT IS
ESTIMATED THAT IN 19714-75 THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO
PAY ONLY $ 165 MILLION TOWARDS THE OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS.
THIS COMPARES WITH AN ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE OF $ 5140 MILLION BY
STATE GOVERNMENTS AND $ 2140 MILLION BY INSURED AND UNINSURED PATIENTS.
IT IS NO WONDER THAT SO MANY OF OUR HOSPITALS ARE INADEQUATE. i / 12 
-12-
IT IS TIME THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ASSUMED A MUCH
GREATER ROLE IN THE FINANCING OF HEALTH SERVICES, IT IS NO LONGER
POSSIBLE FOR THESE SERVICES TO BE FINANCED IN THE FRAGMENTED MANNER
WHICH HAS APPLIED UNTIL NOW. No ONE WOULD EXPECT THAT ANY MAN,
HOWEVER WEALTHY, COULD AFFORD TO PAY BY HIMSELF FOR ALL THE EQUIPMENT
AND MANPOWER NECESSARY FOR HIM TO RECEIVE PROPER TREATMENT FOR A
MAJOR ILLNESS, NO ONE WOULD EXPECT ANY DOCTOR, HOWEVER WEALTHY, TO
BE ABLE TO PROVIDE BY HIMSELF ALL THE'FACILITIES AND STAFF NEEDED
TO TREAT THE RANGE OF ILLNESSES AND INJURIES HE WOULD ENCOUNTER
TODAY. WE ARE ALL DEPENDENT ON THE AVAILABILITY OF COMMUNITY
FACILITIES. I THINK I HAVE DEMONSTRATED THAT THESE FACILITIES ARE
INADEQUATE AND ARE UNEQUALLY AVAILABLE AT PRESENT. IT IS ONLY BY
THE ASSUMPTION OF A NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY IN HEALTH THAT WE CAN
OVERCOME THESE INADEQUACIES,
DR EVERINGHAM TOLD YOU ON WEDNESDAY OF THE DEVELOPMENTS
THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN THE AREA NOW COVERED BY THE HOSPITAL AND
HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION. AS HE TOLD YOU, ITS AIM IS THE
" PROVISION OF HIGH QUALITY, READILY ACCESSIBLE, REASONABLY
COMPREHENSIVE, CO-ORDINATED AND EFFICIENT HEALTH AND RELATED WELFARE
SERVICES AT LOCAL, REGIONAL, STATE AND NATIONAL LEVELS", WE HAVE
ALREADY ALLOCATED $ 4.5 MILLION FOR 1973-74 TO MEET URGENT NEEDS
FOR ADDITIONAL HOSPITALS IN SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, BRISBANE. SIGNIFICANTLY,
$ 4 MILLION OF THIS HAS BEEN ALLOCATED TOWARDS THE COST OF PLANNING
AND COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF A MAJOR HOSPITAL AT WESTMEAD
IN THE WESTERN SUBURBS OF SYDNEY MUCH MORE A CENTRE OF POPULATION
FOR THAT CITY THAN THE G. P. O. WE HAVE ALSO ALLOCATED $ 10 MILLION 
-13-
IN THIS FINANCIAL YEAR TO ASSIST STATES AND ELIGIBLE ORGANISATIONS
TO MEET THE CAPITAL AND OPERATING COSTS OF REGIONALLY ORGANISED,
COMMUNITY-BASED HEALTH SERVICES, COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES,
PROVIDED AT CENTRES AND THROUGH DOMICILIARY SERVICES, OFFER A GREAT
OPPORTUNITY FOR COMBATING THE UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF DOCTORS AND
OTHER HEALTH WORKERS IN OUR COMMUNITY, IN ADDITION, WE HAVE PROVIDED
MILLION TO ASSIST STATES TO DEVELOP COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL
HEALTH, ALCOHOLIC AND DRUG-DEPENDENCY SERVICES,
OUR MAJOR FRUSTRATION IN THE LAST YEAR HAS BEEN IN OUR
ATTEMPTS TO OVERHAUL THE PRESENT HEALTH INSURANCE SYSTEM AND THE
FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS THAT FLOW FROM IT, IF OPPOSITION TO OUR
HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM CONTINUES TO PREVENT ITS IMPLEMENTATION
THIS WILL BE VIEWED BY FUTURE GENERATIONS AS A TRAGEDY OF GREAT
PROPORTIONS, THE PROGRAM WOULD OVERCOME THE SERIOUS PROBLEMS THAT
EXIST UNDER THE PRESENT SYSTEM, FOR A START, IT WOULD AUTOMATICALLY
COVER EVERYONE IN AUSTRALIA, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR MEANS OR THEIR
BACKGROUND. FOR MIGRANTS, THIS WOULD MEAN THAT, VIRTUALLY FROM THE
MOMENT THEY STEPPED OFF THE BOAT OR THE AIRCRAFT THAT BROUGHT THEM
TO AUSTRALIA, THEY WOULD BE PROTECTED AGAINST HEALTH COSTS, IT
WOULD BE FINANCED IN THE MOST EQUITABLE MANNER AS THE PAYMENTS TO
BE MET BY INDIVIDUALS WOULD BE BASED ON THEIR-CAPACITY TO PAY, THE
PROPOSED LEVY OF 1.35 PER CENT ON TAXABLE INCOME WOULD PROVE CHEAPER
FOR THE GREAT MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS, ,/ 14 
-14-
FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS, AUSTRALIANS WOULD RECEIVE A
COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENT, IF A DOCTOR
SENDS HIS BILL DIRECT TO THE PROPOSED HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION,
HIS PATIENT WILL NOT HAVE TO PAY ANYTHING FOR MEDICAL TREATMENT,
EVEN IF THE DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL TO HIS PATIENT, THE COMMISSION
WILL PAY AT LEAST 85 PER CENT OF THE SCHEDULED FEE, AND IN NO CASE,
WHERE THE SCHEDULED FEE IS CHARGEDI WOULD THE PATIENT HAVE TO PAY
MORE THAN $ 5 FOR ANY MEDICAL SERVICES, To DISMISS IMMEDIATELY ONE
PHONY ISSUE THAT HAS BEEN RAISED BY OUR OPPONENTS, THESE ARRANGEMENTS
WOULD APPLY TO SERVICES PROVIDED BY ANY DOCTOR THAT ANY PATIENT
CHOSE TO CONSULT, FOR HOSPITAL TREATMENTI EVERYONE WOULD BE
ENTITLED TO FREE STANDARD WARD TREATMENT; ADMISSION TO THIESE WARDS
WOULD NOT BE RESTRICTED TO PEOPLE WHO SATISFY THE SAVAGE MEANS
TESTS WHICH APPLY IN SOME STATES AT PRESENT, THE PROGRAM WOULD
ACHIEVE THIS GOAL WITHOUT DESTROYING THE VIABILITY AND INDEPENDENCE
OF RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE AND COMMUNITY HOSPITALS, PATIENTS IN
PRIVATE WARDS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS OR IN PRIVATE HOSPITALS WOULD
ATTRACT A BED SUBSIDY OF $ 16 A DAY FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
A CONSIDERABLE IMPROVEMENT ON THE $ 2 A DAY WHICH IS CURRENTLY PAID.
THE GOVERNMENT AIMS TO ENSURE THAT PRIVATE INSURANCE IS AVAILABLE
AT REASONABLE COST TO COVER ANY EXTRA CHARGES FACED BY PRIVATE
PATIENTS, 
ONE OF THE GREAT AND CONTINUING BENEFITS THAT WOULD FLOW
FROM THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM WOULD BE IN THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS. UNDER BILATERAL. AGREEMENTS WITH EACH STATE, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WOULD BE PREPARED TO MEET 50 PER CENT OF THE NET OPERATING
COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS. PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN ALL STATES WOULD
BENEFIT FROM THESE ARRANGEMENTS. THE TOTAL GAIN TO STATE GOVERNMENTS
IN 1974-75 WOULD BE $ 80 MILLION. IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, TO REFER
TO MY EARLIER EXAMPLE, THE STATE WOULD GAIN AN EXTRA $ 9 MILLION
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM, COMBINED WITH THE WORK OF
THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION, WOULD PROVIDE THE
MACHINERY TO ENABLE A CLOSER SCRUTINY OF THE USE OF OUR RESOURCES
FOR HEALTH SERVICES AND GREATER EFFICIENCY. TO GIVE A MINOR EXAMPLE,
THE OPERATING COSTS OF THE HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION WOULD BE ONLY
ABOUT 6 PER CENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS COMPARED TO THE 11 PER CENT
CURRENTLY SPENT BY PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS.
SOME OF YOU MAY HAVE WONDERED WHY, IN AN ADDRESS " A SOCIAL
SERVICE APPROACH To HEALTH", I HAVE MENTIONED SO FREQUENTLY. THE
WORD EFFICIENCY. THE REASON IS SIMPLE. WE CANNOT ALLOW HEALTH
COSTS IN AUSTRALIA TO RISE UNCONTROLLABLY. AT THE SAME TIME WE
ARE DETERMINED TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE HEALTH SERVICES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS.
WE MUST THEREFORE ENSURE THAT EVERY DOLLAR WE SPEND IS SPENT WISELY.
WE MUST ENSURE THAT WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE IS AVOIDED IN AREAS OF
PLENTY SO THAT THE MONEY SAVED CAN BE DEVOTED TO AREAS OF NEED. / 116 
-16-
As I ASSUME YOU ALL KNOW, OUR PLANS HAVE FOUNDERED, AT
LEAST TEMPORARILY, ON THE ROCK OF THE SENATE, THE GOVERNMENT IS
NOW CONSIDERING ITS POSITION IN RELATION TO THE HEALTH INSURANCE
PROGRAM. M HAYDEN IS LEAVING AUSTRALIA IN JUST OVE( A WELK
EXAMINE HEALTH SYSTEMS OVERSEAS, PARTICULARLY THE CANADIAN AND
AMERICAN FEDERATIONS. THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE HAVE ABANDONED
OUR LEGISLATION. BUT WE MUST LOOK AT ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS OF
FINANCING HEALTH SERVICES, PARTICULARLY PUBLIC HOSPITALS, TO ENSURE
THAT WE MEET OUR NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY. SINCE THE 1946 REFERENDUM
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT HAS HAD THE RIGHT AND DUTY TO PROVIDE
MEDICAL SERVICES, UNLESS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT AND FUTURE GOVERNMENTS ACCEPT THIS RESPONSIBILITY,
WE WILL NEVER SATISFY THE OBJECTIVES OF A SOCIAL SERVICE APPROACH
TO HEALTH IN THIS COUNTRY. UNLESS WE ACCEPT OUR NATIONAL
RESPONSIBILITY, INEQUALITY, PRIVILEGE AND INADEQUACIES WILL CONTINUE
TO CHARACTERISE OUR HEALTH SYSTEM. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 172
18 January 1974..
VISIT OVERSEAS BY ELIZABETH REID
Elizabeth Reid, Adviser to the Prime rMinistdr,
left today for a study tour that will take her to ten major
European and North American cities. While away she will
also represent Australia at a United Nations forum on the
Role of Women in Population and Development.
The purpose of her visit will be to establish
contact with women and groups in other countries who are
working in the same field and to inform I'erself of developments
elsewhere relating to the status of women. Areas she will be
studying include future patterns of employment for women,
parliamentary and government organisations responsible for
matters relating to women and the evolution of government
policy to cope with the effects of changes in society on
women in employment and in the home.
These problems are at present being discussed
in northern America and within the European Economic Community
where extensive research is being undertaken. Miss Reid's
tour will include visits to the O. E. C. D. in Paris, the I. L. O.
headquarters in Geneva and the E. E. C. headquarters in Brussels.
She will also meet women's groups and trade union and government
representatives. The Australian Government is in a good position
to learn from the experiences of other countries in their
efforts to formulate policies and initiate changes to improve
the status of women.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 175
22 January 1974
AUSTRALIAN INVESTMENT OVERSEAS
The Prime minister, Mr Whitlan announced today a new
Australian Government policy for overseas investment, especially
in developing countries.
Mr Whitlam said that much Australian investment would take
place in any case in overseas countries and it was the intention of
the Australian Govwrnment to encourage investment which would meet the
type of criteria applied to investment in Australia.
It was the intention of the Australian Government to do all it
can to ensure that Australian investment in overseas countries will
benefit the people in those countries and will be favourable to
ownership and control of enterprises by people in the countries in
which it is made and will have advanced labour relations and
environmental policies. It is expected that all Australian investment
will be in accord with the policies of the governments of the countries
in which it is made.
Mr Whitlam said it was a major objective of the Australian
Government to strengthen its economic relations with developing
countries, particularly in its neighbouring regions. Many developing
countries in the Asian and Pacific regions have expressed a desire for
increased Australian private investment. The Australian Government
recognises the contribution that Australian private investment
accompanied by technical know-how and managerial skills can make to
the development and growth of such countries.
The Australian Government also fully appreciates the desire of
these countries to regulate foreign investment in accordance with their
own national aspirations and development plans. Consequently the
Australian Government was anxious to encourage private Australian
investment in developing countries on a joint venture basis in
accordance with those. countries' social and economic development plans
and their investment policies and procedures. The Australian Government
will use its best endeavours to interest and encourage Australian
enterprises to participate in those specific fields of development in
which it is indicated Australian investment would be particularly
welcomed and which would be in the joint interests of both countries. 
-2-
Mvr. Whit'am said that the Government would amend the Export
Payments In~ suran~ ce Corporation Act to broaden the scope and the
overseas investment insurance scheme, which at present restricts
the availability of insurance cover to those investments which
provide export benefits to Australia and assist in the production and
marketing of goods overseas. The Government proposes to broaden the
eligibility criteria to provide that all new worthwhile direct
investments which can assist in the economic and social development
of an overseas country will be eligible for insurance cover. Also, in
recognition of Papua New Guinea's expressed desire for increased
Australian investment to further its social and economic development
plans, it is proposed to extend the scope of the overseas investment
insurance scheme to cover new eligible investments in Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Whitlam said that the amending legislation would provide for
investments made between now and the enactment of the legislation
would be eligible for consideration under the expanded scheme.
In order to encourage partnership between Australian interests
and investors in the host country concerned, concessional premium
rates would continue to apply when the investment is a joint venture
with local interests.
in addition, Mr. Whitlam, said the Australian Government had
decided to establish an overseas investment feasibility fund of
$ 250,000 to assist Australian companies to meet the costs of preinvestment
feasibility studies in developing countries. The fund will
be administered by the Department of Overseas Trade.
The Australian Government also proposed, where appropriate to
negotiate bilateral investment guarantee agreements with overseas
countries. Mr. Whitlam said that, in view of the important interrelationship
between trade and investment, the Government was seeking
in official bilateral trade negotiations with neighbouring countries,
to have included in trade agreements, where mutually desired, a clause
related to investment.
Furthermore, Mr. Whitlam said the Australian Government would
give early consideration to acceding to the international convention
for the settlement of investment disputes.
Mr. Whitlam said these measures will complement existing measures
for promoting private direct Australian investment in developing
countries. Such investment is already facilitated in a number of ways
by the Government. Under existing policy, for example, exchange contro:
approval is readily given to all direct investments overseas which
include a significant measure of Australian managerial participation
and the expert of managerial and technical skill. Also, Australian
taxation legislation contains uftiilaterial provisions which protect
Australian residents against the possibility of double taxation on
revenue generated overseas.
In addition, Mr Whitlam said the Department of Overseas Trade
provides assistance to potential Australian investors in a variety of
ways, including the publication of investment climate studies, the
sponsoring of investment survey missions and the assistance of the
Trade Commissioner Service. An amount of $ 100,000 had been provided
in the 1973// 74 Budget to strengthen such services.
All of these measures, Mr. Whitlam said, clearly indicated the
Australian Government's desire to see increased flow of Australian
investments to developing countries in areas of activity welcomed
by those countries and in harmony with their economic and social goals.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
Embargo: 6 p~ m PRESS STATEMENT NO. 74
23 January 1974
The Prime Minister today approved grants for the crafts, totalling
$ 139,284.
The grants were recommended by the Crafts Board of the Australian
Council for the Arts, and go to all States.
The Chairman of the Crafts Board, Mrs Marea Gazzard, said that
these, as well as last year's grants of $ 199,481, showed a welcome
revival of interest in craft activities. The Board is again calling
for applications for grants from craftsmen throughout Australia to
encourage this interest.
Mrs Gazzard said that the Government's Crafts Inquiry, now fully
active, should bring to light a great deal of information on the
pattern the crafts were taking in Australia, which could be the
basis for future funding.
She added that it was particularly pleasing to see applications
from craftsmen wanting to train apprentices. Many valuable skills
had been lost in the past because craftsmen struggling to survive
had not been able to give time to training young people wishing
to learn a craft.
One grant of $ 3,000 is for the South Australian blacksmith, Richard
G Howard, of Stirling, to take on a trainee. A self-taught craftsman,
he travelled to England and Europe last year on a Churchill Fellowship.
Mrs Gazzard said that blacksmithing, which sounded utilitarian, was
also a fine art in its own right. The British sculptor, Tim Scott,
who will visit Australia next month at the invitation of the Visual
Arts Board, uses smithing techniques in his steel-and-perspex sculptures.
A number of sculpture students from East Sydney Technical College will
this year be attending a blacksmiths' course.
Another $ 3,000 grant goes to Ronald Edwards of Holloways Beach, Queensland,
to research surviving folk crafts in Australia. He will study pioneer
building methods, bush furniture making, the making of greenhide ropes,
fishing nets and traps and many other crafts. By tape-recording, photographing
and making diagrams, he hopes to make it possible for future
craftsmen to exactly reproduce traditional craft items. 
2.
QUENSLAND CALOUNDRA1 POTTERY ART STUDIO To purchase two
pottery wheels and kiln building materials to equip
the workshop. 1,184
DAVID ROBINSON, to re-establish his pottery studio and
to study with a master potter in New Zealand for three
months. 1,500
RON EDWARDS, maintenance and travelling expenses to
undertake documentation of surviving folk crafts being
practised in Australia. 39000
NL$ SOUTH WALES
' YALLADIBEE' SCHOOL FOR INTELLECTUALLY HANDICAPPED,
to purchase two weaving looms, one pair of handcarders,
one electric spinning wheel and wool materials for
teaching crafts to the students. 115
ALBURY/ WODONGA DISTRICT HANDWEAVERS AND SPINNERS' GUILD,
to subsidise costs of four weaving schools to be
conducted by the Guild between March and August 1974. 200
MUSEUM OF APPLIED ARTS AND SCIENCES, for salaries and
materials to conduct a workshop in embroidery, spinning
and macrame during the Summer School vacation. 800
ANDREW S HALFORD, to work with a master potter in Japan
for one year ( return economy air fare, expenses and
internal travel). 2,000
MR AND MRS KERRY MOORS, to purchase fabrics and dyes for
production of quality batik works. 1,000
t1ESIE A PETERKIN, to conduct a potters' summer school 434
-t T N CUNNINGHAM, to purchase pottery equipment to
-sotablish a workshop. 4,180
DOROTHEA ALLNUTr, towards return sea fare to England and
cost of further tuition in advanced embroidery courses
in London. 1, 000
MOONY E N McNEILAGE, travel and living expenses to undertake
research in Europe and South America for a book on
weaving. 1, 000
JAMES P THOMAS, to purchase materials to prepare for an
exhibition of wood and leather tables. 500
CHRISTINE AND RONALD COLLINS, maintenance and weaving
materials for one year to enable them to prepare for
an exhibition. 6,000
DYIIPNA MARSHALL, maintenance, equipment and materials
to enable her to experiment and further develop her
work in Batik. 3,000
KENNETH R BARNETT, to purchase materials and equipment
to produce a leather mural. 1,800
DIANA BOYNES, maintenance for four months to enable her
to work with a master jeweller. 670 
JOAN ANTONELLIE, to subsidise maintenance to purchase
jewellery making tools and for further tuition courses under
a master jeweller. 2,267
HELGE LARSEN, travelling costs to attend the International
Symposium ' Jewellery of Steel' in Vienna. 800
SUZANNE ARCHER, for 12 month's maintenance and to purchase
a pottery kiln and wheel to enable work in ceramic sculpture. 3,500
JOHN DRAKE, to purchase jewellery making equipment. 500
BERNARD SAHM, for maintenance and materials to enable him
to further develop sculptural ceramics. 5,000
BRUCE N PRYOR, for kiln materials, ballmill plant and pugmill
to equip a pottery. 1,675
BEN HALL, for equipment and materials to enable him to study
guitar-making overseas. 500
KELVYN J ANDERSON, for maching and equipment to enable him
to establish a gem-stone carving workshop. 3,000
ALAN PEASCOD, for air fares, internal travel and living
expenses, camera equipment and film costs, to enable him to
study the behaviour of alkaline glaze materials in early
Egyptian and Islamic pottery, and the different design world
of this area and Mesopotamia. 5,000
VICTORIA IAN R FORSYTH, to produce a film showing all aspects of an
established pottery workshop. 950
HEIL F ANNGWIN, for maintenance and jewellery-making materials
and equipment to enable him to continue the parallel
appl~ ation of rebin and sliver as one art form. 3,500
KIM NM&amp;" INyf4Pb" chase a pugmill and pottery wheel to
equip a workshop. 1,000
PAUL JA. i141 16 enable him to establish himself as a
professional potter. 2,600
K L ESON,&gt;'@-tui economy air fare, internal travel, living
expenses entrance fees and purchase and maintenance of
films and tapes to enable him to do researoh on crafts in
the UK, USA and Southern Europe. 5,000
HEDLEY POTTS, towards costs of economy fare, travel and
living expenses, entrance fees, tapes and photographic
records to enable him to examine the role of crafts in
Europe, UK, USA, Israel and Canada. 3,000
PAMELA BROWN, to purchase materials and equipment to set
up a silk screen workshop. 500
WENNETH BUCKLAND, maintenance to enable her to teach
spinning and weaving, to hold workshops, and to prepare for
an exhibition. 2,600
HAN EDAVERS AND SPINNERS GUILD VICOTIRA, to pay one
year's salaries of teachers to conduct courses in basic
spinning and weaving techniques. 2,000 
VICTORIAN CERAMIC GROUP, to purchase a carousel type slide
projector and scfeen and to conduct five pottery workshops. 1,475
CARLTON FREE COACHING SE'RVICE, for materials and equipment
and part salary for a co-ordinator. 4,000
CRAFT' ASSOCIATION OF VICTORIA, assistance with costs of clay,
textile, macrame and tie-dye materials and equipment for a
' Craft Happening' during the next Moomba Festival. 500
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
KINGSLEY J MARKS, air fare to enable further study of
ceramics in Great Britain and Europe in 1974. 1,500
JUDITH A BARNES, towards cost of return economy air fare,
living and travel expenses, and weaving materials and
equipment to enable her to study and work in South America
for 2-3 years. 3,000
PETER N HARVEY, to purchase equipment for Clarendon Pottery. 2,000
CAROLE A FOOKS, for air fare and tuition fees to enable her
to study ceramics overseas in 1974. 1,500
PRU MEDLIN, to cover costs of employing an assistant in
her weaving workshop for one year. 3,633
RICHARD G HOWARD, to employ a trainee in his blacksmith's
workshop. 3,000
ANN CAMERON-SMITH, to purchase consumable and basic equipment
to establish a pottery workshop. 3,420
ROBERT J KNOTTENBET] T and PETA VAN ROOD CNOTTEBEir, to
purchase kiln materials, kiln furniture, pottery shelving
and blunger to establish a pottery. 2,090
CqAFT ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, return air fare to
Australia for Sam Herman to conduct lectures and workshops
in glass blowing. 2,133
TASMANIA CYNTHIA MITCHE, 3LL, to purchase equipment and materials for
a pottery workshop. 3,169
PENNY SMITH, for equipment to establish a pottery workshop. 3,000
JOHN SMITH, to purchase machinery and equipment to set up
a workshop to produce prototype furniture. 3,000
NORTHEIRN TASMANIAN POTTERS GROUP, for lecturing fees, air
travel, freight and gas cylinder for a five day pottery
seminar for members. ' A 
VESTERN AUSTRALIA
PENELOPE J WARD, maintenance for 12 months to work for
a jewellery exhibition, and to purchase equipment and
materials for her workshop. 3,600
RINSKE CAR, maintenance and rent to enable her to develop
her wcrk in the field of tapestries and production of wall
hangings for an exhibition. 3,000
ERIC CAR, for maintenance and jewellery-making equipment
and to 3ubsidise the employment of a trainee. 4,600
BUNBURY ARTS CENTRE, to purchase pottery, spinning and
weaving equipment and materials for use by members. 2,000
ART WORKSHOP FOR CHILDRFN, towards costs of 12 months
part-time training of two creative art leaders to undertake
and guide organisation of craft activities at the workshop. 3,840
CRAFT ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA, to purchase equipment
for woodwork, metal work and screen printing workshops,
library material and photocopying machine, office equipment
for administrativ3 contre. 7,900
CRAFTS COUNICIL OF AUSTRALIA, for visit to 1974 World Crafts
Council Exhibition in Toronto by the two World Crafts
Council representatives in Australia, the Executive
Secretary of the Crafts Council of Australia and the Editor
of ' Craft Australia'. 4,800
Total no. of grants 59 TOTAL AMOUNT RECOMNDEM $ 139,284 



AL; At
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 176
23 January 1973.
APPOINTMENTS
The Executive Council has approved the following appointments:
Appointed to the Remuneration Tribunal:
Mr Justice Campbell
Mr Andrew Grimwade
Mr R. M. Porter ( General Manager, N. S. W. Government Insurance
Office)
Appointed to Home Loans Investment Corporation ( part-time):
Dr Patricia Apps, Phd. ( Cambridge), M. E. D. ( Yale), B. Arch.
Lecturer in Architecture Sydney University. Age: 32
Re-appointed to the Australian Film Development Corporation
Mr T. S. Duckmanton
Mr D. E. Brown
Mr Barry Jones
Appointed to the Australian Broadcasting Control Board
Mr W. L. C. Davies, manager of Southern T. V. Corp of Adelaide ( NWS9)
Mr H. Souter ( part-time member)
Appointed to the Industries Assistance Commission
Prof. Alan Grahame Lloyd ( as Commissioner)
Ms Hylda Rolfe ( as Commissioner)
Appointed as Director of the Australian Institute of Marine Science
Prof. Malvern Gilmartin
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



jAU STRALI
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement ' No. 177
23 January 1974
TARIFFS ON DOMESTIC APPLIANCES
' he Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced
details of the Government's acceptance, with minor variations,
of the report of the Tariff Baord ( now Industries Assistance
Commission) on domestic appliances, heating and cooling
equipment, etc.
Mr. Whitlam said that in general, the Tariff Board
has recommended a tariff duty of 25% for the goods under reference.
However, there are several exceptions to this whereby some products
will be subject to a duty of 20 per cent and others 35 per cent.
Generally, these recommendations provide for the existing tariff
rates for a number of goods to be reduced significantly. The
Board has stated that evidence supplied by local manufacturers
and other information indicate that major economies could be
achieved by re-organising production activities. These economies
( coupled in many cases with substantial natural advantages) would
allow the industries to operate profitably and probably to command
a larger market under reduced levels of protection. More efficient
production would also provide substantial national benefits.
Because the protective situation which applied until
recently offered few inducements to change, the Board has recommended
duty levels designed to encourage a better use of-resources while
providing adequate protection for the more efficient producers.
The better use of resources and the lower levels of protection should
bring * siqnifi cantly reduced prices to consumers ( including most home
owners) as well as general economic benefits to the community as a
whole. Mr. Whitlam indicated that the industries covered by this
report include the second major consumer products sector of the
economy to be reviewed recently by the Government. ( The first
was the consumer electronic equipment and components industry.) / 2 
-2-
Goods covered by this latest report are wide ranging and
are of major importance to Australian consumers in that many are
now ' necessities' and constitute substantial investments for
most Australian home owners. They include refrigerators, washing
machines, clothes dryers, freezers, dish washing machines, ranges
ovens, and small stoves ( commonly referred to as whitegoods);
certain refrigeration components, air conditioners and commercial
refrigeration; portable appliances such as toasters, irons, kettles,
etc., and water heaters and space heaters.
The Government has decided not to accept the precise
recommendations of the Tariff Board in respect of a suggested deferral
of some duty reductions for two years. Instead, it has decided to
phase-in the duty reductions over the two year period, beginning with
an immediate reduction and further reductions in 12 months and 2 years
hence. This will enable firms to be subjected to a more gradual
increase in competitive pressures and encourage them to undertake
the necessary re-organisation at an early date. The present high
level of consumer demand both here and overseas and the resultant
pressure for higher levels of production will ease adjustments in
the industry. The Government has accepted the Board's recommendation
that a bounty be paid on the production and sale in Australia of
sealed compressors of 1.5kw or less because of the importance
of compressors as components in the manufacture of refriger'ators
and room air conditioners. The payment of bounty will provide local
regrigerator and air conditioner manufacturers with the immediate
advantage of lower prices for an important component and thereby
assist them to prepare for the reduced level of protection on their
appliances. Mr. Whitlam said that details of the customs tariff changes
arising from the Government's decision will be announced when
administrative arrangements to implement them have been finalised.
In accepting the Tariff Board's recoupindatkons, the
Government has decided that assistance will be made available to
firms and employees who may be disadvantaged by the proposed tariff
changes. Details of assistance and eligibility will be announced
after the completion of the Government's general consideration of
adjustment assistance principles. If necessary, interim assistance
arrangements will be implemented.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 178
23 January' 1974
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
FOR NEW4 SOUTH WALES FLOODS
The Prime minister today released details of further
Australian Government proposals for assistance to New South Wales
for the purpose of assisting victims of the widespread floods
in that State. Mr. Whitlam announced on 11 January that he had informed
the Premiers of New South Wales and Queensland that the Australian
Government was prepared to join in the normal way with their
Governments in providing financial assistance * on a dollar for
dollar basis for financing the relief of personal hardship and
distress in the affected areas. He had also referred to the
co-operation of the Australian defence services with the State
Civil Defence and Emergency Services in providing assistance in
flooded areas, and said that this co-operation would continue.
He had informed the two Premiers that his Government was prepared
to consider quickly and sympathetically State proposals for other
assistance. Mr. Whitlam said that, following discussions between
officials of the Australian and New South Wales Governments, the
Australian Government had agreed to assist the State with a
comprehensive range of measures to provide relief and to assist in
the restoration of essential public services and facilities.
He had written ' o the Premier of New South Wales to inform him of
this. The assistance which the State Government had agreed to
provide would include:-
Special assistance through the Rural Bank of New South
Wales to primary producers affected by the floods, covering
advances at concessional rates of interest and favourable
repayment terms to meet carry-on requirements such as the
purchase of household stores and other essentials; for
the replacement of stock and plant lost; and for the
replacement of essential improvements destroyed, excluding
dwellings. 
-2
Rail freight rebates on donated food, fodder, clothing,
etc., for distribution to flood victims.
rail freight concessions on the carriage of fodder
purchased for starving stock and the transport of stock
from flood-affected properties for agistment in respect
of approved districts.
Qtants to Councils to enable them to undertake emergency
repair works of a temporary nature in order to restore
essential services such as water supply and sewerage.
Grants for the restoration of Council roads, bridges,
etc., and for the restoration of Council electricity
and water supply undertakings where the authorities are
unable to finance these from their own resources. In
these cases, Councils will be expected to make a
contribution to the cost of the necessary works commensurate
with their own resources.
Grants for costs of repairing flood-damaged railway
lines and facilities, and for repairs to roads and bridges
under the control of the Department of main Roads.
Mr. Whitlam said that the New South Wales Government would
be expected to meet expenditure on the foregoing measures up to a
specified maximum annual amount of $ 5 million. Any expenditure
beyond that amount would be accepted in full by the Australian
Government, thus ensuring that the contribution by New South Wales
was limited and known in advance.
Mr. Whitlam. pointed out that the funds provided by the
Australian Government would take the form of grants where the New Souti
Wales Government provided grants, and interest-free loans where the
funds were provided by the State by way of loans. The Australian
Government had given a similar assurance in broad terms to the
Queensland Government whose specified maximum commitment is $ 2
million but had not yet received any information on measures
contemplated by that Government, apart from the immediate relief
of personal hardship and distress.
The Prime Minister said that the Commissioner of Taxation
had advised that in cases where, because of adverse financial
circumstances caused by the floods, a taxpayer is experiencing
difficulty in paying his tax, sympathetic consideration would be
given to extending the time for payment. Any taxpayer so affected
should make an individual application to the Deputy Commissioner
in his or her State for additional time to pay.
The Commissioner had also confirmed that income tax
deductions are allowable for gifts of $ 2 or more if made to any
public fund established and maintained for the relief of persons
in Australia who are in necessitous circumstances as a result of
the floods.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



-Av~ i-*
jAUSTHALIAL PRESS STATEMENT NO.
January 1974
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
and the Premier of South Australia, Mr Dunstan
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT SIGNED
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam and the Premier of
South Australia, Mr Dunstan today signed an Urban and
Regional Development Agreement which will provide assistance
of more than $ 41 million for programs in South Australia
this financial year.
The South Australian Government is the first
State Government to enter into such an Agreement which may
be the initial step towards a long term agreement covering
a wider range of urban and regional development programs.
The signing of this comprehensive Agreement is.
a tangible result of the desire of the Australian and
South Australian Governments to co-operate to improve the
day-to-day lives of South Australians.
This Agreement covers financial assistance for:
The South Australian Land Commission to make land
available at a price people can afford.
The development of Monarto to provide an alternative
to existing cities
The provision of sewerage and water supply to
improve water-quality.
The Area Improvement and the National Estate
Programs.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. kI y
4 
SOUTH AUSTRA I. N LAE-D COIIISSIUCX
A total of e24 million is available as a 30 year loan at the
long term bond rate with repayments deferred for the first ten
years mainly to acquire large areas of land for urban use.
The program is aimed directly at increasing the supply of
serviced land on the market, making it available at a price
people can afford to pay and which excludes or greatly reduces
the speculative component, and at helping the co-ordination of
urban development.
Legislation to establish the South Australian Land Commission
was passed by the State Government in October, 1973, and $ 8 million
was made available by the Australian Government last financial year
which was used to acquire 1,220 hectares of land.
South Australia pioneered the program and has shown the way
to other 8tates. It is expected that the first land will be
put on the market in March. 
IM'! NAYTO The Australian and South Australian Government have agreed to
accept the Monarto Development Commission's first stage development
plan which provides for a population target of between 25,000 and
30,000 people by the end of 1983.
The development program for this financial year includes land
acquisition, investigations and studies, and furth~ r tree planting
which is expected to cost about S7.5 million.
Under the Agreement signed today, the Australian Government
will supply z; 6 million, or 80 per cent of the total experditure
whichever is the lesser amount, mainly by way of loans and matching
grants. rThe development of iHonarto and growth centres in other Sta: tes
is aimed at encouraging' the rapid development of a small number
of regional growth centres as desirable alternatives to existing
cities. The role of the iMonarto Development Commission is to plan and
manage the development of Monarto and the attraction of population
and industry to the new city. 
.3.
AIU&amp; A LLRV~~.
A tot'al of 6500, C00 will be available in the ILorthern
1Spencer Guf legio of iouwvh Autasfor an Are"-Im~ provem'ent
Program which aims to link tU'he thr e levels of Government and
community groups togeth.' er in a cooeaieventure.
The programs are &amp; evelIoped in co-oparation with the Regioinal
Organis--tioni of Couicils ccoovvaeircsh the local government counc-Il
areas of" Carrietuon, Cry: s -tal Eol, ' co7getown, Gl~ adstone, Y'allet,
Hawker, i&amp; etozDstitJ1ini. icpaliity, .,' anyaka-Qa or n,
. U" ura, Or.;-oroo, 12etei-b3croughDitrct Peterboroiugh Iuiiaiy
Pirie, Port Augusta, PortL-Cermeir., Po-rtV Pinie, Red Hill, Spa2. din6,
W'hyalla and il; ztn
Lrea irapr've~ ent P'-ogram. s aedirycctcc{ to specific regions
selected for social and ecoromic reg ions. and because major
defiieniesQxit. fuds whi-Lch ; 3re for specific Purposes,
aiv, to give the rei z betrlvnocn-viro reit an At
improve forward inng 
SE. WERAGE Under the National Sewerage " rogram 25,750,000 will be
made. available to remove existing backlog of unsewered
premises and to improve sewerage treatment, the long term
aim being to ensure that by 1982 all new homes can be
connected to an environmentally adequate sewerage system.
The program also covers the trea. tment of industrial wastes.
An important underlying object ive is the protection of
water supplies from pollution.
This year the Program is being extended to cover smaller
cities and the centres which will benefit from this extension
in South Australia are Whyalla and I-it. Gambier.
The funds will be made available in the form of 30% noninterest
bearing non-repayable grants and the rest as loans
at the long term bond rate.
WATER SUPPLY
Adelaide's water treatment scheme will be assisted under
this agreement by the provision of 34.4 million this year. These
funds will also be in the form of 350 grants and 70/ loans.
Adelaide's water comes from local catchments and the River Murray.
Both of these sources are contaminated and the city's water
supply falls a long way short of international quality standards.
The water tre: ltment scheme is aimed at completely eliminating this
problem over the next 10 years. The various planned treatment
works will be supplemented by measures to protect the water
catchment areas wherover possible. 
i'V~ UNT~ ES TATE
A total of 1;: 866,000 will be made available for land
acquisition, studies, restor-tion, preservation and improvement
of landscapes and buildings of special significance.
Under the Natdonal Estate Program in 1973/ 74v $ 262,000
was provided to assist with 14 projects, and considerably
more projects are expected to be undertaken this financial
year. The Australian Government recently approved the establishment
of an Australian Heritage Commission which will play a vital
role in future programs when th-, necessary legislation is passed
by the Australian Parliament.
Projects approved in the program this financial year have
been recommrended to the Minister for Urban and Regional
Development, Tom Uren, by the Interim Committee on the National
Estate.
I 



7_ 77_ _ 7
NQ DATE
M/ ' 9Jauay 97
EMBARON: o to b usedin an for
Tueday 29 January 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS AT STATE DINNER,
KUJALA LUMVPUR
The following is the text of an address by the
Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, at a State Dinner given in' his honour
by the Prime Minister of Malaysia in Kuala Lumpur tonight.
" It is thoroughly appropriate that I should have begun my
visit to six countries in the South East Asian region here, in
Malaysia. I am no stranger to your country. I come as an old
friend as the guest of old friends. I come as Prime Minister of a
nation with a long and proven friendship towards the people of
Malaysia. I come to re-affirm that friendship and to seek new ways
to strengthen the co-operation which has existed between our two
countries for more than two decades0 There is no country in the
region which better exemplifies the spirit of national independence
and regional co-operation than your own.
I believe further there is no country in the region where
the policies of my own government are better understood and where
the responses and attitudes of our two governments to the changes,
challenges and opportunities in the region are more-in harmony.
In this climate of change, in seeking new solutions to
new problems, Malaysia has responded with vigour and imagination.
We Australians have in our own way tried to do the same0 Our views
at so many points coincide, and so do the interests of our two
nations0 In particular, we march in step on three fundamental
matters. We both believe that the detente between the great powers 
2.
can work, that it must be made to work and that the smaller powers
like Malaysia and Australia can help make it work. We both believe
deeply that this region should not become the area for confrontation
and competition between the great powers. We both believe that
regional co-operation and regional associations have a vital
contribution to make to the stability and prosperity of this region.
It is against this background of shared interests, sharedattitudes
and shared aspirations that I wish the policies and actions
of the Australian Government to be seen.
In Australia, we have broadened the range of our international
contacts. We have sought t~ o break down ideological
constraints which had for so long obstructed meaningful relationships
with countries such as China, East Germany and North Viet-Nam. We
have placed our relationships with the United States and the United
Kingdom on the basis of a more mature partnership. We have widened
our horizons and sought greater co-operation with the medium and
smaller powers of Africa, Latin America and the Pacific. We have
given our full support to all questions of human rights and declared
our opposition to any forms of lingering colonialism. We have sought
to remove any taint of racism from our national and international
policies. I would like to turn now to my own and my government's
approach to our continuing involvement in South East Asia.
I wish to make it quite clear that our interest in South.
East Asia continues undiminished. Our genuine concern about the
well-being of Malaysia and our other neighbo-urs-in this region is
a central pre-occupation and an enduring feature of Australian
f oreign policy. My government is a government of constructive change.
' What has changed in our attitude to South East Asia is not the
degree of our interest or of our involvement, but the nature of that
interest and that involvement, We seek to turn away from the
destructive confrontations of the past to constructive co-operation
in the future. After coming to office, we ended our military role in
Viet-Nam a role which Malaysia never had; we ended our military
assistance to Cambodtia assistance of a type which Malaysia did 
d
not give to that country; we reduced our interest in ASPAC from
which Malaysia has already withdrawn; we sought to change the main. Ly
military emphasis of SEATO an organisation, of which Malaysia was
never a member; we decided to withdraw our ground forces garriscned
in Singapore which were removed from Malaysia in 1969.
Some of our critics have suggested that these and other
changes-indicate that the present Australian government is less
interested in South East Asia than its predecessors or that
Australia is embarked on an isolationist course.
I wish to rebut that thesis totally and I would hope to
put this idea to rest now, in Kuala Lumpur, at the outset of my
visit to South East Asia.
My government is, in fact, setting a new course for
Australia in this region. We have shifted the emphasis of our
continuing involvement in South East Asia from one primarily based
on ideological considerations and military alliances ' to one based
increasingly on developing trade with the countries of the region,
on promoting stability through constructive aid programs, on
encouraging security through regional co-operation, on a posLtive
response to the recent proposals that we should consider economic
assistance to agreed ASEAN projects, and on the development of
cultural contacts through the negotiation of cultural agreements wil. h
the countries of South East Asia.
We see in this re-orientation of our diplomatic efforts
the opportunity, which has been too often missed or ignored in the
past, to establish enduring relationships with the countries of the
region. It is not our wish to forge ties based on transitory
concerns but to seek out ways of developing bonds based on an
identification of those interests which will continue irrespective
of the governments in power in Australia or the region. Our imair
endeavours will henceforth be directed towards expanding rej. ations
in those areas of foreign affairs which are most likely to produce
lasting social and economic advantages for both us and our neighbours,
I believe that this shift in emphasis will, as our Minister
for Overseas Trade said in Bangkok in December, mean an increase In
trade and, hopefully, an increase in aid in the years ahead-as wel
as a general development of the network of cultural and other conta: cTs
with the countries of South East Asia. It means in fact that we are 
going to live more thoroughly with Asia than in the past..
Some manifestations of this change are already evident.. k'
In recent months we have joined MEDSEA, the Ministerial Conference
for the Economic Development of South East Asia. Only yesterday
in Bangkok we were proclaimed an associate member of SEA4EO, the
South East Asian Ministers of Education Organisation. Earlier this
month we met for the first time with the Secretaries-General of ASEAN
to discuss ways in which Australia might assist agreed ASEAN economic
projects. I repeat that isolationism is not a policy option for
Australia. We are going through a period of change and adjustment
which I believe will result in a different but more endurin&amp;.
Australian involvement than ever before with the countries of
South East Asia.
In this re-orientation I would stress that we have not
sought to widen our interests and contacts at the expense, of older
friendships. And this applies with especial force to Malaysia and
the ASEAN nations. 1 .1
For too long our interests in this region were seen
excessively in terms of defence. We ' do not now look on the countries
of South East Asia as buffer states or as constituting some northern
military line where some potential future enemy of Australia should
be held. Rather, we see these countries, especially Malaysia,
Singapore, T hailand, Indonesia and the Philippines, as countries
having a common interest with Australia and New Zealand in.
consolidating the security and stability of this region as a whole.
We are of course continuing defence co-operation. Ve hold
to our pledge to the Australian -people to maintain the five power.
arrangements until a more positive and enduring settlement is reached*
in establishing peace, freedom and neutrality in this region.
Accordingly, we see the programs of defence co-operation with Malaysia
and the stationing of Australian Air Force Squadrons at Butterworth
continuing as long as they remain relevant to the needs of both our
nations and relevant to the realities of the region.
our defence association is only one aspect of the.
relations between our two nations and our two peoples. We have our
longstanding common bond through our membership of the Commonwealth.
We have increasinfly fruitful co-operation at the United Nations
and the Australian Government now, as a matter of policy, consults 
closely; with the countries of South East Asia before determining
our position at the United Nations. A glance at our voting patterns
in the United Nations will show that since December 1972 we have
voted together to a much greater extent than ever before.
We have at present over 6,000 Malaysian students in
Australia, many of whom have enriched our culture and widened our
perspectives. Others who have returned occupy prominent positions.
in your government-and Public Service. This exchange can only
strengthen the understanding of and friendship for each country in
the other. Trade and Australian investment in Malaysia have developed
rapidly. Only a week ago I announced a new Australian policy on
Australian investment overseas, especially in developing countries.
We want to encourage private Australian investment on a
joint venture basis in Malaysia in a way which will benefit the
p eople of Malaysia and will be favourable to the ownership and
control of enterprises by Malaysians. We understand and accept the
wish of developing countries to regulate foreign investment in
accordance with their own national aspirations and development plans.
We seek no less for ourselves and we see Australian investment
overseas in the context of mutual benefit and of economic co-operation
without exploitation. Recently the number of Australian tourists visiting Malaysia
has increased greatly. There has also been a rapid growth in the
cultural exchanges between our two countries. This is a matter which
I believe worthy of further active encouragement. I believe that
these programs of exchange between peoples and cultures have an
increasingly greater part to play in developing a wider, enduring
understanding between neighbours with different cultural backgrounds.
Let us freely acknowledge the differences in culture, but let us
learn more about each other and from each other.
W also have many other links. I am glad that we have
been able to make our contribution in the recent past to the
development of your Central Bank, your armed forces, especially the
Navy and the Air Force, your insurance arrangements and, indeed,
your Constitution itself.
All these links have contributed to a high level of
awareness and understanding of each other. 
We, in Australia, have been impressed by the economic
success of Malaysia. I note that in your recent mid-term review
of the second Malaysia plan you have not only achieved, but have
exceeded your growth target. The importance of economic success is
absolute because only with economic progress will there be social
advancement and regional stability.
I do not, however, wish to comment only on Malaysia's
contribution to the economic development of the region. If
anything, in the past few years we have watched with even greater
, admiration the way Malaysia has evolved her foreign policies to
match the changed realities of the area.
Malaysia has, along with Indonesia, the Philippines,
Singapore and Thailand, established a workable, relevant and
important regional grouping ASEAN. ASEAN is an example to all of
us of the co-operation and understanding which can be achieved if
countries with a common interest in progress come together to promote
that common interest.
Malaysia has also used that forum to advance its concept
of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. Australia applaudls this
initiative and welcomes the objectives which the ASEAN countries have
set for themselves for a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in
South East Asia.
It is a creative concept which, if fulfilled, will not only
benefit the nations included in the zone, it will itself be a further
step towards detente, if the great powers are able to agree not to
us e this region as the field for destructive rivalry. You have
acknowledged that the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality will
not be achieved overnight. It is evident that the great powers will
need to show more trust towards each other before they will come to
a point when they can agree mutually to accept the zone.
The search for detente has begun and I believe the
realisation will grow that it is only the imaginative farsightedness
of such new initiatives which will enable our world to attain the
peace and justice we all desire0
In the same spirit of hope but with the same awareness of
the difficulties in the way, my Government has suggested that some
wider regional arrangement for informal consultation between the
nations of the whole region should be established in the future. 
7.
We consider that it is important that the countries of the Asian
and Pacific region should be able to come together to discuss common
interests in an atmosphere free of crisis, free of pomp, free of
drama, and free of excessive expectations of any spectacular results.
I recognise that such a forum cannot be achieved quicly.(
it
has to evolve from within the region, out of the wishes of the*
countries of the region. Like the zone of peace, freedom and
neutrality, it will only come about when the countries concern~ ed.
agree that it is-in their mutual interests to have such a forum.
Lest there be any misunderstanding, I want to emphas'ase that
we do not see such an association competing with ASEAN in any way.
On the contrary, we would see it as being complementary to ASEAN
which has proved itself to be a close, viable and natural grouping
of South East Asian states0
Malaysia and Australia are both moving in the same genera1
direction and, with the benefit of our long-standing friendship and
understanding9 we should, by working together, make our goals that
much more capable of achievement0 We share the same great goa:.--s
We are marching together towards them. In some matters, such as
normalisation of relations with China9 Australia has been able to
move more quickly than Malaysia0 In others, such as the es-tab. shnrt
of relations with North Korea, Malaysia has moved more quicky trian
Australia0 This has been because of differences in our circumstances
rather than differences in our ultimate goals.
We are each involved in our own way in an important
humanitarian experiment0
You9 within Malaysia, are trying to forge a free, prosperous
and harmonious multi-racia" l society.
We9 in Australia, notwithstanding our European origins, are
trying to build strong bridges and develop lasting links with
Malaysia and the countries of South East Asia0
But we both seek9 I believe, the same end, namely to
co-operate closely,, as good neighbours should, in a wider effort tc,
promote a stable9 more prosperous and peaceful multi-racial1 South
East Asian region.
When one sees the severity of the test which the detente
must undergo, as shown so suddenly and dangerously in the Middle East
when one sees the continuing frustration of our high hopes just one
year ago for real peace in Indo-China, it would be an exceptic'na'LiY 
8.
bold or excessively naive man who declares his unqualified optimism
about the course of events and their outcome.
Yet, fundamentally, I am an optimist, certainly about the
future of our region. Diplomacy must be based on realistic hopes
rather than on resignation and despair. And from no country in the
region, from the effectivensss of its government, the growing
prosperity of its people, and the imaginative policies of its
leaders, do I draw more encouragement to sustain that optimism and
that hope than I do from Malaysia." 



NQ DATE
M/ ll 1 February 1974
EMBARGO: Not to be used in any form
before 5.30 p. m. Canberra time
1 February 1974
PRIME MINISTER IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA:
ADDRESS TO THAI-AUSTRALIA ASSOCIATION
The following is the text of the Prime Minister's
address to the Thai-Australia Association in Bangkok today,
1 Februiary 1974.
" I have had many occasions in Australia and overseas to
stress, not just the change of policies of the new Australian
Government, but the continuity within that change. Continuity
' within change ~ is one of the themes of this current journey. Its
re-assertion is one of the purposes of this visit. The relations
between Thailand and Australia perfectly illustrate that theme.
Thailand itself is a spendid example of national
continuity within change, and of change within continuity and
never more truly than in this crucial time in Thailand's long
history, a time when men and women of goodwill around the world
are drawing new hope, new encouragement, from the events in our
region. Change of quite revolutionary dimension has been the very
essence of the recent history of our region. One has only to
consider that less than 30 years ago, of the six nations on my
current itinerary, Thailand alone was independent. Or consider that
in the great area from the old north-west frontier of India to the
shore of the south west Pacific an area containing nearly a
quarter of the world's people Thailand and Australia alone were not
under colonial rule. This is one measure of the scope of change we
have lived with and are still living with. The yearning for true
national independence, for national dignity, which called this vast
change into being is still the most powerful force in our region.
That spirit has preserved the national identity and independence
of Thailand for 700 years. It is the sort of spirit which the 
Australian Government brings to its own affairs and to Australia's
relations with its neighbours, its friends and its allies. We have
tried to understand the aspiration of others as we wish others to
try to understand our own aspirations.
The Governments of both our countries have changed
relatively recently. Of course we have both changed many of our
policies. Ve are both striking out on new paths. But in both
nations there is also a basic continuity of policies. Certainly in
the case of Australia most publicity has naturally been given to the
changes, to the new directions. Yet it cannot be stressed to much
or too often that there is a basic continuity in the conduct of
Australian affairs.
Many of our decisions have been responses to developments
in the relations between the great powers. We have tried to adapt
promptly and intelligently to the new realities, particularly in
our region. In some matters, such as normalisation of relations
with China, we have been able to move more rapidly than some of our
neighbours, including Thailand, but there can be no mistaking the
dir ection events are leading us all. V~ hile developing new relationsnot
just with China but in Africa and Latin America and Eastern
Europe we have strengthened old friendships as well. This is very
much the case with Thailand.
We don't believe it is good enough that Australia should
regard countries like Thailand and her A.:: an partners merely as
some sort of military buffer placed by geography for Australia's
convenience. We have defence arrangements with such countries.
We continue to: but we want them to be viewed in the perspective
of our total relation with the region. Far from losing interest in
Thailand, the fact is that there has never been greater mutual
interest and wider exchanges between the two countries than there
is now. This interest is growing on both sides. Australia
attaches great importance to the continuing well-being of an
independent and forward-looking Thailand, a Thailand playing an
active and cooperative role in the region and adjusting its
policies skilfully to the developing international situation.
Australia and Thailand are expanding their cooperation
in all fields. More Australians than ever before are coming to 
3.
Thailand in my own case this ism ighth visit in the last
fourteen years. Many Thais have stud-*' ed in Australia and more will
come in the future. This cooperation has developed steadily over
nearly 30 years, since Australia established a mission in Thailand.
That mission was one of the first Australian posts to be opened in
South-East Asia. A high point in the development of our relations
was the visit to Australia in 1962 of their Majes-ties the King and
Queen of Thailand. We have aiso been greatly honoured that his
Royal Highness the Crown Prince is furthering his educatIon in
Australia. Australians and Thais have for twenty years been
cooperating in the development of Thailand. A number of joint
projects are being undertaken in different areas of the country
through the Australian aid program. Consultations have recently
taken place between officials of our two governments on another
important and innovative project. Through the efforts of
HRH the Princess Mother, voluntary medical units have been set up
in many provinces to improve health services for people in outlying
areas. However, due to difficulties of communication, medical
treatment is not readily available to large numbers of people in
remote areas a similar situation to that in Australia which led
to the creation of the Royal Flying Doctor Service. I am happy to
announce that, in response to a request from the Government of
Thailand, the Australian Goverrment will support the Princess
Mother's Pioneering Medical Volunteers project by providing
ambulances and radio transceivers. We hope that a pilot project
to determine the exact requirements of the communications network
will proceed in the near future. As a further example of
cooperation, Prime Minister Sanya and I yesterday decided in
principle on a cultural agreement between our two countries.
Quite recently the Australian Government held discussions
with ASEAN representatives in Bangkok on possible Australian
assistance to ASEAN projects. l~ ight now my colleague, the
Minister for Education, is in Bangkok for the conference of
South-East Asian Ministers of Education Organisation at which we
were represented for the first time as an associate member. We 
4.
recently participated for the first time in the Ministerial
Conference for the Economic Development of South-East Asia.
We are cooperating with the M~ ekong Scheme with its headquarters
in Bangkok, which has such great potential as an instrument for
the reconstruction of Indochina. In the wider region, we share
common membership of ECAFE with its headquarters also in Bangkok.
Later on I shall be making reference to SEATO, but I mention these
other matters now to show how far we have moved from a restricted
and restricting concept of our relations as being only, or even
mainly, preoccupied with defence and security. Both our countries
have a well-rounded relationship with each other. Both are anxious
to see that it ripens and matures.
To illustrate this, let me say something of our trade and
economic relationships. There are long established and valued
economic links between Australia and Thailand. Our total trade of
some SA43 million last year is not as large as we would wish, but
it has shown a rapid rise in recent years. For our part, we are
confident that such growth will continue. We recognise, moreover,
that trade must be viewed as a two-way flow. We have taken a
number of initiatives to ensure that countries such as Thailand
will have considerably greater opportunities, and greater
encouragement, to sell to the Australian market. Last year we
reduced all Australian tariffs by 25 per cent. In addition, from
the beginning of this year, we have introduced for the benefit of
developing countries a scheme whereby those countries will receive
additional preferences -in the Australian tariff. We will continue
to increase both the scope of the scheme and the margins of
preference we accord until we are satisfied that the bveloping
countries have achieved a competitive position in the Australian
market. For this purpose my Government is establishing a facilitywithin
the Australian Department of Overseas Trade to provide
market research and to handle trade inquiries for countries such
as Thailand. I invite the Government of Thailand to make use of
it. Let me remind you also that we recognise the importance you
attach to receiving fair and reasonable prices in international
markets for your primary products. Our support in international
forums for the basic justice of such an approach is well known
and will continue. 
Next a word about overseas investment. Australia
recognises that in the right circumstances Australian private
investment overseas can make a positive contribution to the
industrial development of the host country. Although Australia
in the past has not been a significant generator of capital for
investment in overseas countries, we expect more activity-in this
area in the future. We believe, however, that every country
should have the right to regulate foreign investment in accordance
with its own national aspirations and social and economic
objectives. It is a right we exercise ourselves in relation to
foreign investment in Australia. For that reason we have recently
announced that we will seek to encourage Australian private
investment overseas only where it is fully welcomed by the host
country, where it will be favourable to the country in which it
is made, and where it will be consistent with advanced labour
relations and local environmental policies.
I have said that Australia and Thailand have a wellrounded
relationship which we want to see ripen and mature, We
are bringing this approach to all our other relationships in the
region. It is by understanding this basic approach that one can
best understand the changes we have made. I can illustrate it
by reference to some of the more notable of our policies.
I mention the United States. We have an important
defence treaty with U. S. and New Zealand but the American alliance
should never have been regarded as thL-e be-all and end-all of
Australia's., defence and foreign policies and it should never have
been viewed solely or principally as a defence association. Yet
there developed in Australia over a generation a tendency to view
all matters beyond our shores through the single narrow focus of
China. What we are now trying to do is widen the range of our
vision not to downgrade the importance of our friendship with
the U. S. but to upgrade the importance of other relationships,
above all in Asia. We believe we are thereby creating a more
mature partnership. And we believe that frankness is the best
basis for friendship. We expect frankness: we intend to be
frank. I should also refer to our relations with Japan. We
are widening them beyond economics alone, important to both
countries as that aspect is. Japan is Australia's biggest 
customer: we are Japan's second biggest customer after the
United States. Obviously therefore, Australia's prosperity is.
closely linked with Japan's. We recognise Japan's need for
secure access at fair prices to the raw materials her industries
need, and so much of which Australia can provide. At the same
time, the Australian people want a fair say and a fair share in
the control and use of our own resources, just as the Thai
people recognise that investment and trade relations between.
states not merely the states of our own region must
henceforth take account of the welfare and aspirations of the
peoples of those states and cannot be based solely on business
criteria alone. I come now to China. Australia' s new relations with
China are based on the rejection of the relevance today of the
Dulles concept of military containment of China. The war of
intervention in Viet-Nam was created by that doctrine and
destroyed that doctrine. SEATO itself was originally ihe treaty
expression of the doctrine. Clearly our view of the concept which
gave birth to SEATO influences our view of SEATO's present role.
When we addressed ourselves to this matter on assuming office
14 months ago it was urged upon us that withdrawal by Australia
would damage confidence in the area. With an understanding of
the position of Thailand particularly in mind, and the importance
Thailand attaches to the Manila Treaty, we therefore agreed to
work within the organisation for modification of its operation
and orientation: underpin confidence, yes., underwrite
containment, no. And with the cooperation and agreement of all
members, this is what we have done.
Finally I mention our attitude towards regional
arrangements and associations. Of all those in this region,
ASEAN is unquestionably the most important, the most relevant,
the most natural. Australia does not seek to be a member of
ASEAN, though we have close bi-lateral and regional relationships
with all its members. My present tour takes me to four ASEAN
capitals. With each member country and with Indonesia, our
nearest neighbour, we are developing ever-increasing cooperation
at all levels, including defence cooperation. Australia is
playing a cooperative role in the other regional associations I 
7.
mentioned earlier. We are strengthening all our bi-lateral
relations in the region and are seeking new forms of regional
7 cooperation. Increasingly I believe the nations of the Asian
and Pacific region will in the future come to see the need for
a wider forum than presently exists where all who have a common
interest and a common destiny in the region can meet regularly,
quietly and constructively. On this matter I just say two
things here: nobody, least of all me, believes that any new
arrangements will come into being overnight; and secondly,
nobody, certainly not me, believe that any such arrangements
should or could supplant or absorb ASE. AN.
I recognise too that the continuing conflict in
Indochina our hopes of a year ago being still unfulfilled
represents a major obstruction to any plans for new arrangements
in our region. But the need remains, and I believe that
perception of that need will grow and sharpen.
It should be plain therefore that the direction of our
decisions and hopes are outward-looking, regional and truly
international. It is absurd to suggest that Australia is going
isolationist when the whole thrust of our policies is towards
greater international cooperation than ever before, towards
deeper interests in a greater number of nations in every
continent than ever before some of them nations which have
hitherto scarcely made a scratch upon the Australian
consciousness. New interests do not mean a loss or lessening
of old interests. They mean rather a widening of Australian
awareness, a realisation by Australians of their capacities,
their responsibilities and their opportunities. Australia has
not grown weary of international involvement, whatever our
d'isillusionment as a result of Viet-Nam.
That experience, the Viet-Nam experience, when
Australian youth decided no longer to tolerate the intolerable,
just as the youth of Thailand, in a very different context,
did so decisively last October still deeply influenlces our
judgments upon the affairs of this region and
believe we should make to events in this region. n:-
government we would be if our attitudes, declared tr\.' Za
decade when we were powerless to act, were discarded "' c~ cc~
r 
we had the power to translate those attitudes into action.
That would have been true unpredictability, true irresponsibility.
Decidedly Australia has not grown weary of being
involved: we have simply come of age. We draw a distinction
between constructive involvement and counter-productive
intervention. I hope that what my Government has been able to
show is an Australian capacity for self-renewal, just as this
ancient kingdom is demonstrating its capacity for renewal and
resilience, for change in a world of change, without rejecting
its traditions but rather involving the very essence of its
national tradition as the instrument of ordered change itself."
II1I1~ Ui--7i--I 1 



PRI1F T471NISTER' IS SPEDCXH AT THAI-AUSTRALIA ILUNCHEM DUSIT THMAHNO! T1E L
1 FEBRUARY 1974.
I have had many occasions in A~ ustralia and overseas to stress, not
just the change of policies of the new Australian Government, but the
continuity vithin thot changre. Continuity within change is one of the
themes of this current journey. Its re-assertion is one of the purposes
of this visit. The relations between Thailand and Australia perfectly
illustrate that theme. Thailand itself is a splendid example of national
continuity within change, and of chanre within continuity and never more
truly than in this crucial time in Thailand's long history, a time when men
and worren of goodwill around the world are drawinG new hope, new encouragement,
from the events in our region.
Change of quite revolutionary dimension has been the very dssence of
the recent history of our region. One has only to consider that less
than 30 years ago, of the six nations on may current itihierary, Thailand
alone was independent. Or consider that in the great area from the old
north-west frontier of India to the shore of the South west Pacific an
area containing nearly a quarter of the world'Is people Thailand and
Australia alone were not under colonial rule. This is one measure of the
scope of change we have lived with and are still living with. The yearning
for true national independence, for national dignity, which called this vast
change into being is still the most powerful force in our region. That
spirit has preserved the national identity and independence of Thailand for
700 years. It is the sort of spirit which the Australian Government brings
to its own affairs and to Australia's relations with its neighbours, its
friends and its allies. " le have tried to understand the aspiration of
others as we wish others to try to understand our own aspirations.
The Governments of both our countries have changed relatively recently.
Of course we have both changed many of our policies. We are both striking
out on new paths. But in both nations there is also a basic continuity of
policies. Certainly in the case of Australia most publicity has naturally
been given to the changes, to the new directions. Yet it cannot be
stressed too much or too often that there is a basic continuity in the
conduct of Australian affairs.
Many of our decisions have been responses to developments in the
relations between the great powers. We have tried to adapt prornpt~ y and
intelligently to the new realities, particularly in our region. In some
matters, such as normalisaition of relations with China, we have been able
to move more rapidly than some of our neighbours, including Thailand, but
there can be no mistaking the direction events are leading us all. While
developing new relations not just with China but in Akfrica and Latin
-imerica and Eastern Europe we have strengthened old friendships as well.
This is very much the Case with Thailand.
We don't believe it is good enough that Australia should regard
countries like Thailand and her Asian partners merely as some sort Of
military buffer placed by geography for Australia's convenience. We have
defence arrangements with such countries. We continue to: But we want
them to be viewed in the perspective of our total relation with the region.
Far from losing interest in Thailand, the fact is that there has never been
greater mutual interest and wider exchanges between the two countries than
there is now. This interest is growing on both sides. Australia attaches
great importance to the continuing well-being of an independent and forwardlooking
Thailand, a Thailand playing an 8ctive and cooperative role in the
region and adjusting its policies skillfully to the developing international
situation. Australia and Thailand are expanding their cooperation in all fields.
More Australians than ever before Eire coming to Th. oiland in my own case
this is my eighth visit in the last fourteen years. M~ any Thais have
studied in kustralia and more will come in the future. This co-operation
has developed steadily over nearly 50 years, since Australia established a
mission in Thailand. That mission was one of the first Australian posts 
2-
to be opened in South-East Asia. A high point in the development of
our relations was the visit to Aiustrilia in 1962 of Their Majesties the
King and Queen of Thailand. Wehave Palso been gre,-t+. y honoured tha~ t His
Royal Hi; hness The Crown Prince is furthering his education in ! Lustralia.
Australions and Thais have for twenty years been co-operating in the
development of Thailand. I number of joint projects are being undertaken
in different areas of the country through the Australian aid program.
Consultations have recently taken place between officials of our two
governmnents on another important and innovative project. Through the
efforts of HRH the Princess Mother, voluntary medical units have been set
up in many provinces to improve health services for people in outlying
areas. However, due to difficulties of communication, medical treatment
is not readily available to large numbers of people in reilote areas a
similar situation to that in A~ ustralia which led to the creation of the
Royal Flying Doctor service. I am happy to announce that, in response to
a request from the Government of Thailand, the Australian Government will
support the Princess Mother's pioneering medical volunteers project by
providing ambulances and radio transceivers. ' he hope that a pilot project
to determine the exact requirements of the communications network will
proceed in the near future. As a further example of co-operation
Prime Minister Sanya and I # wv* 1i deoided in principle on a cultural
agreement between our two countries.
Quite recently the Australian Government held discussions with ASEANI
representatives in Bangkok on possible Australian assistance to ASEAN
projects. Right now my colleague, the Minister for Education, is in
Bangkok for the Conference of South-East Asian Ministers of Education
Organisation at which we were represented for the first time we an
associate member. We recently participated for the first time in the
Ministerial Conference for the Economic Development of South East Asia.
We are co-operating with the Mekong Scheme with its headquarters in Bangkok,
which has such great potential as an instrument for the reconstruction of
Indochina. In the wider region, we share common membership of ECAFE with
its headquarters also in Bangkok. Later on I shall be making reference to
SEATO, but I mention these other matters now to show how far we have moved
from a restricted and restricting concept of our relations as being only,
or even mainly, preoccupied with defence and security. Both our countries
have a well-rounded relationship with each other. Both are anxious to see
that it ripens and matures.
To illustrate this, let me say something of our trade and conomio
relationships. There are long established and valued economic links
between t'ustralia and Thailand. Our total trade of some dollars A43 million
last year is not as largesas we would wish, but it has shown a rapid rise in
recent years. For our part, we are confident that s uch growth will
continue. We recognise, moreover, that trade must be viewed as a two-way
flow. We have taken a number of initiatives to ensure that countries such
as Thailand will have considerably greater opportunities, and greater
encouragement, to sell to the Australian market. Last year we reduced all
Australian tariffs by 25 per cent. In addition, from the beginning of this
year, wme have introduced for the benefit of developing countries a scheme
whereby those countries will receive additional preferences in the Australian
tariff. We will continue to increase both the scope of the scheme and the
margins of preference we accord until we are satisfied that the developing
countries have achieved a competitive position in the Australian market.
For this purpose my Government is establishing a facility within the
Australian Department of Overseas Trade to provide market research and to
handle trade inquiries for countries such as Thailand. I invite the
Government of Thailand to make use of it. Let me remind you also that we
recognise the importance you attach to receiving fair and reasonable prices in
international markets for your primary products. Uur support in international
forums for the basic justice of such an approach is well kniown and will
continue. 
3
Next a word about overseas investment. -Australia recognises that
in the right circumstances Australianlri) tG investment overseas can make a
positive contribution to the industrial development of the host country.
Although Australia in the past has not been a significant generator of
capital for investment in overseas countries. We expect more activity
in this area in the future. We believe, however, that every country
should have the right to regulate foreign investment in accordance with
its own national aspirations and social and economic objectives. It is
a right we exercise ourselves in relation to foreign investment in
Australia. For that reason we have recently announced that we will seek
to encourage Australian private investment overseas only where-it is fully
welcomed by the host country, where it will be favourable to the country
in which it is made, and where it will be consistent with advanced labour
relations and local environmental policies.
I have aid that Australia and Theiland have a well-rounded
relationship which we want to see ripen and mature. We are bringing this
approach to all our other relationships in the region. It is by
understanding this basic approach thot one can best understand the changes
we have made. I can illustrate it by reference to some of the more
notable of our policies.
I mention the United States. We have an important defence treaty
with U. S. and New Zealand but the American alliance should never have been
regarded as the be-all and end-all of Australia's defence ard foreign
policies and it should never have been viewed solely or principally as a
defence association. Yet there developed in Australia over a generation
a tendency to view all matters beyond our shores through the single narrow
focus of China. What we are now trying to do is widen the range of our
vision not to downgrade the importance of our friendship with the U. S.
but to upgrade the importance of other relationships, above all in Lsia.
We believe we are thereby creating a more mature partnership. And we
believe that frankness is the best basis for friendship. We expect
franknesss We intend to be frank.
I should also refer to our relations with Japan. We are widening
them beyond economics alone, important to both countries as that aspect is.
Japan is Australia's bigest customers We are. Japan's second biggest
customer after the United States. Obviously therefore, Australia's
prosperity is closely linked with Japan's. We recognise Japan's need
for secure access at fair prices to the raw materials her industries need,
and so much of which Australia can provide. At the same time, the
Australian people want a fair say and a fair share in the control and use
of our own resources, just as the Thai people recognise that investment
and trade relations between States not merely the States of our own
region henceforth take account of the welfare and aspirations of the
peoples of those States and cannot be based solely on business criteria.
alone. I come now to China. Australia's new relations with China are
based on the rejection of the relevance today of the DWlles concept of
military containment of China. The war of intervention in Vietnam was
created by that doctrine skid destroyed that doctrine. SEATO itself was
originally the treaty expression of the doctrine. Clearly our view of
the con~ cept which gave birth to SEATO influences our view of SEATO's present
role. When we addressed ourselves to this matter on assuming office 14
months ago it was urged upon us that withdrawal by Australia would damage
confidence in the area. ' With an understanding of the position of Thailand
particularly in mind, and the importance Thailand attaches to the Manila
Treaty, we therefore agreed to work within the organisation for modification
of its operation and orientation: Underpin confidence, Yes., underwrite
containment, no. And with the co-operation and agreement of all members,
this is what we have done. 
Finally I mention our attitude towards regional arrangements and
associations. Of all those in this region, AS= AN is unquestionably the
most important, the most releva~ nt, the Most natural. &amp; ustralia does not
seek to be a member of ASEON, though we have close bi-lateral and regional
relationships with all its members. My present tour takes me to four
ASEhN capitals. . with each member country and with Indonesia, our nearest
neighbour, we are developing ever-increasing co-operation at all levels,
including defence co-operation. Australia is playing a co-operative
role in the other regional associations I mentioned earlier. We are
strengthening all our bi-lateral~ relations in the region and are seeking
new forms of regional co-operation. Increasingly I believe the nations
of the Asian and Pacific region will in the future come to see the need for
a 7wider forum than presently exists where all who have a commnon interest and
a oommon destiny in the region can meet regularly, quietly and constructively.
On this matter I just say two things heret Nobody, least of all me, believes
that any new arrangements will come into being overnight.., And secondly,
nobody, certainly not me, believe that any such arrangements should or
could supplant or absorb ASEAN.
I recognise too that the continuing conflict in Indochina our hopes
of a year ago being still unfulfilled represents a major obstruction to
any plens for new arrangements in our region. But ' the need remains, and
I believe that perception of that need will grow and sharpen.
It should be plain therefore that the direction of our decisions and
hopes are outword-looking, regional and truly international. It is
absurd to suggest that Australia is going isolationist when the whole thrust
of our policies is towards greater international co-operation than ever
before, towards deeper interests in a great number some of them nations
which have hitherto scarcely made a scratch upon the Australian consciousness.
New interests do not mean a loss or lessening of old interests. They mean
rather a widening of Australian awareness, a realisation by Australians of
their capacities, their responsibilities and their opportunities.
Australia has not grown weary of international involvement, whatever our
disillusionment as a result of Vietnam.
That experience, the Vietnam experience when Australian youth
decided no longer to to'. erate the intolerable, just as the youth of
Thailand, in a very different context, did so decisively last October
still deeply influences our judgments upon the affairs of this region and
the responses we believe we should make to events in this region. What
a strange government we would be if our attitudes, declared throughout a
decade when we were powerless to act, were discarded the moment we had the
power to translate those attitudes into action. That would have been true
unpredictability, true irresponsibility.
Decidely Australia has not grown weary of being involved: Vie have
simply come of age. We draw a distinction between constructive involvement
and counter-productive intervention. I hope that what myr Government has
been able to show is an Australian capacity for self-renewal, just as this
ancient Kingdom. is demonstrating its capacity for renewal and resilience,
for change in a world of change, without rejecting its traditions but rather
involving the very essence of its national tradition as the instrument of
ordered change itself.
7-



DEPARTTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWA1G. CABLEGRAM
IN S6 1.15903
FR OM TOD 01.2.74... 2345 LT
AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY TOR 02.2.74... 0501 LT
EA NG KOK 535 UNCLASSIFIED
PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE9 BANGKOK, I FEBRUARY 1974.
PRIME MINISTER
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:
I HAVE OFTEN SEEN THE PRESS IN NIGHTCLUBS BEFORE BUT THIS IS THE
FIRST TIME I HAVE GIVEN THEM A CONFERENCE IN ONE.
I HAVE HAD SOME HOURS NOW IN CONVERSATIONS WITH YOUR PRIME
MINISTER LAST NIGHT AT THE RECEPTION AND AT THE DINNER AND
ENTERTAINMENT9 AND THIS MORNING WITH HIS AND MY OFFICIALS AT
GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
WE WERE AFLE TO DISCUSS A VERY GREAT NUMBER OF MATTERS IN A MOST
R: NDLY AND FRANK FASHION.
THE LAST TIME WE HAD BEEN TOGETHER WAS IN THIS CITY NINE YEARS
AGO AT A MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF JURISTS.
HE MADE SOME AUSTRALIAN FRIENDS AT THAT TIME IN THE LEGAL AND
ACADEMIC SPHERES WHICH HAVE GIVEN HIM A VERY GREAT INTEREST IN
AUSTRAL IA.
I HAD LOOKED FORWARD VERY MUCH TO MEETING HIM BECAUSE HIS NAME
IS GREATLY HONOURED RIGHT ROUND THE WORLD SINCE HE GOT SUCH OBVIOUS
PUBLIC AND ROYAL APPROVAL ON 14 OCTOBER.
THE RELATIONS BETWEEN THE THAI GOVERNMENJ_ AND THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, I AM SURE, ON A PERSONAL LEVEL9 AT THE TOP LEVEL, WILL
EE VERY HAPPY AND FRUITFUL INDEED.
THERE ARE TWO PARTICULAR MATERRS WHICH I MIGHT MENTION TO YOU AT
THIS STAGE.
THERE IS THE PROSPECT, IN THE QUITE NEAR FUTURE, OF A CULTURAL
AGREEMENT BETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES AND ALSO A TRADE AGREEMENT
RTWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES.
I HAVE MENTIONED THE PRIME MINISTER'S INTEREST IN AUSTRALIA IN
ACADEMIC AND LEGAL MATTERS.
HE IS NATURALLY9 THEREFORE9 VERY MUCH DISPOSED PERSONALLY TOWARDS
A CULTURAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN US.
THE AGREEMENT WILL COVER, AMONG OTHER THINGS9 THE PROVISION OF
FACILITIES BY EACH COUNTRY IN THE OTHER COUNTRY FOR THE CITIZENS OF
EACH TO LEARN THE LANGUAGE OF THE OTHER.
THERE WILL ALSO BE ARRANGEMENTS9 WE EXPECT, FOR EXCHANGING MEN
AND WOMEN OUTSTANDING IN SUCH FIELDS AS MUSIC, RADIO, TELEVISION9
FILMS9 ARTISTIC EXCHANGES AND ALSO IN SPORTING MATTERS.
IN REGARD TO THE TRADE AGREEMENT, OUR OFFICIALS ARE NOW PURSUING
THIS MATTER AT THE OFFICIAL LEVEL.
THE PRIME MINISTER SHOWED HIMSELF VERY MUCH AWARE OF THE
I,' ITIATIVES MY. GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN IN RECENT MONTHS AND IN FACT
U ' 0 THE VERY EVE OF MY DEPARTURE FROM AUSTRALIA, IN PROMOTING
M-' iY'ERS OF TRADE AND, WHERE DESIRED, INVESTMENT, ? RODUCTION OF
TARIFFS OVERALL BY AUSTRALIA, REDUCTION FURTHER BY AUSTRALIA ON
TARIFFS, ON GOODS COMING FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, PROMOTING THE
TRADE COMMISSIONER SERVICE IN THAILAND, THE MAKING AVAILABLE OF
. ACILITIES IN TRADE BY AUSTRALIAN OFFICIALSO
I MENTIONED SOME OF THESE MATTERS IN MY SPEECH AT LUNCH TIME.
. o o 2 
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INVVARD CLEGRAM I. 15903
ASI( LMAE DIES AND GENTLEMEN, ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS YOU WOULD LIKE TO
THE AUSTRALIAN JOURNALISTS HAVE BEEN AROUND WITH ME AND WILL
CONTINUE TO BE AROUND WITH ME, BUT THIS IS THE FIRST OPPORTUNITY I
KAVE EVER HAD FOR A PRESS CONFERENCE AT THE HANDS OF THAI
JOURNALISTS, OR INTERNATIONAL PRESS STATIONED IN BANGKOK, SO CAN THEY
SrART. IT WOULD HELP ME IF YOU WERE TO LET ME KNOW YOUR NAMES WHICH I
MIGHT NOT CATCH IMMEDIATELY AND YOUR JOURNALS WHICH I HOPE I WOULD.
PRIME MINISTER9 YOU HAVE MADE SEVERAL STATEMENTS ABOUT THE
AMERICAN BASES IN THAILAND.
COULD YOU CLARIFY YOUR POSITION ABOUT IT?
PRIME MINISTER
MORE SIGNIFICANTLY STILL I BELIEVE IS THE FACT THAT THE ROLE OF
THE BASES HAS CHANGED.
MY GOVERNMENT AND BEFORE IT BECAME THE GOVERNMENT, MY PARTY,
HAD HAD VERY GREAT QUALMS ABOUT, NOT ONLY QUALMS9 THE STRONGEST
O3JECTION TO BOMBING BY THE UNITED STATES AIRFORCE.
A GREAT DEAL OF THIS BOMBING TOOK PLACE FROM BASES IN THAILAND.
I FIRST BECAME AWARE OF THIS WHEN I VISITED UDOM IN JUNE OR
J1LY 1965o
AT TH4AT TIME, THERE WAS A FLIGHT OF AUSTRALIAN AIRFORCE FIGHTERS
SATIONED AT UDOM.
AT THAT TIME, I SAW THE RELATIVELY SMALL BEGINNINGS OF THE UNITED
STATES BOMBING OVER NORTH VIETNAM.
MY PARTY HAS ALWAYS HAD THE STRONGEST OBJECTION TO AMERICAN
BOMBING. IT THOUGHT THAT MILITARILY IT WAS INEFFECTIVE.
MORALLY, IT WAS MONSTROUS.
S ' WE REGRETTED THAT THAI AIR BASES WERE USED FOR THAT PURPOSE.
THEY NO LONGER ARE AND I AM SATISFIED THERE COULD BE NO
RESUMPTION OF AMERICAN BOMBING IN THIS PART OF THE WORLD.
THERE IS A NEW SITUATION THEREFORE.
Q. COULD YOU PLEASE TELL US WHAT USE AUSTRALIA NOW SEES IN SEATO?
( UNCLEAR)
PRIME MINISTER:
WE HAVE NO OBJECTION TO THE MANILA TREATY.
I WISH PEOPLE WOULD READ THE PREAMBLE TO THE MANILA TREATY.
IT EXPRESSES VIEWS AND PRINCIPLES WHICH WERE AND STILL ARE
VALID. SUCH MATTERS AS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL JUSTICE.
THE MANILA TREATY IS SOUNDTHE
SEATO -ORGANISATION EMPHASISED AN ASPECT WHICH NO LONGER IS
REL EV A NT.
.0.3 
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWARD CAK3LEUGRAM 1. 15903
SEATO AROSE OUT OF THE DULLES POLICY OF MILITARY CONTAINMENT OF
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.
THAT DOCTRINE LONG CEASED TO HAVE ANY VALIDITY.
IT WAS -JVEN THE COUP DE GRACE BY DR KISSINGER AND THEN PRESIDENT
NIXON VISIT ING THE CAPITAL OF CHINA.
MY GOVERNMENT CAME TO OFFICE AND THE NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT9 AT
THE SAME TIME, RESOLVED TO DISMANTLE THE RESIDUAL ELEMENTS OF THAT
DOCTRINE AS EMBODIED IN SEATO.
WE SPENT SOME MONTHS IN CONSULTING WITH THE SURVIVING MEMBERS OF
THE MANILA TREATY ON THIS ISSUE AND THE RESULT WAS THE NEW
ARRANGEMENTS WHICH WERE MADE IN NEW YORK BETWEEN THE VARIOUS FOREIGN
MINISTERS LAST SEPTEMBER.
NY GOVERNMENT IS CONTENT WITH THE NEW ARRANGEMENTS.
I THINK THEY HAVE BEEN FULLY CONSUMMATED WITHIN THE LAST WEEK.
I WOULD LIKE TO ASK YOU ABOUT THE THAI STUDENTS THAT ARE GOING TO
AUSTRALIA AND HAVE TO HAVE A TEST IN ENGLISH BECUASE THAI IS NOT
%-ALAYSIAN OR INDONESIAN THEY HAVE TO SPEAK ENGLISH MORE THAN THEIR
Q'JN LANGUAGE9 SO A THAI FINDS IT VERY DIFFICULT TO SPEAK THE ENGLISH
LA ; G UA G E
ALSO9 WHAT IS THE POSITION ABOUT DISCRIMINATION OF A LOT OF THAI
WO. IEN MARRIED TO MEN IN AUSTRALIA.
THEY FIND IT A BIT DIFFICULT TO LIVE AMONG THE ' AUSTRALIANS.
HOW WOULD YOU HELP THEM WITH THESE THINGS?
PRIME MINISTER:
THERE ARE TWO MATTERS WHICH THE LADY RAISES.
THE SECOND ONE I HAVE NO COMMENT TO OFFER.
I HAVE NO IMPRESSION WHATEVER THAT WHERE A THAI CITIZEN HAS
MARRIED AN AUSTRALIAN CITIZEN THAT THEY HAVE NOT BEEN HAPPY WHETHER
THE' WERE LIVING IN AUSTRALIA OR IN THAILAND.
THERE ARE MANY MARRIAGES OF WHICH I AM AWARE AND THEY HAVE ALL
EZEN VERY HAPPY MARRIAGES.
I WOULD NOT THINK THERE IS ANY DIFFICULTY IN EITHER COUNTRY FOR
THE PARTNERS IN SUCH MARRIAGES.
THE OTHER MATTER ABOUT THE USE OF9 OR THE FAMILIARITY WITH
ENGLISH FOR STUDENTS AT AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES IS A MATTER OF WHICH
I HAVE ONLY BECOME AWARE OF IN THE LAST 24 HOURS.
I HAVE DISCUSSED IT WITH OUR AMBASSADOR HERE AND I HAVE DISCUSSED
IT WITH MR. BEAZLEY9 OUR MINISTER FOR EDUCATION WHO HAS FOR THE
LAST FEW DAYS BEEN ATTENDING SEAMEO9 THE MINISTERIAL MEETING OF
MINISTERS OF EDUCATION IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA WHERE WE AND NEW ZEALAND
WERE ADMITTED FOR THE FIRST TIME AS ASSOCIATE MEMBERS.
SO MR. BEAZLEY IS AWARE OF THIS SITUATION ALSO.
NEXT WEEK9 MR0 GRASSBY9 MY MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION9 WILL BE
VISI1' ING BANGKOK AND THE AMBASSADOR WILL DISCUSS THIS MATTER WITH
HI l0 S09 I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT MY MINISTER FOR EDUCATION9 MY MINISTER
FOR IMMIGRATION AND 19 MYSELF ARE NOW AWARE OF THIS MATTER9 AND FOR
MYSELF9IT IS ONLY NOW THAT I HAVE BECOME AWARE OF IT.
.00 4 
I) I_ 1ARTMIENT F01F OREIGN AFFAIRS
NWARD CABLEGRAM
4-I. 15903
PERHAPS I CAN HELP IF I MAKE A FEW GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ABOUT IT.
IN ALL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN AUSTRALIA, ENGLISH IS THE ONLY
LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION.
AND, AT THE UNIVERSITIES IT IS OBVIOUSLY NECESSARY TO HAVE A
THOROUGH COMMAND OF ENGLISH IF ONE IS TO PROFIT FROM ANY OF THE
COUR SE S.
WE HAVE ABOUT 10,000 STUDENTS FROM OVERSEAS AT AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES. ABOUT 8,500 OF THESE OVERSEAS UNIVERSITY STUDENTS IN AUSTRALIA
COME FROM HONG KONG OR FROM SINGAPORE OR FROM MALAYSIA AN' IN EACH
CASE NEARLY ALL OF THEM ARE PERSONS OF ETHNIC CHINESE ORIGIN.
IN EACH CASE, HONG KONG, SINGAPORE9 MALAYSIA, THEY ARE
THOROUGHLY FAMILIAR WITH THE USE OF ENGLISH.
AT THIS STAGE9 SECONDARY EDUCATION AND TECHNICAL SECONDARY
EDUCATION SUCH AS PROFESSIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC COURSES AS DISTINCT
FRO1" CULTURAL COURSES AND HELD IN ENGLISHo
ACCORDINGLY, STUDENTS FROM THOSE COUNTRIES ARE ABLE TO
FARTICIPATE IN LECTURES AND SEMINARS AND COURSES AT AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES WITHOUT ANY DIFFICULTY WHATEVER.
IT IS OBVIOUSLY AND REGRETTABLY MUCH MORE DIFFICULT FOR STUDENTS
erPOM OTHER COUNTRIES9 WHICH DON'T PRIMARILY USE ENGLISH9 TO
FARTICIPATE IN THOSE LECTURES AND SEMINARS AND COURSES.
IT MIGHT NOT MATTER SO MUCH, SAY, IN THE CASE OF INDONESIA
FECAUSE IT IS RARE FOR INDONESIANS TO UNDERGO EDUCATIONAL COURSES
CVERSEAS BEFORE THEY ALREADY HAVE ONE UNIVERSITY DEEREEtuAjND RS
[ 1, LE OFPOICY9 THE INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT ENCOURA DETS T
iHEIR FIRST DEGREE IN INDONESIA AND MAYBE DISCOURAGES THEM
FROM COURSES BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY DEGREE.
THE OTHER ASEAN COUNTRY, THE PHILIPPINES, HASNT LOOKED VERY MUCH
TO AUSTRALIA FOR ADVANCED EDUCATION BUT TO THE UNITED STATES.
I THEREFORE HAVE BECOME AWARE OF THIS PARTICULAR PROBLEM AS
REGARDS THAILAND.
THERE ARE TWO PARTICULAR FEATURES ABOUT THAI EDUCATION WHICH
WOULD DISTINGUISH IT FROM SOME OTHER COUNTRIES IN RESPECT TO OVERSEAS
SF UD IES.
THE FIRST IS THAT THAI STUDENTS WHO HAVE GOT OVERSEAS
QUALIFICATIONS OVERWHELMINGLY GO HOME AFTER THEY HAVE ACQUIRED THOSE
QUAL IFICAT IONS.
THERE IS, THEREFORE, NOT THE DIFFICULTY WHICH IS SOMETIMES
ENCOUNTERED IN RESPECT TO STUDENTS WHO COME FOR UNIVERSITY DEGREES IN
AUSTRALIA OF THEIR NOT WANTING TO GO BACK TO THEIR OWN COUNTRY.
THERE HAS BEEN SOME MISUNDERSTANDING OR EVEN ILL-FELLING BETWEEN
AUSTRALIA AND SINGAPORE ON THIS ISSUE.
SINGAPORE HAS COMPLAINED OF A '' BRAIN DRAIN''.
NOW THIS WOULD NOT APPLY IN THAILAND.
AT LEAST go PER CENT, I AM TOLDO OF THE THAIS WHO OBTAIN OVERSEAS
CUALIFICATIONS GO BACK TO THArLANDø
THAILAND HAS THE VERY GREAT ADVANTAGE OF HAVING HAD9 FOR CENTURIES,
INDEPENDENCE AND IDENTITY.
THE STUDENTS ARE PRIMARILY PATRIOTS WANTING TO GO HOME TO SERVE
TAEIR FELLOW CITIZENS.
0 C 
DEPARTMENT'I OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM I. 15903
THE OTHER QUITE UNUSUAL FEATURE ABOUT THAI STUDENTS OUTSIDE THEIR
COUNTRY IS THAT THEY GO AT A MUCH YOUNGER AGE.
SO MANY THAI STUDENTS ARE ENCOURAGED BY THEIR FAMILIES TO GO TO
SCHOOL IN OTHER COUNTRIES, NOT JUST TO GO TO UNIVERSITIES. OR COLLEGES
BUT TO GO TO SCHOOL.
ONE OF THE OBJECTIVES IS TO OBTAIN A WORKING FAMILIARITY WITH
ENGLISH OR OTHER LANGUAGES WHILE THEY ARE STILL YOUNG AND ADAPTABLE.
THERE ARE NOT SO MANY SECONDARY STUDENTS FROM THAILAND IN
AUSTRALIA. THERE HAVE BEEN SOME HUNDREDS, THERE ARE STILL SOi\ E HUNDREDS,
THERE ALWAYS WILL BE I HOPE A VERY GREAT NUMBER OF THAI STUDENTSo
WE WILL HAVE TO LOOK AT THIS ASPECT OF HAVING SECONDARY COURSES
FOR THAI STUDENTS.
NOW THERE ARE SOME TECHNICAL MATTERS ABOUT THE APPLICATION OF
THIS TEST WHICH I WILL HAVE TO LOOK INTO OR WHICH MY MINISTERS WILL
HAVE TO LOOK INTO WHEN THEY GO BACK TO AUSTRALIA.
WE ARE A FEDERAL SYSTEM IN AUSTRALIA.
THIS YEAR, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS ACCEPTED THE COMPLETE
FI . i. CIALR ESPONSIBILITY FOR EVERY UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGE IN
ALL THESE UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED
UNDER STATE LAWS, AND IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
TO LAY DOWN THE EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS, TESTS AND SO ON, WHICH APPLY
IN THESE UNIVERSITIES.
WE CAN PERHAPS LEAN ON THEM OR TO USE A TERM THAT I ONCE USED IN
ANOTHER CONNECTION, WE CAN NUDGE THEM, BUT WE CANNOT CONTROL THEMo
IT IS A MATTER WHERE WE CAN USE OUR INFLUENCESo
I AM GLAD YOU RAISED THIS MATTER, I MUST CONFESS I WAS NOT AWARE
OF IT UNTIL I SET OUT ON THIS JOURNEY.
IT IS A MATTER WHERE MY GOVERNMENT WOULD NOT WANT TO SEE THAT
THERE WAS ANY DISADVANTAGE FOR THAI STUDENTS AS AGAINST ANY OTHER
OJERSEAS STUDENTS IN AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS OR UNIVERSITIES.
Qo
THERE HAS BEEN AN INCREASE IN COMMUNIST ACTIVITIES IN NORTH-EAST
'-AILAND IN THE PAST TWO OR THREE MONTHS.
WITH REGARD TO YOUR REMARKS TODAY, I WONDER IF YOU WOULD COMMENT
ON THIS ON THE INCREASE OF COMMUNIST ACTIVITIES IN NORTH-EASTERN
THAILAND? WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNED FROM THE PRIME MINISTER OF THAILAND?
PRIME MINISTER
I HAVEN'T DISCUSSED THIS MATTER.
I HAVEN'T RAISED THIS MATTER AND IT HASN'T BEEN RAISED WITH ME,
WE HAVE BEEN LESS THAN A DAY HERE, BUT AT THIS STAGE I HAVE NOT
BEEN INVOLVED IN ANY DISCUSSIONS ON THIS ISSUE.
HAS OUR GOVERNMENT REQUESTED YOU TO ACT AS A MEDIATOR BETWEEN US
AND THE REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM?
PRIME MINISTER
NO.
oo 6 
DPI'A\ RTMFENT 1OFFO REIGN AFFAIRS
INWA1RD CABLEGRAM I. 15905
Qo COULD YOU TELL US THE MEANING OF YOUR TRIP TO SOUTH-EAST ASIA
ESPECIALLY IN RELATION TO THE ASEAN NATIONS?
HOW IS AUSTRALIA GCING TO MAKE BETTER RELATIONS WITH ASEAN
TIONS? PRIME MINISTER
I SUPPOSE I CAN GIVE YOU AN ILLUSTRATION FROM THE MATTER THAT
THE LADY NEXT BUT ONE TO YOU RAISED.
S THIS QUESTION OF THE FAMILIARITY WITH ENGLISH WHICH IS REQUIRED
EFORE STUDENTS ARE ADMITTED TO OUR INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER LEARNING.
THAT WOULD BE A MATTER WHICH I CAN PROMOTE AS A RESULT OF
VISITING ONE OF THE ASEAN NATIONS.
THERE WERE SEVERAL MATTERS IN THE TRADE FIELD WHICH AROSE DURING
MY VISIT TO MALAYSIA.
'-lERE ARE MATTERS AS I MENTIONED IN THE CULTURAL AND TRADE
AGRETMENT FIELD WHICH HAVE COME UP IN THIS VISIT TO THAILAND.
AUSTRALIA'S RELATIONS WITH ALL THE ASEAN NATIONS ARE GOOD.
THEY ARE NOW TAKING PLACE ON A COLLECTIVE BASE ALSO.
IT WAS A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO9 WASN'T IT, 9 THAT AUSTRALIA WAS
INVITED TO CONFER WITH THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF ASEAN COLLECTIVELY
ON ASEAN PROJECTS SO WHILE OUR BILATERAL RELATIONS WITH EVERY ASEAN
MNTION HAVE ALWAYS BEEN GOOD, WE ARE NOW DEVELOPING COLLECTIVE
RLATIONS WITH ASEAN NATIONS.
IT WAS ENCOURAGING FOR ME, ON THIS VISIT9 TO HEAR DIRECTLY FROM
PROFESSOR SANYA HOW MUCH THE THAI GOVERNMENT SUPPORTS THE PRINCIPLE
WN:-CH ASEAN ADOPTED ON THE INITIATIVE OF MALAYSIA FOR A ZONE OF PEACE
' PODOMAN D NEUTRALITY IN THE ASEAN AREA GUARANTEED BY THE GREAT
THERE HAVE BEEN SOME SUGGESTIONS THAT THIS WAS A MATTER UPON
VHICH MALAYSIA WAS MORE INTENT THAN THE OTHER ASEAN MEMBERS.
T IS QUITE CLEAR TO ME NOW THAT THAILAND IS ALSO NO LESS INTENT
ON I SO A OSIT LIKE THIS ENABLES ME DIRECTLY AND PROMPTLY TO ACT
ON MATTERS WHICH CONCERN ASEAN NATIONS.
I THINK THIS IS THE GREAT ADVANTAGE OF A VISIT LIKE THIS TO FOUR
OF THEM WHICH I AM MAKING9 AND TO TWO OF THEIR. IMMEDIATE NEIGHBOURS
WHOM THEY WOULD LIKE TO ENROL IN ASEAN.
Qo
ALTHOUGH YOU HAVE STATED PUBLICLY THAT IT WAS NOT WITHIN YOUR
COUNTRY'S INTEREST TO JOIN ASEAN AND THAT YOU LOOK FORWARD TO A
LAPRGER GROUPING9 NAMELY ASEAN9 MY QUESTION IS WHAT HAS BEEN THE
ETiCRT ON THE PART OF YOUR GOVERNMENT IN TRYING TO ESTABLISH A LINK
P2: ATSHE AN, OR CAN WE EXPECT PERHAPS ON A TOKEN BASIS AN AUSTRALIAN
LINK WITH ASEAN IN THE NEAR FUTURE?
YOU WANT AN ASIAN FORUM SPANNING COUNTRIES IN THE PACIFIC TO
INCLUDE ALSO JAPAN AND CHINA BUT WHAT ARE THE CHANCES THAT JAPAN AND
CHINA UON'T DOMINATE IT JAPAN ECONOMICALLY AND CHINA POLITICALLY?
PRIME MINISTER
AUSTRALIAN HASN'T BEEN ASKED TO JOIN ASEAN BY ANY OF ITS MEMBERS
AND AUSTRALIA HASN'T ASKED TO JO, AS..
* a o7 
RTNI'INT OF' FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWARD CABLE GRAM 1. 15903
I WOULD EXPECT THAT THE ASEAN MEMBERS WOULD PROBABLY BELIEVE AND
AUSTRALIA WOULD ACKNOWLEDGE THE FACT THAT THERE ARE9 AT THIS STAGE9
TW'JO DISPARITIES ECONOMICALLY BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND EACH OF THE ASEAN
COUNTRIES OF SUCH SIZE THAT IT WOULD DISTORT THE GENERAL CONCEPT OF
ASEA N.
WE ARE VERY HAPPY AT THE PROGRESS THAT ASEAN HAS MADE BECAUSE IT
IS A NATURAL ASSOCIATION OF CONTIGUOUS NATIONS.
IT IS RELEVANT INCREASINGLY ANTD IT IS GROWING IN COHESION ALL
THE TIME. IT IS SATISFACTORY FOR ASEAN AND ALSO FOR AUSTRALIA THAT WE HAVE
BEEN ASKED TO CONSULT AS I JUST SAID ON ASEAN PROJECTS9 PROJECTS
WHICH ARE PUT UP ON A COLLECTIVE BASIS OR PROJECTS WHICH MIGHT AFFECT
MORE THAN ONE ASEAN COUNTRY.
NOW9 THOSE ARE FRUITFUL ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND
ASEA N.
THERE IS NO NEED TO MAKE THEM MORE FORMAL BY JOINING THE BODY.
ALL THE ASEAN ' ATIONS HAVE HAD ASSOCIATIONS AT ONE TIME OR
ANOTHER WITH REGIONAl.. ORGANISATIONS.
THERE WAS ASA9 THERE WAS MAPHILIND09 THERE WAS SEATO, THERE WAS
ASPAC. ASEAN IS THE ONLY ONE TO WHICH ALL THE PRESENT FIVE MEMBERS HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO ADHERE.
IT IS THE ONLY ONE WHICH HAS A GROWING FUTURE AHEAD OF IT.
THE WHO IDEA OF REGIONAL CO-OPERATION HAS HAD A LOT OF ATTENTION
IN EACH OF THE ASEAN MEMBERS UP TILL NOW9 BUT ASEAN IS THE ONLY ONE
THAT REALLY HAS MOMENTUM.
NOW YOU MENTION THE POSSIBILITY OF DOMINANCE ECONOMICALLY9
PCLITICALLY I DON'T KNOW WHAT OTHER WAY, IF THERE WAS A WIDER
ASSOCIATION IN SAY THE WESTERN PACIFIC OR IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA.
THIS CAN ALWAYS HAPPEN IN ANY ASSOCIATION.
I'LL GIVE AN INSTANCE OF AN ASSOCIATION THE FIRST ONE TO WHICH
AUSTRALIA BELONGS THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS9 THE BRITISH
COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS AS SOME PEOPLE MIGHT CALL IT.
NOW IT MIGHT BE THOUGHT THAT IN AN ORGANISATION OF ABOUT 34
RATIONS WHICH VARY IN SIZE FROM INDIA WITH HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
POPU_ ATION, TO OTHERS WHICH HAVE LESS THAN ONE MILLION POPULATION9
', HERE WOULD BE TOO MUCH DISPARITY THAT ONE NATION WOULD DOMINATE
ANOTHER, THAT COUNTRIES WHICH HAVE A VERY LARGE INCOME PER HEAD OF
PCPLLATION LIKE BRITAIN AND CANADA OR AUSTRALIA OR NEW ZEALAND OR
SIAGAPORE WOULD BE ABLE TO DOMINATE COUNTRIES WHICH HAD A SMALLER
ItjCOME PER HEAD OF POPULATION,
IT DOESN'T HAPPEN.
IT IS VALUABLE FOR ALL OF THEM TO GET TOGETHER AND SEE WHAT THEY,
HAVE IN COMMON.
NOBODY THESE DAYS TALKS OF LEAVING THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS.
EVERY COLONY9 ON BECOMING INDEPENDENT9 WANTS TO JOIN IT.
EVERY COUNTRY THAT BECOMES INDEPENDENT WHICH HAS BEEN RULED BY
SRITAIN OR THESE IS ONE THAT H:' S BEEN RULED BY AUSTRALIAq PAPUA NEW
GUINEA9 AS SOON AS THEY ARE IXD3EPENDENT THEY WANT TO JOIN THE UNITE
NATIONS AND THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS.
08 
D1I',.\ RTILNF 01: FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWARD CAISLEGaAM 1. 15903
THEY ARE NOT WORRIED ABOUT DOMINATION.
THESE ARE NOT SUCH FORMAL BODIES.
THERE MIGHT BE SOME SUCH MISGIVINGS IN THE ORGANISATION OF
AMERICAN STATES WHERE, ON SOME ISSUES, SUCH AS CUBA9 IT MIGHT BE
THOUGHT THE UNITED STATES WANTED TO LEAN TOO HEAVILY ON THE OTHER
CEM B E R S.
IT MIGHT BE SAID SO IN THE ORGANISATION OF AFRICAN UNITY WHERE
YOU CAN GET VERY LARGE STATES, VERY RICH STATES9 LIKE NIGERIA, BUT
THEY DON'T TRY TO DOMINATE AND THEY ARE NOT RESENTED.
THERE ARE NO ALLEGATIONS THAT THEY ARE DOMINATING.
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT ONE OUGHT TO BE NEGATIVE IN THESE RESPECTS0
IT IS ONLY BY REGULARLY AND INFORMALLY CONSULTING THAT WE REALLY
GT TO UNDERSTAND EACH OTHER.
IF WE HAVE BILATERAL VISITS, EVEN SUCH FAIRLY RELAXED ONES SUCH
AS THE ONE I AM ENGAGED IN AT THE MOMENT9 IT STILL LIMITS THE
OPPORTUNITIES THAT ONE WOULD LIKE TO HAVE BECAUSE YOU JUST CAN'T
MAKE VISITS AS OFTEN AS YOU WOULD LIKE.
BUT YOU CAN ALL PUT TIME ASIDE, ALL FOREIGN MINISTERS, OR HEADS
OF GOVERNMENT, CAN PUT TIME ASIDE ONCE EVERY YEAR OR TWO YEARS TO GET
TOGETHER IN BODIES SUCH AS THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS0
AND9 I THINK THAT IN DUE COURSE WHEN, FOR INSTANCE9 THERE IS THE
ZONE OF PEACE9 FREEDOM AND NEUTRALITY, THIS WOULD MAKE A WIDER
ASSOCIATION VERY MUCH EASIER.
THERE ARE SOME OTHER SUCH ASPECTS SUCH AS THE DIFFERENCE IN
ATTTUDE TOWARDS CHINA.
EVERYBODY HAS TO RECOGNISE EITHER TAIPEI OR PEKING AS BEING THE
SAT OF GOVERNMENT OF CHINA.
NOBODY, BUT NOBODY, CAN RECOGNISE BOTH GOVERNMENTS.
EACH GOVERNMENT INSISTS THAT YOU RECOGNISE IT AND DISREGARD THE
OTHERO NOW9 WE HAVE MADE OUR DECISION IN THIS MATTER9 BUT WE DON'T
C'ERLOOK THE FACT THAT IT IS MORE DIFFICULT FOR OTHER NATIONS WHICH
MAY HAVE A LONGER HISTORICAL INVOLVEMENT.
0. REGARDING CHINA.
ONE OF THE IMAGES OF AUSTRALIA/ THAI DIPLOMACY WAS IN A STATEMENT
YOU MADE LAST YEAR SAYING THAT THAILAND SHOULD RECOGNISE MAINLAND
CHI NA. DO YOU SEE ANY CHANGE IN THAI DIPLOMACY ON THIS?
PRIME MINISTER
I DON'T REMEMBER EVER MAKING A STATEMENT THAT THAILAND9
INDIVIDUALLY9 SHOULD RECOGNISE CHINA BY WHICH I WOULD REGARD
IT AS INEVITABLE THAT SOONER OR LATER ALL THE ASEAN NATIONS SHOULD
AVE NORMAL DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH PEKING AS THE SEAT OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF CHINA.
I WOULD THINK THAT IS iNEVITABLEO
I DON'T THINK ANYBODY WOULD DISPUTE THAT IT IS INEVITABLE BUT IT
IS NOT FOR ME TO MAKE THE DECISION0
AFTER ALL, ASEAN IS NOT IN AGREEMENT AMONG ITS OWN MEMBERS ON TH$
ISSUE0 INDONESIA HAS NEVER SAID THAT GENERALISSIMO CHIANG KAI-SHEK WAS
THE PRESIDENT OF CHINAø
9 
DE1.' ART.\ lE\ T F01F OREIGN \ FFAIRS
iNWARD CAB LEGRAM 1. 15903
TWO OTHER ASEAN NATIONS STILL SAY THAT HE IS.
TtOO OTHERS HAVE NEVER SAID WHO WAS THE PRESIDENT OF CHINA.
SO, IT SHOULDN'T BE NECESSARY TO POINT OUT THAT WE ARE IN A
COMPLETELY NEW BALL GAME SINCE THE 1TH OF OCTOBER.
EVEN BEFORE THAT DATE, THERE WERE CONTACTS BETWEEN BANGKOK AND
PEKING. THEY HAVE CONTINUED.
I BELIEVE THAT THEY ARE LIKELY TO PROVE PRODUCTIVE BUT CAN SEE
T-ERE ARE MORE DIFFICULTIES IN REGARD TO RELATIONS BETWEEN BANGKOK
AND PEKING THAN THERE ARE IN RELATIONS BETlWEEN CANBERRA AND PEKING.
ALL THAT WE HAD TO DO IN CANBERRA WAS TO SAY WHAT I SAID IN MY
PROGRAM FOR THE ELECTIONS 14 MONTHS AGO9 THAT WE WOULD MOVE
AUSTRALIA'S EMBASSY FROM TAIPEI TO PEKING.
WE HAD AN AMBASSADOR TO CHINA,
WE ACCREDITED HIM TO PRESIDENT CHIANG KAI-SHEK.
UHEN WE CAME IN9 WE DISCONTINUED THAT ACCREDITATION.
WE SOUGHT AND WE QUICKLY GAINED ACCREDITATION TO THE CHINESE
CDVERNMENT IN PEKING.
iT WAS RELATIVELY EASY FOR US.
WE ARE MORE DISTANT AND OUR ASSOCIATION IS SIMPLER.
Qo
WHAT IS YOUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE SOVIET PRESENCE IN THE INDIAN
CCEANq AND IF YOU HAVE CONSIDERED IT, HOW DO YOU EXPECT TO HANDLE IT?
BRIT-SAID THE DAY BEFORE YESTERDAY THAT CONFRONTATION BETWEEN
THE SUPER POWERS IN THE INDIAN OCEAN HAS TO COME9 THAT CEYLON'S AND
INDIA'S ATTITUDE OF A PEACEFUL INDIAN OCEAN IS UNREALISTIC..( UNCLEAR)
PRIME MINISTER
SWELLq I WON"? COMMENT ON WHAT THE LADY HAD TO SAY.
WE ARE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN IN AUSTRALIA AS WELL AS ON THE
PACIFIC OCEAN.
I HAVE NOT LOOKED AT THIS MATTER ON THIS VISIT.
I HAVE NO COMMENTS I WANT TO MAKE ON THIS VISIT9 BUT I DO NOT
WANT TO SPEAK IN THESE MATTERS IN TERMS OF THREATS AND SO ON.
THE FACT IS THAT SOME NATIONS HAVE QUITE LARGE NAVIES0
AS THE LAW OF THE SEA STANDS AT THE MOMENT9 THEY CAN SAIL THE
HIGH SEAS.
I WOULD NOT LIKE THE INDIAN OCEAN TO BECOME A SCENE OF
CONFRONTATION AS SAY THE MEDITERRANEAN HAS.
I BELIEVE WE WOULD HAVE THE SUPPORT OF MOST OF THE COUNTRIES IN
THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS9 SO MANY OF WHICH LIE WITHIN AND AROUND
THE INDIAN OCEAN.
JUST AS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVER: MENT HAS POSITIVELY SUPPORTED THE
ASEAN INITIATIVE FOR A ZONE OF '; EACEq FREEDOM AND NEUTRALITY9 SO TOO
T" F AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS POSITIVELY SUPPORTED THE SRI LANKAl'
FROPOSAL FOR A NEUTRAL INDIAN OCEAN5 AND AUSTRALIA IS A MEMBER OF
THE COMMITTEE WHICH THE UNITED NATIONS HAS SET UP TO PROMOTE THAT
CO NCE PT.
o. o00 
1) 1 JA RTMr\ E NT 0 F FOR E IG N A FF1A IR S
INWARD CABLEGRAM 1. 15903
A/ PRIME MINISTER
FOREIGN MINISTER
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
MT'N AND DEPT DEFENCE
TREASURER AND TREASURY
J. 1. 0.
A. I S.
MED IA
AID OFFICE
O. JE%-AS TRADE
E CC K3 A Y INDUSTRY
FEM9S PRESS SECRETARY
RF1 A ND C
Fm S N 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, MP.,
AT A LUNCHEON GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE ROYAL
GOVERNMENT OF LAOS. VIENTIANE; 4 FEBRUARY, 1974-
I AM INDEBTED TO YOUR HIGHNESS FORGIVING ME THE
OPPORTUNITY DURING MY PRESENT JOURNEY TO VISIT VIENTIANE
AND TO RENEW AN ACQUAINTANCE BEGUN WHEN YOU YOURSELF WERE
IN AUSTRALIA SOME YEARS AGO. I WELCOME TOO THE OCCASION
TO INFORM MYSELF OF THE ACHIEVEMENTS AND PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE LONG AWAITED RETURN OF PEACE AND ORDER THROUGHOUT
YOUR COUNTRY, AS YOU WILL KNOW, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
FIRMLY SUPPORTS THE PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL INTEGRITY#
INDEPENDENCE AND NEUTRALITY OF LAOS DECLARED IN THE GENEVA
AGREEMENTS AND LOOKS TO THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO ENDORSE
AND SUPPORT THEM.
AUSTRALIA WELCOMED BOTH THE FEBRUARY AGREEMENT AND
THE SUBSEQUENT PROTOCOL IN SEPTEMBER OF LAST YEAR. WE SAW
THESE AS HIGHLY IMPORTANT IN THEMSELVES, BUT ALSO AS
ENCOURAGING AND HEARTENING EVIDENCE OF A SPIRIT OF GOODWILL,
MAGNANIMITY AND CO-OPERATION AMONG ALL PARTIES IN LAOS OF
WILLINGNESS TO PURSUE A MUTUALLY ACCEPTABLE COMPROMISE IN THE
PRESIDING INTEREST OF A GENUINE NATIONAL RECONCILIATION.
I KNOW HOW MUCH IMPORTANCE YOU PERSONALLY HAVE ATTACHED TO
THIS GREAT OBJECTIVE OF NATIONAL RECONCILIATION AND HOW MUCH
IS OWED TO YOUR WISE JUDGMENT AND IMAGINATIVE LEADERSHIP IN
THE PROGRESS YOU HAVE MADE TOWARDS IT. 
-2-
I SPEAK FOR ALL MY FELLOW AUSTRALIANS WHEN I SAY THAT
AUSTRALIA UNDERSTANDS HOW MUCH NOW HASTO BE DONE TO BIND
UP THE WOUNDS OF WAR, TO REPAIR THE LOSS AND DAMAGE OF SO
PROTRACTED A CONFLICT, ALL OF US IN THIS ROOM ARE CONSCIOUS
OF WHAT THE TRAGIC EVENTS OF THE RECENT PAST HAVE MEANT IN
TERMS OF FAMILY BEREAVEMENT AND HUMAN SUFFERING, THE PAINFUL
REALITY WHICH UNDERLIES THE MACABRE STATISTICS OF WAR,
WE CAN NEVERTHELESS LOOK FORWARD WITH OPTIMISM TO A BRIGHTER
FUTURE FOR ALL THE PEOPLE OF LAOS. WE CONFIDENTLY EXPECT
THAT THE DAY IS NOT FAR OFF WHEN A COALITION GOVERNMENT
WILL MAKE A START IN HARNESSING NATIONAL ENERGIES FOR THE URGENT
TASKS OF REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION,
IN THISWORK ALL FRIENDS OF LAOS WILL WISH TO MAKE
SOME CONTRIBUTION TO PROMOTE THE POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
TALENTS AND RESOURCES OF ALL ITS PEOPLES, MY OWN GOVERNMENT STANDS
READY TO TAKE PART IN THIS COMMON ENDEAVOUR. I BELIEVE THAT THERE
ARE AREAS IN WHICH AUSTRALIAN EXPERIENCE HAS ALREADY PROVED
TO HAVE PARTICULAR RELEVANCE TO THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF THIS
COUNTRY, AS FOR INSTANCE, IN AFFORESTATION AND IN PASTURE
ESTABLISHMENT UNDER TROPICAL CONDITIONS. IN SUCH FIELDS WE
MAY BE ABLE TO EXPAND OUR PRESENT CONTRIBUTION, IF YOU WISH US
TO DO SO, HELPING TO PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT IN THE PROCESS TO
REFUGEES AND DEMOBILISED SOLDIERS, AND TO LAY FOUNDATIONS FOR
THE CONTROLLED DEVELOPMENT OF IMPORTANT NATIONAL RESOURCES,
WE ARE HAPPY, TOO, TO CONTINUE OUR CONTRIBUTION TO FOREIGN
EXCHANGE SUPPORT FOR LAOS. IN OTHER DIRECTIONS WE LOOK FORWARD
TO PURPOSEFUL AND PRACTICAL DISCUSSIONS WITH YOU OF WAYS IN
WHICH YOU THINK WE MIGHT HELP, AND WHERE WE WOULD COUNT IT A'
PRIVILEGE TO SERVE, 
-3-
WE ARE ALSO INTERESTED IN EXPLORING WITH YOU THE
POSSIBILITY OF AN AGREEMENT TO ENCOURAGE TRADE BETWEEN
OUR TWO COUNTRIESy
AUSTRALIA AND LAOS WILL BOTH PROSPER BEST THROUGH
A COMBINATION OF OUR OWN EFFORTS AND THE PROMOTION OF
A HELPFUL CLIMATE OF INTERNATIONAL OPINION AND BEHAVIOURX
WE HAVE TO BE BOTH NATIONALIST AND INTERNATIONALISTy WE
SEE LAOS, AS IT SEES ITSELF, AS PART OF A REGION LINKED BY
GEOGRAPHY, CIRCUMSTANCES AND HISTORY TO THE OTHER COUNTRIES
OF INDO-CHINA AND AS A NEIGHBOUR ALSO TO BURMA, THAILAND
AND CHINAX LAOS DRAWS A RICH AND FASCINATING INHERITANCE
FROM ALL THESE ASSOCIATIONS, WOVEN INTO THE FABRIC OF
POPULAR LIFE AND FURNISHING THE BACKGROUND OF THE NATIONAL
GENIUSy AUSTRALIA IS A MORE RECENT NEIGHBOUR WITH A SHORTER,
MUCH SHORTER, AWARENESS AND EXPERIENCE OF THIS AREA* BUT WE
ACCEPT FULLY AND COMPLETELY THE EXTENT TO WHICH OUR DESTINIES
ARE BOUND UP WITH YOURSX THEY BOTH LARGELY DEPEND UPON THE
DEGREE OF SUCCESS THAT ATTENDS THE LABOURS OF US ALL TO
CONTRIBUTE TO A PEACEFUL WORLD ORDER AND THE PROSPECT OF
PEACEFUL ACCESS TO A FAIR SHARE OF ITS RESOURCES FOR ALL ITS
PEOPLES) 
THERE COULD BE NO BETTER EXAMPLE TO PRESENT AND
FUTURE GENERATIONS OF LEADERS IN LAOS, IN INDO-CHINA AND,
INDEED, THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE REGION OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
THAN THE UNREMITTING LABOUR YOUR HIGHNESS HAS DEVOTED TO
PEACEy IT IS IN THE HOPE OF SEEING EXTENDED THE AREA OF
PEACE, OF FRATERNAL DIALOGUE AND DISCUSSION THAT I WILL
LEAVE VIENTIANE, ENCOURAGED BY THE CONVICTION THAT THE PATH
OF NEGOTIATION ON WHICH YOU ARE NOW EMBARKED IS THE RIGHT
ONE FOR LAOS AND FOR THE REGION OF WHICH IT IS PARTK
WE SHALL FOLLOW WITH THE KEENEST INTEREST AND SYMPATHY
THE OUTCOME OF YOUR ENDEAVOURS)( YOU MAY COUNT UPON US FOR
SUPPORT IN YOUR ACHIEVEMENTy
FINALLY, ON BEHALF OF ALL IN MY PARTY, MAY I EXPRESS
MY DEEP APPRECIATION OF YOUR GENEROUS HOSPITALITY TO US ALLX
I REGRET THAT CIRCUMSTANCES HAVE NOT PERMITTED A LONGER STAY
AND WIDER ACQUAINTANCE WITH LAOSk WE LEAVE WITH YOU OUR MOST
EARNEST HOPES AND GOOD WISHES FOR THE FUTURE PEACE AND
PROGRESS, SO EARNESTLY DESIRED BY EVERY LAO, WHICH WILL
REPRESENT THE CULMINATION OF YOUR EFFORTS AS A STATESMAN AND
PEACEMAKERX 



11" ZIWS RELEASE
NQ9 DATE
M/ 13 6 Feb'riary 1974
PRIMEMINISTER'S VISIT TO BURMA
The following is the text of an address given by the
Prime M'inister, Mr Whitlam, at a dinner given in his honour by the
Chalirman of the Revolutionary Council o~ f the Socialist Republic of
the Union of Burma, U Ne Win, in Rangoon on 5 February 1974.
" Although this is not my first-visit to the Socialist Republic
of the Union of B-. rma, I come here on this occasion as the first
Australian Prime Minister to visit your country. In so doing, I
acknowledge with gratitude -the warm arid generous welcome accorded
to my -wife and me, and to our party.
We look forward, Mr Chairman, to welcoming you and your
gracious wife to Australia. I hope these visits will serve as the
basis for further fruitful development in the range and nature
of the relationship between our two countries. I believe there are
grounds for confidence that, because we now share more common
interest than we did before, there will emerge a more intimate and
substantial relationship between Australia and Burma.
For our part, we are seeking to chart a new course for
Australia in its relations with the countries of Asia. By adopting
a more independent Australian stance in international affairs, by
striving to turn Australia away from a military orientation in its
relations with South-East Asia and by trying to remove the stain of
racialism from our policies, we hope to achieve for Australia a new
standing as a distinctive, tolerant and co-operative nation9 not
only in Asia but in the world.
In support of these objectives we have shifted the emphasis
of our continuiLng involvement in Asia, and especially in South-East
Asia, from one dominated by 7ideological distinctions and military
alliances to one based more on encouraging security through regional
co-operation, on facilitating trade with our near neighbours on a
mutually benef-icial basis, and on promoting economic development 
2.
through constructive aid programs where these are wanted and where
our own resources and skills can be usefully applied. Wae see a
greater range of contacts through tourism9 education and culture.
Such contacts, we believe, will contribute significantly to
furthering our understanding of one another. I also believe that
ministerial and parliamentary visits, like those exchanged recently
between Australia and Burma, are of grea t value to both of us, an~ d I
would hope to see such v isits extended.
I stress that we do not seek to impose any unwanted culture
or alien forms upon our friends. Nor do we seek to provide economic
assistance where this is not welcome or useful. While we desire
to live more intimately with Asia than. we have in the past, we accept
that in many ways the extent and nature of this new relationship is
not ours alone to determine, because we seek to retain our own
freedom of choice and to develop our own in~ depen~ dence and
distinctiveness, we appreciate the aspirations of others to do the
same. In coming to Burma at this time I apprerolate that you are in
the middle of an election an historic election consequent upon the
introduction of a new cons titut ion,-. I am aware that the introductian'
of the constitutioni and the consultations with The people in the
course of the drafting process represent the culmination of your
long-held aspirations for the evolution of a form of government -i
Burma suited to the needs of the country and its people and that for
more than two years it'has imposed a heavy ' burden on you and yo-ui'
ministers. I congratulite you on the successful outcome of the
national referend= u on the constitution held last December. Irn
the same month there was a referendum in Australia on constitutional
changes. I may say, sir, that I envy you in the success you achie-vedi
in your referendum0
Australians have long admired the way Burma has maintained itsi
independence by its owni efforts and by the skill, determination and
spirit of stu-rdy self-reliance which have enabled you to negotiate
your w! ay through so many difficulties created by the interference ofI
outside countries in the affairs of the region. We have not~ lced
that in the United Nations, and in other councils, Burma has sic'Ken.
eloquently of its opposition to imperialism, colonialism, nuclear
weapons testing, racial discrimination. and apartheid. You-have
stressed the fundatentaL importance and here I quote Your
I I I
A
* 1
1, 
distinguished Foreign Minister " of promoting the progressive
establishment of and a universal respect for the role of law".
These are all matters on which my Government, too, has deep
convictions. They are matters in which my Government has taken
important policy initiatives in the past year.
I believe Australia and Burma share a number of common
objectives in our immediate region. We seek to avoid destructive
confrontations and to bring about constructive co-operation. We
hope to see evolve, in time, a truly regional ccmmunity without
ideological overtcnes and free of great power rivalries. We seek
a durable peace in South-East Asia in partnership with other nations
of the region. I understand the name " Rangoon" is derived from
Burmese words meaning " end of strife". Our goal, indeed, is a
South-East Asia free from strife. It will no doubt take time to
achieve that goal and the rest of'our common objectives in the
region and elsewhere. In the meantime, however, I look to tne
consolidation of our bilateral relat. ons, believing that such
consolidation will bring us closer to the realisation of our wider
goals and aspirations.
I am happy to have your assurances of the usefulness of the
Australian aid program in Burma. There will be an annual inrcrease
in the size of that program. The Australian Government has pledged
itself to increase the level of its financial development assistance
to .7 per cent of gross domestic product by the end of the decade.
We also intend to increase the percentage of our aid given through
multilateral programs. Burma's developing relationship with the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank means that in this area
also we will be able increasingly to contribute to Burma's prcGrras
for economic development.
I give these assurances in the full awareness that t" Cre ; il
be new claims on Australia, especially from the emerging cc:.' r:-s
of the South Pacific area, and that shortages of energy ar.
will raise uncertainties about the economic and financia-
Australia and Burma are both rich in natural resources, n
the happy position of having full national control over
My Government faces the urgent task of progressively
over the development of Australia's mineral resources 
of' which are now owned by foreign companies. At the same time we
are developing policies for the balanced development of our resources
and to control their sale in accordance with our national interests
in a world where energy is scarce.
Mr Chairman, I have deeply appreciated the frank and fruitful
discussions we have had during my visit. I believe we have
established that there are opportunities for growth and development
in many aspects of our relationship. Especially I would hope to see
positive development in the areas of trade, aid and cultural
contacts. Australians have much to learn from the rich cultural and
philosophical heritage that belongs to our near neighbours, by
learning mor e about this heritage we will be better placed to gain
from it, so that our perception of the needs and interests of these
countries will be deepened and enlarged. My Government will do all
it can to promote the flow of ideas and experience from the ancient
civilisations of our neighbourhood. My visit to Burma o brief,
yet so memorable will equip us better for that task. I have, had
the opportunity to hear your views and to explain our own J shall
leave with a better understanding of your policies, your -culture and
your people, confident that on the basis of this new'understanding
we will forge a rich, valuable and enduring friendship between our
two countries. 



D\, iZW S RELEASE
NQ DATE
M/ 14 6 February 1974
T4,
PRIME MINISTER IN LAOS
Following is the text of an address by the Prime
MVinister, Mr Whitlam, at a luncheon given in his honour
by the Prime M~ inister of the Royal Government of Laos in
Vientiane on Monday, 4 February:
" I am obliged to Your Highness for giving me the
opportunity during my present journey to pay this visit to
Vientiane and to renew an acquaintance begun when you yourself
were in Australia some years ago. I welcome too the occasion to
inform myself of the achievements and problems associated with tbhe
long awaited return of peace and order throughout your country.
As you will know the Australian Government firmly supports the
principles declared in the Geneva Agreements, as to the nzational
integrity, independence and neutrality of Laos and looks to the
international community to endorse and to respect them.
Australia welcomed both the February Agreement and the
subsequent Protocol in September of last year, seeing these as
highly important in themselves but also as encouraging and
heartening evidence of a spirit of goodwill, magnanimity and
co-operation among all parties in Laos of willingness to pursue
a mutually acceptable compromise on the presiding interest of a
genuine national reconciliation. I know how much importance you
personally have attached to this great objective of national
reconciliation and how much is owed to your wise judgment and
imaginative leadership in the progress towards it so far achieved.
I speak for all my fellow Australians when I say that
Australia understands how much now has to be done to bind up the
wounds of war, to repair the loss and damage of so protracted a
conflict. All of us in this room are conscious of what the tragic 
events of the recent past have meant in terms of family
bereavement and human suffering, the painful reality which
underlies the macabre statistics of war. But we can
nevertheless look forward with optimism to a brighter future
for all the people of Laos. We cant confidently expect that the
day is not far off when a Coalitionñ Government can make a start
on harnessing national energies for urgent tasks of rehabilitation
and reconstruCtion0 In this work all friends of Laos will wish to make some
contribution to promote the positive development of the talents
and resources of all its peoples. My own Government stands ready
to take part in this common endeavour. I believe that there are
areas in which Australian experience has already proved to have
particular relevance to the special needs of this country, as for
instance, in afforestation a-r~ d i~ n pasture establishment under
tropical conditions. In such fields we may be able to expand
our present contribution, if you wish us to do so, helping to
provide employment in the process to refugees and demobilised
soldiers, and to lay foundations fo-r the controlled development
of important nat-ional resources. We are happy too to continue
our contribution to foreign exchange support for Laos. 1.11 . h1er
directions we look forward to purposeful and practical. discussions
with you of ways in which you think we might help, and where we
would count it a privilege to serve. We are also interested in
exploring with you the possibility of an agreement to encourage
trade between our two countries.
Australia and Laos will both prosper best through a
combination of our own efforts and the promotion generally of a
helpful climate of international. opinion and behaviour. We have
to be both nationalist and internationalist. We see Laos, as it
sees itself, as part of a region linked by geography, circumstances
and history, to the other countries of Indo-China but as a
neighbour also to Burma, Thailand and China. Laos draws a rich
and fascinating inheritance from all these associations, woven
into the fabric of popular life and furnishing the background
of the national genius0 Australia is a more recent neighbour
with a shorter, much shorter, awareness and experience of this -N 
3,
area, but we accept fully and completely the extent to which
our destinies are bound up with yours. They both largely depend
upon the degree of success that attends the labours of us all to
Scontribute to a peaceful world order and the prospect of peaceful
access to a fair share of its resources for all its peoples.
There could be no better example to present and future
generations of leaders in Laos in Indo-China, and indeed,
throughout the whole region of South-East Asia, than the
unremitting labour Your Highness has devoted to peace. It is in
the hope of seeing extended the area of peace, of fraternal
dialogue and discussion, that I will leave Vientiane, heartened
and encouraged by the conviction that the path of negotiation on
which you are now embarked is the right one for Laos, and for
the region of which it is part. We shall follow with the keenest
interest and sympathy the outcome of your endeavours and you may
count upon us for support in your achievement.
Finally on behalf of all in my party here today, may I
express my deep appreciation of your generous hospitality to
us all. I regret that circumstances have not permitted a longer
stay and wider acquaintance with Laos. We go away sorry that our
stay was not longer, but leaving our most earnest hopes and good
wishes for the future peace and progress, so earnestly desired
by every Lao, which will represent the culmination of your
efforts as a statesman and peacemaker." 



SPEECH BY THE PR;' Inr MINI6Trh OF AU6T_' nLIA, THE HON. E. G.
WHITLAM, AT THE DINNEr GIVEN AT 8.00 PM
WEDNESDAY 6 FEBRUARY 1974 BY U NE VIN, . WIPAN OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL AND PRIME MINISTER OF THE
SOCIALIST REPUBL1C OF THE UNION OF ] BURMA
Although this is not my first visit to the
Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma, I come here
on this occasion as the first Australian Prime
Minister to visit your country. In so doing, I
acknowledge with gratitude the warm and generous
welcome accorded to my wife and me, and to our
party. We look forward, Mr Chairman, to welcoming
you and your gracious wife to Australia. I hope
these visits will serve as the basis for further
fruitful development in the range and nature of the
relationship between our two countries. I believe there
are grounds for confidence that, because we now share
more common interests than we did before, there will
emerge a more intimate aid substantial relationship
between Australia and Burma.
For our part, we are seeking to chart a new
course for Australia in its relations with the countries
of Asia. By adopting a more independent Australian stance
in international affairs, by striving to turn Australia
away from a military orientation in its relations with
South-East Asia and by trying to remove the stain of
racialism from our policies, we hope to achieve for
Australia a new standing as a distinctive, tolerant and
co-operative nation, not only in Asia but in the world. 
In support of these objectives we have shifted
the emphasis of our continuing involvement in Asia,
and especially in South-East Asia, from one dominated
by ideological distincti(_ ns and military alliances to
one based more on encouraging security through regional
co-operation, on facilitating trade with our near
neighbours on a mutually beneficial basis, and on
promoting economic developnwnt through constructive
aid pro,_-rams where these are wanted and where our own
resources and skills can be usefully applied. We see
a greater range of contacts through tourism,
education and culture.
Such contacts, we believe, will.. oontribute
significantly to furthering our understanding of
one another. I also believe that Ministerial and
Parliamentary visits, like those exchanged recently
between Australia and Burma, are of great value to
both of us, and I would hope to see ouch visits
extended. I stress that we do not seek to impose any
unwanted culture or alien forms upon our friends. Nor
do we seek to provide economic assistance where this
is not welcome or useful1. While we deqire to live
more intimately with Asia than we have in the past, we
accept that in many ways the extent and nature of this
new relationship is not ours alone to determine.
Because we seek to retain our own freedom of choice and
to develop our own independence and distinetiveriea,. vre
appreciate the aspirations of othere to do the same, 
In coming to Burma at this time I appreciate
that you are in the middle of an election an historic
election consequent upon the introduction of a new
Constitution. I am aware that the introduction of the
Constitution and the consultations with the people
in the course of the drafting process represent the
culmination of your long-held aspirations for the
evolution of a form of government in Burma suited to the
needs of the country and its people, arid'. that for more
than two years it has impoised a heavy burden on you and
your Ministers. I congratulate you on the successful
outcome of the national referendum, on the Constitution
held last December. In the sare month there was a
Referendum in Australia on Constitutional changes, I may
say, Sir, that I envy you in the success you achieved
in your Referendum. I
Australians have-long admired the way Burma
has maintained its independence by its own efforts
and by the skill, determination and spirit of sturdy
self-reliance which have enabled you to negotiate your
way through so many difficulties createdi by the
interference of outside countries in the affairs of
the region. We have noticed that in the United Naticns, and
in other councils, Burma has spoken eloquently of its
opposition to imperialism, colonialism, nuclear weapons
testing, racial discrimination and apartheid.* You have
stressed the fundamental importance and hcre I quote
your distinguished Foreign Minister " of promoting the
progressive establishmnent of and a universal respect for
the role of law". These are all matters on which my
Government, too, has deep convictions. They are matters
in which my Government has taken important policy
initiatives in the past year. 
I believe Australia and Burma share a number
of common objectives in ou immediate region. We seek
to avoid destructive confrontations aLrl to b. ing about
constructive co-operation. We hope to see evolve, in
time, a truly regional community without ideological
overtones and free of Great Power rivalries. We seek
a durable peace in South-.. East Asia in partnership
with other nations of the region. I understand the
name " Rangoon" is derived from Burmese words meaning
" end of strife". Our goal, indeed, is a South-
East Asia free from strife. It will no doubt take
time to achieve that goal and the rest of our common
objectives in the region and elsewhere. In the meantime,
however, I look to the consolidation of our bilateral
relations, believing that such consolidation will
bring us closer to the realisation of our wider goals
and aspirations. I am happy to have your assurances of the
useiulness of the Australian Aid Program in Burma.
There will be an annual inarease in the size of that
program. The Australian Government has pledged itself
to increase the level of its financial development
assistance to .7 per centof Gross Domestic Product by
the end of the decade. We also intend to increase
the percentage of our aid given through multilateral
programs. Burma's developing relationship with the
World Ba. ilc and the Asian Development Bank means that
in this area also we will be able increasingly to
contribut6 to Burma's programs for economic development. 
I give these assurances in t Uhe full awareness
that there will be ne-w claims on Aastralia2 especially
from the emerging countries of the S3outh Pacific area,
and that shortages of energy and r -Iourcos will raise
uncertainties about the economic and financial future.
Australia and Burma are both rich in natural resources.
Burma is in the ha-, ppy position o-L hO. ving full
national control over its resources. liy Government
faces the urgent task of progressively resuming control
over the development of Australia's mineral resources,
a large part of which are now owned by foreign companies.
At the same time we are developing policies for the
balanced development of our resources and to control
their sale in accordance with our national interests
in a world where energy is scarce.
Mr Chairman, I have deeply appreciated the
frank and fruitful discussions we have had during my
visit. I believe we have established that there are
no problems between . our two countries, but rather
that there are opportunities for growth and development
in many aspects of our r.,; ationship. Especially I would
hope to see positive development in the areas of trade,
aid and cultural contacts.
Australians have much to learn from the rich
cultural and philosophical heritage that belongs to our
near neighbours. By learning more about this heritage
we will be better placed to gain from it, so that our
perception of the needs and interests of these countries
will be deepened and enlarged. My Government will do all
it can to promote the flow of ideas and experience from
the ancient civilisations of our neighbourhood. My visit
to Burma so brief, yet so memorable will equip us
better for that task. Thave had the opportunity to 
6.
hear your views and to explain our own. I shall leave
with a better understanding of your policies, your
culture and your people, confident that on the basis
of this new understanding we will forge a rich,
valuable and enduring friendship between our two
countries. w A* * K 



AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSION
EMBARGOED UNTIL 9.00 PM 7 FEBRUARY 7 February 1974
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
QC., AT A STATE DINNER GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF
SINGAPORE, MR LEE KUAN YEW, SINGAPORE, THURSDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 1974.
Each time one comes to Singapore, one is reminded of its
economic progress and vitality.
I can think of few countries in which one of the major problems
of the developing world namely sustaining the momentum of economic
growth has been so firmly and successfully met.
This is a nation which has carried out an industrial
revolution and an urban revolution of tremendous import and importance
to this region. I wish to assure you tonight, Mr Prime Minister, of Australia's
strong and continuing interest in maintaining a substantial and enduring
relationship with Singapore, and indeed with all the countries of South-
East Asia. I would like to stress that what has changed since myw Government
came to office is not the degree of Australian interest in South-East
Asia but the nature and direction of that interest. As I have often
said during my present tour, the emphasis of our growing interest will
be less influenced by ideological considerations but more by a
constructive approach, more permanent, more enduring, co-operation
through trade, investment, aid, cultural and other contacts. Defence
co-operation continues, but other forms of co-operation grow.
Behind the change the Australian Government has made lies
partly the political changes occurring within several countries of
the region changes of Government in Australia and New Zealand,
profound constitutional changes in Thailand, Burma and the Philippines,
and the virtual creation of a new independent nation in Papua New Guinea.
It's worth recalling these matters, not least for the benefit
of Australians, because there is a tendency in Australia to think that
Australia has been the only country in the region where there has been
change. Yet important as these internal political changes are, and
significant as the changes in external policies resulting from domestic
change are, they are only part of rapid and dramatic changes taking
place in the wider region in the relations between the great powers. 
-2-
Super-imposed on all these changes, re-inforcing them, complicating
them and where the changes are beneficial threatening them, is the
energy crisis. The political changes in countries like Australia may
look small beer indeed in the face of such tremendous events.
The great thing however is that these events re-inforce the
idea of the mutual interdependence, of all nations not least of
Singapore and Australia. We are the two great traders of the neighbourhood
our very life depends upon it. Wie are among the two most highly
urbanised countries on earth; we are both essentially nations of cityadwellers.
We are both technological nations, our people and our
economies relying not only on our skills, but on our getting access
to the physical means for applying those skills. Perhaps more than
any nations in the region, we both depend upon our ability to develop
effectively tho. skills of our peoples. And our prosperity depends on
the Drosperity of others. The same developments in Japan, in Britain
and lurope, in the United States: which might damage Singapore would
certainly and simultaneously damage Australia. When we consider the
inter-relationship of national economies, the inter-dependence of the
world economy, it is hardly possible to conceive a prosperous Australia
without a prosperous Singapore.
So there was never a time when our mutual interests and
concerns have been closer,
Sure, Australia's perception of Singapore has changed; it
has widened and broadened.
True, there was a time when Singapore was Asia in Australian
minds, to the extent that we thought much about Asia at all, except
in terms of vague menace. And the perception of Singapore was of
British Singapore, not of Asian Singapore. In 1974 I can say
emphatically that Australia's deep and continuing interest in Singapore,
its welfare, its progress, its role in the region, is a genuine
Australian perception of Singapore as a dynamic, pace-setting Asia
nation. Mir Prime Minister there is no head of Government with whom
I have had a longer, closer association, You extended friendship to
me in days when the party and its lead(-rship were discounted; and you
know from your own experience that friendship and attention extended
in days of adversity aand apparent hopelessness is the most worth
having, because the most sincere.. I have always deeply valued our
association. I value it all the more now that that association can
so significantly affect the basic well-being of the peoples of our
two countries. Our countries have so much in common. Naturally, where the
circumstances of our two nations are different, there will be
different perceptions, At Ottawa last year, some of these differences
were-ventilated that was indeed an illustration of the valua we place
on the Commonwealth forum where frankness in exchange Of Views and
ideas provides one of its main advantages and strengths. I hope,
I believe that one day the states of Asia and the Pacific will be able
to set up a similar sort of forum where leaders can meet not in an
atmosphere of fear or crisis or of expection of aid, but to exchange
views and remove misunderstandings before they develop further. 
-3-
I am visiting your country and other South-East Asian states
to demonstrate Australia's continuing more than continuing, our
growing and deepening interest in developing close and friendly ties
with our neighbours.
I hope to place Australia firmly, confidently, co-operatively
in the context of our Asian future.
If we have bilateral problems let us sort thase out in a spirit
of goodwill; if we have different perceptions of world developments,
let us seek to pool our ideas. Our two countries have a long history
of past and friendly co-operation; it is still very much Australian
policy to foster and develop this further.
And they are being developed to our mutual advantage.
We Australians do wish t'Umoo ve away from the idea that our relations
are limited to a defence relationship important as that aspect of
our co-operation is, and will continue to be. It is not just a matter
of bilateral relations at the Government level. There is strengthening
and widening of relations between our peoples Australian tourists,
Singapore students, Australian business, Singapore markets, in civil
aviation, in communicationst in professional interchange over a
whole range of matters which axe important to the people, not just the
politicians. This exchange and interchange on-going and expandingis
the real basis of the developing friendships between our peoples. 



. ij_ 4USTRALIA
. ACTING
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMfENT NO. 181
11 February 1974
RELEASE OF TARIFF BOARD REPORTS
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr Barnard, today
released three reports which the Government had received
from the Tariff Board in the latter half of 1973. The
reports are titled, Textile Bags; Film Processing
Industry, Advertising Film ( Value for Duty); and Paper
and Textile Bags.
Mr Barnard said that the Government's action,
which was taken after receiving the views of
Mr G. A. Rattigan, Chairman of the Industries
Assistance Commission, was consistent with the earlier
announcement made by the Prime Minister on 19 December
1973 that all reports of the new Industries Assistance
Commission which would not cause damaging speculation
would be made public as soon as they were printed.
Mr Barnard also said that the Government's
decisions on the reports will be announced at the
earliest practicable date. 



4/ DATE
M/' 2 0 11 February 1974.
PRIME MINISTERS ADDRESS AT STATE DINNER,
KUAL~ A LJUMPUR
The following is an amended text of an address given by the
Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, at a State dinner in his honour in
Kuala Lumpur on 29 January 1974. This text should replace that
issued in our news release number M/ 9 of 29 January 1974:
" It is -thoroughly appropriate that I should have begun my
visit to six countries in the South-East Asian region here, in
Malaysia. I am no stranger to your country.
I come as an old friend as the guest of old friends.
I come as Prime Minister of a nation with a long and
proven friendship towards the people of Malaysia.
I come to re-affirm that friendship and to seek new ways
to strengthen the Cooperation which has existed between our twro
countries for more than two decades.
There is no country in the region which better exemplifiLes
the spirit of national independence and regional cooperation than
your own, I believe further there is no country in the region where
the policies of my own government are better understood and where
the responses and attitudes of our two governments to the changes,
challenges and opportunities in the region are more in harmony.
In this climate olf change, in seeking new solutions to new;
pblems, Malaysia has responded with vigour and imagination.
We Australians have in our own way tried to do the same.,
Our views at so many points coincide, and so do the
interest of our two nations.
In particular, we march in step on three fundamental
matters. ~ J~ WIT 
WVe both believe that the detente between the great poiier,-N
can work, that it must be made to work and that the smaller pol-aers
like Malaysia. and Australia can help to make it . work.
We both believe deeply that this region should not become
the area for confrontation and comnpetition betweec-' n the great
powers. We both believe that regional cooperation and regional
associations have a vital contribution to make to the stability
and prosperity of this region.
It is against this background of shared interests, shared
attitudes and shared aspirations that I wish the policies and
actions of* -the Australian Governient to be seen.
In Australia, we have broadened the range of our international
contacts.
Ve have sought to break doiwn ideological constraints which
had for so long obstructed meaningful relationships with
countries such as China, East Germany and North Viet-Nam.
We have placed our relationships with the United States
and the United Kingdom on the basis of a more mature partnership.
We have widened our horizons and sought great cooperation
with the medium and smaller powers of Africa, Latin America and
the Pacific. We have given our ful. support to all questions of human
rights and declared our opposition to any forms of lingering
colonialism. We have sought to remove any taint of racism from our
national and international policies.
I wish to make it quite clear that our interest in
South East Asia continues undiminished.
Our genuine concern about the well-being of M~ alaysia and
our other neighbours in the region is a central and enduring
feature of Australian foreign policy.
What has changed in our attitude to South East Asia is
not the degree of our interest or of our involvement, but the
nature of that interest and that involvement.
We seek to turn away from the destructive confrontations
of the past to constructive cooperation in the future. 
3.
In the context of our common view, it ' s worthwhile
recalling that some of my Government's earliest decisions brought
us even more in line with the policy of the Malaysian goverrent
After coming to office, we ended our military role in.
Viet-Nam a role which Malaysia did not undertake.
We ended our military assistance previously given to
Cambodia Malaysia had never given such military assistance.
We reduced our involvement with ASPAC an organisation
in which Malaysia no longer participates, and we sought
successfully to change the military emphasis of SEATO an
organisation of which Malaysia was never a member.
My Government has set a new course for Australia in th'is
region. We have shifted the emphasis of our continuing involvement
in South East Asia from one primarily based on ideological
considerations and military alliances to one based increasingly.
on developing trade with the countries of the region, on promoting
progress through constructive aid programs, on encouraging
security through regional cooperation, on a positive response
to the recent proposals that we should consider financial
assistance to agreed ASEAN projects, and on the development of
cultural contacts through the negotiati~ on of cultural agreements
with the countries of South East Asia.
We see in this re-orientation of our diplomatic efforts
the opportunity, which has been too often missed or ignored in
the past, to establish endu. ring relationships with the countries
of this region0
It is not our wish to forge ties based on transitory
concerns but to seek out ways of developing bonds based on an
identification of those interests -which will continue
irrespective of the governments in power in Australia. or the
region. Our main endeavours will henceforth be directed towards
expanding relations in those fields most likely to produce lasting
social and economic advantages for both us and our neighbours. 
Some manifestations of this change are already evident.
In recent months we have joined IVDSEA, The Ministerial
Conference for the Economic Development of South East Asia.
Only yesterday in B3angkok we were proclaimed an associate
member of SEAYEG, The South East Asian Ministers of Education
Organisation. Earlier this month we met for the first time with the
Secretaries-General of ASEAI to discuss ways in which Australia
might assist ASEAN projects.
I stress that isolationism is not a policy option . fbr
Australia. Ve are going through a period of change and adjus-tent
which I believe will resulIt in more fruitful Australian
involvement than ever before with the countries of South East Asia.
In this re-orientation I would stress that we have not
sought to widen our interests and contacts at the expense of
older friendships. And this applies with special force to Malaysia and
the ASEAN nations.
For too long our interests in this region were seen
excessively in terms of defence.
We do not now look on the countries of South East Asia
as buffer states or as constituting some northern Military line
where some potential future enemy of Australia should be held.
Rather, we see these countries, especially Malaysia,
Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines, as countries
which have a common interest with Australia and New Zealand in
consolidating the security and stability of this region as a
whole. In particular we seek close relations with the Commonwealth
nations in South East Asia and the Pacific and Indian Ocean areas.
Australia's own defence capability is enhanced by mutual
defence arrangements.
My Government gave a pledge to the Australian people to
honour the full terms of the Five Power Arrangements until a more
positive and enduring settlement is reached in establishing peace,
freedom and neutrality in this region. 
I SAustralian Air Force Squadrons will. I remoin at Butterworth
as long as they r elevant to the needs of both our nations
and relevant to the realities of the region.
This is a matter which, in consultation with your
government, we shall review as appr opriate.
Our defence association is only on aspect o f the relations
between our two nations and our two peoples.
We have our longstanding common bond through our membership
of the Commonwealth.
We have increasingly fruitful cooperation at the United
Nations and the Australian Government now, as a matter of policy,
consults closely with the countries of South East Asia before
determining our position at the United Nations.
A glance at our voting patterns in the United Nations will
show that since December 1972 we have voted together to a much
greater extent than ever before.
We have at present over. 6000 Malaysian students in
Australia, many of whom have enriched our culture and widened our
perspectives. Others who have returned occupy prominent positions in
your Goverrment and Public Service.
This exchange can only strengthen the understanding of a
friendship for each country in the other.
Trade and Australian investment in Malaysia have developed
rapidly. Only a week ago I arnounced a new Australian policy on
Australian investment overseas, especially in developing
countries. We want to encourage private Australian investment on a
joint venture basis in Mlalaysia in a way which will benefit the
people of Malaysia and will be favourable to the ownership and
control of enterprises by Malaysians.
We understand and accept the wish of developing countries
to regulate foreign investment in accordance with their own
national aspiratLons and development plans.
We seek no less for ourselves and we see Australian
investment overseas in the context of mutual benefit and of
economic cooperatio~ n without exploitationø 
Recently the number of Australian tourists visiting Malaysia
has increased greatly.
There has also been a rapid growth in the cultural exchanges
between our two countries.
This is a matter which I believe worthy of further active
encouragement. I believe that these programs of exchange between peoples
and cultures have an increasingly greater part to play in
developing a wider, enduring understanding between peoples and
cultures have an increasingly greater part to play in developing
a wider, enduring understanding between neighbours with different
cultural backgrounds.
Let us freely acknowledge the differences in culture, but
let us learn more about each other and from each other.
All these links have contributed to a high level of
awareness and understanding of each other.
W~ e, in Australia, have been impressed by the economic
success of Malaysia.
I note that in your recent mid-term r eview of the second
Malaysia plan you have not only achieved, but have exceeded, your
growth target. The importance of economic success is absolute because
only with economic progress will there be social advancement and
regional stability.
I do not, however, wish to comment only on Malaysia's
contribution to the economic development of the region.
If anything in the past few years we have watched with
even greater admiration the way Malaysia has evolved her foreign.
policies to match the changed realities of the area.
Malaysia has, along with Indonesia, the Philippines,
Singapore and Thailand, established a workable, relevant and
important regional grouping ASEAN.
ASEA14 is an example to all of us of the co-operation and
understanding which can be achieved if countries with a common
interest in progress come together to promote that common interest.
Malaysia has also used that forum to advance its concept
of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. 
Australia applauds this initiative and welcomes the
objectives which the ASEAN countries have set for themselves for
a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South East Asia.
It is a creative concept which, if fulfilled, will not
only benefit the nations in the zone, it will itself be a further
step towards detente, if the great powers are able to agree not to
use this region as the field for destructive rivalry.
You have acknowledgethat the zone of peace, freedom
and neutrality will not be achieved overnight.
It is evident that the great powers will need to show
more trust towards each other before they will come to a point
when they can agree mutually to accept the zone.
The search for detente has begun and I believe the
realisation will grow that it is only the imaginative farsightedness
of such new initiatives which will enable our world to
attain the peace and justice we all desire.
In the same spirit of hope but with the swuae awareness of
the difficulties in the way, my Government has suggested that
some wider' regional arrangement for information consultation
between the nations of the whole region should be established
in the future.
We consider that it is important that the countries of
the Asian and Pacific region should be able to come together to
discuss common interests in an atmosphere free of crisis, free
of pomp, free of drama, and free of excessive expectations of
any spectacular results.
I recognise that such a forum cannot be achieved quickly,
it has to evolve from withIn the region, out of the wishes of
the countries of the region.
Like the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, it will
only come about when the countries concerned agree that it is in
their mutual interests to have such a forum.
Lest there be any misunderstandings, I want to emphasise
that we do not see such an association competing with ASEAN in
any way* On the contrary, we would see it as being complementsry to
ASEAN which has proved itself to be a close viable and natural
grouping of South East Asian states. 
Malaysia and Australia are both moving in the same general
direction and, with the benefit of our long-standing friendship
and understanding, we should, by working together, make our goals
that much more capable of achievement.
1We share the same great goals.
Wie are marching together towards them.
In some matters, such as normalisation of relations with
China, Australia has been able to move more quickly than Malaysia0
In others, such as the establishment of relations with
North Korea, Mvalaysia has moved more quickly than Australia.
This has been ' because of differences in our circumstances
rather than differences in our ultimate goals.
We are each involved in our own way in an important
humanitarian experiment.
You, within Malaysia, are trying to forge a free,
prosperous and harmonious multi-racial society.
We, in AustGralia, notwithstanding our European origins,
are trying to build strong bridges and develop lasting links with
Malaysia and the countries of South East Asia.
But we both seek, I believe, the same end, namely to
cooperate closely, as good neighbours should, in a wider
effort to promote a stable, more prosperous and peaceful
multi-racial South East Asian region.
When one sees the severity of the test which the detente
much undergo, as shown so suddenly and dangerously in the
Middle East when one sees the continuing frustration. of our high
hopes just one year ago for real peace in Indo-China, it would
be an exceptionally bold or excessively naive man who declares
his unqualified optimism about the course of events and their
outcome. Yet, fundamentally, I am an optimist, certainly about the
future of our region.
Diplomacy must be based on realistic hopes rather than on
resignation and despair.
And from no country in the region, from the effectiveness
of its Government, the growing prosperity of its people, and the
imaginative policies of its leaders, do I draw more encouragement
sustain that opt~ imism and that hope than I do from Malaysia. 



PRESS STATEMENT
GOVERN11NTS APPROVE LOANS TO FLOODED BUSINESSES
JOINT STATrEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER,
THlE lION. L. 11. BARNARD, AND QUEENSLAND
PREMTER, Hri~ lON. J. BJEL1M-E-PETERSEN . L. A.
Thc Australian Government has agreed to a proposal
from the Queensland Government for the provision of loan
finance to business firms suffering physical loss as a direct
result of the recent floods.
2. This measure has been accepted as eligible under
the arrangement for reimbursement of State expenditure in
excess of $ 2 million annually.
3. The following are broad details of the scheme of
flood relief for businesses.
4. Amount and Terms : Assistance will be by way of
loan tip to a maximum of $ 25,000 for any one applicant. The
loan will be for 3-5 years with interest at the rate of
Interest for the first year will accrue and be
payable 12 months after the date of the loan. The loan will
be repayable in equal six-monthly instalments of principal
and interest over the remainder of the loan period.
6. Each application will be judged on its merits as
to need, amount of loan and subsequent viability.
7. Eligibility : Applications will be considered
from sole owners, partnerships, firms and private companies.
Public companies do not qualify. eo e12 
-2
8. Applicants must have sustaincd. substantial damage
by flooding to building% plant, equipment and stock or have
had their financial liquidity severely affected.
9. To be eligible for assistance, an applicant must
be unable to effect repairs or replacements and get back into
viable operations from his own resources or from normal
financial sources. The applicant must be able to demonstrate that
with. this assistance he has the prospects of re-establishing
his operations on a viable basis.
11. Mr Barnard and Mr Bjelke-Petersen said it was
agreed that the extent of assistance would be based on a
careful assessment of the applicant's financial position,
including any insurance recoveries. Applications would be
received from tomorrow ( Monday) by the State Department of
Commercial and Industrial Development. Applications would
be processed by a committee under the chairmanship of Sir
David Muir.)
12' 0 This scheme of assistance is in-addition to
measures previously accepted by the Australian Government
as eligible under the arrangement for reimbursement of State
expenditure in excess of $ 2 million annually. These
include: Relief of personal hardship and distress.
Grant or loan assistance to owners of dwellings
damaged or destroyed by floods. 0 ./ 3 



NEWS RELEASE
NQ DATE
M/ 19 11 February 1974i
PRIME MINISTER IN SINGAPORE'
The following is the text of an address by the
Prime IEinister, 11r Vhitlam, to the Singapore Press Club on
8 February 1974:
Iof Au's trali" aA wyaesa r toagooe xpmyl aipnr inthcei paclh antgaessk awse wa, , enreew ., m Parkiimneg i1r1inister
Australia's foreign policy in terms of our political inheritence
after twenty-three years of Opposition.
A year later my task is to put the established, firm
and irreversible policy of the Australian Government in terms of
the realities of the international situation we, with all the
countries of the region, now have to live with.
A year ago, it was very necessary, it iw. as quite
inevitable, that a new Government would stress those aspects of
its policies which emphasised its independence from its
p predecessors. Now I emphasise those great matters which
illustrate the inter-dependence of my nation with other nations,
with old friends as much as with new associates.
It's most appropriate that I do so here, to the press,
in Singapore, at this time.
To the press, because, naturally enough, properly
enough, your writings have tended to emphasise sometimes, dare
I say, dramatise the changes more than the continuity of
policies. In Singapore, because I acknowledge that no nation
has been more directly affected by some of our decisions and no
nation is better entitled to a full explanation of the purposes
of the Australian Government. And now, because there has not
been a time since the war itself that the inter-dependence of
all nations, not just the nations of our region, but of all, the
very greatest with the smallest, has been made so vividly manifest-
in all its complexity, all its fragility, all its vulnerability
and in all its urgent reality.
It's no longer necessary, and it was never really
correct, to measure the policies of my Government just by contrast
with those of its predecessor.
Contrast enough I trust there is, but it is a mistake
to see our policies only as a break with the past.
For four reasons. To do so ignores much that continues
and much that would be happening whatever government was in power
in Australia. Secondly, it ignores the steadiness of the
Australian people, and any elected Australian Government ignores
at its peril the determination of the Australian people to protect
their reputation for reliability and dependability. Thirdly, it
ignores the consistency of policy formulation within the Australian
Labor Party. These policies have long been a matter of public record
and public debate. It is just impossible for anybody to have been surprised
by our major decisions unless we were to accept that it is
surprising these days for elected governments to carry out their
undertakings. And fourthly and most importantly, it ignores the
fundamental fact that our policies are directed towards the future,
not against the past.
We are not merely repairing the past; we are preparing
for the future. Sure enough in matters like China, like Viet-Nam, like
Southern Africa, there is in our thinking and attitudes an element
of apology, of reparation. But the great thing is preparation
preparation for a future of unparallelled opportunities with
appalling consequences confronting us all if we fail to grasp
them. And the old attitudes, the old stances, the old frozen
postures were just not adequate for such a preparation.
So it is in the context of the future that I wish
our policies to be seen, because it is in that context that they
are being developed. 
And if you try to see them in that context, you w,, ill
I believe be able to see their consistency and their true meaning.
They are all part of a pattern; it is a pattern for
the future. Basically, what we are trying to do for Australia, and
to the extent that we have any influence over opinion or events
beyond our shores, what we are trying to do in the region, is to
build a range and breadth of relations in order to prevent any
single preoccupation distorting or paralysing our actions and
attitudes. For most of the period that my party was in opposition,
the overwhelming preoccupation of Australian policy was China
arid that meant, of course, the containment of China by military
action on the Asian mainland.
The American alliance, SEATO, the war in Viet-Nam, were
forced into this single focus; all these matters were debated in
terms of that over-riding preoccupation.
It is precisely because my Government rejects the
premise of that preoccupation, precisely because we believe that
the preoccupation to the point of obsession harmed Australia that
we are determined to widen all Australia's relations to prevent
other newer preoccupations doing similar harm.
Yet in acting to redress the past we do not over react
against the past.
Take China itself. You should not get the idea that
because we moved so very promptly to normalise relations with
China after 23 years of mutual hostility that China is the
be-all and end-all of Australia's foreign policy.
It was the classic case of when it is not necessary to
delay it is necessary not to delay.
Again consider our policy towards the United States
because we choose no longer to beat the drum about the alliance,
that is not to say that ANZUS is not still our most important and
I believe enduring treaty.
And the same kind of consideration lay behind our
decisions affecting the Five Power arrangements. 
You should understand that our decision to withdraw
the battalion and battery from Singapore following incidentally
on its withdrawal by our predecessors four years ago from Terendak
is part of a reconstruction and re-orientation of our whole defeunce
policy. In no way do we repudiate or down-grade the Yive Power
arrangements. Those arrangements do not of course require Australia
to maintain a battalion in Singapore.
Ve are convinced that the kind of army Australia necdi
for her own defence and for her raost effective contribution to
defence of her friends should no longer be structured upon the
concept of fixed garrisons overseas.
For a country like Australia the concept is unreal alk
anachronistic. And for Australia it is a concept which cuts across
her basic defence needs in modern times.
Her needs are for highly professional, high mobile,
finely-equipped forces capable of, and experienced in, proipt
cooperation with friendly forces.
This is the concept relevant to our needs.
The old concept worked as an inhibition economicail2
politically and logisticaly against creating the most effective
defence contribution Australia can make.
And I confidently predict that the next two years . ii
see Australian defence cooperation not only with Singapore,
Malaysia, New Zealand and the British presence in the region, btL.-I.
with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea brought to a more effective
and efficient state than could ever have been achieved simply by
keeping Australian ground forces with all their impedimenta
overseas. The desire for cooperation, the need for cooperation
has not changed; all that has changed is the view of the
Australian Government about the best way of achieving that
cooperation and making it more valuable for all of us.
Some components of Australian forces are going home,
but Australia is not going away. 
Ana this, of course, is the very crux of the matter.
I hear in some quarters concern that Australia, or
the present Australian Government. may go isolationist.
Isolationism i~ s not an option for Australia or for
any Australian Government.
Indeed, it was precisely my belief that we were
isolating ourselves from half the world, from a quarter of the
world's people in China, from the whole of Eiack Africa, from the
other half of Europe east of the Elbe, from Latin America and
even from India in any meaningfol way, and my belief that our
relations with Japan and Indonesia lacked their proper warmth
that has informed, inspired and maoulded the policies, actions and
decisions of my Government and which dictated my own overseas
visits and those of my Foreign Miister.
This Government -by action, by association, by
inclination, by philosophy and above all by the necessities of
the times in which we live and the region in which we live is
the most genuinely internationalist government Australia has ever
had. And even if our wishes were different, Australia's own
needs wouid force irnternationalismn upon is
How could this great trading country t; hose lifelines
lie througn here be indifferenit to what happens here?
How could this great resource producer whose prospority
depends upon: the prosper~ ty of the great resource users be
indifferent to their success and well-be. Ing?
Eut we do make the dictinctaon between internationalism
and interventionism. Ve beiieve that the end of the old interventionism is
the beginning of a new internationalism in which Australia will
play a constructivze, cooperative, and generous part.
\ ie know only too well that peace arnd security do not
come because we want them or merely because we proclaim their
desirability. Peace and security have to be built brick by brick
and bonded by the efforts, energy and imagination of the leaders
of this regio. 
Vhenr. people use the phrase Asian problems should be
settled by Asian countrLes they sometimes tend to forget that
the Asian continent does not end where the borders with Communist
Asian couantr: es start.
The present government, in formulating its policy,
does take account of the views of countries like China and, to
a lesser extent, North Viet-Nam and North Korea although,
naturally, it does not take as much account of their views as
those of traditionally fr-: endly countries and geographically
closer countries. Ir. its bilateral relations with some Asian countries
Australia is going through a period of adjustment, but we are
confident that in the longer run, once this adjustment has been
made, our relationships would be more soundly based than in the
past. The confluence of our history and geography, our
origins as Europeans, our location onr the edge of South-East Asiagive
us a unique opportunity to demonstrate to the international
community that countries with very dafferent cultural, religious
and ethnic backgrounds can evolve intimate and lasting friendships.
To this end we shall spare no effort to ensure that in
the years ahead, Australia is accepted as a cooperative and
helpful member of the Asian and Pacif. c region and a neighbour
of the nations of South-East Asia.
The signs of tnis new approacr, are round us in this
region. In ASEAN, Sirngapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand
and the Philippines have and have sustained an organisation which
is workable and relevant, and which reflects the common needs of
the countries of South-East Asia.
Australia applauds the achievements of ASEAN, and
the hope which it offers for the economic and social progress of
the people of the region.
But we have no desire to intrude; I have said many
times before that Australia does not seek membership of ASEAN.
What we do hope is that we can cooperate with ASEAN
imaginatively and constructively as a neighbour and a friend. 
We think we have certain skills to offer if these
skills are needed; we know that we have much, in turn, to learn
from you and your ASEAN partners.
The sort of fruitful cooperation which I have in mind
is illustrated by the recent discussions which Australian
officials held with representatives of ASEAN in Bangkok on
possible Australian assistance to regional ASEAN projects.
The discussions which Prime Minister Lee and I have
held about concluding a cultural agreement between our two
countries an agreement which we both favour in principle and
which we will work quickly towards formulating is a further
indication of our desire to broaden the form and the depth of
our relations with South-East Asian countries.
W~ e know that you in Singapore, your Government and
your business leaders, are looking to extend the fruits of your
own hard-won economic progress to the region as a whole.
We hope that we, in some way, if only in a small way,
can assist as a catalyst in this process.
There are certain fields of endeavour, in agriculture
and technical and scientific training to name but tio, where we
believe we can make a valuable contribution to regional
development. Ny government is not alone in recogniaing the need
for the promise of a new spirit of international cooperation,
and this region is not the only one where nations are attempting
to establish new forms of cooperative relationships, or where
Australia is anxious to assist with that process.
Put to Australia, South-East Asia is, of course, our
immediate north. Your hopes, your problems, your future are necess4arily
and for ever, part of our own future.
Much is written about Australia' s " new nationalism";
I would rather put it in terms of Australia's new internationalism.
Of course, there is a national spirit awake and abroad
in Australia. 
8.
But Australia wants no more for herself than Singapore
wants for herself, and what all the nations in this region are
seeking a national identity within the international community,
reasonable control over our own destiny and our own resources in
a world where all nations are increasingly inter-dependent.
This is now the task exercising statesmanship throughout
the world to reconcile these three desires and needs of the
peoples of the world their desire for independence, their
dependence upon others and our inter-dependence, all of us with
one another. We are living in times when these three great principlesindependence,
dependence, inter-dependence show themselves to be
interlocked as never before.
Upon their resolution and reconciliation depends the future
even the survival of civilisation itself.
You will not, I believe, find Australia with a very strong
sense of her own nationhood and identity, Australia with a very
real sense of the dependence of her prosperity upon the prosperity
of her neighbours, Australia with a very deep sense of her
inter-dependence with and her responsibilities towards the
international community, failing in her responsibilities or
faltering in our determination to make the most of the opportunity
for a better, safer neighbourhood at this very critical time in0
modern history." 



TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENC' BY THE PRI1' B MINISTEIR OF
AUSTRALIA, MR. E. G. WiITLAI. AT MANILA INTERCONTIN-NTAL HOTEL
FEBRUARY 12, 1974.
The Prime Minister began by explaining the reason
for the delayed start to the conference.
Q: As you know, the scheme whereby Leyland's are seeking to
6ncourage Filipino migrants and mechanics to Australia
haass haasr ouysoeudr as trgornegat stdeaatle meonft si natbeoruets t Whiint -et hAe usPthrialliipapines
throughout this trip to South-East Asia but when this schemeA
was first rmoted in the Australian press a few weeks ago
it was noticeable that there was a very considerable degree.
of continuing opposition even to a scheme like this.
cIo wnotnindueirn gi f oypopuo sictouilodn gtihvaet uyso u shoamvee idtoe a fatchee n ino fy otuhre stand
against racism in Australia and perhaps a little analysis
of what do you think the reasons for these are?
A: The policy of the Australian Government and of the
Australian Labor Party which composes the Australian Governmt
is quite clear. Our immigration policy depends principally
on family union. We want to see that people who already ( i , Q
live in Australia are helped to have their relatives
their brothers or sisters or their sons and daughters
their mothers or fathers, their fiancees come to i:
Australia to join them. Subsidiary to this is the admission of
skilled persons whose skills are undersupplied in Australia.
taghenadot g rfaloparhswithc o, rm e-rsepemelpciltgo iyotmuhesen rteo r iissr ancaoiv-aadlii lsaocbrrliiegm iinin. na tAiNuoosnwt, r aaslt ihaer egaaanprdpd lsiicnation
by* Leyland's for skilled workers whom they can't find in
Australia whom they believe they can find in the Philippines. J
Officials from Australia are coming to the Philippines
to interview and counsel the persons who are willing to come
to Australia. The presentation of this issue by the company
concerned caused some initial misunderstanding or concern
because it appeared to be based on a form of employment
common in Europe of guest workers. The Australian migration
program does not provide for guest workers. It provides for
people coming to Australia who wish to settle in Australia. 
page 2
Q: I believe you discussed the Asia Pacific
grouping or forum with President Marcos.--vc u-
Can you say what degree of common ground you found ith
him-on your proposal for a wider grouping of Asia-Pacific
powers and his for an Asia-Pacific Forum?
A: We are in complete agreement as to the objectives here.
We do realise, however, that there are some current
aspects which mean that it cannot be fulfilled immediately
and they are the fact that some countries.-in fact allthe
Asean countries,.-I believe only the Asean countries
do not have at this stage normal diplomatic relations
with the People's Republic of China. There is also I L
the impediment that there has been no peace settlement in
Cambodia and at this stage the peace settlement in Vietnaml V'LU
is not very effective.
Q: We understand that yguve been asked for supplies of
natural gas could you give us some details of that? I0C
A: This is a commercial matter which a Filipino citizen,
Mr. Borromeo, has been discussing wvith _ Mlpo. The present
Australian Government has introduced and is pursuing
the policy of permitting tho export of resources in two
circumstances. The first is where those resources are surplus
to Australian needs the 6ther is that they are being sold
at appropriate prices considering the prices being paid
for such resources in the world generally. Mr. Borromeo has
discussed this matter not only with Ampol. but with the
Australian Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr. Connor.
I, myself, will be discussing it with Mr. Connor in the next few
days. 
page 3
Q: With the overtures that your Government is making
toward Asia, w-hat do you anticipate as the future of your
country toward the West, Europe and more particularly,
to Britain?
A: Australia has a political system and very largely, Ap'
an economic and industrial and social system derived from
Britain. Obviously, there would always be very close ties
between Australia and Britain. Ncve:---. heless, those ties are no
longer exclusive of ties with other countries, particularly
counrtries which are closer to Australia geographically
and * which are now more important to Australia economically.
Britain herself realises this because Britain has
chosen to as she is entitled to chose the European
Economic Community rather than the Commonwealth of Nations
as the focus of her economic thrust. Secondly, Britain has taken
stops to equate Australian citizens,'
who used to be British subjects, with citizens of other
foreign countries.
Q: Can you tell me is your Government concerned
at the continuation of martial law in the Philippines
and did you discuss this matter with President Marcos?
A: I think you have been told by President Marcos
that it was discussud there is no need for me to go ove g
the ground again -it was discussed in the context that I~~
this is one of the matters in the Philippines which aoss I
great interest in Australia and therefore, is an ingredient
in relations between the countries. r", t 
page 4
Q: ( Indistinct) what are the plans of Australia and
the Philippines for the expanded Asia-Pacific Forum? * u
A: I would think it is inevitable that all the countries of i
Asean will establish normal diplomatic relations with the
~ People's Republic of China.. The Philippines is one of the two
(-Asean nations which reconises the Government of Generalisimo
Chiang Kai Chek as thie Governfent of China. Australia
* did so until December 1972 w-' hen my Government was elected.
As I said before the elecuion-: we would transfer Australia's
Embassy to China from Taipei to Peking. We did so. Within a
couple of woee-' s. It was easier fcr Australia to do it
than it is for the Philippines but nevertheless I am not
making a statement concerning internal politics of any
country; I am merely acknowlel: ging historic inevitabilityevery
country in this region will acknowledge that the Government
in Peking is the Government of Chi. na and the Government in
Taipei is not the Government of China, One has to recognise
either of those contending Governments as the Government of China.
Each of them asserts that it" is the sole, legitimate Government
of the whole of China, including the province of Taiwan. So
one just has to chose one o: r the other. It is inevitable
that it will be recognised. the Philippines
has been involved in a great number of regional associations,
many of them expired, others are in-their death throes....
there was ASA, there was Maphilindo there was the old SEATO
based on the Manila pact, there was ASPAC, and now there is
Asean. And of all of them Asean is the only one which has a
proper regional relevance, the only one which has a thriving
future. None of the Asean countries suggests, Australia
does not suggest, that Australishould join Asean.
But the Asean Secretary--General have agreed with the Australian
Government that there should cje. consultations on economic projects
between Australia and Asoan coll-c; ively.
, That was arranged in Bangkok a f ort_ c.-i ago
and there will be representative of the Asean countries coming
to Australia to pursue those arr. cements within the next few
weeks. No country has done more than-._ the Philippines to
recognise, to promote, the idea of regional arrangements.
You have in the capital of the Philippines one of the most
valuable organs for regional co-. operation the Asian ^ v
Development Bank which I visited this afternoon, -Neertheess,
it is quite clear we ought to have some arrangements as I said
in my speech in the University of the Philippines yesterday. 
Page
Q: I met you before, sir, when I was in Australia in 1972
and I asked your views about SEATO
A: We were right, weren't we Romulo and
Q: Is it the view of the Government of Australia that the membership
of Peking is necessary for any form of a loose Asian forum
to be valid?
A: Any organisation covering the western Pacific would
be inco plete grievously inadeq'uate if China were omitted
from it.
Q: What do you see would be the role of Australia in re1* aion
to Asian affairs in the future?
A: Historically, politically., socially Australia is Duropean
Economically, however, and geographically it is increasingly
or already part of Asian. Certainly of east Asia. and the
western Pacific. Now, already, the relations between Australia
jOr\ and all the countries of that region are expanding. The country
that buys more from Australia than any other country buys is
Z Japan; the country to which Japan sells than any other country
-exct the United States is Australia. Therefore Japan is
Australia's largest trading partner. But our trade with all
' ountries of the region is growing and inevitably it is going to
grow more. There are many other things, such as tourism, cultural
exchanges, education ( one of the greatest forms of exchange
it is quite seminal to our activities in this region). All these
things inevitably mean that the relations between Australia and
the countries of the western-Pacific are going to grow. / e need
each other. We are all there.
IQ, What about the political aspects, si., considering the fact
G-U( v4qthat right now there seems to be some withdrawal of American
presence in the Asian area. I wonder can Australia exert some
influence in this matter? 
-a page 6
A: Australia has quite a considerable influence
with most of t1countries in the area. It has quite a
considerable influence-I expect, with the United States.
America's interest in the area is changing in so far
as she would no longer feel it appropriate to have
armed forces on the mainland of Asia. America, however, is
clearly the greatest naval and air power in the world.
o Q: I believe, Prime Minister, that you raised with
l( e UPresident Marcos the question of the continued
C detention of Senator Aquino. Are you encouraged by
this exchange to expect or hope that you will look
forward to a just and fair trial in due course?
( 1 Q , t.
A: I raised this matter in the same context, for the
same purpose as I raised the matter of the emergency.
You have thoroughly questioned the President on this matter.
I have got nothing more to say on it,
Q: As the prime advocate of an Asian-Pacific Forum
will your Government mount a diplomatic offensive
to facilitate the recognition by the nations of Jr
region of the People's Republic of China thereby
hastening the formation of an Asian-Pacific Forum?
0 y-* vcS v^ ) W
A: You said I was the prime person; President Marcos was
in fact the first. It is not my country's role
to launch a diplomatic offensive in these matters.
Bdt my views, and the vievs of my Government, are well
known in all the countries of the region. There has been
exchange of views during the lasu 16 days on the subject
between me and heads. of Government in alaysia, Thailand,
Laos, Burma, Singapore an: d nc.: the Philippines.
There had been., of course, exch. n. iges of views on this subject
with all of those men-othier than the new Prime Minister
of Thailand and the Chairman of the Burmese Government
neither of whom I had met before. Government
showed its attitude very early by switching its recognition
from one of the rival Governments to the other. New Zealand
did so at exactly the same time. Japan did so a few months
before. It is quite clear that the move is on. It was started
by Canada tJese y. ars ago.
I v 
page 7
Q: You have spent time today in Corregidor and Bataani; I wionder
U could you commuent on your observations of the trip with the
President as your tour guide.
1 The first time I came here after the Wiar I was here
in the last few,-months of the War at that time it w., as not
yet safe to go to Corregidor and besides I did not have the
transport at my individual disposal. But ten years ago
when I first came hero as a Parliamentarian I wovnt over in the
hydrofoil the first time I had ever been in one
to Corregidor to see it. It is of very great significance
in this region. The delay that the Filipino and American
forces put up along Bataan*, and Corregidor was quite
crucial to the preservation of Austra-.-lia, in the early months
of the Pacific W~ ar before we could get under way and play
our considerable role in turning the tide. It would be,
theref ore, incomplcte for an Australiqn Prime Miinister to
visit Manila without visiting Corregidor. On this occasion
j. I appreciated very much that the President, the most
decorated Filipino ex-serviceman, accompanied me. He
also, of course, had several of his Ministers with him.
The Secretaries of Finance, Defence, Communications and the
Executive Secretary. It was-a pleasant occasion,
a nostalgic one, but also one in which a considerable amount of
business was discussed between us between his 11inisters
and the President himself and me and mny senior advisers
who have accompanied me. I have with me not only
-our Ambassador in the Philippines but also the Deputy Secretaries
of the Prime Minister's Department, Foreign Office, Overseas
V Trade and Defence Departments.
Q: What are your impressions of the Philippines? What has
impressed you most about the country and the people?
A: There are some pcrsonal . fecelings I have about the Philippines.
Of course, Manila was the ' first foreign capital I
ever visited and before that I had been in Leyte for a couple of
months. Accordingly I have had ever since some interest in
the political and economic developments* in this country.
There are some other matters which make the Philippines of
particular interest to Australia because it is one of the
countries the only one which is not in the Commonwealthwhere
English is spoken everywhere. Also, I don't stress this
matter, but it is the only country in the region
other than New Zealand which is prcfess * edly Christian.
The other thing I would point out, as I did at the university
yesterday, is that it is high time there -were more direct
links between these countries which have significant links in
common than have hitherto obtained passing, as those have
hitherto, principally through-the United States.* 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR, E. G. WHITLAM, 0l. C., AT
THE OPENING OF THE SOCIETY OF ST, VINCENT DE PAULO " OZANAM" HOME OF
PEACE AND CONTENTMENT, CAMPBELL, A. C. T. 14 FEBRUARY 1974
I AM ESPECIALLY PLEASED ON THE DAY AFTER MY RETURN FROM
SOUTH-EAST ASIA TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE LAUNCHING OF A NEW
ENTERPRISE OF THE ST. VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY. FOR AMONG THE VERY
WIDE RANGE OF ITS ACTIVITIES, THE SOCIETY HAS INCLUDED TRAINING
PROGRAMS AND MATERIAL ASSISTANCE IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA. UNDOUBTEDLY,
SINCE ITS FOUNDATION BY A GROUP OF STUDENTS 141 YEARS AGO, THE
SOCIETY HAS CARRIED ITS WORK AMONG THE POOR INTO AS MANY AREAS
AS POSSIBLE. THE SOCIETY'S WORK AMONG THE HOMELESSo THE YOUNG,
THE HANDICAPPED AND THE DISADVANTAGED, BOTH IN AUSTRALIA AND
OVERSEAS, TESTIFIES TO THE VIGOUR WITH WHICH THE PRINCIPLES SET
By FREDERICK OZANAM ONE OF THE GREAT CATHOLICS OF THE LAST 2oo
YEARS ARE BEING PURSUED.
THE NAME YOU HAVE CHOSEN FOR YOUR LATEST ENTERPRISE,
A NEW AGED PERSONS HOSTEL1 IS THEREFORE PARTICULARLY APPROPRIATE.
AND YOUR POLICY OF ADMITTING AGED PEOPLE ' TO THIS HOME ON THE BASIS
OF NEED IS IN LINE WITH THE HIGHEST IDEALS OF THE FOUNDER OF THE
SOCIETY. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS HAPPY TO HAVE BEEN
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS ENDEAVOUR. CLEARLY THE 1297,000 WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAS PROVIDED UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOSTELS ACT HAS
BEEN WELL DIRECTED.
ANOTHER SOURCE OF PLEASURE FOR ME IS TO SEE THAT, IN
ESTABLISHING THIS HOSTEL, THE SOCIETY HAS SHOWN A FULL AWARENESS
FOR A MODERN APPROACH TO HOUSING FOR THE AGED. THE BREAKDOWN
OF THE TRADITIONAL THREE-GENERATION FAMILY UNIT THROUGHOUT THE
WESTERN WORLD AND ITS REPLACEMENT BY THE SO-CALLED " 1NUCLEAR FAMILY" I 
-2-
HAS CREATED AN ENORMOUS PROBLEM WITH THE CARE OF THE AGED.
FOR TOO LONG THE PROBLEM WAS DEALT WITH BY PROVIDING ONLY ONE
CHOICE THE NURSING HOME FOR AGED PEOPLE WHO DID NOT HAVE
THEIR OWN HOME OR WHO COULD NO LONGER LIVE THERE. THIS FORCED
MANY AGED PEOPLE INTO A STYLE. OF ACCOMMODATION WHICH WAS NOT
APPROPRIATE TO THEIR NEEDS. MIANY OLD PEOPLE WHO WERE FIT AND
WILLING TO PARTICIPATE ACTIVELY IN THE SOCIETY AROUND THEM HAD
TO LIVE IN INSTITUTIONS WHICH WERE INTENDED FOR PEOPLE WHO WERE
LESS PHYSICALLY AND MENTALLY CAPABLE.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CARE
OF THE AGED IN RECENT YEARS HAS BEEN THE GROWING EMPHASIS ON
PROVIDING OTHER CHOICES FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE. THE GOVERNMENT
ACTIVELY SUPPORTS AN APPROACH BASED ON HAVING THREE TYPES OF
ACCOMMODATION PROVIDED FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE WHO NO LONGER CAN STAY
AT HOME. WE WANT TO SEE THESE PEOPLE BE ABLE TO CHOOSE BETWEEN
SELF-CONTAINED UNITS, HOSTEL-TYPE HOMES AND, ONLY WHERE THIS IS
MEDICALLY NECESSARY, NURSING HOMES. THE CREATION OF HOSTEL-TYPE
ACCOMMODATION HERE IN CAMPBELL BY THE ST. VINCENT DE PAUL
SOCIETY FULLY ACCORDS WITH THIS THREE-TIERED APPROACH.
M1UCH REMAINS TO BE DONE IN THIS AREA, EVEN NOW IT HAS
BEEN ESTIMATED THAT ABOUT 25 PER CENT OF PEOPLE CURRENTLY IN
NURSING HOMES SHOULD NOT BE THERE. WE MUST EXPLORE QUICKLY AND
VIGOROUSLY ALL POSSIBLE MEANS OF PROVIDING OTHER CHOICES FOR THE
AGED. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE LAST YEAR HAS TAKEN
SEVERAL IMPORTANT STEPS TO REVIEW AND REVISE THE APPROACH TO
AGED PERSONS HOUSING. THE NEWLY ESTABLISHED SOCIAL FELFARE
COMMISSION APPOINTED A COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO AGED PERSONS 
-3-
HOUSING IN JUNE 1973 AND IT GAVE AN INTERIM REPORT TO THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY AT THE END OF NOVEMBER, IN KEEPING WITH THE
GOVERNMENT'S POLICY OF MAKING DOCUMENTS OF THIS KIND PUBLIC, THE
INTERIM REPORT WAS PROMPTLY TABLED IN FEDERAL PARLIAMENT, IT MADE
A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT RECOMMENDATIONS, PARTICULARLY RELATING TO
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES, I EXPECT THAT CABINET WILL CONSIDER THE
REPORT AND MAKE A DECISION ON THESE RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE NEXT
FEW WEEKS, MEANWHILE THE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY WILL
CONTINUE AND I WOULD DRAW SPECIAL ATTENTION TO THE FACT THAT
ONE OF ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE IS TO INQUIRE INTO ITHE NEED FOR
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO INTRODUCE ANY ALTERNATIVE OR ADDITIONAL
GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS OF ASSISTANCE FOR THE HOUSING AND CARE OF THE
AGED, IN ADDITION TO THIS COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY, THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, MYR HAYDEN, EARLY LAST YEAR ASKED A STANDING
COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH AND IEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
TO INQUIRE INTO AND REPORT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF GERIATRIC CARE
GENERALLY IN AUSTRALIA, THE COMMITTEE HAS BEEN MEETING REGULARLY
UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF DR DAVID DE SOUZA, AN EXPERT IN THE FIELD
OF GERIATRIC CARE, THE COMMITTEE IS EXPECTED TO REPORT TO MR HAYDEN
VERY SOON, ON ANOTHER FRONT, THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING, MR JOHNSON,
HAS ASKED THE STATISTICIAN TO CONDUCT A NATION-WIDE SURVEY OF
AGED PERSONS' HOUSING NEEDS, IN ASKING FOR THE SURVEY MR JOHNSON
DECLARED THAT THE STUDY WAS NECESSARY IF EFFECTIVE ACTION WAS TO
BE TAKEN TO SOLVE THE GRAVE HOUSING PROBLEMS NOW CONFRONTING MANY
AGED PERSONS, ESPECIALLY PENSIONERS, THE SURVEY IS SCHEDULED TO
BEGIN IN DECEMBER THIS YEAR, 
THESE INVESTIGATIONS ARE NEEDED TO ENSURE THAT COMMUNITY
ACTIVITY IN THIS AREA IS APPROPRIATE TO THE NEEDS OF OUR SENIOR
CITIZENS. THE GOVERNMENT, HOWEVER, HAS NOT BEEN CONTENT TO DO NOTHING
FRESH WHILE IT AWAITS THE RESULTS OF THE STUDIES, IT HAS TAKEN
ACTION TO MAKE MORE MONEY AVAILABLE FOR AGED PERSONS HOUSING AND
FOR DOMICILIARY CARE FOR THE AGED, IN MARCH LAST YEAR IT ANNOUNCED
THAT PEOPLE CARING FOR SICK AGED RELATIVES IN NEED OF NURSING CARE
IN THEIR OWN HOMES WOULD BECOME ELIGIBLE FOR A 814 A WEEK GOVERNMENT
GRANT. IT HAS ENACTED AN AGED PERSONS HOMES BILL WHICH INCREASED
FROM 810 TO S12 A WEEK THE RATE OF SUBSIDY PAID TO ELIGIBLE
ORGANISATIONS WHICH PROVIDE PERSONAL CARE SERVICES FOR THE AGED
IN HOSTEL ACCOMMODATION,
TWO OTHER GOVERNMENT ACTIONS LAST YEAR WERE DIRECTED
TO THE NEED FOR IMPROVING HOME CARE FACILITIES FOR THE AGED.
THE DELIVERED MEALS SUBSIDY BILL WAS ENACTED TO INCREASE THE BASIC
RATE OF SUBSIDY PAID TO ".' lEALS-ON-' HEELS" SERVICES FROM 15 CENTS
TO 20 CENTS PER MEAL. THEN THE STATES GRANTS ( HOME CARE) BILL WAS
BROUGHT IN TO INFUSE EXTRA FUNDS INTO THE PRESENT HOME CARE
PROGRAM., THE BILL INCREASED THE GOVERNMENT'S GRANTS TO THE STATES
FROM A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR BASIS TO 92 FOR EVERY õ 1 SPENT BY THE
STATES ON HOUSEKEEPER AND HOME HEALTH SERVICES AND SENIOR CITIZEN
CENTRES. IT ALSO INCREASED THE SUBSIDY FOR WELFARE OFFICERS
EMPLOYED FOR SENIOR CITIZEN CENTRES FROM HALF TO TWO-THIRDS OF
THEIR SALARY. 
THE GOVERNMENT'S AIM WITH ALL OF THESE ACTIONS IS TO
ENSURE THAT ALL AGED PEOPLE THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA CAN LIVE IN
COMFORT AND DIGNITY AND THAT ALL AGED PEOPLE CAN SPEND THEIR
TIME IN AN INTERESTING AND STIMULATING ENVIRONMENT.
TO ACHIEVE THIS AIM WE MUST ENSURE THAT WE ALLOW-J FOR T1HE
UTMOST FLEXIBILITY IN THE CARE OF THE AGED. 1! IE BELIEVE THAT, IF
AT ALL POSSIBLE, AGED PEOPLE SHOULD BE ABLE TO LIVE IN THEIR
OWN HOMES AND MUCH OF OUR ACTIVITY WILL BE DIRECTED TOWARDS THIS
END. VIE HOPE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN WILL PROVIDE A
FRAMEWORK FOR THIS. THiE PLAN, WHICH AIMS TO ASSIST IN THE
DEVELOPMENT AT A REGIONAL LEVEL OF NATIONALLY CO-ORDINATED
WELFARE ACTIVITY, WILL PROVIDE FOR COST SHARING WITH LOCAL
AUTHORITIES AND VOLUNTARY AGENCIES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF WELFARE
SERVICES. HOPE THAT THE PLAN WILL ENABLE GREATER ATTENTION TO
BE PAID TO HOME VISITING AND OTHER DOMICILIARY CARE SO THAT ELDERLY
PEOPLE CAN REMAIN IN THEIR OWN HOM1ES FOR AS LONG AS POSSIRLE.
THE GOVERNMENT IS ALSO EXAMiINING THE POSSIRILITY OF ESTABLISliING
DAY CARE CENTRES TO WHICH AGED PEOPLE WOULD GO FOR M1EDICAL
TREATMENT AND SERVICES, SUCH AS CHIROPODY, WHILE LIVING AT HOME.
THIS CONCEPT HAS THE ADDITIONAL ADVANTAGE THAT IT WOULD OFFER THE
POSSIBILITY OF REGULAR AND WIDE-RANGING SOCIAL CONTACT FOR
ELDERLY PEOPLE. 
-6-
WHETHER THE AGED LIVE AT HOME OR IN HOSTELS OR IN NURSING
HOMES, IT IS BECOMING INCREASINGLY OBVIOUS THAT WE MUST DO ALL THAT
WE CAN TO PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THEM TO REMAIN INVOLVED IN THE
COMMUNITY AROUND THEM, THIS NEED IS FREQUENTLY OVERLOOKED AND
A KIND OF GERIATRIC APARTHEID HAS RESULTED. THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES
THAT WE MUST EXPLORE ALL POSSIBILITIES FOR WIDE-RANGING SOCIAL
CONTACT AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT FOR THE AGED. AS AN EXAMPLE, MR HAYDEN
HAS ASKED THE SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION TO LOOK AT THE POSSIBILITY
OF SENIOR CITIZEN CENTRES BEING USED AS A BASIS FOR DAY CARE SERVICES.
THIS WOULD ENABLE AGED PEOPLE TO LOOK AFTER CHILDREN WITH WHOM THEY
COULD DEVELOP A CLOSE RELATIONSHIP.
I AM SURE THAT THE SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL SHARES
ALL OF THESE AIMS AND IDEALS. THROUGHOUT ITS HISTORY IT HAS
EMPHASISED THE NEED FOR PERSONAL CONTACT BETWEEN ITS WORKERS AND
THE PEOPLE WITH WHOM THEY ARE INVOLVED.
AGED PERSONS HOUSING AND DOMICILIARY CARE WILL NOT, OF
COURSE, BY THEMSELVES SATISFY OUR AIM OF ENSURING A COMFORTABLE
AND DIGNIFIED LIFE FOR THE AGED. THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO
IMPROVING THE LOT OF ELDERLY PEOPLE IN OTHER WAYS, PARTICULARLY
IN FINANCIAL TERMS. ON THE SECOND DAY OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE
NEWLY ELECTED PARLIAMENT LAST YEAR A BILL WAS INTRODUCED TO INCREASE
PENSIONS BY $ 1.50 A WEEK. PAYMENT OF THE PENSION INCREASE WAS
MADE RETROSPECTIVE TO THE FIRST PAY DAY AFTER THE 1972 ELECTIONS.
THE BUDGET PROVIDED FOR A FURTHER INCREASE OF $ 1.50 A WEEK IN
PENSIONS IN THE SPRING. THESE TWO INCREASES HAVE MEANT THAT WITHIN
A YEAR PENSIONS HAVE RISEN BY 15 PER CENT, WHICH HAS ALLOWED THEM
TO KEEP AHEAD OF INFLATION. 
14E HAVE CONSTANTLY RE-AFFIRMED r) IhR INTENTION TO LIFT
PENSIONS To 25 PER CENT OF AVERAGE WEEKLY MALE EARNINGS. IN KEEPING
WITH THIS AIM WE HAVE ALSO REPEATED OUR PLEDGE TO INCREASE PENSIONS
EACH SPRING AND AUTUMN UNTIL THIS LEVEL IS REACHED.
IN ADDITION TO THESE INCREASES, THE GOVERNMENT IS MOVING
TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF THE MEANS TEST ON AGE PENSIONS. THE FIRST
STEP TOWARDS THIS OBJECTIVE WAS TAKEN IN THE BUDGET WITH THE ABOLITION
OF THE MEANS TEST FOR ALL PEOPLE AGED 75 OR MORE. ANOTHER STEP WILL
BE TAKEN IN THIS YEAR'IS BUDGET.
IN THIS CONTEXT OF LIBERALISATION I WOULD ALSO MENTION
A MEASURE OF PARTICULAR SIGNIFICANCE TO ELDERLY CITIZENS WHO HAVE
COME To AUSTRALIA FROM OTHER COUNTRIES. THE NATIONAL PARLIAMFNT
ENACTED LAST YEARl A BILL WHICH MAKES AVAILABLE AGE AND SOME OTHER
PENSIONS To AUSTRALIAN PENSIONERS WHO WISH TO LIVE IN ANY OTHEP
COUNTRY. NO LONGER WILL AN AGED PERSON WHO HAS WORKED HARD IN
AUSTRALI. A LOSE THE SOCIAL SERVICE FRUITS OF HIS LABOUR SIMPLY BECAUSE
HE WANTS TO SPEND HIS LAST YEARS IN HIS COUNTRY OF ORIGIN.
IN ALL THAT IT IS DOING, THE GOVERNMENT AIMS TO OVERCOME
THE DISADVANTAGES AND INEQUALITIES THAT TOO MANY AGED PEOPLE HAVE
SUFFERED IN THE PAST IN AUSTRALIA. BELIEVE THAT WITH PROPER
PLANNING AND ADEQUATE SPENDING WE CAN ERADICATE THE WORST OF THE
INEQUALITIES THAT AT PRESENT EXIST. WE BELIEVE THAT, BY CO-OPERATING
WITH VOLUNTARY AGENCIES SUCH AS THE SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL,
WE CAN ENABLE AGED PEOPLE TO HAVE THE DIGNITY AND COMFORT WHICH IS
THEIR RIGHT. WE APPLAUD ALL THAT YOUR SOCIETY HAS ACHIEVED IN THE PAST
AND WE KNOW4 WE CAN COUNT ON YOUR CO-OPERATION IN THE FUTURE. 



PRIME MINISTER
VISIT TO SOUTH-EAST ASIA 14 February 1974
" I have come to the end of a most important visit to
six nations of South-East Asia Malaysia, Thailand, Laos, Burma,
Singapore and the Philippines. My visit served two basic purposes.
It enabled me to explain at first hand the aims and purposes of the
Australian Government's foreign policy and to hear the views of our
friends and neighbours on issues of common concern. It also enabled
me to set in train official negotiations on a wide range of practical
issues, especially in the area of trade.
The results have given me unqualified satisfaction. There
are no outstanding differences between Australia and her neighbours
in the region. our foreign policies are fully understood and warmly
approved. The Australian Government has established and our
neighbours have recognised a genuine and continuing interest in
South-East Asia. We are now seen as a steadfast and interested
partner a true participant in the destiny of the region.
There can be no turning back from this commitment.
I was struck throughout my visit by the warmth and cordiality
of the reception given to me and my officials in each of the countries
we visited. I encountered a genuine affection for Australia and her
people and a positive and heartening response to the changes and new
directions in Australia's foreign policies.
One result of my visit has been a series of decisions in
favour of trade and cultural agreements between Australia and the
countries of South-East Asia. We have agreed to update our trade
agreements with Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines and to open
negotiations for a trade agreement with Laos.
I was able to explain the benefits of our new policies on
Australian investment overseas and our plans for trade concessions
for developing countries. These initiatives were warmly welcomed
in all the countries I visited. / 2 
2
In a number of countries I was asked whether Australia could
supply, usually on a long term basis, commodities of basic importance
to their economies. Favourable responses have already been given
concerning sugar, wheat and rice to Malaysia, and coal to Burma.
Contacts are continuing concerning the supply of steel, nitrogeneous
fertilisers and liquid petroleum gas to Asian markets. I have made
clear in each country I have visited that the increased flow of two-wa3
trade is one of our prime objectives in our relations with South-East
Asia. During my trip I took the opportunity to talk to students
and their leaders and gained a valuable understanding of their
concerns and aspirations.
I assured the Governments of the region that while Australia
still retained her natural interest in the defence and security of
South-East Asia, we saw our future involvement in the region and
indeed the best hope for the nations of the region itself in terms
of growing co-operation and mutual assistance in the peaceful and
productive areas of trade, economic assistance and social development
based on the needs and wishes of the people.
Most important of all, perhaps, in my talks with political
leaders and in my public speeches, I was able to lay to rest any
lingering suspicions of Australia as a racist country. I trust
that Australia's old racist image has been buried forever.
Australia is now closer in spirit and objectives to the
nations of South-East Asia than ever before. On the basis of new
and enriched understandings, and a common acceptance of the inevitability
of change in the wake of cold war rivalries and out-dated
ideological obsessions, our country will establish new and lasting
friendships with our neighbours.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 184
February 1974
PHOSPHATE FERTILIZERS BOUNTY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced that
the Government had decided that the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty
should be allowed to expire at 31 December 1974. Mr Whitlam said
that the decision was being announced well before the ending of the
bounty to give primary producers and the fertilizer industry time
to make appropriate adjustments to their planning.
Mr Whitlam said that the phosphate fertilizers bounty
meant the payment to the fertilizer manufacturers of $ 12 a ton
of standard superphosphate and an equivalent amount in respect
of available phosphorus in other fertilizers produced and sold
for use as fertilizer in Australia. The bounty is paid with the
intention that the full benefit be passed on to the end-user.
Total payments under the bounty to 30 June 1973 amounted to just
over $ 337 million and in 1972/ 73 to $ 56.6 million. Most of the
benefit of these payments goes to users in the more prosperous
rural industries. The bounty was introduced in 1963 to emphasise the
benefits arising from the use of superphosphate. This aim has been
well met and it is no longer appropriate for this expensive charge
to be carried by the taxpayer.
Canberra. A. C. T. IAUSTRA. IA. I c~ 



Embargo 8.00 p. m. Saturday 16 February... 0900 16 February London time
iress Statement No. 184
Statement by the xrime Fvinister, Mr Whitlam.
( Issued in connection with the statement to be made at 8. uO p. mo
tonight by Buckingham Palace see copy attached.)
The Queen to Return to Australia
I am pleased that it will be possible for The Queen
to return to Australia and visit Adelaide, Perth and Darwin.
This had been her hope after fulfilling her constitutional
rluties in the United Eingdom.
I know that the Premiers of South Australia and
Western Australia, who have been kept informed, share my
Odlight. It will mean many hours of additional travelling
by air for The Queen but she does not want to disappoint the
peo'ple of outh Australia, Western Australia and the-Northern
Territory. It has been ten years since The Queen has visited
those States and the Northern Territory.
The Queen will now return to Australia through
Darwin to carry out engagementn with The Prince Philip in
Adelaide ( Friday 8 March), Perth ( Saturday 9 March) and Darwin
(' iunlday 10 Mlnrch). The Queen and The Prince Philip accompanied by
The Princess Anne and Captain Mark Phillips will arrive in
Canberra from Port Moresby on Wednesday 27 February.
Immediately after her arrival at Fairbairn RAAF Base
The Queen, The Prince Philip, The Princess Anne and Captain
Mark Phillips will drive to Civic Centre, Canberra, for a formal
ceremonial welcome to be followed by a walk around part of
City Hill to enable them to meet and talk to the citizens of the
National Capital. The Queen and The Prince Philip will stay at Government
House, Canberra. The Princess Anne and Captain Mark Phillips will
travel to Sydney as planned to stay overnight with the Governor
of New South Wales and Lady Cublero
In Canberra, The Queen will open the Second Session
of the 28th Parliament on Thursday 28 February and then leave
for Sydney from where she and The Princess Anne with Captain
Phillips will leave by air for London. 2/ o
I 
-2-
The Prince Philip's itinerary thereafter will be
Fri 1 Mar
Sat 2 Mar
Sun 3 I'[ ar
1on 4 tMar
Tue 5 Mar
Wed 6 iar
Thu 7 iar
Fri 8 M~ ar 10.40 a. m.
12.00 noon
12.00 noon
2.15 p. m.
10.45 aom.
2.45 p. m. Leave Canberra
Arrive Adelaide
Engagements in
South Australia
Leave Adelaide
Arrive Perth
Engagements in
Western Australia
Leave Perth
Arrive Adelaide
NOTE: When the engagements for Adelaide, Perth and Darwin
for The Queen and The Prince Philip are agreed with
the Palace, announcements will be made from the
respective Royal Visit Organisations.
Contact..... Press Liaison Officer, Royal Visit
Bruce King95 1249 ( Home)
73 3468 ( Office) 
Text of announcement from Buckingham Palace at 0900 Saturday ( 8.00 p. m.
16 February will be as follows: A. E. T.)
" As has already been announced, The Queen will be
leaving Canberra on Thursday 28 February, and will
be arriving in London by 10.00 a. m. on Friday
1 Mi. rch. Subsequently Her . lMajesty will leave
London on the evening, of 6 Mfarch to resume her tour
in Australia and to carry out her State Visit to
Indonesia. larliament will be opened on 12 March
by a Real Commission. During The Queen's absence
from the tour the Duke of Edinburgh will remain in
Australia and will carry out engagements already
arranged as appropriate." 



" 4 &gt; A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 189
18 February 1974
APPOINTMENTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced the following
appointments, which were approved by the Executive Council:-
Mr. T. K. Critchley has been appointed High Commissioner
of Papua New Guinea from 29 March. Mr. Critchley has been
Australian Ambassador to Thailand since 1969. He was
High Commissioner to Malaysia in 1957/ 65, and Senior
External Affairs representative in London in 1966/ 69.
Mr. Critchley, 58, will replace Mr. L. W. Johnson, who
will be recommended to the Executive Council for appointmient
as head of the Australian Development Assistatice Agency.
Mr. V. E. Jennings has been appointed a part-time member
of the C. 5. I. R. O. Executive. Mr. Jennings, who is Managing
Director of A. V. Jennings Industries ( Australia) Pty. Ltd.,
will take up his appointment from 26 March.
The appointment is for three years. He replaces
Sir Henry Somerset, who is retiring.
Mr. C. H. Webb has been appointed Administrator of
Christmas Island. Mr. Webb, a former will take
up his appointment, which is for one year, on 15 March.
He replaces Mr. F. S. Evatt.
Two appointments have also been made to the Commonwealth
Banking Corporation Board. Both appointments are for
five years. Professor L. F. Crisp and 1Mr. J. J. Kennedy.
Professor Crisp has been Professor of Political Science
at the Australian National University since 1950.
He was Director-General of Post-War Reconstruction in
1949/ 50. Mr. Kennedy, a Brisbane Accountant is
proprietor of a chain of electrical retail stores.
He was been appointed as a member of the Post Office
Commission of Inquiry in February 1973.
Professor Crisp and Mr. Kennedy will replace Sir Reginald
Groom and Mr. R. J. Baxter, whose terms of office have
expired.
CANBERRA. 



Press Statement No. 185
Statement by the Prime Minister
New Itinerary for The Queen's Interrupted Visit
As a result of changes during the weekend a new
itinerary has been arranged for the return visit in March
by The Queen -to South Austral. ia, Western Australia and the
Northern Territory. The Queen will now visit Western Australia before
South Australia instead of' the other way around.
She will fly from Adelaide to Darwin, ending her
tour there on Sunday 10 March as previously announced.
The Queen returns to Australia through Darwi~ n
on. Thursday 7 March and after spending a night aboard the
Roya. Yacht, she will fly to Perth on Friday 8 Ma@ rch to
Adelaide on Saturday 9 March and to Darwin on 10 March0
I was pleased to take up on behalf of the
Government of South Australia a proposal that Her Majesty
be in Adelaide on 9 March to open the Festival of Arts and
this she has now agreed to do.
To do this it was necessary to have the agrepnment
of the Premier of Western Australia..
Both The Queen and I are grateful-to the Premier
of Western Australia for consenting to the change in the
Perth program so as to allow the Adelaide Festival opening
by The Queen to take place. 



' I3 Press Statement No. 186
18 February 1974
NATURAL DISASTERS ORGANISATION
Members of the Cabinet spent much of today reviewing the capacity
of the nation to meet major natural disasters when it hits us in any form
Cabinet decided to create a Natural Disasters Organisation which
will absorb the existing Civil Defence 0rganisation and put new emphasis
on the threat of floods, bushfires and other disasters. I have been
authorised by Cabinet to cormaunicate with all the Premiers immediately
suggesting the earliest possible meeting of Ministers to consider our
proposals in detail. My telegrams have already been despatched.
Emergency measures for flood relief taken by the Australian
Government and others will continue uninterrupted. Submissions made to
Cabinet for the proposed n. w Natural Disasters Organisation came forward
under two headings.
One involved the organisation to , be assoiated with our defence
1 forces and the other is concerned with the mitigation'of financial
losses. On the latter, Cabinet agreed to hear the views df the
coriercial insurance companies and to commence inquiries into the
possibility of wider insurance cover than'is at present available.
The Minister for Defence, Mr. Barnard and the Treasurer, Mr. Crean
will make such detailed statements as are appropriate.
Apart from the flood damage suffered by the farmers, there is
evidence enough that ill-planned and over-crowded cities are exposing
people to great dangers. in times of disaster. It can be anticipated
that this Government will look very warily at any future projects that
might expose people or the environment to peril.
A detailed account of Queensland's recent terrible experiences
prepared by my Department, was made available to all Ministers. It
stated among other things that it is still not possible to estimate
the cost of the floods in terms either of human hardship or material
losses.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JAUSTRALIA g-
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 188
18 February 1974
EARTHMOVING, CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS HANDLING EQUIPMENT ETC.
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced the Government's
decision on the Tariff Board's report on Earthmoving, Construction
and Materials Handling Equipment, Etc. The Prime Minister stated that
the Government had accepted the Board's recommendations, with some
minor rate adjustments arising from international commitments.
The report covered a wide range of earthmoving, construction
and materials handling equipment including attachments and parts.
The Government's decison to implement the Board's recommendations
will mean that for the more important products the following rates
of duty will apply: for loaders and backhoes 40%; for cranes
to 35% ( the lower rate applying to cranes with a working. weight in
excess of 50 tonnes); engine propelled forklift trucks 30% ( with
the existing alternative specific rate being phased out in two stages
over five years); for road rollers and road making machinery
hoists, pulley tackle and other lifting devices 30% to 40%; conveyors
but reducing to 20% and 30% over 3 years; lifts and escalators
Although the Tariff Boards report was signed after the
Government's announcement on the 25% tariff cut the existing duties
referred to in the report are those applying before the reduction.
Consequently, although the Board's recommended rates are in some
cases lower than the rates applying before the 25% tariff cuts when
compared with the rates actually operating since the tariff cuts, the
rates on some products will now have been increased.
Furthermore, importers may also encounter increased duties in
certain circumstances, for example, higher duties could result from
the abolition of the tariff preferences which British goods have
enjoyed. In some cases Britain is the main source of competition to
the local industry.
Mr Whitlam said that details of the Customs tariff changes
arising from the Government's decision will be announced when
administrative arrangements to implement them have been finalised.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 189
18 February 1974
APPOINTMENTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced the following
appointments, which were approved by the Executive Council:-
Mr. T. K. Critchley has been appointed High Commissioner
of Papua New Guinea from 29 March. Mr. Critchley has been
Australian Ambassador to Thailand since 1969. He was
High Commissioner to Malaysia in 1957/ 65, and Senior
External Affairs representative in London in 1966/ 69.
Mr. Critchley, 58, will replace Mr. L. W. Johnson, who
will be recommended to the Executive Council for appointment
as head of the Australian Development Assistaiice Agency.
Mr. V. E. Jennings has been appointed a part-time member
of the C. S. I. R. O. Executive. Mr. Jennings, who is Managing
Director of A. V. Jennings Industries ( Australia) Pty. Ltd.,
will take up his appointment from 26 March.
The appointment is for three years. He replaces
Sir Henry Somerset, who is retiring.
Mr. C. H. Webb has been appointed Administrator of
hrstmas Island. Mr. Webb, a former will take
up his appointment, which is for one year, on 15 March.
He replaces Mr. F. S. Evatt.
Two appointments have also been made to the Commonwealth
Banking Corporation Board. Both appointments are for
five years. Professor L. F. Crisp and Mr. J. J. Kennedy.
Professor Crisp has been Professor of Political' Science
at the Australian National University since 1950.
He was Director-General of Post-War Reconstruction in
1949/ 50. Mr. Kennedy, a Brisbane Accountant is
proprietor of a chain of electrical retail stores.
He was been appointed as a member of the Post Office
Commission of Inquiry in February 1973.
Professor Crisp and Mr. Kennedy will replace Sir Reginald
Groom and Mr. R. J. Baxter, whose terms of office have
expired.
CANBERRA. A. C. T._ 



7543t9
L PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 187
18 February 1974
PRE -SCHOOL AND DAY CARE FACILITIES
The Prime Minister announced today that the Government
' APbrdea-sSkcehdo otlh e aSnodc iaDla y WeClafraer eo ppCoormtmuinsistiioens tof rolmo okt hea t Wetlhfe ardee vealsopepcmte. nt
Tile Commission has been asked to make proposals
consistent with the Government's policy commitments and the ALP Party
Platform on Pre-School Opportunities and Day Care. It will report
before the preparationt of the 1974/ 75 Budget.
The Priorities Review Staff have also been offered
the opportunity to develop thoughts on these programs at the same time.
This represents an extension of the work already
* one by the Pre-Schools Committee into the wider welfare area. The
oc ial Welfare Commission will collaborate closely with the Pre-Schools
Committee, the Department of Education, the Schools Commission, the
Priorities Review Staff and other interested bodies.
4 The Prime Minister stressed that the sum of
wnich had been contemplated for allocation to Pre-School education
purposes during the later half of 1973/ 74 would be made available.
He hiad written to the Premiers in January asking them for their advice
on arrangements for expenditure of this. The Prime Minister has now
said that the Government will determine the basis for the use of this
money as soon as proposals from the States have been received and
considered. He gave an assurance that Priorities Review Staff program
for wnich grants are made during this financial year will be eligible
for continuing support.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 188
18 February 1974
EARTHMOVING, CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS HANDLING EQUIPMENT ETC.
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced the Government's
decision on the Tariff Board's report on Earthmoving, Construction
and Materials Handling Equipment, Etc. The Prime M4inister stated that
the Government had accepted the Board's recommendations, with some
minor rate adjustments arising from international commitments.
The report covered a wide range of earthmoving, construction
and materials handling equipment including attachments and parts. f
The Government's decison to implement the Board's recommendations
will mean that for the more important products the following rates
of duty will apply: for loaders and backhoes 40%; for cranes
to 35% ( the lower rate applying to cranes with a working.-weight in
excess of 50 tonnes); engine propelled forklift trucks 30% ( with
the existing alternative specific rate being phased out in two stages
over five years); for road rollers and road making machinery
hoists, pulley tackle and other lifting devices 30% to 40% conveyors
but reducing to 20% and 30% over 3 years; lifts and escalators
Although the Tariff Boards report was signed after the
Government's announcement on the 25% tariff cut the existing duties
referred to in the report are those applying before the reduction.
Consequently, although the Board's recommended rates are in some
cases lower than the rates applying before the 25% tariff cuts when
compared with the rates actually operating since the tariff cuts, the
rates on some products will now have been increased.
Furthermore, importers may also encounter increased duties in
certain circumstances, for example, higher duties could'result from
the abolition of the tariff preferences which British goods have
enjoyed. In some cases Britain is the main source of competition to
the local industry.
Mr Whitlam said that details of the Customs tariff changes
arising from the Government's decision will be announced when
administrative arrangements to implement them have been finalised.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFERE14DUM
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MIiISTER,
THE HON, E. G, ' HITLA1, M. P.,
TO THE 1971' CONFEREACE OF
THE 111STITUTE OF IUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION,
( RAYMOND WEST ORATIOi)
MELBOURNE, 19 FEBRUARY 1974,
I SHOULD BEGIN BY EMPHASISING THE PROFOUND
COMMUNITY OF INTEREST BETWEEN THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF
YOUR INSTITUTE AND THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF MY
GOVERNMENT. YOUR ORGANISATION WAS AMONG THE FIRST TO
RECOGNISE THAT MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION IS AS MUCH A
NATIONAL AS A STATE OR LOCAL CONCERN. YOU WERE AMONG
THE FIRST TO PERCEIVE THAT THE PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE NATIONAL IMPLICATIONS QUITE
DISTINCT FROM THEIR RELEVANCE TO PARTICULAR LOCALITIES.
WHEN YOUR INSTITUTE WAS ESTABLISHED ON A FEDERAL BASIS IN
1952, YOU CONCLUDED TO USE YOUR OWN WORDS THAT " WHILE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS LOCAL AND, IN FACT, DERIVES ITS FUNCTIONS
FROM EACH RESPECTIVE STATE', THE DEVELOPMENT AND STRENGTH OF IT
IS A MATTER OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE AND OF NATIONAL CONCERN." I @/ 2 
2
YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF THAT PRINCIPLE WITH WHAT I
BELIEVE ARE ITS INEVITABLE CONSEQUENCES WAS DUE IN LARGE
MEASURE TO THE VISION AND ENERGY OF THE LATE RAYMOND WEST,
AN ADMINISTRATOR OF EXCEPTIONAL GIFTS AND RARE DEDICATION.
I MIGHT REMIND YOU THAT IT WAS IN THAT SAME YEAR, 1952,
THAT I FIRST ENTERED PARLIAMENT. FROM THAT MOMENT,
IN ALL MY SPEECHES, IN ALL MY ACTIONS, I SOUGHT TO
PERSUADE MY COLLEAGUES AND MY PARTY THAT THE FUTURE OF
SO MANY OF OUR INSTITUTIONS AND SERVICES HEALTH,
TRANSPORT, SEWERAGE, HOUSING, ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS,
CHILD CARE, ALL THE THINGS THAT MAKE FOR THE BETTERMENT
AND HAPPINESS OF OUR PEOPLE DEPENDED ON STRONG LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND A MEASURE OF NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT. So I APPLAUD WHAT YOUR INSTITUTE
STANDS FOR. YOU ARE DEDICATED TO BETTER AND MORE
EFFICIENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT; SO AM I, YOU PERCEIVE THE
NATIONAL IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT; SO DO WE.
YOU BELIEVE THAT SOUND LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS FUNDAMENTAL
TO THE WELL BEING OF OUR PEOPLE; SO DO WE. .1/ 3 
3
ONE IN FACT KJO'. S LETTER THAN YOU TIE LONG
AND SORRY HISTORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THIS COUNTRY, THE
YEARS OF NEGLECT AND INDIFFERENCE FRCii WHICH IT HAS
SUFFERED, AND THE ATMOSPHERE OF PERPETUAL FINAINCIAL
CRISIS THAT HAS SURROUNDED IT FOR GENERATIONS. I HAVE
OFTEN MARVELLED AT THE DEDICATION AND FORTITUDE OF MEN
WHO HAVE CONTINUED TO SERVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE FACE
OF SUCH ODDS,. So LET ME PUT TO YOU SOME PROPOSITIONS
WHICH ARE CENTRAL TO MY GOVERNMENT'S WHOLE APPROACH TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND WHICH I BELIEVE WILL HAVE YOUR
ASSENT AS THE MEN AND WOMEN MOST CONCERNED, AND EXPERT,
IN THIS FIELD. PMY FIRST PROPOSITION 13 THAT NO ONE,
WHATEVER HIS PARTY, WHATEVER HIS BELIEFS, CAN BE SATISFIED
WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS IT IS. BASICALLY THIS IS A
QUESTION OF THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
OUTSTRIPPING ITS MEANS. LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS CALLED
UPON TO PROVIDE MORE AND MORE SERVICES TO MORE AND
MORE PEOPLE. THIS IS NOT SOMETHING IT HAS SOUGHT
FOR ITSELF; IT IS SOMETHING DEMANDED BY THE PEOPLE.
AND THE RESOURCES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ARE MANIFESTLY
INADEQUATE TO MEET THOSE DEMANDS. / 4 
i'
1IY SECOND PROPOSITION IS THAT FUNDAMENTAL
CHANGES ARE NEEDED TO GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROPER ACCESS
TO THE NATION'S FINANCIAL RESOURCES. FOR THAT REASON
WE PROPOSE, AS YOU KNOW, TO ASK THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
TO APPROVE A CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT THAT WILL REMOVE,
ONCE AND FOR ALL, THE PRESENT FINANCIAL PARRIERS TO
EFFICIENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS FULL AND EFFECTIVE
PARTNERSHIP IN A FEDERAL SYSTEM.
AND MY THIRD PROPOSITION IS THAT UNLESS THAT
REFERENDUM IS CARRIED, UNLESS IT IS SUPPORTED BY ALL ' WHO
HAVE THE TRUE INTERESTS OF LOCAL GOVERINENT AT HEART,
UNLESS IT HAS THE VIGOROUS WORKING SUPPORT OF MEN SUCH
AS YOU, LOCAL GOVERNMENT WILL BE CONFINED FOR FURTHER
GENERATIONS IN ITS PRESENT STRAITJACKET OF STAGNATION
AND IMPOVERISHMENT. / s. 1 
I DO NOT THINK WE CAN APPROACH THIS QUESTION
RATIONALLY UNTIL WE CLEAR OUR MINDS OF IRRELEVANT CANT
PHRASES AND TIRED SLOGANS ABOUT " CENTRALISM" AND " STATE
RIGHTS". I CONFESS THAT I FIND IT STRANGE THAT A
GOVERNMENT SUCH AS MINE, DEDICATED NOT ONLY TO THE
GROWTH BUT TO THE GREATER AUTONOMY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
SHOULD BE ACCUSED OF CENTRALISM ON THAT SCORE.
THE VERY REVERSE IS TRUE. ' HAT WE SEEK TO DO IS
LIBERATE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FROM ITS FORCED DEPENDENCE
ON STATE ADMINISTRATIONS THAT CANNOT GIVE IT THE
RESOURCES IT NEEDS. ARE NOT SEEKING TO DENY
EITHER POWER OR FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO THE STATES.
WHAT WE ARE SEEKING IS A PROPER AND RATIONAL BALANCE
BETWEEN THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT NATIONAL,
STATE AND LOCAL THAT WILL ENABLE EACH TO FUNCTION
EFFICIENTLY AND DISCHARGE ITS RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE
FULL. 
r
S-UJ
IN THIS CONTEXT I SHOULD LIKE TO RECALL TO YOU
SOME WORDS USED BY AR JUSTICE ELSE MITCHELL, CHAIRMAN OF
THE ROYAL COMMISSION INTO NEW SOUTH 4ALES LAND VALUATION
RATING SYSTEMS IN 1965. HE SAID: " PRESENT CENTRALISED
POLICIES, WHICH HAVE REDUCED LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO A STATE
OF VASSALAGE AND COUNCILS TO THE ROLE OF MENDICANTS,
NEED DRASTIC REAPPRAISEMENT, THOUGH I WONDER IF STATE
GOVERNMENTS ARE VERY ANXIOUS FOR LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO
GAIN ANY SUBSTANTIAL MEASURE OF FINANCIAL INDEPENDENCE
OR TO DEVELOP QUALITIES OF STRONG LOCAL AUTONOMY."
HIS HONOUR HIGHLIGHTED A FACT THAT IS FREQUENTLY
OVERLOOKED WHEN ACCUSATIONS OF " CENTRALISM" ARE BANDIED
AROUND. AND IT IS THIS: WITHIN THEIR OWN BORDERS
THE STATES TEND TO BE MUCH MORE CENTRALIST AND
CENTRALISED THAN CANBERRA HAS EVER ASPIRED TO BE
WITHIN THE CONTINENT. / 7 
7
THIS HAS BEEN SO SINCE LONG BEFORE FEDERATION.
ONE HAS ONLY TO REMEMBER THAT THE MAINLAND COLONIES,,
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF . UEENSLAND, BUILT THEIR RAILWAY
SYSTEMS TO ENSURE CENTRALISATION UPON THEIR CAPITAL CITIES.
WHY SHOULD CENTRALISM, SO CALLED, BE LESS BANEFUL WHEN
PRACTISED BY A STATE GOVERNMENT THAN WHEN PRACTISED BY
THE COMMONWEALTH? IT IS ABSURD TO SUPPOSE THAT COMMUNITIES
SUCH AS SHEPPARTON OR ARMIDALE, FOR EXAMPLE, SHOULD FEEL
ANY GREATER KINSHIP WITH MIELBOURNE OR SYDNEY THAN THEY
DO WITH CANBERRA. IT IS ABSURD TO IMAGINE THAT THERE IS
SOME NATURAL LOGIC IN A SITUATION THAT REQUIRES A SEWERAGE
PROGRAM IN BOURKE OR A ROAD PROGRAM IN GEELONG TO RE LY ON,
THE BENEVOLENCE OF MACQUARIE STREET OR SPRING STREET.
WHAT MAGIC FORMULA DO THE STATES POSSESS FOR R EDUCING
INEQUALITIES WITHIN THEIR OWN BOUNDARIES? OUR WHOLE
HISTORY HAS SHOWN THAT THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS
WITHIN THE STATES ARE AT LEAST AS GREAT AS THOSE BETWEEN
THE STATES THEMSELVES. IN EACH STATE THERE ARE REGIONS AND
DISTRICTS WHICH CANNOT, BY REASONABLE EFFORT, FUNCTION ON
THE STANDARD OF OTHER REG! ONS AND DISTRICTS. IT IS NO0 ANSWER
TO THESE PROBLEMS, THESE INHERENT AND CHRONIC INEQUALITIES,
TO ARGUE ABOUT STATE RIGHTS. IT IS NOT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
BUT STATE GOVERNMENTS WHICH HAVE CENTRALISED LOCAL GOVERNMElJT.
IT IS UNDER STATE GOVERNMENTS THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS
STAGNATED AND DECLINED. W4HAT I ASK YOU TO DO IS LOOIK AFRESH
AT THESE PROBLEMS, TO START FROM THE BASIC ASSUMPTION THAT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUST BE GIVEN THE RESOURCES TO DO ITS JOB,
AND TO IGNORE THESE FUTILE AND IRRELEVANT ARGUMENTS ABOUT
RIGHTS AND AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY. I 1 / 13 
8
I THINK I CAN BEST DISPOSE OF THE CENTRALIST
RED HERRING BY REFERRING TO SOME REMARKS I MADE IN
NOVEMBER 1971 AT A SEMINAR ON THE FUTURE OF FEDERALISM
AT THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY. YOU WILL SEE
THE CONSISTENCY OF MY PARTY'S APPROACH, AND MY GOVERNMENT'S
APPROACH, TO THESE QUESTIONS, I SAID: " THE FUTURE
OF AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM DEPENDS FAR MORE UPON
MUNICIPALITIES THAN UPON THE COMMONWEALTH OR THE STATES.
FEDERALISM IS THREATENED NOT BY THE DRIFT OF ' POWER FROM
STATE CAPITALS TO CANBERRA BUT BY THE STATES IMPOSING
UPON MUNICIPALITIES FUNCTIONS WHICH ARE BEYOND THEIR
MEANS. IT IS NOT THE COMMONWEALTH BUT THE STATES WHICH
MUST RESIST OR FEAR A REASSESSMENT OF FUNCTIONS IN OUR
FEDERATION, FOR THE STATES TREAT MUNICIPALITIES EVEN MORE
FRUGALLY THAN THE STATES CLAIM THAT THEY THEMSELVES ARE
TREATED BY THE COMMONWEALTH." THAT WAS OUR POSITION
BEFORE THE ELECTION; IT IS OUR POSITION TODAY, ALL OUR
POLICIES HAVE BEEN DIRECTED TO ACHIEVING THOSE AIMS, TO
ELEVATING THE STATUS AND IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WITHIN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM. FAR FROM ADVOCATING CENTRALISM
OR CONCENTRATION OF POWER, I BELIEVE THERE IS A PRESSING CASE
FOR DECENTRALISATION OF AUTHORITY SO THAT MANY GOVERNMENT
FUNCTIONS IN CRITICAL AREAS, SUCH AS WELFARE, CULTURE AND
THE ENVIRONMENT, WILL BE PERFORMED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES EQUIPPED WITH THE RESOURCES THEY NEED. / 9 
IE SHOULD NEVER, FORGET THE DISGRACEFUL WAY L-OCAL
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN NEGLECTED AND DOWNGRADED SIN4CE TlF! E
VERY BEGINNINGS OF OUR FEDERATION. ANYONE LOOKING BACK
ON THlE HISTORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUST FIND IT INEXPLICABLE
TODAY THAT THE FRAHERS OF THE CONSTITUTION MADE NO MENTION
OF LOCAL GOVERN4MEN4T AT ALL. AS LATE AS 1927, WHEN THE
FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN'THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE
STATES WAS DRAWN UP, LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS STILL IGNORED.
IF THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT WERE BEING DRAWN UP TODAY IT IS
INCONCEIVABLE THAT THESE AUTHIORITIES WOULD BE OVERLOOKED.
IT WAS NOT UNTIL 1936 THAT TH4E LOAN COUNCIL BEGAN DEALING
WITH THE BORROWINGS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. YET
IN ALL THAT TIME, AND ESPECIALLY SINCE THE WAR, THE
SCALE OF OPERATIONS OF LOCAL AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAS BEEN STEADILY TRANSFORMED. WE HAVE ONLY
TO LOOK AT THlE FIGURES OF COMPAFr'ATIVE DEBTS. THE INDEBTEDNESS
OF THE COMMONWEALTH HAS NOT GROWN SINCE THE WAR BUT THE DEBTS
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMEN4T AUTHORITIES HAVE
MULTIPLIED MORE THAN TWELVE TIMES. LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES ARE NOW BORROWING MORE EACH YEAR THAN THE TOTAL
AMOUNT OF THEIR OUTSTANDING DEBT ONLY 20 YEARS OR SO AGO.
AT THE SAME TIME THERE HAVE BEEN ACCELERATING DEIMANDS QUITE
NATURAL AND PREDICTABLE DEMANDS ON THE SaCRVICES WHICH LOCAL
GOVERNMENT PROVIDES. YET NOTHING W". AS DONE TO REDRESS THESE
DEFICIENCIES; NOTHING WAS DON! E TO CORRECT A SYSTEM" THAT
ALLOWED THEM TO WORSEN YEAR BY YEAR. 
9A
IN THIS CONTEXT I CAN HARDLY DO BETTER THAN REFER
YOU TO SOME OF THE FINDINGS OF THE RECENT REPORT OF THE
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO LOCAL GOVERNMENT .'. REAS AND
ADMINISTRATION IN IIEW SOUTH vALES, KNOWN AS THE OARNETT REPORT.
THE COMMITTEE POINTED OUT THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT'S SHARE OF
TOTAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES HAS BEEN SHRI,' KING STEADILY
IN AUSTRALIA. IN 1969-70 IT REPRESENTED 7.11' 7 OF TOTAL
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE IN AUSTRALIA, COMPARED WITH 21.670
IN CANADA, 25,14% IN THE UNITED STATES AND 34.6% IN GREAT
BRITAIN ( WHERE, IT MUST BE SAID, THERE ARE NO STATE GOVERNMENTS),
THE COMMITTEE REPORT'ED THAT IN THE VIEW OF MOST SHIRE COUNCILS
IN [ JEW SOUTH ' IALES, " THEIR AREAS COULD rNOT SURVIVE WITHOUT
A CONTINUANCE OF LARGE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND,
WITHOUT EXCEPTION, COUNCILS BELIEVED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
INVOLVEMENT IN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS ESSENTIAL."
THE COMMITTEE, AS YOU KNOW, RECOMMENDED SOME AMALGAMATION
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES, THIS IS AN ISSUE THAT
NEED NOT CONCERN US HERE, THOUGH I SHOULD SAY THAT THE
COMMITTEE'S BELIEFS HAPPEN TO ACCORD WITH MY OWN, IT IS
SUFFICIENT TO RECALL THAT BOTH THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ASSOCIATION AND THE SHIRES ASSOCIATION, TOGETHER REPRESENTING
ALMOST ALL LOCAL COUNCI-LS IN NEW SOUTH WALES, AGREED THAT
THERE WAS A NEED FOR A REVIEW OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM,
IN THE WORDS OF THE REPORT, " THEY POINTED OUT THAT NO
INSTITUTIONS COULD STAND STILL, LEAST OF ALL GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTIONS, YET MAJOR REFORMS IN LOCAL GOVERNMEINT HAD
BEEN FEW AND FAR BETWEEN." it e I! 
i0
THE FACT IS THAT FOR. AT LEAST TWO DECADES
SUCCESSIVE GOVERNMENTS STOOD BY WHILE SERIOUS DEFICIENCIES
DEVELOPED IN MANY OF THE PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES
WHICH IT WAS THE DUTY OF THE STATE-LOCAL GOVERNMENT
SECTOR TO PROVIDE. PARTLY THIS WAS DUE TO INSUFFICIENT
RESOURCES.; BUT IT WAS ALSO A REFLECTION OF PROCESSES
OF PLANNING AND DETERMINING PRIORITIES WHICH WERE
INADEQUATE OR NARROWLY BASED. HiY GOVERNMENT HAS SET
ITSELF THE TASK OF HELPING TO REMEDY THESE DEFICIENCIES
IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES.
.4E HAVE MADE A STRONG BEGINNING WITAESS THE NEW OR
ENLARGED ALLOCATIONS IN OUR BUDGET FOR 1973-74 FOR
EDUCATION, COMMUNITY HEALTH, PUBLIC HOUSIIG, SEWERAGE
SElVICES, LAND MANAGEMENT, URBAN TRANSPORT AND GROWTH
CENTRES. TOTAL ALLOCATIONS TO THE STATES IN 1973-74,
INCLUDING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS' LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS,
BUT EXCLUDING UNEMPLOYMENT RELIEF GRANTS, ARE ESTIMATED
TO BE NO LESS THAN 2Lt PER CENT GREATER THAN T: iE
CORRESPONDING ALLOCATIONS IN 1972-73. 
1~ 1-
IT IS NOT, HOWEVER, SIMPLY A MATTER OF PROVIDING
MORE MONEY. AT THE RISK OF VOICING A TRUISM, LET ME SAY
THAT THE IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL SOVENIMENT DERIVES FROM
THE VERY FACT THAT IT IS LOCAL THAT THE SERVICES
AND FACILITIES IT PROVIDES HAVE SUCH A CLOSE AND DIRECT
IMPACT ON THE WELFARE OF THE POPULATION IT SERVES.
IT IS OUR AIM, IN PART, TO MAKE AVAILABLE TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT FUNDS MORE ADEQUAFE FOP ITS FUNCTIONS.
BUT OUR AIM IS LARGER THAN THAT. IF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT IS TO PLAY THE FULLER AND MORE EFFECTIVE
PART THAT I BELIEVE THE COMMUNITY WISHES IT TO PLAY,
THEN WE MUST ALSO INCREASE THE EFFECTIVE INFLUENCE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXERCISES Ii RELATION ro THE
FUNDAMENTAL DECISION-MAKING AFFECTING ITS ACTIVITIES.
IT WILL REPRESENT A MOST SIGNIFICANT STEP TOWARDS
REAL FEDERALISM,, REAL LOCAL PARTICIPATION IN, PUBLIC
AFFAIRS AND, INDEED, REAL DECENTRALISATION OF
GOVERNMENT WHEN THIS IS ACHIEVED. / i11 
12
WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN-SEVERAL IMPORTANT
INITIATIVES IN THAT DIRECTION. IN ITS AUTUMN SITTINGS
LAST YEAR WITHIN SIX M9NTAIS OF THE ELECTION THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT PASSED A NEW~ GRANITS COMMISSION
ACT AUTHORISING THAT BODY TO INOUiRE INJTO APPLICAVIOIS
FOR ASSISTANCE BY REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT. ANY ASS ISTANCE RECOMMENDED BY THE COtIMI SSION
AND APPROVED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE PAID
TO THE STATES UNDER SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON
CONDITION THAT IT BE PASSED ON T0 THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS CONCERNED. ADDITIONAL MENSERS HAVE SEENJ
APPOINTED TO THE COMIMISSIO! AND ITS STAFF IS BEING
EXPANDED TO ENABLE IT TO DEAL WITH THIS LARGE NEW
RESPONSIBILITY. IT IS HOPED THAT APPLICATIONS SY
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS WILL BEGIN TO BE RECEIVED AND
CONSIDERED EARLY THIS YEAR. FROM NOW ON, THE COMMISSION
WILL PLAY THE SAME ROLE IN REDUCING INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
REGIONS AS IT HAS BETWEEN THE STATES SINCE 193). I SHOULD
STRESS THAT THIS REFORM PAYS DUE HEED TO THE NATURAL
RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OF THE STATES. A'NY REGIONAL AUTHORITY
THAT APPLIES FOR SPECIAL ASSISTANCE WILL BE REQUIRED TO
NOTIFY THE APPROPRIATE STATE JINISTER, AND THE COMMISSION
ITSELF WILL BE REQUIRED TO CONSIDER ANY SUBMISSIONS FROM
STATE flINISTERS ON THE APPLICATION. 1013 
13
OUR SECOND GREAT IITIATIVE LAST YEAR WAS
TO SEEK A VOICE AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE
LOA1N COUNCIL. OUR PURPOSE WAS, AND STILL IS., TO ADMIT
REPRESENTATIVES OF ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS FROM EACH
STATE AND ENABLE THE COMMONWEALTH, ON REQUEST, TO
RAISE APPROVED LOANS OHi BE!. IALF OF SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. THEY WOULD TIUS
HAVE THE ADVANTAGE OF THE LONGER PERIOD AND LOWER
INTEREST RATES THAT APPLY TO LOANS RAISED BY THE
COMMONWEALTH ON BEHALF OF THE STATES. THIS WAS A
FIRM UNDERTAKING IN MY POLICY SPEECH AT THE LAST
ELECTIONS. I FIRST RAISED THE PROPOSALS WITH THE
PREMIERS AT THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION IN SEPTEMSER
LAST YEAR AND I REMIND YOU THAT IT WAS AT THE EXPRESS
INSISTENCE OF MY GOVERNMENT THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT
REPRESENTATIVES WERE ADMITTED TO THE CONVENTION'S
DELIBERATIONS. MADE IT CLEAR FROM THE START THAT
WITHOUT YOUR PARTICIPATION WE WOULD HAVE NO PART IN
THE CONVENTION AT ALL. I DOUBT IF ANYONE, IN
RETROSPECT, WOULD CLAIM MUCH SUCCESS FOR THAT
CONVENTION, BUT IT IS WORTH RECALLING SOME WORDS THAT
I USED TO THE PREMIERS WHEN EXPLAINING THE PURPOSE OF
OUR PROPOSALS. , I14 
I1!
I TOLD THE CONVENTION: " I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT
THE OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION IN MANY MINDS HERE RELATES
TO THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS BETWEE; I THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES. SOtlE OF YOU MAY PREFER
TO BELIEVE THAT THE OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION IN MY
MIND IS TO CONTINUE AND. EVE;-COMPOUND THE PRESENT
SITUATION BY WHICH THE 1. ATIONALI GOVERNMENT DOMI! JATES
THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS BET'iEEN IT AND THE STATES,
THAT IS NOT TRUE. IIY OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION
AND CONCERN IN THIS CONTEXT IS TO BALANCE THE
FUNCTIONS AND FINACES OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO ENSURE ADEQUATE
SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENTS OF RESOURCES. I WISH
EACH LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT TO BE IN A POSITION TO
PERFORM BETTER ITS ASSIGNED FUNCTIONS, FOR THE
BETTER WELFARE OF ALL OUR CITIZENS, WHEREVER THEY
LIVE." 
15
IN OCTOBER LAST YEAR A SPECIAL PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE WAS HELD TO DISCUSS THESE QUESTIONS. AT
THAT CONFERENCE IN CANBERRA I AGAIN PROPOSED THAT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE BOTH A VOICE AND A VOTE ON THE
LOAN COUNCIL AND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BE
EMPOWERED TO BORROW MONEY ON LOCAL GOVElNMENTS'
BEHALF. SPECIFICALLY I SUGGE.' TED THAT REPRESEFNTATIVES
OF ELECTED LOCAL GOVERNMENT BE ADMITTED TO ALL LOA; J
COUNCIL DISCUSSIONS, WITH A RIGHT TO VOTE ON THOSE
MATTERS DIRECTLY AFFECTING THEIR INTERESTS ESSENTIALLY,
THE BORROWING PROGRAMS FOR THE BODIES THEY REPRESENT
AND THE ALLOCATIONS OF THESE PROGRAMS. I NLED HARDLY
REMIND YOU OF THE RESULTS OF THAT MEETING. JUR
PROPOSALS WERE TURNED DOWN. TIlE IMPORTANT POINT
TO REMEMBER IS THAT THE PROPOSED CHAiJGES COULD
HAVE BEEN EFFECTED QUITE SIMPLY AT THAT MEETING BY
AN AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE BETWEEN THE PREMIERS AND
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERN;. IENT TO AMEND THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT,
IF THAT HAD BEEN DONE, NO CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT WOULD
HAVE BEEN REQUIRED. BUT WHEN THE PREMIERS REJECTED OUR
PROPOSALS WE HAD NO ALTERNATIVE BOUND AS WE WERE BY OUR
MANDATE FROM THE PEOPLE BUT TO PROCEED WITH A REFERENDUM.
THAT REFERENDUM, IF CARRIED, WILL EMPOWER THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT TO BORROW ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
GRANT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECTLY. ,/ 16 
if)
IT MUST SURELY STRIKE YOU AS ODD THAT, ' HILE
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED ARRANGEMENTS FOR BORROWINGS DY STATE
GOVERNMENTS TO BE UNDERTAKEN ON THEIR BEHALF BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES ARE
LARGELY LEFT TO FEND FOR THEMSELVES IN THE CAPITAL MARKETS.
' ITH THE GROWING COMPLEXITY AND SOPHISTICATION OF THESrE
MARKETS THEY ARE HANDICAPPED AS BORROWERS. THEY MUST
COMPETE ON THE MONEY MARKET AMONG THEMSELVES, AGAINST
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND AGAINST OTHER FINANCIAL
ORGANISATIONS. GIVEN THE NATURE AND RANGE OF PUBLIC
SERVICES AND FACILITIES THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
ARE CALLED UPON TO PROVIDE, WHY SHOULDN'T FHE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, WITH ITS SUPERIOR CAPACITY AS A BORROWIER,
UNDERTAKE BORROWINGS ON THEIR BEHALF?
THE COSTS OF SERVICING THEIR BORROWINGS BEAR
HEAVILY AND INCREASINGLY SO ON THE BUDGETS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. IHILE THE PICTURE DIFFERS
FROM STATE TO STATE, AND BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL AUTHORITIES,
OVERALL INTEREST PAYMENTS BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
WOULD NO'WY BE EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 12 PER CENT OF THEIR
REVENUES. INTEREST PAYMENTS PLUS CAPITAL REPAYMENTS
AMOUNTED TO $ 177.5 MILLION IN 1970-71, EQUIVALENT TO
ABOUT 25 PER CENT OF REVENUES. ./ 17 
17
You HAVE HEARD IT SAID AND NO DOUBT YOU WILL
HEAR IT AGAIN THAT IF WE WANT TO HELP LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THEN ALL WE NEED . DO IS GIVE MORE MONEY TO THE ) TATES AJD
LET THE STATES DISBURSE IT OR RAISE FUNDS IN THE USUAL
WAY. THAT ARGUMENT IGNORES AN" D OBSCURES THE REAL
ISSUES IN THIS REFERENDUM, FOR ONE THING IT IS A MISTAKE,
AS I HAVE SAID, TO SUPPOSE THAT T; 1IS ARGUMENT IS ABOUT
MONEY ALONE, THOUGH MORE MONEY 13 CERTAI: LY ;! EEDED,
IT IS VERY MUCH AN ARGUMENT. ABOUT BALAIJCING AVAILABLE
RESOURCES, AND FLEXIBILITY IN THE C2EATIONI AND APPLICATIONJ
OF THOSE RESOURCES, IT IS ALSO AN ARGUMENT A30UT THE
ULTIMATE STATUS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ITSELF. Is IT TO
REMAIN A VASSAL OF THE STATES, A POOR RELATION OF THE
STATES, OR IS IT TO BE GIVEN ITS RIGHTFUL AND HONOURED
PLACE AS FAR AS POSSIBLE, AN INDEFPENDE!' T AIND DISTINCTIVE
PLACE AS AN EQUAL PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM?
FOR MY PART I HAVE NO WISH TO SEE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BECOME
AN APPENDAGE OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ANY MORE THAN I
WANT IT TO REMAIN AN APPENDAGE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS,
BUT I DO WANT IT TO HAVE ADEQUATE AND REASONABLE ACCESS
TO THE NATION'S FINANCIAL RESOURCES. . IE ARE NOT SEEKING TO DENY
ANY RIGHTS OR POWERS OR RESOURCES TO THE STATES. INDEED
I WOULD BE THE FIRST TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE STATES THEMSELVES
HAVE OFTEN BEEN DEPRIVED OF THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES THEY
NEED, A GREAT NUMBER OF OUR INITIATIVES IN OUR FIRST YEAR
OF OFFICE, A GREAT PART OF THE THRUST AND PHILOSOPHY OF OUR
FIRST BUDGET, WERE CONCERNED WITH REDRESSING DEFICIENCIES
IN THE REVENUES OF THE STATES. AND JUST AS I WANT THE STATES
TO HAVE THE MEANS TO DISCHARGE THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES
ADEQUATELY, SO I PRESS THE SAME CASE ON BEHALF OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT. ., 11 
13
W; HY SHOULD LOCAL GOVERNMENT BE " 4HOLLY DEPENDENT
ON THE STA-rES? WHY SHOULD IT BE DENIED THE RIGHT TO
DEAL DIRECTLY WITH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT? THERE
ARE MANY MATTERS WHERE THERE ARE DISTINCT ADVANTAGES
IN DIRECT DEALING BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. I GIVE YOU A RECENT AND HIGHLY
TOPICAL EXAMPLE OUR FLOOD RELIEF PROGRAM. ', IE HAVE
GUARANTEED TO THE PEOPLE OF'QUEENSLAND AND iEW SOUTH
4ALES FLOOD RELIEF AND RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMS THAT
ARE VIRTUALLY OPEN-E4DED, OUR RESPONSE TO THE DISASTER
WAS, QUITE NATURALLY, IMMEDIATE AND GENEROUS, IT IS
EQUALLY NATURAL AND OBVIOUS THAT THE BEST WAY TO DISTRIBUTE
AND ALLOCATE THOSE FUNDS IS BY DIRECT CONSULTATION
BETWEEN THE AUTHORITY PROVIDING THEM AND THE REGIONAL
AUTHORITIES WHO WILL BE USING THEM. AGAIN, AS YOU KNOW,
WE HAVE AMBITIOUS PROGRAMS FOR SEWERAGE WORKS AND CHILD
CARE FACILITIES AND HEALTH CENTRES. " IE HAVE EMBARKED ON
OUR LONG-TERN PLANS FOR THE RENOVATION OF OUR SUBURBS AND
THE CREATION OF NEW CITIES. IN THE NEXT FEW MONTHS WE SHALL
BE MAKING ARRANGEMENTS WITH THE STATES TO ALLOCATE FUNDS FOR
ROADS FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEAR PERIOD. IN ALL THESE AREAS
IT IS QUITE ESSENTIAL AND I SHOULD HAVE THOUGHT, QUITE
OBVIOUS THAT SUCCESS WILL DEPEND IN LARGE MEASURE ON
OPPORTUNITIES FOR DIRECT DEAL-ING AND DIRECT FINANCIAL
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE AUSTRALIAN
UOVERNMENT. So LET US BE QUITE CLEAR THAT THOSE WHO RESIST
THIS REFERENDUM ARE NOT MER-LY FRUSTFRATING THE PROGRESS OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT; THEY ARE DOING THEIR BEST TO BLOCK THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S PLANS FOR SOCIAL WELFARE AND REFORM
ON AN UNPRECEDENTED SCALE. 
19
I SAID AT THE OUTSET THAT THE SUCCESS OF THIS
REFERENDUM, WITH ALL ITS PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
FUTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, WOULD DEPEND LARGELY ON YOUR
SUPPORT, YOUR KNOWLEDGEABLE AND EXPERT SUPPORT AS
ADMINISTRATORS IN THIS FIELD. I THI YOU MUST ASK
YOURSELVES WHETHER YOU ARE CONTENT WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AS IT IS, WITH ITS GROWING ACCUMULATION OF DEBT, ITS
WIDENING GAP BETWEEN RESPO4SIBILITIES AND RESOURCES,
ITS ENDLESS NEED TO FORCE UP RATES AND CHARGES, ITS
DEMEANED AND DIMINISHED STATUS IN ThE IhIERARCHY OF
GOVERNMENT, ITS FRUSTRATIONS AND DISAPPOINTMENTS.
IF YOU BELIEVE THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS CRYING OUT FOR
A NEN DEAL THEN I ASK YOU TO SUPPORT THIS REFERENDUM.
YOU MUST BE THE OPINION MAKERS ON THIS ISSUE; YOUR
THOUGHTS, YOUR OPINIONS, YOUR LETTERS, YOUR INFLUENCE
ARE WHAT WILL COUNT. I MAKE NO APOLOGY FOR APPEALING
TO YOU IN THIS WAY BECAUSE I THINK THE ISSUES ARE
CRUCIAL AND THE CHOICE FUNDAMENTAL TO OUR WELFARE AND
PROGRESS. WE DO NOT SEEK CHANGE FOR CHANGE'S SAKE.
WE SEEK CHANGE BECAUSE IT IS DEMANDED OF US, FORCED
UPON US BY INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT AND COMPLEX PROBLEMS
OF SOCIAL PLANNING AND ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT. ' 4E CAN NO
LONGER CLING TO OLD CONCEPTS, TO DOCUMENTS AND RULES
AND AGREEMENTS DRAWN UP IN THE DISTANT PAST, TO IRRELEVANT
OBSESSIONS WITH BOUNDARY LINES AND THE DEMARCATION OF RIGHTS
AND INTERESTS. LET US ACKNOWLEDGE THAT OUR FIRST TASK
OUR ONLY TASK IS TO ELEVATE LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO ITS PROPER
PLACE IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY AND GIVE IT THE MEANS TO CARRY
OUT ITS WORK FOR THE LASTING BENEFIT OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. 



C I
SPE BY TI-H!-PRI[ I iNISTI., fi, E. G. liiTlfLAl NM. P.,
AT TihE OP IN IG OF TihE I IPAfP. DS . IF IELD DAYS AT BI\ AID1E B, iS,
VICFORIA, TiFSDAY, 19 I: EBRUAL! RY
NOTHING PROVES MORE CLEARLY THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF
PRIMARY INDUSTRY TO AUSTRALIA THAN AN EVENT OF THE KIND
BEING STAGED HIF. RE TODAY, To SEE THE DISPLAYS OF FARM
EQUIPMENT, THE DEMONSTRATION OF NEW TECHNIQUES AND THE
EXHIBITIONS OF STOCK IS TO CONFIRM THE VITALITY,
SOPHISTICATION AND DURABILITY OF FARMING IN AUSTRALIA,
NO GOVERNMENT CAN FAIL TO BE IMPRESSED BY THIS VITAL ASPECT
OF OUR NATIONAL LIFE. CERTAINLY THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT
RECOGNISES THAT WITHOUT THE RURAL ACTIVITIES WHICH ARE SO
VIVIDLY ON SHOW TODAY AUSTRALIA COULD NOT HOPE TO CONTINUE
AS A PROSPEROUS AND GROWING NATION.
I AM GLAD TO HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO AFFIRM THE
GOVERNMENT'S GREAT CONCERN FOR THE CONTINUED WELL-BEING
OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY, BECAUSE SO MUCH OF THE DEBATE SURROUNDING
THE LAST FEDERAL ELECTIONS INVOLVED ISSUES AFFECTING OUR CITIES,
THERE HAS BEEN A TENDENCY IN SOME QUARTERS TO BELIEVE THAT THE
GOVERNMENT ATTACHES A DIMINISHED IMPORTANCE TO OUR RURAL AREAS.
I WANT TO SAY QUITE UNEQUIVOCALLY THAT ANY SUCH BELIEF IS
UNFOUNDED. THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT IS AS DEDICATED AS ANY
PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT TO THE CREATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SELFSUFFICIENT,
PROSPEROUS AND EFFICIENT PRIMARY INDUSTRIES,
INDEED, I BELIEVE THATI WE HAVE GIVEN A NEW AND HEALTHY EMPHASIS
TO THCESE INDUSTRIES, 
11o 600RwNME'T HAS DOME SO MIUCH 10 REDJUCE THE DUJPDEN WHIJCH
RURAL1 INDUSTRIES HAVL HAD TO CARRY AS A RESULT OF EXCES; SIVE
TAR IFF PROTECTI1ON, No Gov0RHIMET HAS DONE SO MU~ LCH TO IN'SUPcL
THAT MOST PUBLIC ASSISTANCE GOES TO THOSE FAR~ M FAMILIES WHiO NFLD
IT MOST. No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE SO MUCH TO OPEN UP NFAW AND
EXPANDING OVERSEAS MARKETS,
DESPITE WHAT WE HAVE DONE, THERE IS STILL MISUNDERSTANDING,
AND CRITICISM OF THE THRUST OF OUR RURAL POLICIES IN SOME
QUARTERS, OUR CRITICS HAVE SEIZED UPON THE ABOLITION OR
REDUCTION OF SOME SUBSIDIES IN AN ATTEMPT TO ARGUE THAT THE
GOVERNMENT IS ANTI-RURAL. THEY HA\' E NOT BOTHERED TO CONSIDER
WHETHER THESE SUBSIDIES ARE APPROPRIATE FOR OUR ECONOMY OR
HELPFUL TO OUR FARMERS. THEY HAVE NOT STOPPED TO CONSIDER
WHETHER THESE SUBSIDIES HELP ALL FARMERS OR WHETHER THEY
OVERWHELMINGLY FAVOUR THE LARGEST AND WEALTHIEST PRODUCERS
ANDj IN SO DOING, DEPRIVE. THE GOVERNMENT OF MONE Y WHICH
MIGHT BE BETTER DIRECTED TO AID FAMILY . li THEY HAVE NOT
STOPPED TO CONSIDER WHETHER THESE SUBSIDIES HAVE STOOD IN
THE WAY OF ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMS WHICH PROMISE GREATER
LONG-TERM ASSISTANCE TO FARMERS. THEY HAVE NOT STOPPED TO
CONSIDER WHAT WERE THE MOTIVES BEHIND THEIR INTRODUCTION,
ANY ANALYSIS OF OUR PRIMARY INDUSTRY POLICY WILL SHOW THAT
WE ARE STRIVING TO SEE THAT OUR RURAL AREAS ARE NOT CYNICALLY
EXPLOITED BY PORK-BARREL POLITICS. WE WANT TO ENSURE THAT
THEY ARE GIVEN A FIRM ECONOMIC BASIS SO THAT COUNTRY PEOPLE
CAN BE SURE OF SHARING THE SECURITY AND WEALTH OF OUR NATION. 
TO ACHIEVE OUR AIIIS WE ARE STRIVING TO IMPROVE THE
DOMESTIC HARKETS FOR PRIMARY PRODUCERS, TO CONSOLIDATE
EXIST] HG EXPORT M1ARKETS AND TO CREATE NEW MARKETS. AS
I HAVE ALFREADY INDICATED. I } 3ELIEVE WE HAVE HAD A GREAT
DEAL OF SUCCESS IN THESE IERMS IN THE LAST YEAR, WE HAVE,
FOR EXANPLE, NEGOTIATED WHEAT AND SUGAR CONTRACTS WITH
CHINA AND RURAL INDUSTRY WILL BENEFIT FROM THE CLOSER TRADE
TIES WE HAVE ESTABLISHED WITH JAPAN.
WHATEVER OUR CRITICS MIGHT SAY, THE FACT REMAINS
THAT THERE HAS BEEN A GREAT IMPROVEMENT IN FARM INCOME
IN THE LAST YEAR.
IN THE THREE YEARS ENDED 1969/ 70 FARM INCOME AVERAGED
ABOUT $ 1,050 MILLION A YEAR. THE ONSET OF DROUGHT AND
DECLINING PRICES CAUSED FARM INCOME TO DROP TO $ 885 MILLION
IN 1970/ 71 AND MANY PRODUCERS FACED SERIOUS FINANCIAL
DIFFICULTIES,. LAST YEAR SAW A COMPLETE REVERSAL OF THIS
SITUATION AND, UNTIL RECENTLY, THE ESTIMATE FOR FARM INCOME
IN 1973/ 74 WAS $ 2,885 MILLION MORE THAN THREE TIMES AS
GREAT AS IN 19/ 0/ 71 AND WELL OVER DOUBLE THE AVERAGE INCOME
FOR THE THREE YEARS BEFORE THEN. 
THE SAME SORT OF PATTERN EMERGED L-AST YEAR IN TrHE
FIGURES FOR EXPOR~ TS OF RURAL ORIGIN. HS EXPORTS EARNED
AUSTRLIA. $ 2,1419 M1ILLION Im 1971/ 72. THE MOST RECENT
ESTIMATE FOR 197-/ 7/ 4 PREDICTED THAT THEY WOULD BE WORTH
$ 3,874-MILLION A VERY GREAT IMPROVEMENT.
THE DEVASTATING FLOODS WHICH HAVE SW4EPT QUEENSLAND
AND NORTHERN NEW SOUTH WALES IN RECENT WEEKS WI1LL INEVITABLY
FORCE A REVISION OF THESE ESTIMATES. THEY WILL ALSO MEAN
THAT MANY FARMERS WILL NOT SHARE THE CURRENT BUOYANCY OF
PRICES FOR RURAL COMMODITIES. NEVERTHELESS, IT REMAINS TRUE
THAT THE MARKET OUTLOOK FOR AUSTRALIAN PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS
EXTREMELY FAVOURABLE AND THAT A GOVERNMENT POLICY AIMED AT
MAINTAINING AND IMPROVING THIS BUOYANCY IS SOUNDLY BASED.
I WOULD BE MUCH TOO SANGUINE IF I TRIED TO PRETEND
THAT SOME UNCERTAINTIES DID NOT FACE PRIMARY PRODUCERS.
THE FLOODS AND CYCLONES IN THE NORTH INDICATE YET AGAIN
THE UNPREDICTABILITY OF A FARMER'IS LIFE. SOME UNPREDICTABILITY
MUST ALSO RESULT FROM THE CURRENT OIL PROBLEM, ESPECIALLY AS
IT RELATES TO BUNKERING FUEL. THE GOVERNMENT IS DOING ALL
THAT IT CAN TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS CREATED BY THESE NEW
AND SUDDEN FACTORS IN THE RURAL OUTLOOK. IN THE CASE OF THE
QUEENSLAND AND NEW SOUTH WALES FLOODS, IT IS PROVIDING ALL
POSSIBLE ASSISTANCE TO HELP OVERCOME THE DAMAGE CAUSED. IN THE
CASE OF THE INTERNATIONAL OIL CRISIS, WE ARE BACKING UP OUR OWN
NATURAL WEALTH WITH GOVERNMENT POLICIES AIMED AT PROTECTING AND
ADVANCING OUR NATIONAL INTERESTS. 
A MAJOR FACTOR IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
RURAL. POLICY HAS BEEN THE ROLE PLAYED BY TIHE MINISTER FOR
PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR KEN WIRIEDT. FARMERS COULD NOT
HOPE TO HAVE A MORE PERSUASIVE AD\ VOCATE IN THE CABINET.
HE HAS INTRODUCED A RAT* IONAL COMMITMENT TO0 THE NEEDS OF PIRIMIARY
PRODUCERS AND THIS COMMITMENT NOWI PERVADES ALL AREAS OF OUR
RURAL POLICY. A RECENT OPINION POLL AMONG PRIMARY PRODUCERS
SHOWED THAT THEY APPRECIATED SENATOR WRIEDT' S WORK; MORE
THAN 70 PER CENT OF THEM APPROVED HIS HANDLING OF HIS
PORTFOLIO. ONE OF THE MAJOR ACTIVITIES THAT HE HA* S SET IN MOTION
IS THE HOLDING OF AN INQUIRY INTO ALL ASPECTS OF RURAL POLICY
IN AUSTRALIA. THE INQUIRY WILL RESULT IN THE FIRST
GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED REPORT ON OVERALL RURAL POLICY SINCE
THE PUBLICATION OF " AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION: AIMS AND POLICIES"
BY -THE FORMER DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND AGRICULTURE IN 1952,
MORE THAN 20 YEARS AGO. To CONDUCT THE INQUIRY THE GOVERNMENT
HAS SET UP A RURAL POLICY WORKING GROUP, HEADED By DR. STUART
HARRIS, DEPUTY SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT O F OVERSEAS TRADE.
SENATOR WRIEDT HAS ALSO TAKEN STEPS TO ENSURE THAT THE WORKING
GROUP HAS READY AND FULL ACCESS TO THE VIEWS OF FARMERS.
HE HAS AGREED TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMITTEE OF FARMERS
TO ADVISE AND CO-OPERATE WITH THE GROUP. 
-6-
A HiAJOR BASIS FOR THE INQUIRY IS THE GOVERNMNENT' S
\' IEll THAT THERE IS NO0 PLACE IN THE ECONOMY FOR A RURAL
POLICY THAT IS NOT BOTH EQUITABLE FOR PRIM~ ARY( PRODUCERS
AND ECONOMICALLY SOUND. 1IN ANNOU1NCING THE INQUIRY, THE
MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR KEN 14RIEDT, AND
I SAID THE GOVERNMENT WISHES TO AVOID AD HOC DECISIONS
THAT MIGHT APPEAR TO SOME TO BE POLITICALLY ATTRACTIVE
AT THE TIME, BUT WHICH IN FACT MIGHT OFFER NO LONG TERM
SECURITY OR REAL BENEFITS TO THE GENUINE PRIMARY PRODUCER.
THE GOVERNMENT NEEDED A BASIS OF EXPERT ADVICE ON WHICH
TO FORMULATE ECONOMICALLY SOUND AND SOCIALLY EQUITABLE
MEASURES THAT WOULD HELP THE RESIDENT FARM FAMILY.
IT ALSO SAW A NEED FOR A RURAL POLICY THAT RECOGNISED
THAT LARGE AND IMPORTANT SECTIONS OF THE RURAL COMMUNITY
ARE NOT THEMSELVES ENGAGED IN FARMING ALTHOUGH THE
PROSPERITY OF MANY DID DEPEND ON THE HEALTH OF THE PRIMARY
INDUSTRIES. 
-7-
THE WORKING GROUP WILL DRAFT, FOR CONSIDERATION BY
THE Govii-Mrl NFr, A " GREEN PAPER" ON RURAL POLICY, INCORPORATING
ASPECTS FROM PRESENT AUSTRALIANI GOVERNMENT POLICIES SUCH AS
SELECTIVE DECENTRALISATION, CONSERVATION, RURAL. RECONSTRUCTION
AND LONG-TERM INTERNATI ONAL COMMODITY AGREEMENTS. IT WILL
ALSO ATTEMPT TO INTEGRATE THESE AND OTHER FACTORS INTO A SET
OF PRINCIPLES UPON WHICH FUTURE POLICIES COULD BE BUILT.
WE EXPECT TO PUBLISH THE GREEN PAPER BY GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY
BUT WITHOUT FORMAL ENDORSEMENT, IN THAT FORM, IT WOULD BE
DEBATED IN CABINET, IN PARLIAMENT, AND IN THE COMMUNITY
GENERALLY PARTICULARLY IN THE RURAL SECTOR. THESE DEBATES
WILL ASSIST THE GOVERNMENT T' 0 CREATE A MORE VIABLE RURAL
SECTOR IN THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, WE HOPE TO RECEIVE THE
WORKING GROUP'S REPORT BY APRIL,
IN ADDITION TO THE EVOLUTION OF NEW POLICIES TO ENSURE
THE. PROSPERITY OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY, THE GOVERNMENT HAS MOVED
TO CREATE OTHER OPPORTUNITIES FOR OUR RURAL AREAS. THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT IS THE FIRST TO TAKE POSITIVE AND DECISIVE ACTION
TO PROMOTE DECENTRALISATION IN AUSTRALIA. PLANNING FOR THE
CREATION OF A NEW GROWTH CENTRE AT ALBURY-WODONGA IS ALREADY
WELL ADVANCED AND WE AIM TO MAKE THIS THE PROTOTYPE FOR OTHER
GROWTH CENTRES, DECENTRALISATION HAS LONG BEEN TALKED ABOUT
IN THIS COUNTRY. THE LAST YEAR HAS SEEN THE BEGINNING OF THE
FIRST REALLY CONCRETE PROPOSALS TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT. 
-8-
I BELIEVE THAT BY THE APPLICATION OF SENSIBLE
POLICIES ON PRIMARY INDUSTRY AND DECENTRAL.. ISATION WE CAN
ENSURE THAT PEOPLE IN OUR RURAL AREAS SHARE THE BENEFITS
OF THE UNDOUBTEDLY GREAT ! EALTH OF AUSTRALIA, PEOPLE IN
THESE AREAS HAVE CONTRIBUTED AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT TO THAT
WEALTH IN THE PAST AND I AM SURE THAT THEIR CONTRIBUTION
WILL REMAIN FUNDAMENTALLY IMPORTANT IN THE FUTURE. 



r33
THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 1973
ACTING PRIME MINISTER:. Today the Cabinet considered a number of
submissions and the first one was on recreation leave and maternity
leave. The Cabinet gave further consideration today to papers
prepared for us which raised issues requiring clarification before
our earlier decisions on an additional week's recreation leave for
Commonwealth staff and maternity leave for them can be implemented.
On recreation leave the principle is that the additional week's leave
is to be restricted basically to members of a union whether registered
or otherwise, that is recognised by the Australian Council of Trade
Unions. As previously announced, provision will be made for
consciencious objectors who will be expected to pay an amount
equivalent to union membership fees to consolidated revenue with
the Industrial Registrar determining when an individual may make
such a payment. There are some complex legal issues requiring
resolution for aspects of the principle of four weks annual leave
are decided and the Cabinet has referred them to the Welfare
Committee for study and report. A similar situation applies to
maternity leave where a particular question raised was how the rules
for servants of the Australian Government are to be brouqht into
conformity with the relevant I. L. O. convention. The issues relating
to maternity leave have also been referred to the Welfare Committee
for examination and report to Cabinet.
Probably one of the most important decisions that was made
today was the decision to give effect to the recommendations of the
Woodward Committee. You remember that this Committee was set up to
examine pay, conditions and allowances for serving members of the
Armed Forces. It sought the development of a cogent remuneration
policy to meet the needs of modern-day defence forces within the
framework of widely accepted wage fixing principles and community
wage standards; secondly, the total abandonment of the present
incomprehensible system and the introduction of a completely new
and simplified pay structure which will clearly show its real
meaning and value. 3. The adoption of the concept of commitment
to service to life and financial recognition of the obligjations
accepted by members resulting from commitment through the provision
of a continuing allowance of $ 750 a year together with a series of
additional allowances to meet particular circumstances which arise
from time to time ( for example) separation of a member from his
family. Comparisons between rates of pay before and after the
Woodward Report cannot readily be made. The position of each
individual member will be different depending on whether he is
married or single; and because of the abolition of tax-exempt
elements in pay his income tax commitments. I must stress that
the new structure of service pay is a complete replacement of and
entirely different from the old structure. I draw your close
attention to the Report from which the difficulty of making ready,
accurate comparisons will be clear. However, except for some junior
officers who will now pay more for their rations and quarters,
noone will suffer a decrease in pay. Most in fact will enjoy
an increase. The figure of $ 73 million appearing in the final
report and which will now be available to you and which was the cost
Of the recommendation as submitted by the Woodward Committee is flow 
2.
reduced to $ 63 million following the abolition of national service.
I will also be in touch with Mr Justice Woodward shortly about the
offer made by the Committee in its final report to meet again if
necessary to clarify or elaborate on any issue from the
recommendations it has made. I have the question of permanent
services pay fixing machinery currently under consideration.
one of the recommendations of the Committee was that there should
be a permanent committee established to conduct frequent enquiries
into service pay allowa nces and conditions. I am now examining the
terms under which that committee will be appointed and who should
head it. Now what I've given you is only a brief outline of the
Woodward Committee Report, the changes that have been made in
relation to pay and allowances for serving members of the forces,
the fact that for example taxation laws will now apply to members
of the forces in a way that they were not previously applied. But
there is a full press statement available on this matter and it
will be made available to you immediately following this conference.
Secondly of course the Woodward Committee's Report is also
available. Now the * De fence forces re-engagement bonus. You will remember
this is the $ 1,00O whichw as one of the policy matters that we
* put to the people of Australia in the elections in 1972. There has
been some comment in relation to this matter that it would not be
the full $ 1,000, that if tax was considered, then something less
than $ 1,000 would be available to an ex-serviceman who re-engaged.
Cabinet considered this matter today and affirmed that the reengagement
bonus of $ 1,000 to be paid to eligible members of the
Defence forces will be exempt from tax. Appropriate amendments of
the Income Tax Assessment Act will be prepared.
I come next to the Tariff Boar Report on cathode ray tube
display terminals. Cabinet today considered a Tariff Board Report
on cathode ray tube display terminals. The particular units under
reference comprise a cathode ray tube ( of the T. V. screen type),
various specially designed electronic circuits and a device for
connecting its terminals to other parts of a data processing or
communications system. They are used for airline reservations,
I. off-track betting, education and defence communications.
The reference to the Board arose from representations by a Canberrabased
firm Information Electronics and AWA now also manufacture
these terminals. Subsequent to the Board reporting on these units
the Government forwarded to it a reference on the electronics
industry generally. Bearing in mind the Board's own approach that
its examination of relevant issues can be more thorough in broader
industry reviews than in inquiries covering only one or two outputs
of an industry's total product range, the Government has decided
to defer a decision on the Board's present recommendation pending
its report on the industry generally. The Board is to be asked to
consider any changed circumstances with regard to the local
production of the units in its report on the relevant sections
of the electronics industry. It is understood that the Board has
this well in hand. In the meantime the present rates of duty
general rate 32.5 per cent will remain in force, and because the
Board noted in some cases that export prices were less than current
domestic values the question of dumping will now be investigated
by the Department of Customs and Excise. The Government is aware
that the continuation of the existing level of protection could
attract prospective new manufacturers. The Government would like
it to be clearly understood, however, that it does not wish
fragmentation to be caused in the electronics industry by reason 
of the continuation of the present protection ' and it will not
hesitate to take action which may prove necessary to prevent
fragmentation and excess capacity.
The Na{ tional Pipeline System. The Cabinet approved the creation
of a national p ipeline authority by legislation in the forthc oming
session. The authority will have the carriage of the planning and
construction of a national pipeline system and its subsequent
operation and maintenance. On this matter Mr Connor of course will
have further details.
On T. A. A. The Cabinet decided that it would move a step
further towards implementing its t. w-ailn plg as set out in
the Platform. Again, I suggest that on this question Mr Jones would
be able to elaborate.
Trespass on Commonwealth Lands. Cabinet decided to the repeal
of sanctions 8A, 8B and 8C of the A. C. T. Tres pas ' s on Commonwealth-
Lands Ordinance was approved. You remember that these sanctions were
introduced by the previous Government in the last session of the
Parliament. Cabinet also authorised the preparation of amendments
to the Ordinance to ensure adequate protection of Commonwealth land
in the A. C. T. while properly safeguarding the rights of citizens.
Cabinet determined and approved the guarantee for loan from Asian
Development 13ank to Papua New Guinea. It approved the preparation
of authorising legislation to provide the necessary assurances to
the Asian Development Bank for the borrowing of $ 9.8 million U. S.
dollars by Papua New Guinea for the upgrading, realignment and
sealing of about 75 miles of the Highlands highway between Lae and
Waterais and the upgrading and new construction of about 62 miles
of the Hiritano Highway between Port Moresby and Bereina. The
legislation will be ready for introduction during the autumn sittings.
Further guarantee for overseas borrowing by Papu a New Guinea.
The Cabinet authorised the introduction of appropriate legisliation
to provide for a contractual guarantee by the Australian Government
of an overseas borrowing in the 1973 financial year by Papua New
Guinea in foreign currencies not exceeding the equivalent of
$ US 20 million.
The Broadcasting and Television Act. Action against breaches.
The Cabinet has authorised the Minister for the media to issue a
notice of suspension to any television or radio ITJ-cecee company
which may display in the future a blatant disregard of the standards
laid down by the Broadcasting Control Board on advertising content
and programs. Again this is a matter which the Minister for the Media
may wish to remark on and you'll be able to get the full information
from Senator McClelland.
The Home Brewing of Beer. Cabinet decided to introduce
legislation to amend the Excise Act to allow the brewing of beer
by individuals for their own consumption. Senator Murphy has the
full details. Wh~ a Delivery Quotas and First Advance. Cabinet today gave
consideration to the question of wheat quotas for the 1973 pool
and the level of the first advance in relation to that pool.
Certain decisions were taken, but as you would know, wheat quotas
is a matter involving the States. The next step therefore is for the
decision to be conveyed to the States and discussed with them. My
colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry, will be taking this
up and I'm sure he will release details as soon as he is able to do
SO. 
4.
Gentlemen, that completes the business the Cabinet
Submissions, and the business of the Cabinet.
Q: Mr Barnard, could you give us some indication of the number of
troops that are going to be kept in Sinapore when the battalion and
the artillery battery come home at the end--o-this year or early
next year?
Acting No, at this stage I cannot give you any indication.
The matter is quite clearly under consideration. The Prime Minister
has made a statement on this matter and I would not want to enlarge
Upon it except to say this, since I have no doubt that it will be
raised with me and I'm now referring to the question of the Signal
Section. As soon as I became informed on this matter I immediately
issued instructions that alternative arrangements were to be made
for facilities to be provided for the Signal Section back in
Australia. That information and that request that decision was
conveyed to my Department and they are acting on it. There are some-
I suppose if one dealt with a breakdown of the forces in Singaporethere
are some forces probably that would be required but I would
not be able to give you at this stage precisely any accurate figures
in relation to the number who would be expected to remain for this
purpose. It has been suggested that 500 to 600 might be kept there.
Would this be an accurate estimation do you think?
Acting The matter is still under consideration.
If the Federal Conference of the Labor Party decides that all
troops come home will the Government bring them home?
Acting . If the Federal Conference of the Party makes a
decision then I think as it was suggested quite recently that the
Prime minister would accede to a decision, a decision of a properly
constituted conference.
Sir, you said you'd given instructions for the Signals Unit
to come back. It was suggested last week by a senior source I
understand that this wouldn't be until 1975. Do you think that
it will now be advanced? And secondly can you tell us on the record
what the function of the Signals Unit in Singapore is?
Acting No, I cannot. That's the answer to your second part.
But in relation to the first part, then I can assure you that
whatever instructions and whatever decision I make in relation to
bringing the Signals Unit back to Australia will be made on the
basi~ s that it should be done Wi thout any delay. Let me amplify that:
you cannot bring back a Signals Unit without certain facilities
being available for them.
Sir, that doesn't quite clarify the point. Will it be before
1975? Acting I'm not able to answer that question at this stage.
Sir, can we get some idea of your hopes on what you know...
Acting In view of what has been said and what I have said
that I would want to ensure that there is no undue delay.
Q: Mr Barnard, you make the point that when you were told of 
this existence of the Unit in Singapore you decided it should be
brought back to Australia. When were-you told?
Acting At the same time as the Prime Minister.
Was there any discussion or decision in Cabinet about making
greater use of the Commonwealth Savings Bank loans for housing to
promote competition among the other banks?
Acting No.
Q. Mr Barnard, did Dr Cairns raise the question of revaluation
and the way the decision was reached?
Acting No, he did not. I put it to the Cabinet that any
economic decisions should quite properly be left until the Prime
Minister returned to Australia and that was accepted without question
by the Cabinet.
Sir, have officials of the Department of Defence or the Army
advised the Queensland Premier that Australia should retain control
of the islands it presently holds in the Torres Strait for strategic
reasons? Were these discussions with Defe3&amp; se -officiawlhsic h
Mr Bjelke-Petersen is alleged to have said took place did they take
place with your knowledge were they official or unofficial?
Acting I have no knowledge of the matter at all.' There has
been some discussion as you know by correspondence between the
Premier of Queensland and the Prime Minister.
But you are unaware that Defence Department officials have
spoken to the Queensland Premier?
( 0 OAfc tiingt . I cannot confirm or deny it. I have no knowledge
Mr Barnard, as Shadow Defence Minister you toured Pine Gap.
As Defence Minister yesterday you toured Pine Gap. Can you tell us
whether you were shown-things yesterday that you weren't shown in
Opposition and can you give us 8ome indication of whether you plan
to allow Opposition M. P. s and other M. P. s in Australia greater
access than you had to these bases?
Acting Yesterday and Sunday I visited Woomera and Alice
Springs. I had been to these centres before but -yowui ll remember
that I indicated when I was asked a question on this I think at
the first Press Conference that the Prime Minister held what
I would be doing about the bases in Australia. So I visited the
joint Defence establishment at these centres Sunday and yesterday.
I did that because I wanted to be in a position as I indicated
during that first Press. Conference that I believed I had a
responsibility to make a statement to the national Parliament
and in doing so to inform the people of Australia. What I have said
in the past in relation to these matters and any criticism I've made
in relation to the Parliament itself was that there was never an
opportunity for an informed discussion. The purpose of my visit to
these areas was to bring myself up to date on these matters to enable
me to be able to present a statement to the Federal Parliament as
soon as possible. That statement will be considered by the Cabinet
by the Parliamentary Labor Party and by the Government and it will
be delivered in the Parliament.
Could I press you on the first point. Were you shown things as
Minister that you weren't allowed to see before you were Minister? 
Acting The only thing that I can say all I would say
in answer to that question is that when I visited ' the establishment*
as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition I was shown the utmost courtesy
and my visit on this occasion was no different.
Sir, do you propose giving the Parliament the opportunity
for informed discussion on these installations?
Acting If I make a statement to the Parliament as I will be
then naturally that statement will be open to debate.
Sir, would the Government consider allox-inq the Press to
inspect the installations at Pine Gap member-s of the Press?
Acting I think that on these questions you should wait until
I have made the statements to Parliament. You'll be able to question
me further on them. Naturally one of the matters that I am looking
at if I have been critical in the past would be the rights of
members of Parliament and others.
You'll be giving a detailed briefing to Parliament about
Pine Gap and Woomera. Can you give me some general indication now
as to what the bases are all about?
Acting I do not believe, as I have said before, that I
ought to make statements on these matters until I have the
opportunity to inform the Parliament. I have been critical myself
in the Federal Parliament on other occasions about statements on
important matters being issued outside the Parliament. I think
the nation has a right to be informed and it should be informed
through the Parliament and I will do that.
On a general note, have you learnt anything or were you shown
anything that could make anyone believe that Pine Gap or Woomera
might possibly be a nuclear target?
Acting I'm sure that when I make my statement to Parliament
you will have the answer to that question.
Q. Mr Barnard, back to the Si-p~ Signals Unit why was it
apparently suggested last week that the reason for us keeping
Australian logistic troops in Singapore was to screen the Signals
Unit there when it was only two or three years ago that the main
Australian Army force moved from Terandah to Singapore and up to
that stage no screen was apparently thought necessary?
Acting I said a few moments ago that one could give a
breakdown I haven't the figures before me of troops who would be
stationed in Singapore of the men who are stationed now in
Singapore, but who certainly would have no relationship to the Unit
that you've just mentioned.
Sir, you've said that you can't give us any details of
Pine Gap and the other bases at the moment because you want to save
thaEt or Parliament. But you've announced a number of major
decisions today Mr Whitlam has done so every Tuesday when he has
been in Canberra. Presumably you've got good reason for regarding
the Pine Gap business as something special. Could you tell us why
that must wait for Parliament when other major decisions can be
announced outside Parliament?
Acting Because the decisions that I have outlined today are
Cabinet decisions. They have been approved by Cabinet. The one that 
7.
you've raised has not been considered by Cabinet. It will be
considered by Cabinet.
Will you have to get any clearance from America before you
make your statement about Pine Gap?
Acting This is not a matter for the United States
Government. This is a matter for the Australian Government, and
it will determine the issue since it's a joint Defence installation
I would regard it as a matter of courtesy that the statement, once
it is cleared by the Government, should be available to them.
Sir, do you intend to get in touch with them before you draft
the statement or in view of what you
Acting No, I will not be getting in touch with them.
Mr Barnard, will the agreement with the American Government
in relation to American bases in Australia will the agreements be
tabled in Parliament to allow any form of debate?
Acting the agreements?
The agreements setting up the bases. Would they be tabled
as well?
Acting Again I'll be referring to those matters in the
statement. Mr Barnard, Mr Connor last week spoke to the Japanese
Government and has suggested that mineral contracts should be
re-negotiated in the wake of the currency decision last week.
Was there any discussion of this in Cabinet?
Acting No.
Sir, even if no discussion came up in Cabinet today on the
matter of Commonwealth Bank interest rates, was a decision made on
this last week or has any concrete plan on lowering interest rates
before Cabinet at the moment?
Acting No.
Sir, again on the r-e-engqagement bonus, you've cleared up the
tax side of it. I don't know whether you are issuing a special
statement on this, but it's not quite clear who decides who's
eligible how many you envisage would be eligible in any one year,
or this year, and what the cost would be?
Acting I will be able to get these figures. of course the
re-engagement bonus has been paid already to some members of the
forces. I haven't got the figures in front of me nor could I recall
them immediately but, no doubt this information will be required by
the Parliament and it is available. 4
Mr Barnard, was the subject of the Public Service Board's
circular sent last week to Departments dealing with the fourth week
annual leave for public servants discussed by the Cabinet in the
course of discussion on the subject of maternity leave. Was there
any criticism of the Public Service Board's circular in Cabinet?
Acting I'm sorry. I didn't get the last part of your
question... 
8.
Did Cabinet or any members of Cabinet criticise the Public
Service Board's circular sent to the Departments last week dealing
with the fourth week annual leave?
Acting Cabinet had a submission before it in relation to
the four weeks annual leave auestion. It dealt with that and
nothing else on this subject.
Sir, in relation * to the controversy over the Singapore
Signals Unit, Mr Hartley last week made a statement in which he said
that this showed there was a problem in relationships between the
Government and the Public Service. I've no doubt that you've seen
this statement since it was in most newspapers and it applied to
your Department. Would you like to agree with Mr Hartl. ey?
Is there a problem in dealing with the Public Service? Is there a
problem in them trying to run politicians?
Acting The answer is no.
Could you elaborate obviously this impression is abroad.
Could you tell us why
Acting I can see no conflict of opinion in this. It's
merely an interpretation of the Government's decision and I think
it's reasonable that there may be a request for an interpretation.
The Government determined its attitude in relation to that to
the query that was raised in this way.
Was it on your instructions that a desk in your office was
allegedly cleared out by a Defence liaison officer or was it on
the Department's instructions?
Acting A desk in my office?
Yes, Sir,
Acting Well it certainly was not on my instructions and
I'm not aware of it.
Q. Was it searched?
Acting I'm not aware of it, but what I can do, I can
assure you, is find out.
Q. Sixr, are you satisfied that the bases at Pine Gap are forming
p~ roper and correct function in relation to Australia's defence?
Acting P. M.: AAcgtiagi nP, M .: t his I will be stating in my statement. 



Icf:
jAUSTRA A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 190
February 1974
JOINT STATEMENT BY THEL PRIME MINISTER, MR. WHITLAM,
THE PREMIER OF WESTERA AUSTRALIA, MR. TONKIN, AND
THE LORD MAYOR OF PERT+-, I! R. LEE-STEERE
New planning proposals for part of the central area of
Perth were announced today by the Prime Minist-er Mr. Whitlam,
the Premier of Western Australia, Mr. Tonkin and the Lord
Mayor of Perth, Mr. Lee-Steere.
The imaginative proposals envisage extensive changes
to the appearance and character of the city.
They involve:-
re-planning and widening of Forrest Place;
a new Administrative Centre in Forrest Place for
the Australian Post Office;
re-development and landscaping of the central railway
area; integration of the Cultural Centre north of the
railway line with the central railway area.
The proposals regarding Forrest Place are the result of
agreement between the Australian and State Governments and representatives
of the Perth City Council. The other two proposals do not
involve the Australian Government.
All four proposals have been incorporated in an overall
plan which has been submitted to Cabinet by the Perth Central Area
Design Co-ordinating Committee after receiving an interim report
from its consultant, Professor Gordon Stephenson.
The proposals were considered by State Cabinet at its
meeting on Tuesday. / 2 
-2 described
The new concept for Forrest Place is/ in the following
joint st-tement. A new plaza will be created in Forrest Place, Perth.
In addition, the Australian Post Office proposes to construct
a new Administrative Centre adjacent to the existing Perth G. P. O.
The two developments will be made possible by an exchange of land
between the Australian Government and the Perth City Council.
The Prime minister promised the creation of the new
Forrest Place Plaza at an election meeting in Forres. Place shortly
before the 1972 Federal elections.
The West-. Australian Government has. active ' ly supported the
proposal in negotiations over the transfer of land. The Australian
Government will transfer to the City Council the land on which
Padbury Building now stands and the building will be demolished.
Forrest Place will be widened and public space will be
increased significant ' ly. This will transform Forrest Place into a
public pedestrian plaza enclosed at the northern end by the proposed
Post Office Administrative Centre.
The new building will protect the plaza from winds while not
preventing a desirable amount of air circulation and sun penetration.
The Administrative Centre will be designed to enable vistas
from within the plaza at ground and first floor level to the Perth
Cultural Centre.
The old Central Hotel structure,' will be demolished as well as
the Padbury Building and the new Administrative Centre will be erected
on part of these sites and part of the northern section of Forrest
Place. The Administrative Centre will enable a centralisation of
many now scattered elements of Perth's postal and telephone services.
It will be sited across the northern end of Forrest Place with two
extra floors at the western end. This will enable it to achieve
harmony with the existing G. P. O. building which will remain.
Subject to the approval of the Australian Parliament, the
Administrative Centre could be operational early in 1979. State and
Civic authorities propose an elevated pedestrian way linking Hay Street
and the Cultural Centre.
This will traverse the eastern side of the plaza, pass through
the new Administrative Centre and cross Wellington Street.
The re-development of the Forrest Place area follows a
feasibility study carried out by a local firm of architects and town
planning consultants. The study commission by the Australian
Department of Housing and Construction was carried out in conjunction
with State and City planning authorities. / 3 
3
We believe that the re-development will materially
enhance the environment of Forrest Place and will complement
conceptual plans of the State Government and the Perth City
Council for the development of the " heart of Perth".
The Administrative Centre will also provide services of
benefit to the community in Perth.
The Premier, Mr. Tonkin said that two models and plans
showing the proposals would go on public exhibition in the
R. and I. Bank, Barrack Street, Perth, on Thursday morning.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



-7
GOVERNMENT ACHIEVEMENTS IN TASMANIA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO A LUNCHEON OF THE HOBART CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
HOBART, 22 FEBRUARY 1974
THIS IS MY FOURTH VISIT TO TASMANIA SINCE I
BECAME PRIME MINISTER. I CONFESS THAT IT IS ALTOGETHER
TOO RARE A PLEASURE FOR ME TO VISIT YOUR CHARMING AND
HISTORIC CITY. AFTER THIS WEEK, I DECIDED I WOULD RATHER
BE HERE WITH YOU THAN TALKING TO THE GIPPSLAND FARMERS.
THERE'S NOTHING LIKE A FRIENDLY GATHERING OF TASMANIAN
BUSINESSMEN TO MAKE ONE FEEL AT HOME: NO TOMATOES,
NO EGGS, NO PITCHFORKS, THEN I WAS REMINDED THAT MUCH
OF AUSTRALIA'S'SUPERPHOSPHATE IS MANUFACTURED HERE IN
TASMANIA, SO YOU CAN UNDERSTAND WHY AUSTRALIAN PRIME
MINISTERS OCCASIONALLY WANT TO GO ABROAD. / 2 
Now SINCE I'VE RAISED THIS MATTER OF THE PHOSPHATE
BOUNTY, AND SINCE IT IS CLEARLY A MATTER OF VERY GREAT
INTEREST TO AN AGRICULTURAL STATE SUCH AS YOURS, LET ME
BEGIN BY SAYING A FEW WORDS ABOUT THE DECISION WE MADE, THE
OTHER DAY IN VICTORIA I QUOTED SOME REMARKS BY SIR JOHN
MCEWEN WHEN THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT ABOLISHED
THE LAST PHOSPHATE BOUNTY IN 1950, I WANT TO REMIND YOU
OF WHAT THE FORMER LEADER OF THE COUNTRY PARTY SAID BECAUSE
I KNOW HE IS A MAN YOU RESPECT AND I REGRET THAT HIS WORDS
DID NOT RECEIVE THE PUBLICITY WHICH I HOPED THEY WOULD,
DON'T FORGET THAT IT WAS A LABOR GOVERNMENT THAT INTRODUCED
THE FIRST PHOSPHATE BOUNTY AS A WARTIME MEASURE AND IT WAS
THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT THAT REPEALED IT, THEIR
DECISION WAS EXPLAINED BY SIR JOHN MCEWEN IN THESE TERMS:
THE ACT TO BE REPEALED WAS PASSED AS A
WARTIME CONTINGENCY ArID IT HAS SERVED ITS
PURPOSE, IT HAS ONLY A LIMITED USEFULNESS,
THERE IS NO LONGER ANY JUSTIFICATION FOR
PAYMENT FROM PUBLIC FUNDS OF A BOUNTY TO
REDUCE THE COST OF A PRODUCT WHEN FOR THE
OVERWHELMING PERCENTAGE OF ITS USERS IT
HAS SERVED ITS PURPOSE, 
-3-
Now THAT IS PRECISELY OUR POSITION TODAY, THE
BOUNTY HAS OUTLIVED ITS USEFULNESS, IT HAS SERVED ITS PURPOSE,
IN THE PRESENT BOUYANT CONDITION OF THE RURAL SECTOR, NO
GOVERNMENT CAN JUSTIFY THE EXPENDITURE OF $ 60 MILLION A YEAR
ON A SUBSIDY THAT IS NO LONGER USEFUL, WE HAVE GIVEN A FULL
YEAR'S NOTICE OF THE REMOVAL OF THE SUBSIDY AND I HAVE
REMINDED FARMERS THAT IF THEY FEEL THEY HAVE A CASE FOR
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE THEY SHOULD PUT IT TO THE INDUSTRIES
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION WHICH MY GOVERNMENT SET UP, I MUST
SAY I FIND IT CURIOUS. THAT THE PEOPLE OBJECTING MOST LOUDLY
TO THE REMOVAL OF THIS SUBSIDY ARE THOSE WHO ARE CONSTANTLY
TELLING US TO REDUCE GOVERNMENT SPENDING,
LET ME EXPRESS THAT FIGURE OF $ 60 MILLION A YEAR
IN TERMS RELEVANT TO YOUR OWN STATE, IT IS ROUGHLY EQUAL TO
THE ESTIMATED TOTAL $ 65,159,000 OF ALL SPECIFIC PURPOSE
REVENUE PAYMENTS TO BE MADE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
TASMANIA IN THE PRESENT FINANCIAL YEAR, IT IS ALMOST
TWO-THIRDS THE TOTAL OF ALL GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE TO
TASMANIA. IT IS ROUGHLY FIVE TIMES THE AMOUNT PAID BY THE
COMMONWEALTH TO TASMANIA FOR ALL EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES IN THE
CURRENT YEAR, NOW MUCH AS I WOULD LIKE TO TELL YOU THAT THE
WHOLE $ 60 MILLION SAVED IN THIS WAY WILL BE PAID TO TASMANIA,
I REGRET I CANNOT DO SO. IT IS QUITE CLEAR, HOWEVER, THAT
SAVINGS OF THAT ORDER, WHEN APPLIED IN OTHER WAYS, CAN HAVE
A CONSIDERABLE IMPACT ON THE WELL-BEING OF THE SMALLER STATES,
MODEST SAVINGS ON A NATIONAL SCALE CAN BRING MORE THAN MODEST
REWARDS TO A STATE SUCH AS YOURS, ,/ 4 
I WELCOME THIS OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TO YOU BECAUSE
I KNOW THERE IS TENDENCY FOR TASMANIANS TO FEEL WHATEVER
GOVERNMENT MAY BE IN POWER THAT THEY ARE NEGLECTED OR
FORGOTTEN IN CANBERRA. YOUR PRIDE, YOUR UNIQUENESSi YOUR
HISTORY, YOUR ISOLATION IN A LITERAL SENSE, YOUR INSULARITY
MAKE YOU SOMEWHAT SUSPICIOUS OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS. IF YOU
EXAMINE THE RECORD FAIRLY I DOUBT IF YOU WILL FIND ANY INSTANCE
OF TASMANIA BEING UNFAIRLY TREATED BY MY GOVERNMENT OR PLACED
AT A DISADVANTAGE COMPARED WITH THE OTHER STATES. INDEED IT
CAN BE SHOWN THAT TASMANIA HAS BENEFITED PROPORTIONATELY BETTER
FROM NATIONAL GOVERNMENT SPENDING THAN THE REST OF AUSTRALIA.
I SHALL LIST SOME OF THESE AREAS IN A MOMENT. BUT FIRST
LET ME MAKE A PURELY POLITICAL POINT. AS YOU KNOW, THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, WHICH COMPOSES THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT,
CURRENTLY HOLDS ALL FIVE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SEATS IN TASMANIA. THAT IS A REMARKABLE, GRATIFYING AND,
I BELIEVE, QUITE UNPRECEDENTED EXPRESSION OF PUBLIC TRUST
IN A POLITICAL PARTY. NOW THOSE FIVE SEATS IN TASMANIA
REPRESENT, FOR THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, MORE THAN HALF ITS
ENTIRE MAJORITY. I MERELY SAY THIS: IT MAY BE THAT YOUR
BEST ASSURANCE, YOUR MOST COMPELLING GUARANTEE OF MY GOVERNMENT'S
CONCERN FOR YOUR STATE LIES IN THOSE FIVE SEATS. I ASK YOU TO
ACCEPT, AS POLITICALLY REALISTIC MEN, THAT NO GOVERNMENT
ENJOYING THE PUBLIC TRUST PLACED IN IT BY THE PEOPLE OF TASMANIA
COULD AFFORD FOR A MOMENT TO NEGLECT YOUR INTERESTS OR YOUR
WELFARE. 
THE OTHER BASIC ASSURANCE YOU HAVE OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN LIES,, PARADOXICALLY IT MAY SEEM, IN OUR
CONCERN FOR THE LARGER CITIES OF THE MAINLAND. No
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS COMMITTED TO RESTRICT THE GROWTH OF
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE CAN BE INDIFFERENT TO THE GROWTH OF THE
SMALLER CAPITALS. FOR THE SAME REASON THAT WE ARE ENCOURAGING
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW CIT IES LIKE ALBURY-WODONGA WE ARE
ENCOURAGING THE GROWTH OF EXISTING CITIES SUCH As HOBART.
MIND YOU, WE ARE DETERMINED THAT HOBART WILL AVOID THE
INTOLERABLE PRESSURES PLACED ON THE' LARGER CITIES. IT
IS, HOWEVER, ESSENTIAL TO OUR PLANS FOR BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
AND MORE EQUITABLE AND EFFICIENT USE OF OUR RESOURCES THAT
SOME OF THE GROWTH OF SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE SHOULD BE DIVERTED
TO SMALLER CITIES WHERE IT WILL NOT ONLY BE ACCEPTABLE,
BUT BENEFICIAL. SYDNEY's LOSS, I TRUST, WILL BE HOBART's
GAIN. WITH THAT IN MIND, LET ME GIVE YOU SOME EXAMPLES OF HOW
TASMANIA BENEFITS FROM THE WIDE RANGE OF NEW AND INCREASED
EXPENDITURES PROVIDED IN THE GOVERNMENT's FIRST BUDGET.
TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT IN 1973-74,
FOR ALL PURPOSES AND INCLUDING THE STATES' LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAM,
ARE ESTIMATED TO TOTAL $ 228 MILLION, AN INCREASE OF $ 32 MILLION
OR 16% OVER THE AMOUNT IN 1972-73, THIS REPRESENTS OVER $ 570
PER HEAD OF POPULATION IN TASMANIA, COMPARED WITH AVERAGE PAYMENTS
TO ALL STATES OF $ 337 PER HEAD. 
6
IT IS ESTIMATED THAT TASMANIA WILL RECEIVE GENERAL
REVENUE GRANTS TOTALLING $ 97.7 MILLION IN 1973-74,
REPRESENTING $ 245 PER HEAD COMPARED WITH A NATIONAL AVERAGE
OF $ 143 PER HEAD,
TASMANIA HAS BEEN ALLOCATED $ 64 MILLION IN
GENERAL PURPOSE CAPITAL FUNDS, UNDER DECISIONS TAKEN BY THE
LOAN COUNCIL LAST JUNE, FOR STATE GOVERNMENT WORKS IN
1973-74, INCLUDING AN. INTEREST-FREE GRANT FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OF $ 20,5 MILLION. IN PER CAPITA TERMS, TASMANIA
IS RECEIVING OVER DOUBLE THE NATIONAL ALLOCATION $ 161 PER
HEAD COMPARED WITH $ 66.9 PER HEAD FOR THE SIX STATES COMBINED.
ALL THESE ALLOCATIONS RECOGNISE THE SPECIAL NEEDS
OF YOUR STATE, ATTRIBUTABLE TO ITS SMALL POPULATION AND
ITS RELATIVELY LOW CAPACITY TO RAISE REVENUE AND SPREAD
ITS OVERHEAD COSTS. / 7 
7
IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT GRANTS WILL RISE DRAVATICALLY, MAINLY AS A RESULT
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE KARMEL COMMITTEE. GRANTS
FOR SCHOOLS IN TASMANIA ARE ESTIMATED TO TOTAL MILLION
IN 1973-74, AN INCREASE OF $ 2.9 MILLION OR 112% OVER THE
PREVIOUS YEAR. GRANTS FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION WILL TOTAL
ABOUT $ 12.5 MILLION THIS YEAR, AN INCREASE OF MILLION
OR 112% OVER THE CORRESPONDING TOTAL IN 1972-73. OUR
ADVANCES FOR HOUSING WILL INCREASE BY 82'% OVER THE PREVIOUS
YEAR. WE HAVE ALSO MADE GENEROUS GRANTS TO TASMANIA FOR
GROWTH CENTRES AND OTHER URBAN AND REGIONAL PROJECTS,
FOR LAND ACQUISITION, URBAN TRANSPORT AND SEWERAGE, IN
ADDITION, TASMANIA WILL RECEIVE GRANTS OF $ 14 MILLION IN.
1973-74 UNDER THE COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS ARRANGEMENTS,
THIS IS ANOTHER AREA WHERE TASMANIA DOES PROPORTIONATELY
BETTER THAN OTHER STATES. IN 1973-74 ITS GRANTS WILL BE
ABOUT $ 35 PER HEAD OF POPULATION COMPARED WITH $ 214 PER HEAD
FOR THE SIX STATES. TASMANIA'S SPECIAL PROBLEMS, SUCH AS THE
HIGH COST OF ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE DUE TO YOUR
PECULIAR TOPOGRAPHICAL CONDITIONS, ARE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT
WHEN GRANTS ARE DETERMI-NED. 
-8-
IF WE LOOK AT TASMANIA'S ECONOMY AS A WHOLE
AND AS BUSINESSMEN I KNOW THAT IS YOUR MAJOR CONCERN
WE FIND A STRONG PATTERN OF EXPANSION IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS.
RETAIL SALES IN THE SEPTEMBER QUARTER WERE 12.7% HIGHER THAN
THE SAME QUARTER OF 1972, REGISTRATIONS OF NEW MOTOR VEHICLES
IN THE DECEMBER QUARTER WERE-]. 2. L'% HIGHER THAN A YEAR BEFORE,
COMPARED WITH A 10.3% INCREASE FOR THE WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA,
THERE WAS A STRONG GROWTH IN HOME BUILDING. THE NUMBER OF DWELLINIGS
UNDER CONSTRUCTION WAS 40,7% GREATER IN THE DECEMBER QUARTER
OF 1973 THAN IN THE DECEMBER QUARTER OF 1972 WELL ABOVE THE
AUSTRALIAN AVERAGE OF 33%. IT IS TRUE THAT THE LABOUR
MARKET HAS RECCRDED ONLY MARGINAL IMPROVEMENT IN THE PAST
YEAR, BUT THERE HAS BEEN A SIGNIFICANT ACCELERATION IN
EMPLOYMENT GROWTH. BETWEEN NOVEMEER 1972 AND IIOVEMBER 1073
( THE LATEST MONTH FOR WHICH FIGURES ARE AVAILABLE) THE NUMBER
OF EMPLOYED WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS INCREASED BY A MARKED
IMPROVEMENT ON THE INCREASE BETWEEN NOVEMBER 1971 AND
NOVEMBER 1972. THE EXPANSION IN FEMALE EMPLOYMENT HAS
BEEN ESPECIALLY PRONOUNCED: 6.9% IN THE LATEST 12-MONTH
PERIOD, COMPARED WITH A GROWTH OF 0.7% IN THE PRECEDING YEAP. I 1,/ 9 
C
I WOULD NOT WANT THOSE FIGURES IMPORTANT AS THEY
ARE, ENCOURAGING AS THEY ARE TO BE TAKEN IN ISOLATION TO
GIVE A MISLEADING PICTURE OF CONDITIONS IN TASMANIA, I
ACKNOWLEDGE FRANKLY THAT GrOWTH AND DEMAND IN YOUR STATE
HAS BEEN LESS MARKED THAN It! AUSTRALIA AS A WHOLE DURING
RECENT MONTHS. IN PARTICULAR YOUR LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT
JUST OVER 3% AT THE END OF JANUARY IS STILL UNACCEPTA[ LLY
HIGH, ALMOST 1% HIGHER THAN'THE NATIONAL FIGURE. I BELIEVE
THIS IS DUE TO UNIQUE LOCAL AND SEASONAL FACTORS IN TASMANIA.
NEVERTHELESS OE WANT T0 SEE THAT FIGURE REDUCED, ANID IT WILL
BE REDUCED. MY GOVERNMENT' S FIRST PRIORITY ITS FIRST DUTY
TO ITS SUPPORTERS AND TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WAS TO
RESTORE FULL EMPLOYMENT AFTER THE RECESSION OF 1971-72,
WE HAVE RESTORED FULL EMPLOYMIENT IN NATIONAL TERMS AND WE
HAVE RESTORED A STRONG LEVEL OF REAL NATIONAL GROWTH.
WE HAVE OPENED UP IMPORTANT NEW MARKETS IN ASIA AND OTHER
COUNTRIES FOR OUR EXPORTS, ESPECIALLY PRIMARY PRODUCTION.
FARMiERS IN PARTICULAR ARE ENJOYING RECORD INCOMES, RECORD
PRODUCTION, RECORD PROSPERITY. ViE HAVE GOT OUR OVERSEAS
RESERVES INTO A MUCH HEALTHIER STATE OF BALANCE. VIE HAVE
TAKEN OVERDUE MEASURES, * INCLUDING TWO REVALUATIONS, TO PLACE
THE CURRENCY ON A SOUNDER FOOTING IN RELATION TO CURRENCIES
OVERSEAS. I BELIEVE WE CAN NOW CLAIM THAT THE AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR
IS THE STRONGEST CURRENCY IN THE WORLD. 
10
I HAVE SAID MANY TIMES THAT INFLATION REMAINS THE
MOST IMPORTANT SINGLE PROBLEM FACING THE GOVERNMENT. THE
MEASURES WE HAVE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN INFLATION OUR TARIFF
CUTS, OUR REVALUATIONS, THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL,
OUR MONETARY POLICIES HAVE ALL HAD POSITIVE AND IMPORTANT
EFFECTS ON THE LEVEL OF INFLATION. INFLATION WOULD BE
A GREAT DEAL HIGHER TODAY IF MY GOVERNMENT HAD NOT TAKEN THE
ACTION IT HAS IF WE HAD NEGLECTED THE OVERDUE MEASURES
WHICH WERE SHIRKED FOR SO LONG EY OUR PREDECESSORS,
I GIVE AN ASSURANCE THAT OUR UNREMITTING AND M'ANY-SIDED 13ATTLE
AGAINST INFLATION WILL GO ON. THE ENERGY CRISIS AND THE
ENORMOUS UNCERTAINTIES IT HAS BROUGHT TO THE ECONOMIES OF
OUR TRADING PARTNERS MAKE THE FUTURE MORE HAZARDOUS AND
UNPREDICTABLE. ISHOULD MAKE IT QUITE PLAIN, HOWEVER, THAT
INFLATION WILL NOT BE TACKLED WITH THE OLD-FASHIONED METHODS
OF THE PAST. WE WILL NOT REDUCE INFLATION BY CREATING
UNEMPLOYMENT FOR WORKERS OR STAGNATION FOR BUSINESSMEN.
WE WILL NOT FIGHT INFLATION BY RENEGING ON THE PROMISES WE!
MADE TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FOR SOCIAL REFORM, FOR EDUCATION,
FOR DECENT CITIES, FOR BETTER TRANSPORT, FOR A NEW DEAL FOR
PENSIONERS, MIGRANTS, ABORIGINALS AND THE POOR. WE ARE OFTEN
TOLD THAT WE MUST REDUCE GOVERNMENT SPENDING. NO ONE EVER TELLS
US WHAT SPENDING WE SHOULD CUT, THE FACT IS THAT EVERY MEASURE
FOR INCREASED WELFARE OR INCREASED SPENDING ON SOCIAL REFORM.
PROGRAMS HAS BEEN SUPPORTED BY OUR OPPONENTS IN. THE PARLIAMENT,
IN THE CASE OF EDUCATION THEY EVEN ASKED US TO SPEND A LITTLE
MORE ON SCHOOLS THAT DIDN'IT' NEED IT. IN THE CASE OF PHOSPHATES,
THEY ASKED US TO KEEP A SUBSIDY THAT NO LONGER SERVES ITS PURPOSE
AND WHICH OUR PREDECESSORS THEMSELVES ABOLISHED WHEN ITS
USEFULNESS EXPIRED. IT IS ALL VERY WELL TO TALK ABOUT CUTS IN
SPENDING, BUT I ASK: WHERE ARE THE CUTS COMING FROM? 
1]
I COME NOW TO SOME MATTERS OF SPECIAL CONCERN TO YOUR
STATE. I KNOW THERE IS ANXIETY FOR THE OUTLOOK IN THE APPLE
INDUSTRY. MY COLLEAGUE, SENATOR KEN WRIEDT, THE MINISTER
FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, IS AWARE OF THE NEED FOR EXPANDED EXPORT
MARKETS. LAST OCTOBER HE ANNOUNCED THAT THE GOVERNMEr'T HAD
DECIDED TO ESTABLISH AN AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION
TO REPLACE THE EXISTING APPLE AND PEAR BOARD. THE CORPORATION
WILL BE ABLE TO TRADE IN ITS OWN RIGHT AND PLAY AN IMPORTANT
ROLE IN RESEARCH AND PROMOTION. THE SEARCH FOR NEW~ MARKETS
WILL BE AN IMPORTANT -TASK OF THE NEW CORPORATION. IN
ADDITION, THE GOVERNMENT HAS MADE EMERGENCY PAYMENTS
TOTALLING $ 2.1 MILLION TO ASSIST APPLE EXPORTEPS ADVERSELY
AFFECTED BY THE REVALUATION OF THE DOLLAR. SUPPLEMENTARY
GRANTS OF $ 1,000 WILL ALSO BE MADE TO FARMERS GROWING
EXPORT APPLES WHO MAY BE IN EXTREME FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES.
I SHOULD SAY THAT NO ONE UNDERSTANDS YOUR PROBLEMS BETTFR
OR HAS DONE MORE FOR THE LONG-TERN INTERESTS OF PRIMARY
PRODUCERS IN THIS COUNTRY, THAN YOUR FELLOW-TASMANIAN,
KEN WRIEDT. I BELIEVE HE IS HELD IN UNIVERSAL RESPECT
THROUGHOUT THIS STATE AND THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, / 12 
12
NEXT, I MENTION OUR POLICY ON WATER RESOURCES.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS PUBLISHED A DOCUMENT, " A NATIONAL
APPROACH TO WATER RESOUIRCES MANAGEMENT", WHICH SETS OUT
A NUMBER OF OBJECTIVES AND PROPOSED COURSES OF ACTION
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
AUSTRALIA'S WATER RESOURCES. A MEETING OF STATE AND
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MINISTERS IN MELBOURNE ON ILI DECEMBER
ENDORSED OUR CONCEPT OF A NATIONAL WATER POLICY, AND FURTHER
DISCUSSIONS WILL BE HELD ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THAT
POLICY, YOUR PREMIER HAS SOUGHT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE FOR THE NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL-WATER SCHEME,
WHICH WILL AUGMENT THE WATER SUPPLIES OF SEVERAL TOWNS
IN THE BURNIE-DEVONPORT AREA. CONSULTATIONS ON THIS
PROJECT WILL BE UNDERTAKEN SHORTLY.
INi THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR IMPORTANT MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES, ESPECIALLY THOSE BASED ON YOUR MINERAL AND TIMBER
RESOURCES, my GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES
IMPOSED BY HIGH TRANSPORT COSTS FETWEENj TASMANIA AND THE
MAINLAND. ON 30 NOVEMBER LAST YEAR I ANNOUNCED THE APPOINTMENT
OF MR J. F. NIMMO, FORMER SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING,
AS A ROYAL COMMISSIONER TO UNDERTAKE AN INGUIRY INTO THE IMPACT
OF FREIGHT RATES ON THE TASMANIAN ECONOMY. WE HAVE ALSO
ANNOUNCED THAT MR M. M. SUMMERS, FORMER SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORT, WILL INQUIRE INTO THE LONG-TERM DEVELOPMENT OF
THE MARITIME INDUSTRY. AM HOPEFUL THAT BOTH THESE INQUIRIES
WILL BENEFIT TASMANIA,. .113 
73
I MENTION OUP IMPORTANT DECISION TO MOVE IHE
HEADQUARTERS OF THE ANTARCTIC DIVISION OF THE DEPARTMErT
OF SCIENCE TO HOBART. THE DIVISION WILL MOVE INTO A NEW
UNIFIED COMPLEX TO COST AROUND 17 MILLION AND EXPECTED TO
BE COMPLETED IN 1977. THIS WILL BE A MAJOR DECENTRALISATION
OF AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT, MIUCH OF THE
DIVISION IS BUDGET OF MORE THAN $ 7 MILLION A YEAR WILL PE.
SPENT IN TASMANIA PURCHASING SUPPLIES FOR EXPEDITIONS
AND SHIPS, HOBART WAS CHOSEN nECAUSE OF ITS EXCELLENT
PORT FACILITIES AND GREATER PROXIMITY TO THE ANTARCTIC.
THE RESULT WILL BE A MORE FRECUENT USE OF H4OBART BY THE
POLAR VESSELS ON CHARTER TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THE UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA, WHICH HAS HAD A LONG ASSOCIATION
WITH THE DIVISION IN RESEARCH WORK ON COSMIC RAYS, WILL BE
ABLE TO CO-OPERATE MORE CLOSELY IN OTHER AREAS OF RESEARCH
AND BUILD UP ITS ALREADY CONSIDERABLE SCIENTIFIC REPUTATION.
THE ENTHUSIASTIC RESPONSE OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR, SIR
GEORGE CARTLAND, AND THE ACADEMIC STAFF OF THE UNI/ ErsiTY
TO THE TRANSFER OF THE DIVISION UNDERLINES THE LONG-TERM
IMPORTANCE THAT THEY SEE IN THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISION,
IREFER NEXT TO OUR SPECIAL ENCOURAGEMENT FOR TOURISM
IN TASMANIA. WE ESTABLISHED A NEW DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND
RECREATION AND LAST YEAR THE MINISTER APPROVED A GRANT OF
$ 95,000 To TASMANIA TOWARDS THE RESTORATION AND. CON'/ ERSIOM OF
THE HISTORIC ASYLUM AT PORT ARTHUR. WE HAVE APPROVED CRAMTVS,
ON A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR BANIS WITH THE STATES, TO DEV'EL. OP YOUTH
HOSTELS FOR YOUNG TRAVELLERS. / J L! 
1L
FINALLY I MENTION THE IMPORTANT WORK OF THE CSIRO
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE IN CHECKING AND MONITORING
MERCURY POLLUTION IN THE DERWENT; LAST YEAR OUR LABORATORIES
IN TASMANIA DETECTED A HIGH LEVEL OF MERCURY IN SOME TYPES
OF FISH AND WARNINGS WERE ISSUED TO THE PUBLIC BY THE
TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT, THE DEPARTMENTS OF SCIENCE AND HEALTH
ARE MAKING A CONTINUING INVESTIGATION INTO THE PRESFtCE OF
MERCURY AND BROMIDE IN HOUSEHOLD FOODS.
I KNOW THAT A SMALL STATE SUCH AS YOURS HAS SPECIAL
PROELEMS IN KEEPING PACE WITH THE DEVELOPMENT AND LIVING STANDARDS
OF THE LARGER STATES. SO LET ME CONCLUDE WITH SOME REFERENCE
TO THE MEASURES WE ARE TAKING TO ENSURE GREATER EOUALITY AND
FAIRNESS IN THE ALLOCATION OF OUR NATIONAL RESOURCES. THESE
RELATE SPECIALLY TO THE AREA OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. TASMANIANS
ARE WELL AWARE OF THE IMPORTANT ROLE OF THE COMMONWEALTH GRANTS
COMMISSION IN REDRESSING THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN THE STATES.
YOU ALSO HAVE DIRECT EXPERIENCE OF INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS
WITHIN YOUR STATE, FOR SMALL AS TASMANIA IS IN GEOGRAPHICAL TERMS,
THERE ARE AREAS WITHIN IT WHICH ARE MARKEDLY LESS DEVELOPED, LESS
PROSPEROUS, THAN OTHERS. IT IS FOR THAT REASON THAT MY
GOVERNMENT DECIDED LAST YEAR TO WIDEN THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
GRANTS COMMISSION TO ENABLE IT TO GIVE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A REGIONAL EDsIS. APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE
HAVE BEEN MADE AND I EXPECT THE COMMISSION TO COMPLETE ITS HEARINGS
ABOUT THE END OF MAY, WITH RECOVtlENDATIONS IN TIME FOR THE
1.974-75 BUDGET, I 
15
OUR OTHER INITIATIVE IS DESIGNED TO GIVE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT A VOICE AND A VOTE ON THE LOAN COUNCIL AND TO
ENABLE THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT TO BORROW MONEY ON BEHALF
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND CRANT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE DIRECT
TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES, THIS WILL BE POSSIBLE IF OUR
REFERENDUM ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS APPROVED IN MAY, I STRESS
THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS PROPOSAL TO TASMANIA, YOUR " TATE
HAS MANY SPECIAL NEEDS WHICH ONLY LOCAL GOVERNMENT CAN SUPPLY,
IF WE ARE TO ENSURE THAT TASMANIA'S DEVELOPMENT KEEPS UP
WITH THE OTHER'STATES. IF WE ARE TO ENSURE THAT THE FINANCIAL
RESOURCES OF THE NATION ARE FULLY AND EFFECTIVELY USED
FOR THE WELFARE OF THE SMALLER STATES AND THE REGIONS
WITHIN IT, IF WE ARE TO ENSURE THAT TASMANIA AND TASMANIANS
HAVE JUST AND PROPER ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES OF THE
NATION AND THAT THESE RESOURCES ARE USED WHERE THEY ARE
MOST NEEDED, THEN I URGE YOU TO SUPPORT THE REFERENDUM
WE SHALL BE PUTTING TO THE PEOPLE IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE
SENATE ELECTIONS, THERE WILL NO LONGER BE ANY NEED FOR
A SMALL STATE TO BE DISADVANTAGED OR FOR REGIONS WITHIN
THAT STATE TO BE DEPRIVED, BY THIS REFERENDUM I HOPE
TO SEE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED AS A FULL AND EQUAL
PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM, IN THE SAME WAY, AND WITH
THE ASSISTANCE AND CONTINUED SUPPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, I BELIEVE TASMANIA WILL PROSPER AS A FULL
AND EQUAL PARTNER IN OUR FEDERATION, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
FOR THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CENTRE, HOBART,
FRIDAY$ 22 FEBRUARY 1974
THIS IS THE FIRST MAJOR ADMINlISTRATIVE BUILDING
ERECTED IN TASMANIA BY ANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCE
FEDERATION. THE NEED FOR THE BUILDING AROSE IN THE LATE
1960s WHEN THE LACK OF SUITABLE PREMISES AVAILABLE FOR
LEASING FORCED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO BUY LAND
AND PLAN THE BUILDING. ITS CONSTRUCTION IS VERY MUCH
IN ACCORD WITH THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT'S POLICY ON OFFICIAL
BUILDINGS$ THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN FAF. D WITH
AN INCREASING RENT BILL WHEREVER IT 0AINTAINS OFFICES.
IN MANY AREAS I. EASING HAS RESULTED IN ITS OFFICES BiNCG
UNDULY SCATTERED. THE GOVERNMENT HAS THERZFORE SiATED
THAT ITS FUTURE POLICY WILL FAVOUR GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP,
THE SITE FOR THE NEW AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CENTRE
IS PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT AS IT IS ON THE FRINGE OF HOBART'S
RETAIL BUSINESS CENTRE, YET NEAR ITS EXPANDING
ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL CENTRE. IT IS READILY
ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC USING EITtIIR PRIVATE CARS OR PUBLIC
TRANSPORT$ THUS, IN THIS ONE BUILDING, THE GREATER PORTION
OF THE COMMONWEALTH'S ADMINISTRATIVE AND W8LFARE SERVICES
IN HOBART WILL BE EASILY AVAILABLE TO THE CITIZENS OF THE CITY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS TO BE HOUSED IN THE
BUILDING INCLUDE SOCIAL SECURITY, IMMIGRATION AND LABOUR AND
THE AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE. 
-2-
THE GOVERNMENT CENTRE, BUILT AT A COST OF $ 5,2 MILLION,
IS ONE OF SEVERAL BUILDING PROJECTS PLANNED FOR HOBART BY
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, A MULTI-STORY BUILDING IS
PROPOSED ON THE SITE ADJACENT TO THE EXISTING HOBART CENTRAL
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE, THE GROWTH OF THE NUMBER OF TELEPHONE
SUBSCRIBERS IN THE HOBART AREA HAS PUT GREAT PRESSURE ON
EXISTING FACILITIES, A MAIL EXCHANGE AND TRANSPORT COMPLEX
IS ALSO PROPOSED FOR THE CITY,
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE ANNOUNCED ON 25 JANUARY THAT
THE ANTARCTIC DIVISION OF HIS DEPARTMENT WILL MOVE ITS
HEADQUARTERS TO HOBART. THE DIVISION IS NOW DISPERSED OVER
SIX LOCATIONS IN MELBOURNE AND HOBART, A NEW UNIFIED COMPLEX
TO COST ABOUT $ 3 MILLION IS EXPECTED TO BE COMPLETED IN 1977,
THIS IS NOT JUST A MATTER OF MOVING BUILDINGS NOROF THEEXPENDITURE
OF ABOUT $ 3 MILLION ON THE HEADQUARTERS,
YOUR EXCELLENT PORT FACILITIES WILL BENEFIT FROM MOUNTING
THE ANNUAL EXPEDITIONS TO THE ANTARCTIC, THE UNIVERSITY
OF TASMANIA WHICH HAS HAD A LONG ASSOCIATION WITH THE DIVISION
IN RESEARCH WORK ON COSMIC RAYS WILL BE IN A POSITION TO
CO-OPERATE MORE CLOSELY IN OTHER AREAS OF RESEARCH AND
BUILD UP ITS SCIENTIFIC REPUTATION, T; IE ENTHUSIASTIC RESPONSE
OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR, SIR GEORGE CATLAND, AND THE ACADEMIC
STAFF OF THE UNIVERSITY TO THE TRANSFER OF THL DIVISION
UNDERLINES THE LONG-TERM IMPORTANCE THAT THEY SEE IN MY
GOVERNMENT'S DECISION, 
WE WILL BE CO-OPERATING CLOSELY WITH THE TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE HOBART COUNCIL AND OTHER AUTHORITIES IN THE SITING
AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE HEADQUARTERS, WE ARE ANXIOUS TO ADD
TO AND NOT DETRACT FROM THE GREAT CHARM OF YOUR CAPITAL,
IN ADDITION, A NEW MULTI-STORY BUILDING; DUE TO BE
COMPLETED IN SEPTEMBER 1975, IS BEING CONSTRUCTED AT THE
REPATRIATION GENERAL HOSPITAL, HOBART, AT A COST OF
MILLION, THIS BUILDING WILL CONTAIN TWO THIRTY-BED
WARDS PREVIOUSLY HOUSED IN 50 YEAR OLD PREMISES, PARAMEDICAL
FACILITIES AND NURSING STAFF ACCOMMODATION. NURSING AIDE
TRAINING WILL BE UNDERTAKEN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN TASMANIA
AT TIHIS HOSPITAL. THIS TRAINING IS AT PRESENT BEING
UNDERTAKEN IN VICTORIA AND, AS THIS RESULTS IN HIGH WASTAGE,
THE NEW ARRANGEMENTS ARE EXPECTED TO HELP RETAIN THESE. SKILLS
LOCALLY, IN LINE WITH PRESENT POLICY, ANY SPARE BED CAPACITY
AT THE HOSPITAL WILL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO MEMBERS OF THE
COMMUNITY GENERALLY,
THE NEW BUILDING ACTIVITY IS IN LINE WITH A GENERALLY
GREATER AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EMPHASIS ON TASMANIA, IT HAS
SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED ITS EXPENDITURE IN HOBART AND THE
REST OF TASMANIA IN THE LAST YEAR, TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE
TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT IN 1973/ 74, FOR ALL PURPOSES AND INCLUDING
THE STATE'S LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAM, ARE ESTIMATED TO TOTAL ABOUT
$ 228 MILLION, 
THIS IS AN INCREASE OF ABOUT $ 32 MILLION OR 16 PER CENT
OVER PAYMENTS IN 1972/ 73, IT REPRESENTS MORE THAN $ 570
PER HEAD OF POPULATION IN TASMANIA, COMPARED TO AVERAGE
PAYMENTS TO ALL STATES OF ABOUT $ 337 PER HEAD. THIS IS
ONE INDICATOR OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S RECOGNITION
OF THE SPECIAL NEEDS AND PROBLEMS OF TASMANIA.
TWO AREAS THAT HAVE BENEFITED PARTICULARLY FROM A
MUCH GREATER INFUSION OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FUNDS ARE
HOUSING AND EDUCATION, ADVANCES TOTALLING $ 16.3 MILLION
WILL BE MADE TO TASMANIA IN 1973/ 74 UNDER THE NEW HOUSING
AGREEMENT WITH THE STATES. THIS IS AN INCREASE OF NO LESS
THAN 82 PER CENT OVER THE CORRESPONDIN, ALLOCATION IN
1972/ 73, THE PURPOSE OF THE HOUSING AGREEMENT IS TO ASSIST
TASMANIA AND OTHER STATES TO PROVIDE MORE HOUSING FOR NEEDY
PERSONS. FOR EDUCATION, TASMANIA IS EXPEC: TED TO RECEIVE GRpi'iFS
TOTALLING ALMOST $ 19 MILLION IN 1973/ 74. THIS IS AN INCREASE
OF 111 PER CENT OVER THE PRECEDING YEAR. IN 1972/ 73 THE
COMPARABLE INCREASE WAS ONLY 12 PER CEN1, THIS MASSIVE
INCREASE WILL PROVIDE MORE MONEY FOR UNIVERSITIES, COLLEGES
OF ADVANCED EDUCATION, TEACHERS' COLLFGES, TECHNICAL COLLEGES,
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND PRE-SCHOOLS, iN THE SPECIFIC
FIELDS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION TASMANIA WILL
RECEIVE A TOTAL OF $ 20 MILLION IN 1974 AND 197j, FOLLOWING
THE GENERAL ACCEPTANCE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVCRN I[ WNI OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE KARMEL COMMITTEE. THE FIRST PAYMENT
UNDER THE STATES GRANTS ( SCHOOLS) ACT 1973 $ 962,000 FOR THE
FIRST QUARTER OF 1974 HAS ALREADY BEEN MADE. 
THIS BUILDING IS A TANGIBLE SYMBOL OF THE EXPANDED
ACTIVITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN TASMANIA. WE HAVE
DIRECTED OUR POLICIES IN THE LAST 15 MONTHS TO ENSURING
THAT THIS STATE SHARES IN THE BENEFITS OF THE NEW
INITIATIVES WHICH WE ARE TAKING THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
WE WILL CONTINUE TO DIRECT OUR POLICIES TO THAT. END.
L 



PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 191
Sunday 24 February 1974
NATIONAL ESTATE PROJECTS FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Australian Government has offered Western Australia $ 330,000
this financial year for projects to preserve the National Estate.
The grants are being made to help a wide variety of projects
put forward by the Western Australian Government on behalf of
Government authorities, the National Trust and local government bodies.
In my policy speech in 1972 I stated that in relation to land,
an over-riding objective of a Labor Government would be " to preserve
and enhance the quality of the national estate". In May 1973 we
established a Committee of Inquiry which will soon present its report.
Both the inquiry and the concept itself have been welcomed
throughout Australia. There is clearly a rapidly growing concern over
the pressures that threaten what is best and most valuable in our
surroundings. Equally there is a growing sense of the value and beauty
of our natural and cultural inheritance.
The Australian Government's introduction of the concept of the
National Estate, and its assumption of responsibilities in preserving
and enhancing it, represent a turning-point in our national sense of
values and in our cultural maturity.
We have a great and varied inheritance to protect and care for.
Australia is in many ways unique in her wildlife and her many natural
beauties. Further we are now beginning to recognise the value of the
often excellent buildings and historic towns left us by early
Australians. All these things, and many more, comprise the National Estate,
and to conserve and enhance them will increase our own sense of pride
and responsibility as a nation and extend the respect of other peoples.
I want to pay special tribute to the help and co-operation that
my Government has received from the Western Australian Government in
developing the idea of the National Estate.
The Western Australian Government arranged for a State Policy
Group to be established and this has provided a most useful contact point.
/ 2 
-2-
Actions taken by the State in this way show how the States and
the Australian Government can work together in a joint effort to
preserve our heritage.
In some cases the funds to be provided to Western Australia
this year are by way of assistance towards large projects which have
been planned and will be executed by the Western Australian Government.
A large sum is being provided to help with the acquisition
of land for park purposes on the south-west coast. Many Perth people
use this area for recreation. The Western Australian Government
hopes to see a system of parks developed for the benefit of city dwellers.
$ 40,000 is being made available, through the Environmental
Protection Authority, for estuarine management studies and associated
urgent measures in the Peel Inlet and Hardy Inlet areas.
Several historic towns form part of the man-made heritage of
Western Australia. Help will be given to the town of York for
development of its special characteristics, to Cossack in the
north-west, and Greenough near Geraldton. Funds will be provided
to the Esperance Bay Historical Society to establish a local historic
museum. Fremantle will receive special attention as it is one of the
few towns in Australia that retain its historic character and is at
the same time a thriving community.
The Australian Government has arranged, through the Cities
Commission, to finance an action plan for the preservation of
Fremantle. $ 30,000 has been allocated for this project.
Funds will also be provided to the National Trust for help
in restoration of a number of important projects planned by the
Trust. 



I THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFFRFTJCF:
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 26 FEBRUARY 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Welcome back ladies and gentlemen.* There are a
couple of things that I can announce to you because the telegrams
to the Premiers concerned will have been-. received by now.
Today Cabinet considered the Universities Commission's Report
on the Victorian Governent's proposal for a multi-campus university at
Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo. We decided that we ' were'not prepared to
support the Victorian Government's proposal, but we will establish a
university at Geelong. The Geelong University will incorporate the
. theaxti sting College of Advanced Education and the Teachers College in
city. This is in line with the proposal by the Universities
Commission in its report to the Government. I advised the Premier
of Victoria of our decision and I suggested to him that in Ballarat
and Bendigo the existing College of Advanced Education and the Teachers
College in each city should be merged to form a major College of
Advanced Education in each city. With respect to the provision of
opportunities to university study in Ballarat and Bendigo, I believe
that this could be met by the establishment of regional study centres
in association with such institutions as may be recommended by the
committee for an open university. Mr. Beazley, the Minister for
Education, will be providing further details of the Government's
decision. The report of the Universities Commission on the multi-campus
Cnuiversity at Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo and its recommendations
for Geelony) were sent to Mr. Hamer a few days ago.
Also, I have told the Premier of New South Wales that we shall
be happy for blue Pole6 to be displayed in the art galleries of New
South Wales. It will arrive in Australia at the end of March and it
. Soouugthht to be available for exhibition there in the Art Gallery of New
Wales, to coincide with the opening there of the exhibition of
recent American art. The Government of New South Wales would, of course,
be responsible for indemnifying us against any damage to the painting
during the time it is on exhibition and in the custody of the Art
Gallery of New South Wales. Provided this poses no problem, details of
the exhibition of the painting and security arrangements can be kept
to be settled between the Director of that gallery Mr. Laverty, and the
Director of the Australian National Gallery, Mr. Mollison. Afterwards,
we would be willing to have Blue Poles exhibited in Melbourne and
Adelaide which have air-conditioned galleries. Are there any questions?
F QUESTION: Was it your wish, Sir, that Mr. Charles Perkins should
not be charged under the Public Service Act?
PRIME MINISTER: Whether it is my wish iz relevant because the Head
of the Department in which Perkins serves, the Department of Aboriginal
Affairs, Mr. Dexter, tlic3 Secretar~ y of the Department, has the
jurisdiction and, in some circumstances, the duty to charge Mr. Perkins
or some other person, any other person in his Department, who he believes
has contravened the provisions of the Public Service Act. / 2 
-2
Now that is something which is the statutory function of the Permanent
Head of the Department. Neither the Minister nor the Cabinet can direct
a Permanent Head as to the discharge of his duties in this respect.
If the Permanent Head believes that a charge should be made against an
employee of his department he suspends that employee, he reports the
suspension to the Public Service Board and the Public Service Board
can then appoint a Board of Inquiry to try the matter. That Board
makes findings which then go to the Governor-General who acts on the
advice of the Government at that stage in implementing or rejecting.
or varying any recommendation finding that the Board of Inquiry makes.
I have a copy of the charge against Mr. Perkins. I could say that if I
was a Permanent Head I would not have laid the charge. The charge is
that Mr. Perkins was guilty of improper conduct in criticising certain
political parties represented in the Parliament.* I don't know what
evidence Mr. Dexter, the Permanent Head, would have of the nature of
Mr. Perkins criticism other than the evidence that all of us have
reading the newspapers. All that I can say for myself is that no
leader or in fact member of any of the political parties criticised
mine has been among them has complained to me or to anybody in my
Shearing of those criticisms. In particular, I gather, the basis of the
Vimproper conduct in Mr. Dexter's view, I assume this, I have not discussed
this with Mr. Dexter directly or indirectly. The basis of his view is
that Mr. Perkins was guilty of improper conduct in criticising the Liberal
and Country Parties. If I was a Permanent Head I would wait for the
leader or some persons acting on behalf of those parties to complain of
the criticism and to state the nature of the evidence that he would
give or call. If a Leader of a political party made such a complaint
and was willing to give or call evidence in support of the complaint
-then I can well understand that a Permanent Head would suspend the
pea-son. After all, the Act says Section 56 that any person can
cha; 3: ge a Public Servant any person and that would include Sir
Chctrles Court or anybody else who may feel himself aggrieved but
whose own manner of political comment on other political parties might
well have inspired Mr. Perkins.
QUESTION: Would you say Sir, that the implementation of the Labor
Party's Aboriginal policy has been a disaster?
SP RIME MINISTER: No, but it has been suggested by my colleague, I
Wgather, that that is the headline that members of the National Press
Club might like to use.
QUESTION: How would you describe it?
PRIME MINISTER: , It is making progress in a very difficult field.
We have the first Australian Government in office now which has ever
tried to do anything directly in the Aboriginal field. It is the first
Australian Government which has tried to exercise the Constitutional
powers which were conferred on the Parliament by the overwhelming
vote of the people at the referendum in 1967.
QUESTION: Both Sir Charles Court and Senator Withers have complained
about mr. Perkins statement in Perth there was a press statement issued
by Senator Withers.
PRIME MINISTER: In that case Sir Charles Court could write to me and
Senator Withers could. Senator Withers has on many matters concerning
his own perks, at least he could about the people. I do want make the
point that any person can charge a Public Servant, any person, including
Senator Withers or Sir Charles Court. ./ 3 
-3
if, furthermore, Senator Withers or Sir Charles Court were to state the
nature of the evidence that he would give or call, I would think it would
be a reasonable proper thing for the departmental head concerned to
suspend the Public Servant concerned.
QUESTION: Senator Cavanagh has been under frequent attack ever since,
for Aboriginals that he is supposed to be helping
PRIME MINISTER: Who he is helping.
QUESTION: ever since you appointed him to the position. I wonder
whether you think that any other Minister would also . be under attack,
and if you don't think that, do you think that your appointment was a
mistake? PRIME MINISTER: I think that anybody who holds this portfolio will be
subject to attack; it goes with the job. I believe-Senator Cavanagh
is doing a very good job, he has my complete support.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, is Section 56 of the Public Service Act one
which you wquld repeal if the Freedom of Information Act ever gets off
the ground? Do you feel yourself, that is is not in accordance with
the policy of your Government that Public Servants should be prohibited
from speaking out when complaints are made against them by private
citizens, politicians or anybody else in this sort of area?
PRIME MINISTER: The Freedom of Information Bill will be introduced by us,
There is a very great deal of legislation, as you know, to which we are
committed. ' We are committed to this legislation. Already I can say,
it is clear that there will be more Bills introduced this year than last
year. Section 56 and similar cognate sections of the Public Service Act
are being reviewed by the Public Service Board in consultation with the
various Public Service unions. I have thought for a long time, and I
still think, that Section 56 is too vague. I think that like so many
of the provisions of the Commonwealth Criminal Law, for instance, the
amendments of the Crimes Act in 1960it is aimed to be A deterrent,
it's so vague that it's not a proper law. The Public Servants don't
know where they stand, in fact I suppose it could be said that the
Sections and the previous one, Section 55, are so wide that I wouldn't
* be at all surprised if a Board of Inquiry were to find the charge not
proven and I would be surprised if the Governor-General would be advised
by the Government to implement any adverse finding against a Public
Servant charged. I don't know what the evidence is, but if the evidence
which is to be brought against Mr. Perkins consists of no more than his
remarks about and reposts to Sir Charles Court I would regard it. as
fantastic for an adverse finding to be made by any Board of Inquiry
appointed by the Public Service Board.
QUESTION: Despite everything that you have said tonight, have you taken
any steps whatsoever in the last twenty-four hours to influence a NO
decision on the Perkins affair?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. I told you I have not spoken directly or
indirectly to the Permanent Head. I have-also told you that the
Permanent Head -has jurisdiction and maybe the duty under the Act to
lay charges to make suspensions. / 14 
-4
QUESTION: What about the Minister, did you discuss that particular
point with him?
PRIME MINISTER: No. He takes the same attitude, the last time I spoke to
him which was some weeks ago on this matter. It is the Permanent Head
who . suspends, the Minister can charge but the minister has not charged.
No other Minister has charged, no political leader has charged, any
of them, or in fact, any person that's what the Act says, any
person can make a charge.
QUESTION: But the Minister told us at lunch time that he had spoken to
you about this this'morning, and that whether your attitude was right or
wrong, as he said, he thought it would be wrong-of him to reveal it
because it might influence what he insists on referring to as the trial
of Mr. Perkins. Have you any comment on that?
PRIME MINISTER: No. As I have said, I haven't heard what was said
so I am not going to comment.
* QUESTION: But you did speak to him about this this morning?
PRIME MINISTER: I take the attitude, and he knows I take the attitude
that it's the Permanent Head's job. Now look, can I be clearer than that?
QUESTION: Did you speak to Senator Cavanagh about this this morning?
PRIME MINIST * ER: I spoke to him about this ritatter in general terms,
but not about any charge.
QUESTION: What view did you express then to him?
PRIME MINISTER: You don't expect me to talk about conversations of this
character, do you. We have conversations sometimes, and I don't reveal
them. QUESTION: In view of what happened tonight?
SPRIME MINISTER: My own attitude is pretty clear from what I have said,
WI would have thought. If I was Permanent Head you know what I would be
doing, but the fact is, this is the Permanent Head's job and it is not
my right to influence him. I don't come into it unless there is a
recommendation by a Board of Inquiry to the Governor-General. Then
if the only evidence that comes up is what I have seen hitherto in
the papers, you've got a fair indication of what my attitude would be.
QUESTION: Did you seek to make known your views to Mr. Dexter through
a senior Public Servant?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Gentlemen, I have already stated that I have not
been in touch with Mr. Dexter directly or indir;-ctly. Now I don't have
to answer each of you individually and repeat that.
QUESTION: Was the Perkins matter raised in Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: No. not at all. 
QUESTION: Do you support Mr. Perkins comments which have now lead to
this charge?
PRIME MINISTER: I regret that Mr. Perkins speaks as strongly as he does.
But I do understand the situation that nobody in Mr. Perkins position,
the most important position that an Aboriginal Australian has had for
nearly two centuries could be expected to remain silent on subjects about
which he must know, to have views, and experience and responsibilities.
I make allowance for the fact that he has respQnsibilities in an area
where there have been very great wrongs and shortcomings and his own
effectiveness in doing his job is reduced if he is mute, when other people
speak or who are reported as speaking on some of these matters where he
is involved.
QUESTION: In view of what you have said, will you be taking any steps
to make your views known directly to a Board of Inquiry other than as it
may be reported in the Press Conference here today?.
PRIME MINISTER: The only think that I-would think that I could have
anything to do with the Board of Inquiry is whether legal representation
is to be made available for the person charged, obviously I think it
should be.
QUESTION: On a point that Mungo raised, on the Freedom of Information
Act, Mr. Perkins has drawn a distinction between Public Servants speaking
on issues involving social change and issues of defence and foreign
policy. Do you accept that there is a distinction and that Public
Servants ought to be able to speak on questions involving social issues?
PRIME MINISTER: In general terms I accept that. Mind you, in answering
your question, I don't want to endorse your summary of what Mr. Perkins
may have said. I haven't got in front of me a report, let alone all the
reports, , of what he said on this subject. I think that there must be
limitations on what a First or Second Division Public Servant says about
matters of policy where he is or could be involved himself. But I would
regard it as quite wrong and quite apart from that, quite futile to
silence Public Servants in respect of matters where they don't have an
0official responsibility themselves. Everybody knows that Public Servants
have political views; it would be extraordinary if they were the only
political muters in the community.
QUESTION: In view of your comments about what you wouldn't have done if
you had been Mr. Dexter, do you have confidence in Mr. Dexter's
administration as Permanent Head of the Department, and do you plan
to keep him on as Permanent Head of the Department?
PRIME MINISTER: I know of no moves I, myself, wouldn't contemplate
any move to transfer Mr. Dexter elsewhere. I believe Mr. Dexter is
a dedicated person. I agree with what Senator Cpvanagh, his Minister,
said about him.
QUESTION: Could you tell me whether the Government has received
applications from the Allwest and the BHP organisations waiving the
exchange control requirements, and if you have, could you tell me what
state they are at at the moment? Do you expect the Government to hand
down a decision before the West Australian elections? 
-6
PRIME MINISTER: The parties to the Aliwest project sent submissions
on the 11th of this month, they were received in the Department on
the 14th of this month, and there was a submission before Cabinet
today and before the Economic Committee of Cabinet yesterday concerning
those applications. We have referred it to the Inter-departmental
Committee on Foreign Takeovers for examination and report to the
Cabinet by 14 March. The Minister for the Environment and Conservation
has been requested to report to the Cabinet by the same date on the
environmental aspects of the proposal and the Minister for Urban and
Regional Development has been requested to report to the Cabinet by
14 March also, on the implications of the proposal for the Bunbury Collie
region. I would therefore expect that Cabinet could consider the matter
on Monday 18 March, but couldn't consider it before.
QUESTION: Could I ask you about the BHP Jumbo Plant any proposal from
them? PRIME MINISTER: Yes, BHP wrote to the Minister for Secondary Industry
SMr. Enderby, or maybe to his Department, I think on 7 February. But in
Vall events, it was not until this month. We decided in the Economic
Committee yesterday and in Cabinet today the form of the reply to the
letter. Mr. Enderby, Mr. Crean and I are settling it. I hope we do
it today but otherwise I expect we would do it tomorrow.
QUESTION: From what you have just said the Department of the
Environment and Conservation is to report on the environmental aspect
of the Allwest program by 14 March. Do you think that a period of
16 days is adequate for a full environmental study of the consequences
for the introduction of the scheme, and what will you do if the
Department says that it can't give you such a report in that time?
PRIME MINISTER: There has already been, I am told the Premier of
West Australia Mr. Tonkin has emphasised to me that there has already
been an environmental impact statement by the State Authority concerned
and the West Australian Government, Mr. Tonkin's Government, has had
experience in other development projects of this nature other
bauxite and alumina projects. Nevertheless, we feel that as an
SAustralian Government which can, in due course, have responsibilities
Wto grant export licences, we must also check the environmental aspects
ourselves. From that fact it might be appropriate to mention to you
that I have written to the Premiers sometime ago, I haven't had any
replies, I think, on two general matters in the environmental field.
The Lake Pedder situation shows that the Australian Government can be held
responsible for public works, government works, carried out with furnds
raised by the Australian Government pursuent to decisions of the Loan
Council. Accordingly, I have suggested to the Premiers that the
Australian Government and the State Government concerned should have a
joint environmental survey of any Government work, loan program, which
might have environmental aspects. In that case we know, all of us on the
Loan Council know in advance what the implicati6ns will be. There can
not be the allegations later on that the people have had second thoughts
or that they come in too late. The other thing concerns private
developmental projects which may have an export factor. My Government
has taken tne attitude that we must consider environmental owner-ship,
foreign ownership, industrial aspects of projects from which exports
will flow. It can be said, and it has been said, that when we want to
be satisfied on those aspects it's somewhat late in the day, -he projects
are under way. So, therefore, I have suggestedi to all the Premiers
that in respect to those private projects for which they are asked to
give their permission, exploration, exploitation, then we would also
join in an environmental impact statement with them. Then, everybody
knows from not only the State Governments which has some responsibilities, 
-7
but from the Australian Government which has the export responsibility,
at least, whether the project will meet acceptable criteria.
QUESTION: Is the question of the continuation of subsidies on nitrogenous
fertiliser and superphosphate now both before the Industries
Assistance Commission. Have you asked the Commission to expedite the
inquiry into this. Is it feasible for these subsidies to be selective
in their application for farmers or small farmers, or farmers in certain
areas to receive this superphosphate bounty but not large pastoral
companies? PRIME MINISTER: On thie last one I would think that the approach that
would be preferable and might be constitutional, I doubt if the other
one distinguishing between big and small farmers would be constitutional,
but the one which would be more likely to be constitutional and which
would also be a more rational one, I think, would be to choose between
particular industries which use some substance for which a bounty is
sought. The Government has considered the question of the superphosphate
Sfertilizers bounty; it has not considered the question of the nitrogenous
Vfertilizer bounty. The Industries Assistance Commission has before it'a
reference concerning nitrogenous fertilizers from the people who make
them. They are seeking a tariff against nitrogenous fertilizers which
are imported. The question of referring the overall question of an
overall bounty on superphosphate fertilizers was considered but we were
assured by the AIC that it would be impossible for them to make a
report this year. In those circumstances the Cabinet decided not to
recommend that the present Act, which expires at the end of this calendar
year, be renewed.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, you stated in your announcement of 15 February
that you were giving primary producers plenty of time to make adjustments.
When can we expect a decision on the nitrogenous bounty?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I think it is a few months.
QUESTION: The Hungarian public has been watching with great interest
how rapidly you began to implement. Australia's new independent foreign
policy. What do you regard as the major achievement in this area?
PRIME MINISTER: My Government has emphasised the responsibility tha ' t it
has to develop direct relations with all countries in its region the
East Asian and South-East Asian, South Pacific and Indian Ocean area
irrespective of ideology. We want to have normal relations with all the
Governments in this region. Accordingly, we have also wanted to have
direct relations, not merely relations which are subsidiary to those
arranged on either side of the north Atlantic. I was told you might ask
some questions, but I didn't realise it would be quite as wide, but
perhaps I might take this opportunity to say that late last year,
following negotiations in Budapest, between Hungarian officials and
Australian officials, a text for a revised and updated Trade Agreement
with Hungary has been agreed on at official level, and this followed
Hungary's recent accession to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
So I can give this as an illustration to where an opportunity arises f or
us to have new relations or augmented relations with some countries we
swiftly take that opportunity.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, last week you intervened in the Northern
Territory Legislative Council and sought the postponement of consideration
of legislation related to mining in national parks in the Northern
Territory. I understand you had discussions on this matter. Could
you tell me the outcome of the discussions? ./ 8 
8
PRIME MINISTER: The relevant Ministers are discussing this question.
The Minister for the Northern Territory, the Minister for Minerals and
Energy, and the Minister for the Environment and Conservation. 



I,, AUST ALIA , j
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEUENT NO. 192
27 FEBRUARY 1974
APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL
It is announced today from Government House, Canberra,
that Her -Majesty The Queen has graciously approved the
appointment of the Hon. Sir John Kerr K. C. EI. G., to be
Governor-General of Australia. He will take up office at the
end of June this year when the present Governor-General,
Sir Paul Hasluck, relinquishes his appointment.
Sir John has been Chief Justice of New South V ales
and Lieutenant-Governor since 1972. He has had a distinguished
career in both the law and public administration.
After war service with the Secornd AIF Sir John
was the first Principal of the Australian School of Pacific
Administration. He then followed a distinguished career at
the Bar in New South Wales, becoming a Queen's Counsel in
1955. In 1966 he was acpointed a Judge of the Commonwealth
I dustrial Court and a Judge of the Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory. He has also served as a
Judge of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory and
has held other Australian judicial commissions.
Sir John has held a number of executive positions in
the legal profession, including President of the New South
Wales Bar Association, President of the Law Council of Australia
and foundation President of the Law Association of Asia and the
Western Pacific. He has also -served on a number of Government
bodies, including in 1968 as Chairman of the Committee on
Review of Administration Decisions, and in 1970 as Chairman of
the Committee on Review of Pay for the Armed Services. In
1971 he conducted an inquiry into the salaries and allowances
of Members of the Australian Parliament.
Sir John was appointed C. M. G. in 1966 and K. C. M. G.
this year. Sir John's significant attainments in the fields of
law and administration nave given him a familiarity with 
2.
Australian Government and State Government affairs and he is,
of course, well known throughout Australia.
All Australians will join me in congratulating
Sir John and welcoming him and Lady Kerr to their high
appointments. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



R n-L* Es A-LE
/ a 4 NQ DATE
M/ 33 1 March 1974
INDIAN GIFT TO QUEENSLJAND
FLOOD VICTIMS
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, said today that he had been delighted by India's
friendly gesture in making available 20,000 lbs. of tea to
Australia for distribution to families affected by the recent
flooding in Queensland.
The offer of the gift of tea was made by India' s
Prime Minister, Mrs Gandhi, and conveyed through her Foreign
Secretary, Mr Kewal Singh, who is in Canberra to lead the
Indian delegation to the round of talks with Australian
foreign affairs officials in Canberra.
The Prime Minister said: " India is a country which
has suffered greatly from natural catastrophes of this kind.
Australia has responded to India's misfortunes in the past.
It is most pleasing to have our misfortune noted in this manner
by the Indian Government and we are deeply appreciative of this
gift.,' 



ex pp~ g
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C. 1M. P.,
AT A PUBLIC MEETING AT MITCHAM HIGH SCHOOL, MELBOURNE,
FRIDAY 1 MARCH 1974
IT IS WITH A SPECIAL SENSE OF PLEASURE THAT I COME TO
THE EASTERN AREA OF MELBOURNE TONIGHT. FOR IT IS THIS AREA WHICH
PLAYED A VITAL ROLE ON 2 DECEMBER 1972 INTHE ELECTION OF THE FIRST
NATIONAL LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 23 YEARS. WE NEEDED TO W IN FOUR
SEATS TO GAIN GOVERNMENT. ONLY ABOUT AN HOUR AFTER THE-START OF
COUNTING ON THAT NIGHT IT WAS OBVIOUS THAT WE WOULD WIN THESE
SEATS IN THIS AREA. WE KNEW THEN THAT CASEY, HOLT, DIAMOND VALLEY
AND LA TROBE HAD . GONE To LABOR. OUR GAINS ELSEWHERE WOULD
CONSTITUTE OUR WORKING MAJORITYo OUR SAFETY MARGIN.
ONE . OF THE VICTORIES HERE GAVE ME PARTICULAR SATISFACTION;
IT MEANT THAT RACE MATHEWS, WHO, AS MY PRIVATE SECRETARY HAD DONE
SO MUCH TO DEVELOP OUR POLICIES FOR GOVERNMENT, WOULD ENTER
PARLIAMENT AS THE MEMBER FOR CASEY. NO LEADER WOULD HAVE BEEN
LESS THAN DELIGHTED BY THE KNOWLEDGE THAT HE WOULD TAKE HIS SEAT
ALONGSIDE MAX OLDMEADOW, DAVID MCK( ENZIE AND TONY LArM. As
CANDIDATES THEY PROMISED TO BE EXCELLENT MEMBERS; AS MEMBERS
THEY HAVE ALREADY PROVED THEIR EXCELLENCE. . a a/ 2 
-2-
NO PART OF AUSTRALIA PROVIDES A BETTER INDICATION OF WHY
WE WON THE ELECTION THAN THE EASTERN SUBURBS OF MELBOURNE. THEY
HAVE SEEN PHENOMENAL GROWTH IN THE POST-WAR YEARS BUT WITH THIS
GROWTH HAVE COME A HOST OF PROBLEMS. OUR SCHOOLS, OUR HOSPITALS,
OUR HEALTH SERVICES, OUR TRANSPORT FACILITIES, OUR COMMUNITY
SERVICES HAVE NOT KEPT PACE WITH THE GREAT EXPANSION OF OUR
MAJOR CITIES. THIS WAS PLAIN TO THE VOTERS OF THESE SUBURBS AND
THEY MADE THEIR AWARENESS EQUALLY PLAIN WITH THEIR VOTES. THEY
KNEW THAT NO PROMISE MADE BY THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT COULD
COMPENSATE FOR 23 YEARS OF NEGLECT AND MIS-MANAGEMENT. THEY KNEW
THAT ONLY AUSTRALIA'S LARGEST AND MOST REPRESENTATIVE POLITICAL
PARTY THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY HAD DRAWN UP PROGRAMS TO TACKLE
THE MAMMOTH PROBLEMS OF OUR CITIES.
THEY ALSO KNEW THAT ONLY THE LABOR PARTY WOULD BE GUIDED
BY THE PRINCI-PLES OF EQUALITY AND EQUITY IN ITS APPROACH TO THESE
PROBLEMS. THOSE PRINCIPLES HAVE REMAINED OUR BEACON IN THE
MONTHS SINCE-THE PEOPLE OF THIS AND OTHER AREAS OF AUSTRALIA
RECORDED THEIR SUPPORT FOR THEM. IN ALL THAT WE HAVE DONE IN THAT
TIME WE HAVE SOUGHT TO MEASURE UP TO THE IDEAL CONTAINED IN MY
ELECTION POLICY SPEECH WHEN I SAID: " IT'S TIME FOR A NEW TEAM,
A NEW PROGRAM, A NEW DRIVE FOR EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITIES; IT'S
TIME TO CREATE NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIANS.-TIME FOR A NEW
VISION OF WHAT WE CAN ACHIEVE IN THIS GENERATION FOR OUR NATION
AND THE REGION IN WHICH WE LIVE." s @/ 3 
-3-
IN THAT SAME SPEECH I SAID THAT OUR PROGRAM WAS
AMBITIOUS, AND THAT WE COULD NOT BE EXPECTED TO CLEAR AWAY THE
BACKLOG OF 23 YEARS IN 3 MONTHS OR EVEN 3 YEARS, A START, HOWEVER,
HAS BEEN MADE AND, IN LINE WITH OUR GOAL OF SHARED OPPORTUNITY
AND PROSPERITY FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS, WE HAVE SET OUR NATION ON
A NEW COURSE, I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE ALREADY DONE ENOUGH TO
ENSURE THAT THERE CAN BE NO TURNINGBACK FROM THAT COURSE,
LET US LOOK AT THE ACHIEVEMENTS THAT JUSTIFY SUCH A
PRONOUNCEMENT. THERE CAN BE NO GREATER JUSTIFICATION THAN OUR
ACHIEVEMENTS IN EDUCATION, WE HAVE RAISED THE EDUCATIONAL
HORIZONS OF THE VAST MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN, WE HAVE
TAKEN THE FIRST MAJOR STEPS TO FULFIL OUR OBJECTIVE OF BRINGING
HIGHER STANDARDS OF EDUCATION AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES IN
EDUCATION TO EVERY CHILD AT EVERY LEVEL FROM PRE-SCHOOL TO
TERTIARY, IN ITS FIRST BUDGET THE GOVERNV: ENT COMMITTED
$ 843 MILLION TO EDUCATION FOR 1973/ 74 ALMOST DOUBLE THE AMOUNT
GIVEN BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN 1972/ 73. THE ALLOCATION FOR
GOVERNMENT AND NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN
VICTORIA ALONE IS $ 57.7 MILLION AN INCREASE OF 153 PER CENT,
WE HAVE ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TERTIARY
EDUCATION AND HAVE ABOLISHED FEES, FOR THE FIRST TIME WE ARE
GIVING ASSISTANCE TO TEACHERS COLLEGES AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERS
COLLEGES ON THE SAME BASIS AS UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF
ADVANCED EDUCATION; WE WILL SPEND $ 188 : IILLION ON TEACHER
EDUCATION IN THE TWO AND A HALF YEARS FROM 1 JULY LAST YEAR,
WE ARE GIVING MUCH MORE GENEROUS ALLOWANCES TO STUDENTS AND WE
HAVE MORE THAN TREBLED THE NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIPS, ,/ 4 
IN'THE SPECIFIC FIELDS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
WE WILL MAKE AVAILABLE A TOTAL OF $ 700 MILLION TO ALL SCHOOLS IN
1974 AND 1975. OF EQUAL IMPORTANCE TO THIS GREAT INCREASE IN FUNDS,
IS OUR ESTABLISHMENT OF A PERMANENT SCHOOLS COMMISSION TO GIVE AID
TO ALL SCHOOLS WITHOUT DISTINCTION ON A " tNEEDS" i BASIS.. THIS WILL
BE A MECHANISM BY WHICH WE WILL SEEK TO ENSURE EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.
IBELIEVE THAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS RIGHT TO BE PROUD OF
SUCH ADVANCES. IT MUST BE RECOGNISEDi HOWEVER, THAT. MUCH OF THE
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION OF OUR NEW PROGRAMS IN EDUCATION WILL
DEPEND UPON THE PLANNING AND CO-OPERATION OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
AND NON-GOVERNMENT EDUCATION AUTHORITIES. FOR THIS REASON I AM
DIST IURBED AT THE PROPAGANDA EMANATING FROM CERTAIN STATE GOVERNMENTS
THAT THE FUNDS PROVIDED FOR 1974 AND 1975 ARE RIGIDLY EAR-MARKED.
IT IS TRUE THAT ABOUT $ 44 MILLION IS ASSIGNED To GOVERNMENT
DISADVANTAGED SCHOOLS THAT IS TO AREAS OF PAST CHRONIC NEGLECT
AND UNDER-ACHIEVEMENT. IT IS TRUE THAT $ 20 MILLION ALLOTTED
TO BUILDING PROJECTS FOR SCHOOLS FOR THE HANDICAPPED AND NEARLY
$ 9 MILLION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND RETRAINING OF TEACHERS OF THESE
CHILDREN. IT IS TRUE THAT $ 16 MILLION IS ALLOTTED TO PRIMARY
SCHOOL LIBRARIES WHICH HAVE RECEIVED NO DIRECT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SUPPORT IN THE PAST AND MORE THAN $ 17 MILLION IS ALLOCATED TO
SECONDARY LIBRARIES. SURELY NO ONE WOULD DISPUTE THE SPECIAL NEEDS
I N THESE AREAS; SURELY NO ONE WOULD CRITICISE A GOVERNMENT FOR
A DETERMINATION TO MEET THESE NEEDS. EVEN ALLOWING FOR THIS SPECIFIC
GRANT, IT IS ABSURD TO TALK ABOUT RIGIDITY WHEN A GLANCE AT THE
STATES GRANTS ( SCHOOLS) ACT SHOWS THAT THE STATES WILL RECEIVE
$ 100 MILLION IN GENERAL BUILDING GRANTS AND $ 174 MILLION IN GRANTS
FOR GENERAL RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS. 
IT IS BREATHTAKING EFFRONTERY FOR STATE LIBERAL MINISTERS,
WHO SUPPORTED A LIBERAL GOVERNMENT MAKING GRANTS TO STATE SCHOOLS
AT THE RATE OF $ 32 MILLION A YEAR WITHOUT A COMPLAINT, TO SUGGEST
INDIFFERENCE ON THE PART OF AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHOSE GRANTS
TO STATE SCHOOLS REPRESENTS SOMETHING LIKE A EIGHT-FOLD INCREASE
CRITICAL WORDS ARE ONE THING; ACTIONS ARE ANOTHER. THE
MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, MR BEAZLEY, HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY CONCERNED
TO ENSURE THAT EDUCATION AUTHORITIES IMPLEMENT THE " NEEDS" POLICY
WITH INTEGRITY. HE HAS BEEN INFORMED HE HOPES INCORRECTLY
THAT ONE STATE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, IN HIS ALLOCATION OF THE
EXTRA MONEY PROVIDED FOR DISADVANTAGED SCHOOLS, IS OFFERING A MERE
$ 2,000 EACH TO THE PRINCIPALS OF A VAST RANGE OF SCHOOLSo INCLUDING
A NUMBER WHICH ARE CLEARLY DISADVANTAGED. HE HAS ALSO BEEN
INFORMED AGAIN HE HOPES INCORRECTLY THAT THIS MINISTER IS
IDENTIFYING AS DISADVANTAGED SOME ALREADY EXCELLENT HIGH SCHOOLS,
INCLUDING ONE WHICH, IN THE CONSTITUENCY OF A FORMER MINISTER
FOR EDUCATION OF THE STATE, WAS A RECIPIENT OF SPECIAL ADVANTAGES
IN THE PAST. WE WANT FROM EDUCATION AUTHORITIES A CLEAR STATEMENT
ON THEIR CRITERIA OF DISADVANTAGE AND A CLEAR CONCENTRATION OF
THE DISADVANTAGED EXPENDITURE ON SLUM SCHOOLS TO BRING THEM UP TO
STANDARD. 
-6-
BEFORE I LEAVE THE SUBJECT OF EDUCATION, I WOULD LIKE TO
MENTION ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR CHILDREN
WHO HAVE TOO OFTEN SUFFERED NEGLECT IN THE PAST. I HAVE ALREADY
MENTIONED OUR ALLOCATION FOR BUILDING PROJECTS FOR SCHOOLS FOR
THE HANDICAPPED. IN THE LAST FORTNIGHT, THE CABINET HAS DECIDED
TO APPROPRIATE A FURTHER $ 1 MILLION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION APPLIED
SPECIFICALLY FOR RESEARCH AND FOR THE TRAINING OF TEACHERS OF
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN. ULTIMATELY THIS WILL PRODUCE " THE TEACHERS
OF THE TEACHERS" OF THE HANDICAPPED AND THIS IS A CONCOMITANT OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS OF ASSISTANCE TO SCHOOLS FOR THE
HANDICAPPED. I WOULD ALSO STRESS THAT THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION IS
OBLIGED TO HAVE REGARD TO " THE EDUCATIONAL NEEDS OF HANDICAPPED
CHILDREN AND HANDICAPPED YOUNG PERSONS.
AT THE OTHER END OF THE SPECTRUM OF PERSONAL FORTUNE, THE
SCHOOLS COMMISSION IS CHARGED WITH THE RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARTING
COURSES OF ACTION WHICH WILL PROVIDE " SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR STUDENTS WHO HAVE DEMONSTRATED THEIR ABILITY IN
A PARTICULAR FIELD OF STUDIES, INCLUDING SCIENTIFIC, LITERARY,
ARTISTIC OR MUSICAL STUDIES." THE SCHOLARSHIP SCHEMES OF AUSTRALIA
HAVE OFTEN AWARDED MONEY BUT NOT OPPORTUNITIES FOR GENIUS OR TALENT
IN SUCH AREAS TO PROCEED AT THE PACE OF THAT GENIUS AND TALENT AND THIS
IS ONE OF THE MOST BAFFLING BUT FASCINATING PROBLEMS IN EDUCATION.
IT REACHED ITS EXTREME IN A PRODIGY WHO, IN THE UNITED STATES, COULD
LECTURE IN MATHEMATICS AT A UNIVERSITY AT THE AGE OF SEVEN, BUT WHO
ALSO BELIEVED IN FATHER CHRISTMAS. THIS MAY HELP TO REMIND US THAT
INTELLECTUAL BRILLIANCE DOES NOT NECESSARILY MEAN SOCIAL MATURITY
AND THAT SUCH A CHILD IS IN NEED OF SPECIAL ATTENTION. .1/ 7 
-7-
EQUALITY AND EQUITY HAVE BEEN JUST AS MUCH THE PRINCIPAL
FORCES BEHIND THE GOVERNMENT's POLICIES FOR THE PROVISION OF HEALTH
SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA. OUR HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM IS PROOF
ENOUGH OF THIS, AND I WILL HAVE MORE TO SAY ABOUT IT SHORTLY. As
MUCH PROOF CAN BE FOUND IN THE WORK OF THE HOSPITALS AND-HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION WHICH WE ESTABLISHED LAST YEAR. FOR TOO LONG*
THE SITING OF HOSPITALS HAS IGNORED-THE POPULATI* ON TRENDS OF OUR
COUNTRY. FOR TOO LONG PEOPLE IN OUTER URBAN AREAS HAVE HAD TO PUT
UP WITH TRAVELLING MILES TO RECEIVE ADEQUATE HOSPITAL TREATMENT.
FOR TOO LONG NEWLY-DEVELOPED AREAS HAVE HAD TO SUFFER A SHORTAGE
OF DOCTORS. MY COLLEAGUE MAX OLDMEADOW HAS TOLD ME OF. ONE AREA IN
HIS ELECTORATE WITH 18,000 PEOPLE AND ONLY TWO FULL-TIME GENERAL
PRACTITIONERS. THROUGH THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION WE
ARE DETERMINED TO OVERCOME THIS GROTESQUELY UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF
SUCH ESSENTIAL SERVICES. THE COMMISSION IS CURRENTLY EXAMINING
HOSPITAL NEEDS AND WILL PRESENT A REPORT AS A BASIS FOR GOVERNMENT
ACTION IN APRIL. IN ADDITION, WE HAVE INTRODUCED A MAJOR PROGRAM
FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRES, WHICH, AMONG
OTHER THINGS,-WILL MAKE AVAILABLE DOCTORS IN AREAS WHERE THEY ARE
CURRENTLY IN SHORT SUPPLY. IN VICTORI A WE EXPECT TO SPEND
$ 4.2 MILLION IN 1973/ 74 ON SUCH COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES. PART
OF OUR PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST THE STATES TO DEVELOP COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL
HEALTH, ALCHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY SERVICES. THE ALLOCATION
OF MORE THAN $ 77,000 FOR THE JANEFIELD FAMILY ASSESSMENT UNIT AT
BUNDOORA A CENTRE WHERE WHOLE FAMILIES CAN BE BROUGHT FOR THE
ASSESSMENT OF PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH MENTAL DEFICIENCIES IS A
GOOD EXAMPLE OF THIS PROGRAM IN ACTION IN THE EASTERN SUBURBS OF
MELBOURNE. 
-8-
ANOTHER IS THE PROVISION OF NEARLY $ 80,000 FOR THE DANDENONG
COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CENTRE AND TEACHING UNIT IN CONJUNCTION
WITH MONASH UNIVERSITY.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS . ALSO RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR GREATLY
EXPANDED ACTIVITY IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL SECURITY. WE INCREASED
PENSIONS TWICE LAST YEAR AND WILL LIFT THEM AGAIN IN THE AUTUMN.
WE HAVE TAKEN THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF THE MEANS
TEST. WE HAVE INTRODUCED A NUMBER OF NEW BENEFITS AND IMPROVED
A NUMBER OF EXISTING ONES. THESE RANGE FROM INCREASES IN SUBSIDIES
FOR AGED PERSONS HOMES TO GREATER ENCOURAGEMENT FOR HOME CARE
SERVICES; FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF A SUPPORTING MOTHERS BENEFIT
TO THE PROVISION OF AN ORPHAN'IS PENSION. ONE OF OUR MOST AMBITIOUS
PROJECTS IS TO DEVISE AN AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN TO ENABLE LOCAL
AUTHORITIES AND VOLUNTARY AGENCIES TO SHARE THE COST OF A WIDER
RANGE OF WELFARE SERVICES. THE FIRST GRANTS UNDER THE NEW PLAN
AFFECTING VICTORIA WERE ANNOUNCED BY THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY
IN OCTOBER. INITIALLY THE GRANTS ARE FOR SETTING UP SECRETARIATS
FOR SOCIAL PLANNING WHICH IN TURN WILL LEAD TO THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT. OF THE SIX INITIAL
GRANTS, WHICH TOTALLED $ 91,000, A GRANT OF $ 10,000 A YEAR HAS
BEEN MADE TO THE MELBOURNE/ OUTER EASTERN SUBURBS INTERIM COMMITTEE.
IMENTIONED A MOMENT AGO THE UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION AND
INADEQUACY OF HEALTH SERVICES IN OUR MAJOR CITIES. THIS IS ONLY ONE
ASPECT OF THE PROBLEMS THAT OUR HUGE URBAN AREAS-FACE. IT IS ONLY
ONE ASPECT OF PROGRAMS WHICH WE HAVE INITIATED TO OVERCOME THESE PROBLEMSe 289/ 9 
-9-
WE HAVE EMBARKED ON A LONG-RANGE PROGRAM TO MAKE AUSTRALIAN
CITIES -EXISTING ONES AND NEW ONES AND THEIR SUBURBS MORE
EFFICIENT, MORE ORDERLY AND MORE BEAUTIFUL. THE DEPARTMENT OF
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT WAS CREATED LESS THAN THREE WEEKS
AFTER WE CAME INTO OFFICE AS THE MAJOR POLICY ARM OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN URBAN AFFAIRS. THE CITIES COMMISSION WAS SET UP TO
PROVIDE TOWN PLANNING AND OTHER PRACTICAL SKILLS FOR DEVELOPING
EXISTING CITIES AND PLANNING NEW GROWTH CENTRES. THE FIRST FRUITS
OF THESE MEASURES HAVE COME WITH THE PLANNING OF A MAJOR CENTRE
IN ALBURY-WODONGA. THIS AND OTHER FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS ARE AIMED AT
RELIEVING OUR EXISTING CITIES, PARTICULARLY MELBOURNE AND SYDNEYJ*
OF THE UNBEARABLE STRAINS CAUSED BY EXCESSIVE DEVELOPMENT.
IN FEBRUARY LAST YEAR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED
A SCHEME TO IMPROVE URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN THE CAPITAL CITIES.
ISAID IN MY POLICY SPEECH THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT " MUST NOW
ACCEPT A SHARE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
OF AUSTRALIAN CITIES." THE SCHEME WE ANNOUNCED MORE THAN LIVES UP
TO THAT PLEDGE. IT IS BASED ON THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CONTRIBUTING TWO-THIRDS OF THE COST OF IMPROVING URBAN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT AND LEAVING ONLY ONE-THIRD OF THE COST TO THE STATES.
SUGGESTED PROJECTS FOR A FIVE-YEAR PROGRAM HAVE BEEN SUBMITTED BY
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS INCLUDING VICTORIA. WHILE MOST OF THESE
PROPOSALS ARE BEING EVALUATED, WE HAVE ALREADY AGREED TO PROVIDE
$ 4.32 MILLION IN 1973/ 74 TO PROVIDE NEW TRAINS, TRAMS AND BUSES
IN THIS STATE. 
WE ARE THE FIRST GOVERNMENT TO RECOGNISE THAT ONE OF
THE MOST APPALLING EFFECTS OF THE RAPID GROWTH OF OUR CITIES HAS
BEEN THE INADEQUACY OF SEWERAGE SERVICES IN NEW SUBURBS. WE ARE
THE FIRST NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO ACCEPT A DIRECT RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THIS PROBLEM. THE BUDGET PROVIDED FOR AN ADVANCE OF.
MILLION TO HELP CATCH UP ON THE BACKLOG OF SEWERAGE. THIS
INCLUDES $ 9.3 MILLION FOR VICTORIA.' THE MELBOURNE AND METROPOLITAN
BOARD OF WORKS HAS ADVISED , US THAT $ 7.3 fvILLION OF THIS IS EXPECTED
TO BE ALLOCATED FOR MAJOR AND MINOR SEWERAGE WORKS IN THE EASTERN
SUBURBS OF MELBOURNE IN 1973/ 74. A LONG-TERM NATIONAL SEWERAGE
PROGRAM IS AT PRESENT UNDERGOING DETAILED NEGOTIATION. BETWEEN
THE VARIOUS STATE AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS. THE PROGRAM
TO BE DEVELOPED IN VICTORIA IS EXPECTED TO ELIMINATE THE SEWERAGE
BACKLOG IN MAJOR URBAN AREAS BY 1982.
OUR'CITIES HAVE ALSO SUFFERED MIGHTILY FROM THE SHORTAGE
OF HOUSING. AGAIN WE HAVE MOVED TO DEAL WITH THIS PROBLEM. THE
TOTAL AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROVISION FOR HOUSING HAS GONE UP BY
34 PER CENT THIS FINANCIAL YEAR FROM $ 370 MILLION TO $ 495 MILLION.
ADVANCES TO THE STATES INCREASED By 29 PER CENT TO $ 219 MILLION;
VICTORIA RECEIVED $ 53.5 MILLION, COMPARED TO ONLY $ 39 MILLION IN
THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR. VICTORIA IS ADVANCED $ 16 MILLION IN
THE AGREEMENT UNDER THE HOME BUILDERS' ACCOUNT, WHICH IS USED FOR
TERMINATING BUILDING SOCIETY LOANS; THIS IS NEARLY $ 5 MILLION MORE
THAN IN THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR, AND WILL BE SPENT FOR HOMES
FOR SALE, NOT FOR RENTAL, AS STATE AUTHORITIES HAVE TRIED TO CLAIM. ./ 11 
-11-
THE HOUSING AUTHORITY ADVANCE FOR USE IN BUILDING HOUSING COMMISSION
HOMES FOR RENTAL AND PURCHASE ROSE IN 1973/ 74 TO $ 37.5 MILLION, AN
INCREASE OF NEARLY $ 10 MILLION ON THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR.
I WOULD EMPHASISE THAT THESE LARGE INCREASES WERE THE AMOUNTS THE
VICTORIAN STATE GOVERNMENT-SOUGHT, LIMITED ONLY BY THE CAPACITY
OF THE BUILDING INDUSTRY.
THESE GENEROUS ADVANCES WILL ENABLE VICTORIA* TO BUILD
3.000 HOUSING COMMISSION DWELLINGS THIS FINANCIAL YEAR A MAJOR
IMPROVEMENT ON THE NUMBERS BUILT WITH MONEY HANDED OUT BY OUR
PREDECESSORS. THE GREAT BULK OF THIS MONEY IS PROVIDED AT THE
HIGHLY CONCESSIONAL INTEREST RATE OF FOUR PER CENT FOR THE FIVE
YEARS OF THE AGREEMENT SURELY A SIGNIFICANT FIGURE WHEN THE BOND
RATE IS AROUND 8.5 PER CENT. THE HOME BUILDERS' ACCOUNT FUNDS
ALLOCATED TO EACH STATE WILL BE LOANED OUT TO HOMESEEKERS AT
INTEREST RATES NOT EXCEEDING FIVE AND THREE-QUARTER PER CENT.
HOUSING COMMISSION DWELLINGS ALSO MUST BE SOLD WITHIN THIS INTEREST
RATE LIMIT, SO IT CAN BE READILY SEEN THAT THE NEW AGREEMENT GIVES
SUBSTANTIAL FINANCIAL AID TO THOSE WHO HAVE TO BUY THEIR HOMES
WITHIN THE PUBLIC HOUSING SECTOR.
WE HAVE TAKEN SEVERAL OTHER IMPORTANT STEPS IN THE HOUSING
FIELD. WE ARE WORKING ON A UNIFORM BUILDING REGULATIONS CODE WHICH
MAY EVENTUALLY REDUCE HOUSING COSTS BY AS MUCH AS SIX PER CENT.
A TASK FORCE INVESTIGATING SYSTEMS OF FACTORY PRODUCED HOUSING HAS
ALREADY PRODUCED AN INTERIM REPORT, AND IT MAY PROVE POSSIBLE TO
ACHIEVE SAVINGS AS HIGH As 20 PER CENT FOR A COTTAGE IF THESE NEW
HOUSING TECHNIQUES CAN EFFECTIVELY BE UTILISED IN THE FUTURE. 
-12-
THE SCOPE OF THE DEFENCE SERVICES HOMES SCHEME HAS BEEN GREATLY
WIDENED, AND THE MAXIMUM LOAN LIMIT RAISED FROM $ 9,000 TO $ 12,000.
SPENDING ON DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES THIS FINANCIAL YEAR HAS INCREASED
BY 37 PER CENT TO $ 102 MILLION, ABORIGINAL HOUSING ALLOCATIONS HAVE
INCREASED THIS FINANCIAL YEAR" BY 123 PER CENT TO $ 32,4 MILLION,
WE ARE PHASING OUT THE INEQUITABLE HOME SAVINGS GRANT SCHEMEI AND
THIS SESSION OF PARLIAMENT WILL SEE THE INTRODUCTION OF A MUCH
FAIRER AND WIDER SCHEME OF LIMITED TAX DEDUCTIBILITY ON MORTGAGE
INTEREST, WE CONCEDE THAT AUSTRALIA FACES AN AWESOME PROBLEM IN
OVERCOMING OUR ENDEMIC HOUSING CRISIS; BUT THIS GOVERNMENT IS
EVOLVING POLICIES DESIGNED TO TACKLE THE PROBLEM FROM MANY SIDES,
A SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT IS ALREADY OCCURRING IN THE WELFARE
HOUSING FIELD, AND OUR EFFORTS IN THE OTHER SECTORS WILL SOON SHOW
SIMILAR GAINS, kSPITE ALL WE ARE DOING IN THESE AREAS, WE WILL NOT BE
ABLE TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OUR CITIES AND OTHER PROBLEMS AS
EFFECTIVELY AS WE MUST, IF WE DO NOT ALLOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO
ASSUME A GREATER ROLE IN AUSTRALIA, LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE ORGAN OF
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE, WHICH KNOWS BEST THEIR
DETAILED NEEDS AND WHICH CAN BE MOST RESPONSIVE TO THOSE NEEDS,
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA FOR TOO LONG HAS BEEN DENIED A PROPER
ROLE, PROPER RESPONSIBILITY AND PROPER FINANCES, IT ALSO PROVIDES
A VIVID DEMONSTRATION OF INEQUALITY IN OUR SOCIETY, LONG-ESTABLISHED
AREAS BENEFIT FROM SERVICES WHICH HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED OVER DECADES,
NEWLY-ESTABLISHED AREAS SUFFER FROM THE FACT THAT LOCAL COUNCILS
CANNOT KEEP UP WITH THE PACE OF DEVELOPMENT IN THE PROVISION OF
ESSENTIAL SERVICES, / 13 
./ 14
-13-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO ENABLE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT TO PLAY A FULL AND PROPER ROLE IN THE AFFAIRS OF OUR
NATION, LAST YEAR WE TOOK A MAJOR STEP IN THIS DIRECTION BY
BRINGING IN THE GRANTS COMMISSION ACT. THIS RECONSTITUTES THE
GRANTS COMMISSION TO GIVE IT POWER TO MAKE FUNDS AVAILABLE TO
LOCAL AS WELL AS STATE GOVERNMENTS, THIS RECOGNISES THAT THERE
ARE GREAT DISPARITIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT AREAS WITHIN ONE STATE
JUST AS THERE HAVE BEEN DISPARITIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT STATES.
THE GRANTS COMMISSION IS NOW ABLE TO PROVIDE FUNDS TO REDUCE THESE
REGIONAL DISPARITIES, IN THE LAST FORTNIGHT IT BEGAN ITS FIRST
HEARINGS UNDER THE NEW ACT. IT HEARD AN APPLICATION FROM COUNCILS
IN REGION 16 OF VICTORIA FOR SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO OVERCOME THE
BACKLOG OF SERVICES IN THAT REGION, REGION 16 COVERS SOME OF
THE EASTERN SUBURBS OF MELBOURNEI INCLUDING PART OF THIS ELECTORATE
OF CASEY. THIS WILL BE THE FIRST OF MANY HEARINGS WHICH I TRUST
WILL RESULT IN A PROPER MEASURE OF COMMONWEALTH AID FOR AREAS,
PARTICULARLY NEWLY-DEVELOPED AREAS, WHICH ARE INADEQUATELY
SERVICED AT PRESENT,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR TRIED TO PERSUADE THE
STATES TO ALLOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS TO THE LOAN COUNCIL.
THE STATES REFUSED TO AGREE TO THIS PROPOSAL AND SO DEPRIVED, AT
LEAST TEMPORARILY, LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF THE OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE
SURE ACCESS TO ADEQUATE FUNDS, MY GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO ACCEPT
THE ATTITUDE OF THE STATES ON THIS QUESTION AND WE WILL TAKE THIS
MATTER TO THE PEOPLE IN A REFERENDUM TO BE CONDUCTED IN CONJUNCTION
WITH THE SENATE ELECTIONS THIS YEAR, 
-14-
THIS LEADS ME TO THE QUESTION OF THE SENATE. I HAVE
OUTLINED TO YOU TONIGHT THE PRINCIPLES WHICH HAVE GUIDED THE
POLICIES WHICH WE HAVE TRIED TO IMPLEMENT IN THE LAST 15 MONTHS.
IN 1972 WE WON A MANDATE FOR'THOSE POLICIES AND AN ENDORSEMENT OF
THOSE PRINCIPLES. YET CONTINUALLY IN THE LAST 15 MONTHS MEN
WHO WERE ELECTED TO THE SENATE AS LONG AGO AS 1967 AND 1970 HAVE
TRIED TO THWART THOSE POLICIES AND PERVERT THOSE PRINCIPLES.
WHERE IS THEIR MANDATE FOR THE 1970' s? THEY DO NOT HAVE ONE.
YET LOOK AT THE CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR ACTIONS., LAST YEAR
THE SENATE REJECTED 13 BILLS, DEFERRED ANOTHER 10 AND. AMENDED 21.
I HAVE MENTIONED IN PASSING OUR HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM, A PROGRAM
DESIGNED TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGAINST THE COST OF
ILLNESS FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS,-INCLUDING THE ONE AND A HALF MILLION
PEOPLE WHO HAVE NO SUCH PROTECTION AT PRESENT; A PROGRAM DESIGNED
TO PROVIDE THAT PROTECTION BY THE FAIREST METHOD OF CONTRIBUTION.
THIS WAS. PROBABLY THE MOST THOROUGHLY DISCUSSED POLICY PROPOSED
BY THE LABOR PARTY WHILE IT WAS IN OPPOSITION. ITS POPULAR
ACCEPTANCE PLAYED A LARGE PART IN THE GREAT LIFT IN OUR ELECTORAL
FORTUNES IN 1969 AND THE FULFILMENT OF THOSE FORTUNES IN 1972.
YET THESE MEN, ELECTED AS MUCH AS SIX YEARS AGO, HAVE REJECTED OUR
LEGISLATION FOR THAT PROGRAM; THEY HAVE REJECTED THE PRINCIPLES
OF EQUITY AND UNIVERSALITY WHICH ARE ITS CORNERSTONES. 
IN THE FACE OF OUR MANDATE* THEY HAVE SHELVED THE TRADE
PRACTICES BILL AND, IN SO DOING, THEY LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO
MONOPOLIES AND BIG CORPORATIONS TO FIX PRICES, ORGANISE CARTELS
AND EXPLOIT THE AUSTRALIAN CONSUMER, AGAIN, THEY HAVE DENIED
AUSTRALIANS FAIRNESS, THEY.-HAVE SHELVED THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL AND THUS BLOCKED THE MOST EFFECTIVE'
INSTRUMENT FOR ENSURING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF OUR INDUSTRIES AND
FOR DEVELOPING NEW INDUSTRIES, THEY HAVE LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO
FOREIGN TAKEOVERS AND FOREIGN EXPLOITATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
ECONOMY, THESE SAME MEN HAVE REJECTED THE DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE
OF EQUAL ELECTORATES, THESE MEN, WHO ARE SO QUICK TO COMPLAIN OF
STRIKES# HAVE BLOCKED ATTEMPTS TO DEMOCRATISE AND MODERNISE THE
TRADE UNION MOVEMENT, THEY HAVE PRESERVED FOR FOREIGN MINING
INTERESTS THE. RIGHT TO EXPLOIT OUR OFF-SHORE RESOURCES, LIKE THE
STATES, THEY HAVE SOUGHT TO DENY TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS
TO NATIONAL REVENUES AND BORROWINGS,
I TRUST THEIR ACTIONS WILL BE REMEMBERED WHEN THE SENATE
ELECTIONS ARE HELD THIS YEAR, I TRUST THAT THE MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS WHO SUPPORTED OUR POLICIES IN 1972 WILL REMEMBER HOW SOME
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT OF THOSE POLICIES HAVE BEEN FRUSTRATED BY A
HOSTILE AND REACTIONARY OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE,
THE VOTERS OF AUSTRALIA GAVE US THE SUPPORT WE NEEDED TO
INITIATE THOSE POLICIES IN 1972. I TRUST THAT IN 1974 THEY WILL
GIVE US THE POWER TO ENSURE THEIR FULL IMPLEMENTATION, 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 194
1 March 1974
PRODUCTION OF SUPERPHOSPHATE REFERRED TO INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION
As a result of a reference sent to the Industries
Assistance Commission by the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today,
the Commission will examine the need for the continuation of
the tariff on super-phosphate.
Mr. Whitlam has asked the Commission to inquire into
and report on whether assistance currently accorded the production
of superphosphate in Australia should be continued and, if so,
the nature and extent of such assistance.
Mr. Whitlam emphasised that the reference to the Commission
was limited to the question of assistance for Australian production
and was not concerned with the question of a bounty for users of
superphosphate. Mr. Whitlam said that at present imports of superphosphate
into Australia attract a duty of just under 17 per cent under the
General Tariff and jusqt under 6 per cent from preferential sources.
The last full report on the protective requirements of this
industry was that from the Tariff Board in December 1929, although
it was included in the Board's 1972 report on General Rates of Duty
which dealt with preferences. Mr. Whitlam said that it is
appropriate for the Commission to review the assistance available
to this manufacturing industry. It is also relevant that at
present the Commission is inquiring into the protective needs of
the industry producing nitrogenous fertilisers. 
-2-
The reference to the Commission on superphosphate
production covers items 31.03.100 and 31.05.110 to the First
Schedule of the Customs Tariff 1966-1973.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



N EWS RLEAS
N9 DATE
M/ 34 4 March 1974
FOREIGN AFFAIRS APPOINTMIENTS
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced today two senior diplomatic
appointments. Mr M. R. Booker, currently Ambassador to Italy, has been
appointed Australian Ambassador to Yugoslavia. He has also been
concurrently appointed as non-resident Ambassador to Romania
and Bulgaria. Mr J. E. Ryan, at present First Assistant
Succeedry M naBookae srD usvriaeia nAbssori toe Detay enil
secetary Manageentkervtaies Divisori the Deartenyil
Mr'Booker was born in 1915. He attended the University
of Sydney where he obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree. He joined
the A ustralian Public Service in 1940 and the Department of
Foreign Affairs in 1942. Mr Booker's overseas postings have
included Chungking 1943-44, The Hague 1945-46, Berlin 1946-47,
Manila 1950-52, Rangoon 1952-53, and Washington 1956-60, where
he was Consellor and later Minister. From 1960 to 1963 1Mr Book.-er
was Australian Ambassador to Thailand. In 1963 he transferred to
the Department of External Territories as Deputy Secretary and
returned to the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1964 as
First Assistant Secretary in charge of European and Middle East
Af fairs and Economic Relations and Information activities. He
has been Ambassador to Italy since 1970. Mr Booker is married
with four children.
Mr Ryan was born in 1923 and was educated at St Patrick's
College, Goulburn and the University of Sydney. He joined the
Department of Foreign Affairs in 1946. Mr Ryan was Australian 1iligh
Commissioner to Ghana in 1965/ 67 and Ambassador to Laos in 196S/' 69.
He was Minister at the Australian Embassy, Washington from 1969 to
1971 during which time he acted as Charge d'Affaires on several
occasions. He has been First Assistant Secretary, Management
Services Division since 1971. Mr Ryan is married with three 



SPEECH BY THE PRIMIE f1INISTEI E. G. 1HTI C. MP. ,/
FOR THE OPENINHG OF THE SE'HOR ILIAGE LT PROGrAH N~ LOA
GOVERNMENT AT THE CAINUIRRA COLLEGE OF AD CE BJA! U
MO~ D1Y fIC 19/ 1b
IIWELCOME THE INAUGURATION OF THIS IMPORTANT COUr,$'
~* IN THIS IMPORTANT SUBJECT AT THIS IMPORT-ANT INSTITUTTONv
jo IF I HAVE ONE COMPLAINT AGAINST AUSTRALIAN
INSTITUTIONS OF TERTIARY EDUCATION IT IS THIS: THEY HAVE
B3EEN REMARKABLY SLOW TO RECOGNISE THE VALUE OF PRACTICAL.
TRAINING IN GOVERNM1ENT AND PUB3LIC ADMINISTRATION: CAN
., ILLUSTRATE THIS BY RECALLING MY OWN DAY-S AS A STnflENTgC
IN THOSE DAYS, AND INDEED UNTIL QUITE RECENTLY, THERE
WERE PLENTY OF COURSES IN PO. I. TICAL SCIENCE BUT N1O COURSES
p IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT; THERE WERE COURSES IN MEDICIN. E BUT-
/ 9NONE IN. HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATION; THERE lWEtE. COURSOiS IN
EDUCATION BUT NONE IN UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION , t THJERE
' i ~ WAS A STRONG TEMPTATION AND I SUSPECT THERE IS~ A TEMPTA1J ON'
NOW -TO REGARD THESE PRACTICAL SUBJECTS* AS THE PROVINCE
AMATEURS*, BENEATH THE DIGNITY OF THE TRUE SCHOLAIR A 1-1D A 11.11I
' OF TIME FOR THE BORN LEADER) C YET TODAY, IF WE. Tf!-K2-THOSE
SAME THREE CONTEMPORARY DISCIPLINES -LOCAL GOVE; lkl: l: ThT,-j
HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATION AND UNIVERSITY ADNiINISTRAT ION W
4-df F IND COURSES READILY AVAILABLE IN* UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIAN
Vt, 
i -2-
S1 IT IS A MEA,..; E OF THE IMPORTANCE NOW ACCORDED TO SUCH
STUDIES, A RECOGNITION OF THE GROWING COMPLEXITY AND
SOPHISTICATION OF MODERN GOVERNM1ENT AND SOCIAL ORGANISATION,
THAT WE ARE INAUGURATING THIS SENIOR MANAGEMENT PROGRAM IN
SLOCAL GOVERNMENT AT THE CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED
SEDUCATIONX
* TWO WEEKS AGO I SPOKE TO MEMBERS OF THE INSTITUTE
IOF MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION IN MELBOURNE AND GAVE AN ACCOU; T
S OF THE GOVERNMENT'S INITIATIVES ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS..
IT STRUCK ME THAT SO MUCH OF MY GOVERNMENT'S HOPES AND
. AMBITIONS FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEPENDED NOT JUST ON WHAT
: GOVERNMENTS CAN DO, BUT ON THE CALIBRE AND EXPERIENCE OF THE
S' MEN AND WOMEN WHO ADMINISTER CITIES, SHIRES AND MUNICIPALITIES
.' FROM DAY TO DAY, IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES
SHOULD BE RUN BY PEOPLE WITH RIGOROUS PRACTICAL TRAINING IN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATIONX THIS IS NO TASK FOR THE
AMATEUR OR THE DILETTANTEX VIE ACCEPT THE IMPORTANCE OF
' SYSTEMATIC STUDIES FOR THE PROFESSIONAL MAN, AND THE
BUSINESSMANX WHY HAS IT TAKEN SO LONG TO RECOGNISE THAT
SUCH TRAINING IS ESSENTIAL FOR THE ADMINISTRATOR IN LOCAL'
" c GOVERNMENT, FOR THE LEADER IN PUBLIC LIFE AS WELL AS FOR THE
SLEADER IN COMMERCIAL AND PROFESSIONAL LIFE?
it
I 
. THIS COURSE IN LOCAL G
: COME AT A MORE OPPORTUNE TIMErt
EVENTFUL ONE PERHAPS A FATEFU
* d IN AUSTRALIAX I DON'T THINK AN
THE EMPHASIS MY GOVERNMENT HAS
GOVERNMENT OR DOUBT THE STRENGT
FIELD) WE WANT TO ELEVATE LOCA
PLACE AS A FULL AND EQUAL PARTN
IT IS NOT SIMPLY A MATTER OF PRI
MORE MONEY IS CERTAINLY NEEDEDX
ARE WITH THE TRUE STATUS OF L
ULTIMATE IMPACT ON OUR LIVESX
NEXT MAY AND THERE SHOULD BE
COMPANY TO EXPLAIN OUR REFERENDI
GOVERNMENT WILL BE EMPOWERED TO
GOVERNMENT BODIES AND TO DISTRI
DEALINGS BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMEI
IN THAT WAY, LOCAL GOVERNMENT W
THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES OF THE
S AS THE THIRD TIER OF GOVERNMENT
' CONSTITUTION FOR THE FIRST TIME
THE FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES OF Ti
SAND MAKE POSSIBLE A RATIONAL CO
, J I p OVERNtENT COULD HARDLY HAVE
THE YEAR AHEAD WILL'BE AN
L ONE FOR LOCAL GOVE-NF! ENT
Y OF YOU WOULD QUARREL WITH
GIVEN TO BETTER LOCAL
H OF OUR RESOLVE IN THIS
L GOVERNMENT TO ITS RIGHTFUL
ER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM.
OVIDING. MORE MONEY, THOUGH
WE ARE CONCERNED AS YOU
OCAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS
IF OUR REFERENDUM IS CARRIED
LITTLE NEED FOR ME IN THIS
UM PROPOSALS THE NATIONAL
RAISE MONEY FOR LOCAL
BUTE THAT MONEY IN DIRECT
NT AND THE COMMONWEALTH,
ILL HAVE DIRECT ACCESS TO
NATION-ITS ESSENTIAL-PL ACE
WILL BE ENTRENCHED IN THE
y WE WILL BE ABLE TO -BALANCE
HE THREE DIVISIONS OF
-ORDINATION BETWEEN THE" i,
r i r
r-
SALREADY MY GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN SEVERAL PRACTICAL
STEPS TO PLACE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A MORE SECURE FOOTING,
, ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTIONS LAST YEAR WAS TO WIDEN THE CHARTER
OF THE COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMiISSION TO ENABLE IT TO HEAR
APPLICATIONS FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT REGIONS FOR GRANTS UNDER
" SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION. IN THIS WAY WE HOPE TO MAKE
THE COMMISSION AS EFFECTIVE IN REDUCING INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
S" REGIONS WITHIN THE STATES AS IT HAS BEEN IN REDUCING
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN THE STATES THEMSELVESt THE FIRST
APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE HAVE BEEN RECEIVED AND HEARINGS
WILL BEGIN SHORTLY OUR SECOND INITIATIVE WAS TO SEEK A VOICE
AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LOAN COUNCIL, WE
RAISED THIS PROPOSAL A PROPOSAL CONSISTENT WITH THE POLICY
S, OF THE LABOR PARTY AND OUR MANDATE FROM'THE PEOPLE AT THE
.; CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION LAST SEPTEMBER; AND I REMIND YOU THAT
IT WAS AT THE EXPRESS INSISTENCE OF MY GOVERNMENT THAT
: IR, EPRESENTATIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT WERE ADMITTED TO THAT
CONVENTIONX WE RAISED THE PROPOSAL AGAIN AT A SPECIAL
CONFERENCE OF THE PREMIERS IN OCTOBERx THE INABILITY OF THE
PREMIERS TO REACH UNANIMITY ON OUR PROPOSAL OBLIGED US TO
EEK A REFERENDUM A REFERENDUM TO REMOVE ALL CONSTITUTIONAL
OBSTACLES TO THE RATIONAL CO-ORDINATION OF LOCAL, STATE AND
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA, 
IAM FIRU-1LY CONIVIVICED THAT UNLESS THAT REFERENDUIM
IS CARRIED LOCAL COVERNMIET IN AUSTRALIA WILL REMAIN IN ITS
PRESENT SAT-JACK1ET, ITS PRESENT STATE OF PERM'ANENT
FINANCIAL CRISIS, A POOR RELATION OF STATE GOV'ERNMENTS THAT
LACK THE MEANS rO GIVE LOCAL GOVERIHEiNIT THE RESOURCES IT
NEEDS,,, VE CAN GIVE LOCAL GOV/ ERNMENT THE MEANS TO DO ITS JOBA
WE CAN GI\ VE IT THE STATUS AND AUTONOMY IT DESERVES)( WE CAN
ENSURE ITS RIGHTFUL PLACE NOT AS AN APPENDAGE OF THE STATES,
: NOT AS AN APPENDAGE OF THE COMMONWEALTH* BUT AS AN EQUAL
9 PARTNER W1ITH BOTH IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEIf.! NO ONE KNOWS BETTER
THAN YOU PEOPLE IN THIS ROOM, AND ESPECIALLY THE DEDICATED
MEN AND 11OMEN WHO HAVE UNDERTAKEN THIS FIRST COURSE IN LOCAL
GOVERN4MENT AT THIS COLLEGE, THE FRUSTRATIONS AND DIFFICULTI0
OF THE CAREER YOU HAVE CHOSEN~ I BELIEVE THAT IF YOUR CAREERS
Q , ARE TO BE FULLY REWARDING, IF YOUR STUDIES AT THIS COLLEGE
ARE TO BE TRULY MEANINGFUL AND VALUABLE TO YOU AND SOCIETYf
THEN TOGETHER WE MUST WORK FOR A NEW DEAL FOR LOkCAL GOVERNMENT
A-NEW DEAL THAT WILL ENSURE ITS FIRM PLACE It 0NES TI T tiT
AND IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEMit
. IHAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE REAL FUTURE OF LOCAL
', GOVERNMENT, ITS REAL SUCCESS, ITS RELEVAN4CE A0D APAPiABILITY,
ITS POPULARITY, ITS ABILITY TO INVOLVE CITIZENS AND * fO ENGAGE
:;-THEIR EFFORTS AND SYMPATHIES, WILL DEPEND LARGELY ON 711E
PEOPLE WHO ADMINIISTER LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A DAILY BASIS, 0
:. L~ OCAL. GOVERNMENT IS CONCERNED DIRECTLY-WITH OUR LIV
,' OHREELSE DO WE FIND SUCH INTIMATE L114KS BETWEEN GG VERN,' IENZtJ
Y~ ANPT~ GOVERm0,1(' IN NO OTHER AREA OF GOVERNMET RETHR
$,( CH. EA DIEI HE'iSERVCS ROIDED AiD 
-6-
', THE RESOURCES AVAILABLE * ro PAY FOR THOSE SERVTcc-s THE
* RESULTING DEMANDS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMI1NISTPATORSR
ON THEIR SK( ILLS, THEIR EXPERIENCE, THEIR INGENUITY -WL
. INCREASE AS RAPIDLY AS THE DEMAN4DS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ITSELFPt
THAT IS WHY I WELCOME THE I14ITIATIVE FOR THIS COURSE
. AT THE CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCAT 1ONf I SHOULD
EMPHASISE THAT IT IS NOT AN " ACCREDITATION COURSE" FOR LOCAL
V GOVERNMENT OFFICERS SUCH AS THE MITCHtELL COLLEGE OF ADVANCED
L7~' EUCATION PROVIDES IN NEW SOUTI*: ALES OR THE ROYAL MELBAJURNE
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. IN VICTORIA;! IT IS IN NO SENSE
ATTEMPT TO MUSCLE IN ON COURSES THAT STATE INSTIION ARE
. ALREADY PROVIDINGX IN FACT IT'IS A MODEL OF THE NlAY THAT
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS CAN AND SHOULD BE ORGAf,' MEDX
~ NATIONAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORGAN! SATIONS HAVE ALL
0HAD A PART TO PLAY IN ARRANGING THIS COURSEr, [ HE FIRST
SINITIATIVE CAME FROM THE INSTITUTE OF felUNICIPAL Anm~ INISTRATiON
I1N7 O~ IT BEGAN LOOKING FOR A TERTIARY INTI17IN1Oi~ 3I
COUSESIN LOCAL GOVERNMENT;? THE RESPONSE CA'E FROM THIS
COLLEGE -A BODY FUNDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GoVERNMENTA(~ oz
IN ORDER TO PLAN AND ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM, AN ADVISORY
COUNCIL. HAS BEEN FORMED REPRESENTING NATIONAL, STATE A.-11 LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AND ALL OTHER ORGAHlISATIOI NjS CONCERtNELi~ ' THE 1N2v TTtJTI
OF MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION, THE AUSTRALIAN COU; I4C1L of-Lo2AL'
GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATIONS; LOCAL GOVERNIMENT ENGINEERS, HEALTH
41 ' , SURVEYORS, PRIVATE BUSINESSMEN, STATE L. OCAL. GOVEPFNhIENT
DEPARTMENTS, THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND REG-IONAL DEV:.-71OPMEN'r,
HE DEPARTMENTS OF THE CAPITAL TERRITORY AND THE NORTHERN
. TALA R
TRR I THE AuSTALA INTTTE OF URBAN STUDIES -ALL ARE:
Fni W. AIT) 
IDOUB3T IF A 14ORE COMPREHENSIVE ASSEMBLY OF STATE, L-OCAL
AND NATIONAL AGlENiCIES HAS BEEN BPoU'orit TOGETHER FOR A SINGLEl:
PURPOSE INJ SUCH A READY SPIRIT OF CO-0OP
ICONGR~ ATULATE ALL THOSE' 1 HO HAVE ORGANISED THIS
COURSE, BUT TI] ERE ARE TWO MEN I14 PARTICULAR WHO DESERVE
OUR GH-ATITUDE) THE PROGRAM OWIES MUCH TO THE INITIATI VE
OF IMR, ANDREW IIIALLS, A FORMER To! V~ CLERK OF BOX HILL AND
NOW4 A MEMBER OF THE-GRANTS CoNNrISSloN; AND Milh. 1GMi' '. IO) RSLEY,
CONVENOR OF TH'-E COMMITTEE ESTAflLISHIED BY THlE INSTITUTE OF
MIUNICIPAL ADI-1IINISTRATI'ON IN 19/ 0 TO EXPLORE THE POSSIBILITY
OF AN INSTITUTE OF LOCAL GOVERMlENT STUDIES-,, YOU ARE
FORTUNATE ALSO IN HAVING THE SUP PORT AND COLLABOR~ ATI OF
* THE INSTITUTE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT STUDIES IN THE UNIVERSITY
OF BI RM ItJ M YOOUR INITIAL PLANS ARE FOR TWO OUSS
YEAR WITH 25 PL. ACES IN EACiqf. TiiERE ARE, MN FACT, 2/ PEOPLE.
PARTICIPATING IN THE FIRST COUjRSE., THAT IS A MOST CRAT IFY 11*.
* RESPONSEje
' I.
2
4 iC ' 4.
E
4 
-8-
I AM GLAD TO ANNOUNCE THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN
AND REGIONAL DEVELOP1MENT, FROM NEXT YEAR, WILL BE CONTRIBUTING
$ 12,000 A YEAR IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE COURSE4 THE COLLEGE
HAS ACCEPTED THE DEPARTMENT'S SUGGESTION THAT, DEPENDING
ON THE NEEDS OF THE COLLEGE, PRIORITY WILL BE GIVEN TO
USING THE MONEY TO ENSURE AN ADEQUATE REPRESENTATION AT
COURSES BY OFFICERS FROM SMALLER AREAS; A GENERAL REDUCTION
IN THE COST OF THE COURSE WHERE PRACTICAL; AND PROVISION
OF FUNDS FOR VISITING LECTURERS OR RESEARCH ACTIVITIESX
ANY FUNDS ALLOCATED BY THE COLLEGE FOR . SCHOLARSHIP ATTENDANCE'
CERTAINLY YOU CAN RELY ON MY GOVERNMENT'S ACTIVE
E NCOURAGEMENT AND PRACTICAL SUPPORTt BUT WHAT I FIND TRULY
HEARTENING IS THAT THE INITIATIVE FOR THIS COURSE CAME FROM
LOCAL-GOVERNMENT ITSELF,, IT IS SYMBOLIC, PERHAPS, OF
NGATTHIOEN AL IMPORTANCE WE ATTACH TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT THAT
r: THE COURSE SHOULD BE PROVIDED HERE, IN THE NATIONAL CAPITALIT
SEEMS TO ME THAT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION ARE
UNIQUELY EQUIPPED, WITH THEIR MORE FEEXIBLE PROGRAMMING
ORRANTGOE MPERNOTVSID, E COURSES IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
E AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS NOW ASSUMED TOTAL FUNDING
RESPONSIBILITIES'FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, INCLUDING
POLYTECHNICSt THE GOVERNMENT'S FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION
IN THE 1973/ 75 TRIENNIUM IS MORE THAN $ 600 MILLIONg
SI / 8A 
4-8 WE I3ELIFVE THE COL. LEGES CAN WIDFll THE RA ' Y E OF
TERTIARY EDUCATION OPPORTUITIES1 " I ITH A STRONG
BIAS TOWARDS THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE
STUDIES UNDERTAKEN~ IN THE INTRODUCTION OF N EW
COURSES -OF WHICH THIS COURSE IS A GOOD E) XAMPLE-
' THE COLLEGES ANID STATE AND NATIONAL GOVERfl" 1F NT
-AUTHORITIES HAVE PLACED PROPER I~ PHASIS ON KNOWN
INDUISTRIAL AND SOCIAL NEEDS-I HOPE THAT THERE
1 11111 SOON BE COURSES AVAILABLE, NOT ONLY IN
UTI VR1fENTO EArN~ DE TA DMIINISTRATION
AT ALL LEVELSgt 
~ 71
~ j.
I. S..
1~ I' 12 I ii I? a .91-I, YOUR O11' 11 EXPERIENCE IN PUBLIC LIFE, NO LESS THAN
MINE, HAS SHOWN HOW INCREASINGLY COMPLEX, SOPHISTICATED
AND DIFFICULT THE PRACTICE OF GO\' ER[ IMET HAS BECOM1E IN MODERN
TIMESy, IN THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THIS COURSE WILL DO MUCH TO
REDUCE THOSE COMPLEXITIES AND REf--OVE THOSE DIFFICULTIES, IN
THE KNOWLEDGE THAT YOUR STUDIES WILL MAKE FOR MORE EXPERT
AND EFFICIENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR OUR PEOPLE, I HAVE GREAT
PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN THIS FIRST SENAOR M1ANAGEMENT PROGRANl
IN LOCAL GOVEN MIENT AT THE CANBERRA COLLEGE CF ADVAN4CED
EDUCATIONA
77' 



EMBARGO: 8.00 A. M.
PRESS STATEMENT NO.
March 1974
STATE VISIT TO AUSTRALIA BY PRESIDENT NYERERE OF THE UNITED
REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
At the invitation of the Governor-General, Sir Paul
Hasluck, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Mwamilu Julius Nyerere is to make a State Visit to Australia
later this month, during a tour of the Asian and Pacific Region.
Announcing this today, the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam,
said that President Nyerere would visit Canberra and Sydney from
19 March to 23 March.
Mr. Whitlam said that he looked forward to continuing
the fruitful discussions he had had with President Nyerere in
Ottawa at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting last
year. " President Myerere has indicated a particular interest
in various aspects of Australia's development which are of
relevance to Tanzania's own situation", Mr. Whitlam. said.
" These and other aspects of Australian life and
development will be covered in the intensive program which has
been arranged for him.
" I am sure that all Australians will warmly welcome
President Nyerere as a distinguished African and world leader.
We recall with admiration the unique role he has played in the
attainment of independence by his own country and his role in
Tanzania's subsequent development. His personal contribution
to the philosophy and practice of self-reliant development,
embodied in the ujama program of Tanzania, has been a source of
hope to many in the developing world.
The State Visit program of engagements will be announced
when details have been settled with the Tanzanian authorities". 



HN EWS RELEASIE
NQ DATE 6 March 1974
AUSTRAILIA AND ASI A : THE CHALLENGE OF EDUCATION
The following is the text of a speech by the
Prime Minister, The Hon. E. G. Whitlam, MV. P., to the
Asian Seminar during the Centenary Celebrations of the
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Tuesday 5 March, 1974:
" There is something profoundly satisfying, and
essentially contemporary in spirit, in the decision to hold an
Asian Seminar in conjunction with the centenary of this great
University. I can think of no more fitting demonstration of the
reality of your involvement, and Australia's involvement, in the
welfare of the countries of our region.
The origins of this University, like those of this
State, are of course rooted deeply in European culture and, more
particularly, in the customs and traditions of the great English
foundations of scholarship and learning. For that reason, yo-a'
emphasis on Asian education and culture, and Australia's links
with Asia, is striking proof of a modern and progressive interest
in our neighbours. For myself it is especially gratifying that
your seminar reflects two deep personal commitments of my own:
my commitment to education and my commitment to the progress and
development of our region.
During my recent visit to South-East Asia my aim was
to advance Australia's national interests in a region of
continuing and increasing importance to this country. I believe
I succeeded. I believe the confluence of history and geographyour
mainly European origins and our location on the edge of
South-East Asia affords us a unique opportunity to demonstrate
that countries with quite different ethnic, cultural and
religious backgrounds can evolve intimate and lasting relationships.
We have moved closer to Asia; we are involved in Asia 
2.
as never before. And we are particularly involved in the
education of Asian people. We provide funds for the expansion
of the teaching of Asian languages and cultures in Australia.
We provide travel grants to enable Australian teachers to visit
Asia. A month ago my colleague the Minister for Education went
to Bangkok to accept, on behalf of Australia, an invitation to
join SEAMEC, the South-East Asian Ministers of Education
Conference. Naturally our interest in the region extends beyond
cultural and educational matters, important as these are. We
give substantial economic aid to Asian development. I have
therefore chosen this occasion to announce that the Australian
Government will contribute $ 18,150,000 to the Asian Development
Fund. As many of you know, the Fund has been established within
the Asian Development Bank, and my colleague the Treasurer, in
his capacity as Governor of the Bank, was among those who
supported the creation of the Development Fund. Historians will
note, I trust, that Australia is one of the first countries to
announce its contribution. The beneficiaries of the Fund will
be the poorer developing member countries of the Asian and Pacific
region. There are many who suggest that the chief emphasis of
Government has been to promote a " new nationalism" in Australia.
It would, I think, be better and more accurate to describe our
policy as a new internationalism.
My principal purpose this morning is to tell you
something of Australia's contribution to Asian education,
particularly through the Colombo Plan.' In this room today there
is living, brilliant evidence of the success of that Plan and 4
of the contribution this university has made to its ideals and
objectives. I note,' among t he other participa nts of your
seminar, the Honourable Datuk Taib, Minister of Primary Industries
in Malaysia, a distinguished member of the South Australian bar
and a graduate of this university. I welcome Mr W. R. Crocker,
Lieutenant-Governor of South Australia, a former Australian
diplomat of great eminence and, again, a graduate of Adelaide
University. I pay tribute to Sir Percy Spender, former
President of the International Court of Justice, who, as a
Minister of the Australian Government, did much to develop and
-encourage the Colombo Plan in its early years. 
3.
Indeed,-looking at your list of speakers and chairman
both Asians and Australians I cannot recall a more distinguished
and representative assembly of men whose whole lives and careers
have been devoted to the cultural and educational advancement of
the Asian people. I welcome you all, and wish your seminar the
utmost success. The Australian Government attaches great importance to
its overseas aid activities. We regard the technical assistance and
training elements of that aid as most significant. We are now
establishing a new organisation, the Development Assistance Agency,
to administer all our aid programs, whether bilateral or
multilateral. We want to ensure that an innovative and imaginative
approach is adopted to foreign aid and to see that our aid programs
are quickly and effectively put into action. Our objective is not
only to increase the volume of Australian aid, but to improve the
quality of the assistance we are able to provide; to ensure that
it has a more direct bearing upon improving the quality of life in
developing countries.
Put simply, our aid is oriented to the needs of fellow
human beings. The training and education elements of aid programs
are the most direct means by which we can attain this orientation.
By building upon human skills and knowledge, we help to develop th-a
one essential, self-regenerating resource upon which social and
economic progress ultimately depends. Training and education
programs have properly been in the forefront since our official
overseas aid programs began in' 195l with the commencement of the
Colombo Plan. Australian assistance to education under the Colombo Plan
has been directed over the years into a range of activities designed
to meet various needs of the recipient countries. At present our
assistance covers training in Australian universities, Government
departments, educational institutions and industry; the sending of
experts and advisers to the developing countries to assist in
research, training and development; and the provision of equipment
for educational institutions in the developing countries themselves.
The number of awards financed each year under Australian
Government aid schemes for training and education in Australia has 
4.
grown impressively; from 450 in 1955 to 3,345 in 1973. In money
terms, annual expeinditure on education and training under the
Colombo Plan has increased in the last five years from $ 3.7 million
to $ 6.4 million. To this should be added substantial sums for
assisting educational institutions abroad. These figures can be
expected to grow, in keeping with the general growth of our aid
programs.. You will recall that the Government last year accepted
the United Nations target to raise its official development
assistance to 0.7 per cent of GNP by the end of the decade.
Perhaps I should point out that the Colombo Plan techniques
of providing training and technical assistance now extend beyond the
Colombo Plan area being covered by various programs of assistance to
countries in Africa and the South Pacific, including Papau New
Guinea. My-commaents today can be generally taken to include these
other programs.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING IN AUSTRALIA
Overseas students have made up a significant percentage of
full-time enrolments in Australian universities. In 1972 3492
overseas students from Asian, African and Pacific countries were
enrolled at universities. This represented 4.2 per cent of a total
full-time enrolment of 83,600. Australian Government-sponsored
overseas students enrolled at universities totalled 1,383 or 1.7
per cent of the full-time university enrolment.
Each year recipient Governments are invited to nominate
students for training in Australia. Levels and fields of study
are determined by the governments of the recipient country depending
. upon their own varying national needs. The only limitations imposed
by the Australian Government are concerned with the relevance of
the proposed training to the economic development of the nominating
country, the availability of the proposed training in the nominating
country, the adequacy of the qualifications of the nominee to
undertake the proposed training and the capacity of Australian
institutions to provide it. Members of the Colombo Plan have
agreed among themselves that training at technician level and below
should be provided only for highly specialised instruction for which
adequate facilities are unavailable within their own or neighbouring
countries. 
.4
Malaysia has been the largest recipient of Australian
Colombo Plan scholarships and fellowships, with some 2,300 awards
up to the end of last year. Then follows Indonesia, also with over
2,000 awards; India 1,300 and Thailand 1,200. Numbers however do
not tell the whole story, and the impact of Australian studies may
be relatively greater in some of the smaller recipient countries
than in the larger ones. The 56 Australian-trained students in the
Maldive Islands, or the 30 Bhutanese, contribute significantly
to the pooi of skills available in those countries, whereas our
much greater contribution to a country like India must remain
largely unseen. In all, over 13,000 Colombo Plan students and
trainees have trained in Australia since the commencement of the
Colombo Plan. Scholarships and fellowships have been provided for
secondary and undergraduate courses, post-graduate studies and
for academic work in research institutions. In the early days of
the Colombo Plan a high percentage of awards was taken up for these
formal courses. One interesting development, reflecting the
changing needs and priorities of the developing countries, is the
current trend towards short intensive courses outside the formal
educational institutions.
In 1972/ 73, the universities and technical colleges
accounted for only 31 per cent of the new intake of sponsored
students with 69 per cent undertaking non-formal types of training.
This was almost the exact opposite of the respective percentages
applying only five years earlier. I expect that this trend will
continue as the educational institutions within the developing
countries become more and more able to cope with their own needs,
particularly at the undergraduate and secondary schools level.
The practical courses of training to which I have just
referred are designed to meet the needs of individual students
and groups of students, and consequently follow varied patterns.
Training may consist of practical attachments in Government
departments and industry; international training courses in a
wide range of fields, mainly concerned with agriculture and food
production, administration and management, and professional and
scientific subjects; courses in the English language; and awards 
6.
to train people to manage and control projects being set up in their
homelands by Australia. Another means of help has been assistance
to Australian universities to establish courses especially designed
. to meet the needs of the developing countries, such as the
Agricultural Development Economics course at the Australian
National University.
Australian academics and universities have themselves made
a direct and valuable contribution to Australia's role in international
education, not only through their contributions to the
formulation of Aid policies, but also by direct participation in
the business of aid. The Australian-Asian Universities Co-operation
Scheme, administered through the Australian Vice-Chancellors'
Committee, provides for a direct association between Australian
universities and universities in Indonesia, Malaysia arnd Singapore.
To avoid the dissipation of resources the area of activities has
initially been confined to disciplines related to agriculture and
food production, with the future intention of extending into
population studies. The Scheme is financed from our aid funds.
I should now like to mention Australian assistance to
educational institutions in developing countries themselves, a
somewhat less well known feature of Australian aid than the training
provided in Australia.
Under the Colombo Plan we have already provided experts and
equipment to a number of countries. For instance, in Indonesia,
Australia is providing adv ice to the Ministry of Education and
Culture on the planning of vocational training programs and the
training of technical teachers and administrators. Experts have
been sent to the Jogjakarta Vocational Training Institute to advise
on curriculum and teacher training.
In Singapore, we are providing equipment and advice for
instruction and curriculum planning at the Jurong Vocational
Institute, and lecturers and examiners for medical degree
examinations at the University of Singapore. In Malaysia,
Australia has recently equipped a number of woodwork schools.
. In Thailand, we have provided lecturers for the Language
Institute, the North Bangkok Engineering School, and equipment for
the Mahidol University and the Bangkok Technical Institute. 
is*~ 7.
In Korea, we have been assisting with instructors and
equipment at a major Technical School for a number of years, at a
cost of over half a million dollars. In laos, we have provided
supplies for primary schools and are building a Forestry School,
as well as providing instructors for the Vientiane Teachers'
Training College. I consider initiatives such as these serve a good purpose
and, as I shall mention later, this is an area to which we should
divert increasing attention.
Another area for development is that of " third country"
awards, whereby Australia provides fellowships for students from a
developing country to study in another country in the Colombo Plan
region. Until recently, the number of awards of this type was very
small, but such training offers distinct advantages. We should
encourage it wherever appropriate. I have in mind educational
institutions such as the Regional English Language Centre in
Singapore, the Civil Aviation Training Centre, the Asian Institute
of Technology in Bangkok and the International Rice Research
Institute in Manila.
I know the overriding question in many minds is whether
our aid programs are working. Various studies of the results of our
educational programs have been made. These have not been
co-ordinated, nor are they by any means comprehensive; but they
have contributed to our knowledge and appreciation of the problems
involved. I have in mind the studies made by various research
scholars on the utilisation of Australian skills within the countries
of South and South-East Asia; the effects of their Australian
experience upon students' attitudes to their homelands, their
employment on their return and the problems of communication
experienced by the foreign student abroad.
Within the Government the Department of Foreign Affairs
has conducted for many years a follow-up evaluation covering
returned students. On the initiative of Australia, the Colombo
Plan Council for Technical Co-operation has now adopted a standard
form of evaluation questionnaire directed to the recipient
governments, to obtain their assessment of the results of training.
abroad. The Departments of Foreign Affairs, Immigration and 
Education have also been collaborating for the last two years with
* the Australian-National University in a study undertaken as a part
of a worldwide examination by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research ( UNITAR) of the effects of study abroad upon
the attitudes of foreign students, in relation to the problem of
the so-called " brain drain".
These studies are a necessary part of the process of review
and assessment. Inevitably, the 23 years of Colombo Plan activity
are not an unrelieved history of success. Aspects of the programs
have come in for criticism and it would be surprising if this were
not so.* Looking at our total educational assistance, both through
the Colombo Plan and. to private students, I have been concerned to
see an ethnic and economic imbalance. Our educational aid has gone
overwhelmingly to people of the Chinese race. Much as I respect and
admire such people, we have tended to help those whose economic
circumstances in many cases would have allowed them to help
themselves. A poor student is unlikely to be able to take advantage
of cdur educational opportunities no matter how brilliant
scholastically unless he succeeds in gaining his own Government's
Inomination for a Colombo Plan Scholarship. At the same time we have
been reluctant to apply a means test to the citizens of other
countries seeking to enter Australia for education, nor to apply
other discriminatory measures.
In considering how best to ensure that benefits are more
equally open to other ethnic groups and to those in greatest need,
I believe we should be providing greater assistance than at present
for the development of educational institutions in the developing
countries themselves. I recognise that there are difficulties.
The supply of teachers and lecturers able to undertake assignments*
abroad is not unlimited, The demands for staff arising from the
Government's educational policies within Australia cannot yet be
fully assessed. There are problems in the adaptation of Australian
teachers and lecturers to the curricula and methods of other
educational systems, to an alien cultural background, and often to
a foreign language. However these are problems which I believe
can be overcome with effective planning. I would see such expanded
progress abroad as complementing continuing programs in Australia. 
I also see value in extending the present system of Third
Country fellowships for regional education and training institutions.
We can provide training teams to conduct short courses within the
developing countries in fields of study where this type of assistance
can be effectively introduced. We will expand joint training courses
already offered in collaboration with the Government of New Zealand
and will investigate the possibilities of joint arrangements for
training abroad with international organisations such as the
World Bank. The Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Aid drew
attention to the need to direct our assistance away from the heavy
preponderance of private students pursuing undergraduate studies
in Australia. As I have explained earlier, this readjustment has
already occurred in the Colombo Plan. Within an officially
sponsored aid program, worked out between Governments, the level
of studies can be readily adjusted to the specific needs of each
country, at its particular stage of development.
It is far more difficult, however, to influence the
aspirations of private citizens in other countries whose sights are
set upon an academic career. As I found during my visit to Thailand,
the tradition of study abroad is well established. The Thai
Government and individual citizens attach great importance to the
opportunities we have offered to their young students and we must
take due account of their views.
-I turn now to the question of the return of students to
their homeland after their studies. The objectives of our sponsored
programs -the transfer of knowledge and training to the developing
countries -would be defeated if the skills acquired abroad were not
taken home by the student. This has been a matter to which Australia
and its Colombo Plan partners have always attached considerable
importance. Indeed it was on the Australian initiative that it was
made the subject of special study by the Colombo Plan Consultative
Committee in 1972. To limit a " brain drain", the Colombo Plan
Council for Technical Co-operation, which represents all donor and
all recipient governments, requires that every trainee under the
Colombo Plan shall return home on the completion of his training.
In addition, most home governments impose a money bond or a bond
of service on their trainees to encourage their return or compensate 
for the loss of their skills. This is a contract between the
recipient government and its own citizens in which the donor
government is not directly involved.
The same general arrangements apply in Australia to trainees
under other schemes for sponsored training, which extend the
Colombo Plan principle to other areas of the world.
Given these arr-angements the return of sponsored stude-nts
has not proved to be a problem. Less than 2 per cent of the total1
number of sponsored students remain in Australia, in most instances
because of the thoroughly laudable reason that they have married
Australians. Private students are in a different position. There are
at the moment approximately 10,000 private overseas students in
Australia and there have been about 40,000 in the period since 1950,
They are quite distinct from sponsored students, They have no
official backing from their own governments; they are enrolled by
direct personal application to Australian institutions; they
provide their own financ-ia. resources to travel to Australia and t,-o
maintain and educate themselves. Nevertheless, government subsidies
-to educational. institutions in respect of places occupied by private
ovecse: s students amoun-ted to about $ 9.5 million in 1972. My
Government's abolition of tertiary fees will considerably increase
indirect assistance to private students of this kind.
Private students have been coming to Australia since the
beginning of the century. The first arrangements for student entry
were made in 1904. Over the years many thousands of private Asian
students have studied in Australia and returned home to help in
the development of their countries.
Until 1973 the private overseas students program was
considered an adjunct to aid to developing countries. My
Government's objectives in reviewing the admission of private students
has been to place emphasis on good relations and cultural exchange.
Under our new policy private students continue to enter Australia on
a temporary basis; but if successful private students wish to remain
in Australia and can meet the normal migration criteria, the
Australian Government will no longer compel them to depart. As in
the past, I expect that most private students will continue to see 
their future in their own homelands. We have been inclined to
exaggerate -the attractions of Australia to the young people of other
countries. The ties of family and friends, their obligations to
their fellow countrymen and their own natural attachment to the land
of their birth will draw most of the students home when their studies
are completed. Some will wish to remain, including some whose skills
are also needed in their own countries.
In my recent Asian tour some coiuntries, notably Singapore,
expressed concern at the contributory effect this policy would have
on the " brain drain" and the loss of skilled personnel. I consider
the onus most properly lie on the home country to impose the
limitations and barriers or conditions that it considers necessary.
It must also bear the odium or responsibility of requiring its
students to return. I have agreed with the Prime Minister of
Singapore that in future all Singapore private students should be
officially sponsored by the Government of Singapore to ensure their
return to Singapore at the conclusion of their studies. There could
be cases where humanitarian considerations might require a depar-ture
from this principle. Mr Lee agreed that this could be so.
In looking at the results achieved by the Colombo Plan
in thp educational area, we have to remember that we are not
dealing only with statistics but with human beings. Not that the
statistics are unimpressi-ve. More than 13,000 sponsored students
have passed through the scheme up to the end of 1973. Sponsored
overseas students' results at the annual examinations of Australian
universities have been very satisfactory, with a pass rate of over
per cent in 1972 ( the last year for which figures are available).
That is a tribute to the care with which they were selected, their
personal efforts, and the assistance they received from their tutors
and mentors here. But impressive and important as these figures
are, they are less significant than the contributions that these
students have made to the economic and social development of their
countries and the effects that they have had upon our relationships
Viith their own governments and peoples.
We have trained under the Colombo Plan 1,800 engineers,
2,500 educationists, 900 agriculturalists, 900 medical and health 
workers, 550 nurses, and over 1, C00 public administrators. I can
list for you Members of Parliament, Governors of Provinces, Heads
of Departments, senior scientists, professors, and a host of senior
and middle administrators in Asian countries who have received their
education and training with us in Australia. These are facts. They
are a record of important achievement. But they are not the full
story. An equally important, less easily defined, achievement is
the growth of bonds between Australia and the developing countries,
a heightened level of understanding between us, and perhaps most
gratifying of all, a withering away of xenophobia, isolationism and
racism in Australia. I have no doubt that your seminar will make
its own important contribution to these great objectives of
enlightenment, tolerance and understanding."
r~ 12. 



Press Statement No. 197
7 March 1974
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY
International Women' s Day will be observed tomorrow.
It is an appropriate time for me to draw attention to the need
for continued efforts to remove discrimination against women.
It is a fundamental objective of the Government to ensure
respect for civil liberties and human rights and for that reason
the Government is committed to the promotion of ecsual rights
for women. Since coming to office, the Government has removed
discriminatory provisions against women employed in the Australian
Public Service and has extended eligibility for social security
benefits to many women formerly excluded on various discriminatory
grounds. The appointment of an adviser on women's affairs to my staff
also reflected the importance which the Government attaches to the
improvement of the status of women in Australia.
The Government is seeking the extension of the minimum
wage to adult female employees in the National Wage Case presently
before the Arbitration Commission.
I welcome the United Nations decision to designate 1975 as
International Women's Year in order to encourage equality of
opportunity for women and improve their status throughout the world.
The Government is preparing an official program for International
Women's Year. I pay tribute to the work of women's groups throughout
Australia in seeking to use * International Women's Day and International
Women's Year to draw attention to the achievement of women and the
need to raise their status of women in the community. / 2 
2
The Government will ratify the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights as well as the U. N.
Convention on the Political Rights of Women as soon as enabling
legislation has been passed. Ratification of these legal
instruments will be an important contribution to the enforcement
of human rights in Australia, including the rights of women.
Australia's ratification of the International Labour Organisation
Convention III on Discrimination ( Employment and Occupation) in
June 1973 highlighted the Government's adoption of a national
policy to eliminate discrimination in employment and occupation.
Committees have been established, in accordance with the Convention,
to work for the ending of all such discrimination. A community
education campaign will be launched soon to dramatize discriminatory
attitudes and practices in Australia. This action, while seeking
to ensure equality of opportunity in employment for d ll, wi-_]
be of special significance to women in the workforce.
C ANBERRA. A. C. T. 



,7
NQ DATE
M4/ 36 7 March 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA
The following is the text of a statement in
the House of Representatives by the Prime Minister,
The Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M4. P., Thursday 7 March 1974:-
Mr Speaker-In this, the first week of the new session of
Parliament, I wish to report to the House and to the Australian
people on my recent visit to South East Asia. I believe that
visit advanced Auistralia's national interests in a region of
c ontinuing and increasing importance to this country.
No one in this House would deny that Australia and the
countries of South East Asia share profolind and lasting common
interests. No one in this House would deny that the maintenance
of close relationships with these countries is one of several
important challenges facing Austra~ lian foreign policy. The
confluence of our history and geography our mainly European
origins and our location on the edge. of South East Asia
affords us a unique opportunity to demonstrate that countries
with different cultural, ethnic, social and religious backgrounds
can evolve intimate and lasting relationships. The Government
is determined to seize that opportunity and to ensure that
Australia is accepted as a good neighbour and a co-operative
and helpful. member of the Asian and Pacific region.
I visited lialaysia from 28 to 31 January, Thailand from
31 January to 4 February, Laos on 4 February, Burma from
4 to 6 February, Singapore from 6 to 9 February and the
Philippines from 10 to 13 February. I also paid a brief visit
to the Malaysian Air Force Base at Butterworth where our Mirage
squadrons are stationed and a brief private visit to
Kota Kinabalu at the invitation of an old friend, the former
Malaysian High Commissioner to Australia and Dean of the
Diplomatic Corps and present Governor of Sabah, Tan Sri Stephens.
-1 
I have now visited, in the 15 months since the
Government came into office, virtually all the major countries
in the Asian and Pacific region. No former Prime Minister has
done more. Visits by the Prime Minister and other ministers
symbolise the importance that the Australian Government attaches
to the countries visited. But there is more to it than that;
the results which will flow from my visit will, I believe,
advance our interests and involvement in this region to a new
level. I had four main objectives in undertaking this visit,
I believe I succeeded in fulfilling them.
My first and perhaps my principal objective was to
emphasise to leaders in South East Asia the continuing and
undiminished importance which my Government attaches to its
relations with the countries of South East Asia. I wanted to
explain to them that wha~ t had changed was not the degree of
Australian involvement in the region but the nature and
direction of that involvement. I wanted to make clear that
our emphasis had shifted from an involvement based mainly on
ideological considerations and military alliances to one based
c _, snore enduring ties such as trade, aid programs, regional
co-operation, ecornomic co-operation, and the development of a
network of cultural contacts and agreements.
My second objective was to establish or reinforce
personal contacts with South East Asian Heads of Government.
I was able to have very frank and detail ed talks with them,
My third objective was to outline to Government leaders
in the region the positive character of the Australian
Government's foreign policy and to dispel any misunderstandings
about it. My fourth objective was to seek practical and enduring
ways in which co-operation between Australia and the countries
of the region can be strengthened.
In all the countries I visited Australia has, and always
will have, an important influence. While our foreign policy
interests have been diversified and our horizons are now wider 
than the United States, the United Kingdom and South East Asiavie
no longer ignore, for example, the existence of Communist
Asia, including China with its 800,000,000 people the fact
remains that it is in our own immediate neighbourhood that we
are most likely to find an effective role for Australia. I
found that the new friendships which we have developed with
countries like China and North Viet-Nlam have in no way diminished
our traditional friendships with the countries I visited. If
anything, they have enhanced our standing in them and increased
their interest in us.
Foreign policy cannot be created in a vacuum. It must
grow out of national aspirations and patterns of events in our
environment. We need to take account of the evolving Great
Power relaticnships. In the sixties the main thrust of
United States policy in this area was the containment of China
by military involvement in Viet-Nam. But the United States has
itself opened up new opportunities by abandoning these policies;
itv no longer looks to Australia to provide a mere supporting
echo of policies which it has itself progressively abandoned.
As Dr Kissing-er, the most realistic and pragmatic
necotiator to fill the office of Secretary of State, has shown,
initiatives in foreign affairs open up new possibilities for
progress and understanding. Such initiatives will not always
produce predictable or entirely desirable results, but log-jams
are broken, stale habits of mind are abandoned, and movement is
often pre ferable to a dogged perseverance with an outmoded
status quo. Like most of the leaders I met, I believe that detente
between the Great Powers must be made to work. The journey down
this road has begun. It wil~ l not be smooth. Peace and security
do not come simply because we wish them to come. But diplomacy
must be based on realistic hopes rather than on resignation and
despair. It was in this spirit that I went to South East Asia.
And it was this spirit which evoked such a warm response. I
recall, in particular, the remarks by the Prime Minister of
Singapore at a dinner he gave for my delegation. I shall seek
leave to table the text of that speech, and all other p~ incipal
speeches during my visit, later this evening. 
TRADE AND ECONOMIC LINKS
I turn now to trade. I believe that increasingly our
foreign policy in South East Asia will be related to our efforts
to develop mutually advantageous trade. In each country I
visited I expected, and found, keen interest in closer trading
and economic links with Australia.
Australia has long established and valued trading ties
with all the countries I visited0 Last year we had a favourable
trade balance of $ 225 million with these countries and we
expect this favourable balance to increase in the short term.
Our exports last year to these countries totalled $ 318 million,
of which over 40% were manufacturers; our imports from them
were $ 93 million. It can be seen that this situation, while
advantageous to us now, could generate friction if neglected.
So in each country I made a point of explaining the 25% tariff
cut made by the Government in July last year and the greatly
expanded scheme of tariff preferences for developing countries
which came into force on 1 January. I told them of the special
s ervice which has been established in the Department of Overseas
Trade to help developing countries in market research and
-om-inercial contacts. I arranged for experts from Australia.
to visit all the countries on my itinerary, as well as Indorñ-sit,
in March and April. This will ensure that new preferences and
trading opportunities are understood and that the countries
concerned can take full advantage of them. These experts will
also visit a number of other developing countries later in the
year. I elaborated on the statement on Australian investment
policy which the Government issued on 22 January** I emphasised
that, for the first time, an Australian Government had adopted.
a co-operative and creative role in encouraging Australian
investment overseas, particularly in South East Asia. I made
it clear that such investment must accord with the social and
economic objectives of the host country and be consistent with
progressive labour relations and local environmental policies.
I was also able to point to the expansion of the EPIC
investment insurance facilities and the creation of two
separate funds, one of $ 250,000 a year and one of $ 100,000
a year, to promote respectively, investment feasibility studies 
overseas by. Australian manufacturers and investment awareness
wi* thin Australia. All these policies and initiatives were warmly welcomed.
I believe the ground is now laid for increased Australian
investment in South East Asia. The obvious link between trade
and investment and the general acceptance of Australia as a
source of investment was widely recognised.
We have reached understandings that our trade agreements
with Malaysia and the Philippines will be updated and that new
Trade Agreements with Thailand and Laos will be negotiated0
A feature of such agreements will be the establishment of mixed
commissions of Australian businessmen and officialsp who will
meet their counterparts -in the other countries on a regular
basis to examine the practical problems of two-way trade and to
seek their prompt resolution.
I also took the opportunity to stress the desirability,
wherever practicable, of securing access to markets over a
long term for the products of Australia's rural industries.
Since my visit, the parties directly concerned have met to
explore the possibility of long term contracts for the export
~ fsubstantially increased quantities of wheat and sugar to
Malaysia. An inquiry for 500,000 tons of coal from Thailand
is under consideraticn and export approval has been given by
the Australian Government for 1509000 tons of coal to Burma.
A number of countries I visited inquired about products essential
to their economic development, including nitrogenous fertilisers,
steel and engineering products. These are being dealt with as
a matter of urgency. An Australian investment of over $ 4 million
in the forging industry in the Philippines was approved within a
few days of my raising this question with President Marcos. In
Thailand our offer tc assist with the establishment and training
of their Trade Cominissicner Service . was accepted and the initial
moves are already under way. We are also examining, as a matter
of urgency, requests received during my visit for extensions to
our scheme of tariff preference for developing countries.
All of this provides a practical illustration of our
present objective of securing a thriving and well-rounded 
6.
commercial relationship with the countries of South East As ia.
The* Government's decision last October to respond positively
and constructively to interest in the ASEAN countries in
Australian co-operation with agreed ASEAN projects was also
well received in the ASEAN capitals I visited. In fact, all
our policies and initiatives in trade were accepted as evidence
of our strong continuing involvement in South East Asia and
our willingness to assist our Asian neighbours in genuinely
constructive ways.
DEFENCE During my visit I stressed on a number of occasions
that although the emphasis of our policy is-changing we still
retain important defence interests in South East Asia.
We no longer look on the countries of South East Asia as
buffer states or as some northern military line where a possible
future enemy should be held. Rather, we look upon them as
countries having a conmon Interest with Australia and New Zealand
in consolidating the security and stability of the region as a
whole. I made it clear to representatives of the L~ ao Patriotic
Forces in Vientiane that Australia was concerned that all foreign
countries withdraw their forces from L~ aos. I also expressed the
hope that the Great Powers would cease supplying arms to North
and South Viet-Nam. I said so i~ n the firm belief, which I have
expressed before, that the dpportunities which were lost after
the signing of the Geneva Accords of 1954 should not be lost
again. The pr6spects for reconciliation and for the-formation
of genuinely national governments in the countries of Indo-China
would be greatly enhanced if external interference of all kinds
could cease. We have pledged that the terms of the Five Power
Arrangements will be honQured in full until a more enduring
settlement is reached in establ~ ishing the peace, freedom and
neutrality of the region. Our defence co-operation programs with
countries like Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia will be
maintained. I also indicated that Australia's Mirage squadrons
would remain at Butterworth as long as they are relevant to 
7,
the needs of both our nations and the realities of the region
and that, as previously announced, this question would be
reviewed, as appropriate by the two Governments.
It has been suggested that because I believe our
interest in this region have in the past been seen-excessively
in terms of Defence, Australia is in some way drifting towards
isolationism. I repeat categorically what I said several time s
in South East Asia: Isolationism is not a policy option for
Australia. It is precisely because I thought that we were
isolating ourselves from a quarter of the world's population in
China, and to some extent, from Black Africa and Europe east of
the Elbe, that I have stressed since December 1972, the
Government's wish to diversify its foreign policy interests.
In fact, in both action and philosophy, I believe that my
Government is the most genuinely internationalist government
Australia has had.
RACE, CUTUTRE AITD . IMIGRAT ION
The Government's attempts to rid Australia of any
lingering racist image are very warmly welcomed in South East
Asia. They are especially welcomed in Singapore and the
Prillippines. Race is a transcending international and moral issue.
I am not prepared to allow the bridges that have been built to
the countries of Asia, and which are currently being widened and
strengthened by the Government's policies, to be undermined by
stigma of racism. The Minister for Immigration and his Department
are working -to ensure that there are no gaps between our
enunciated principles and our administrative practices. As I
said in Manila, we want no double standards in this matter.
I was particularly concerned in Manila to explain to
President Marcos the Government's uncompromising opposition to
racism in all its forms and to assure him that our immigration
policy is non-discriminatory. I was able to announce that the
Government had given its agreement in principle to the entry of
Philippine skilled workers for the L~ eyland Factory in Sydney.
A team is to go to Manila next week to help select the
immigrants who will come to Australia. U, 
.1 .7. XZU-. iZ.. 4~ z. L L. flL.. C.. L4A..-J
8.
The Government's wish to negotiate cultural agreements with
M~ alaysia, Thailand, Singapore and the Philippines evoked a warm
response. As a result of my visit we have undertaken to double the
number of cultural agreements we now have. We already have such an
agreement with Indonesia. The new agreements will mean that we
shall have cultural agreements with all members of ASEAN. This is
a manifestation of the importance the Government attaches to
promoting a distinctively Australian culture and excellence in
the arts generally. It acknowledges that we have much to gain
from the rich and ancient cultures of our Asian neighbours.
CONTACTS WITH YOUTH
During my visit I sought, with members of my party, to
establish contacts with student and youth leaders. I visited the
University of Singapore, Nanyang University and the University of
the Philippines, at which I delivered a major speech. In Thailand
a senior Foreign Affairs official accompanying me and two members
of jny personal staff spent fLive hours in discussions with Thai
student leaders, These contacts, unprecedented in a visit of this
kind, were of value to both sides.
DISCUSSIONS The discussions I had were, of course, confidential and
lasted many hours, It would be impossible to summnarise them all
in detail. The roles of the great Powers The United States,
the Soviet Union, China and Japan in the Asian region were
discussed in each capital. I discussed my own visits to China and
Japan and economic problems in the region, including the effect of
the oil shortage and the energy crisis.
I discussed the situation in Indo-China and general questions
of security and stability in South East Asia. I found these
discussions in total educative, valuable and of great interest.
In Mvalaysia, Thailand, Singapore and the Philippines there was an
acknowledgement that the normalisation cf relations between China
and the countries of South East Asia is inevitable. Burma and Laos
already have diplomatic relations with China. In the other countries
the issue is not one of principle but of timing. 
9.
Another common theme was regional co-operation. The
ASEAN countries naturally attach priority to the consolidation of
ASEAN, an organisation which Australia does not seek to join but
which has our wholehearted support. I was encouraged, however, to
find a widespread interest in the idea of a future wider regional
association in which the countries of Asia and the Pacific could
meet at a high level for informal discussions, much in the manner
in which Commonwealth Heads of Government meet. The Philippines,
in particular, fully agrees with this concept and President Marcos
has advanced almost identical proposals.
STUDENTS I had the opportunity during the visit to discuss with a
number of countries in the region their concern over students.
The countries I visited in particular Malaysia, Thailand and
Singapore continue to place importance on the opportunities
for their studernts to study JIn Australia. The sponsored student
programs, that is, the Colombo Plan and other official programs
in the main run smoothly and successfully. There are no
difficulties in this area. There have been some difficulties,
hi_,-ever, with private students in Thailand over the English test,
whichn is a pre-requisite to entry for study, and the level of entry
for their students. I have agreed to look into these problems and
the Departments concerned are at present conducting a review of
policy with a view to resolving them. The Ministers for Education
and Immigration have also had discussions with the Thai authorities
on this matter.,
In Singapore there were discussions on the return of private
students and the so-called brain drain. Under our non-discriminatory
immigration policy, private students enter Australia on the
understanding that they will return home. However, if they can
meet migration criteria they are allowed to remain in Australia.
The Singapore Government was perturbed about this and have now
decided to sponsor officially all private students coming to
Australia. Sponsored students have always been required to return
to their home country on completion of their studies and this has
been at the express insistence of their home governments. 
I want to make it clear that if any student from Singapore is to
be sent home, it will be as the result off his sponsorship by the
Singapore Government and not as the result of a decision taken on
its own account by the Australian Government. Mr Lee also raised
the question of students already in Australia and I have agreed to
look into this.
AID I did not see my visit as an occasion for new aid commitments.
I believe that visits by the Prime Minister and Ministers to
neighbouring South East Asian countries should be seen as part of
a regular pattern of visits and not necessarily as occasions for
important new aid agreements.
Naturally, however, bilateral aid programs were discussed in
each capital. In Kuala Lumpur I undertook to study Malaysian
requests for assistance in preparing a feas6ibility study on the
development of the Trengganu River Basin and on the development
of the proposed Kuantan industrial area. In Vientiane I undertook
* that the Government would consider assisting that city in its
proposed expansion of its city water supply. I stressed to the
Prime Minister of Laos and the leaders of the Lao Patriotic Forces
that Australia would do all it could to help in the postwar
* rehabilitation of Laos. In Bangkok I announced that Australia
* would support the Pioneer Medical Volunteers Program of the
Princess Mother. We will provide ambulances and radio transceivers
fo r the pilot project. In the Philippines I was glad to announce
that the Australian Government had agreed to enter a joint aid
project with the Philippines Government for the construction of
roads and related irrigation and agricultural development in
Zamboanga Del Suir. This is a large project which will cost the
Australian Government approximately S2 million a year for each of
the next five years.
I take this opportunity of informing the House that the
Australian Government has decided to contribute $ 18,150,000 to the
Asian Development Fund. This decision, following as it does on
our decision to join the Ministerial Conference for the Economic
Development of South East Asia and the South East Asian Ministers cof
Education Organisation, and our decision to help finance a greed ASE.---
projects, is a further manifestation of the Government's growing
interest in the well-being of the South East Asian region. 
S-a -2rlxAw a. it 11.
I mentioned during my visit the possibility of sending
Australian staff and other forms of assistance to Asian educational I
institutions. This would ease the demand for places in Australian
universities. I expect it to become a more significant part of oix-r
aid programs. It would not, however, mean that we would be
unwilling to continue to assist in training the students and
officials who come to us under the Colombo Plan and other aid
schemes. The presence of overseas students in our educational
institutions and in our whole society is a valuable means of
furthering understanding between Australia and Asia. This view
was also put to me by the Prime Minister of Singapore and the
Prime Minister of Thailand.
I believe that during my visit I was able to affirm
Australia's genuine, continuing and growing interest in South East
Asia. I was gratified that the leaders with whom I spoke and their
statements were reflected in the press of the countries I visited
saw fit to praise Australia and the Government's policies in terms
that went beyond the normal requirements of courtesy to a visiting
Head of Government. I believe Australia walks taller and stands in
higher regard in South East Asia than ever before. Our policies
are understood. Our continuing and growing interest in the regio"
is accepted and appreciated. As one leading South East Asian
statesman said to me, our present policies are " approved and
applauded". I believe we are rightly regarded in South East Asia
as a genuine and trusted friend.
( I seek leave to table the six main speeches I made during
the visit and the main speeches made by the six heads of Government
of the countries visited).' 



SPEECHI BY THE PRI IE MINISTER, [ iR. E. G. WIPITLA:!,
AT THE OPENING OF THE KAISER STUHL ' IIERY CIATEAU, ' URIOPTA
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, FRIflAY 9 11ARCi 1974
JNE OF THE MOST NOTICEABLE CHANGES IN AUSTRALIAN
LIVING IN THE LAST DECADE OR SO HAS 3EEN THE GREAT AND
GROWING POPULARITY OF WINE. IT HAS COME HAND-IN-HAND
WITH A TRANSFORMATION OF OUR EATING HABITS. ARE NO
LONGER A NATION OF PEOPLE WHO EAT STEAK, EGGS AND CHIPS,
WASHED DOWN WITH BEER. MANY AUSTRALIANS ARE NOW AS
LIKELY TO BE FOUND EATING VEAL MARSALA, ACCOMPANIED BY
A RIESLING, OR BOEUF AU POIVRE WITH A BOTTLE OF CABERNET
SHIRAZ. IT IS ONE OF THE SMALL DISADVANTAGES OF MY
DUTIES THAT I AM NOT ABLE TO SHARE THE FULL FRUITS OF
THIS TRANSFORMATION, A SYBARITIC LIFE, IT SEEMS, IS NOT
POSSIBLE FOR THOSE IN HIGH OFFICE.
IT IS FITTING IN THE IAROSSA VALLEY TO PAY TRIBUTE
TO THE TWO QUITE DISTINCT GENERATIONS OF NEW SETTLERS WHO
HAVE PLAYED SUCH AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THIS DEVELOPMENT.
GERMAN REFUGEES ESCAPING FROM RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION
FOUNDED THE FIRST PROFITABLE WINERIES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
AND THEIR DESCENDENTS HAVE CONTINUED AND EXPANDED THEIR
ACTIVITIES SINCE THEN. THE NAME KAISER STUHliL ALONE
SYMBOLISES THE EFFORTS OF THE MIGRANTS FROM PRUSSIA AND
SILESIA WHO WERE THE FIRST SETTLERS IN THIS VALLEY IN 1842. 
IT WAS A LATER GENERATION OF MIGRANTS WHO DID SO MUCH
TO MAKE AUSTRALIANS APPRECIATE THEIR OWN WINES.
SOME OF THOSE MIGRANTS, TOO, WERE ESCAPING RELIGIOUS
PERSECUTION INDEED, THE MOST FEARSOME PERSECUTION THE
WORLD HAS EVER SEEN, OTHERS WERE SEEKING A NEW LIFE
AFTER THE RAVAGES OF WORLD WAR I. THEY BROUGHT WITH
THEM A NEW AND DIVERSE STYLE OF LIVING WHICH HAS CHANGED
IRREVOCAIBLY THE HABITS OF ALL AUSTRALIANS.
THIE CURRENT SOOM IN WINE, W,-IHICH IS ONE OF THE
BENEFITS OF THE INFLUENCE OF THESE TWO SEPARATE
GENERATIONS, FOLLOWS A LONG PUT UNCERTAIN HISTORY FOR
THE INDUSTRY. THE FIRST FEEBLE VINEYARD IN AUSTRALIA
WAS PLANTED BY CAPTAIN ARTHUR PHILLIP SOON AFTER THE
ARRIVAL OF THE FIRST FLEET IN 1788, IT WAS NOT UNTIL
YEARS AFTER THIS INITIAL FAILURE THAT GREGORY PLAXLAND
PRODUCED A VINTAGE AND SHIPPED A 30 GALLON CASK OF h4INE
TO LONDON. IN THE ENSUING FEW YEARS WINE MAKING WAS
CARRIED ON BY OTHER SETTLERS. ONE WRITER HAS, HOWEVER,
REMARKED THAT IN THOSE VERY EARLY DAYS VITICULTURE AND
WINE MAKING 1WERE EXCLUSIVELY THE HOBBY OF LANDED,
EDUCATED ENGLISH COLONISTS WHO HAD ACQUIRED A TASTE FOR
WINE OF THE CONTINENTAL STYLES':, :' PRODABLY THE WINE THEY
MADE WAS POOR STUFF,' THE WRITER HAS REMARKED RATHER
GRUFFLY, NEVERTHELESS, THE INDUSTRY GRADUALLY SPREAD
IN NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA, WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, 
Tin LSTH CENTURY HAD NOT ENDED, HOW'. EVER, BEFORE
THE INDUJSTRYI STRUCK PRODLEMS. ITS REPUTATION SUJFFERED
GREAT DAMAGE BECAUSE OF THE BOOM IN CHEAP, FORTIFIED WINES
ON THE GOLD DIGGINGS. THEN THE WINE DISEASE, PHYLLOXERA
VASTATRIX, SPREAD THROUGHOUJT VICTORIA AND PARTS OF NEW
SOUTH WALES. LIE SECOND PROBLEM WAS SOLVED. THE FIRST
CONTINUED, IN DIFFERENT FORMS, FOR SOME TIME. TIE LACK
OF PROPER EXPORT QUJALITY CONTROLS AND ' BAD BLENDING WITH
INFERIOR WINE FROM OTHER PARTS OF THE THEN EMPIRE GREATLY
HARMED THE REPUTATION OF AUSTRALIAN WINE. IRONICALLY, IT
WAS THlE SECOND WORLD WAR NHICH GAVE NEW nEART TO OUR
WINEMAKERS. THE SHORTAGE OF OTHER LIQUOR LED TO AN
ALMOST THREE-FOLD INCREASE IN THE DOMESTIC CONSUMPTION
OF WINE. THE REAL BREAKTHROUGH, HOWEVER, CAME IN THE
1950S AND 1960lS. A. T LONG LAST AUSTRALIAN WINES WERE
ACCEPTED BY A GROW1ING NUM' 3ER OF AUSTRALIANS FOR THEIR TRUE
WORTH. AUSTRALIANS ARE NOW DRINKING MORE THAN TWO GALLONS
OF WINE PER HEAD EVERY YEAR, THE INDUSTRY HAS BEEN OF
PARTICULAR IMPORTANCE TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA. MORE THAN
TWO-THIRDS OF ALL AUSTRALIAN WINE IS GROWN IN THIS STATE
AND THIS HAS BEEN A SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN THE ECONOMY OF
A NUJMBER OF REGIONS, SUCH AS THIS AREA.
-j-
WHILE THE INDUSTRY IS GENERALLY BUOYANT AT PRESENT,
THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THAT SOME PROBLEMS DO EXIST.
A TARIFF B3OARD REPORT ON BRANDY IN AUGUST LAST YEAR DREW
ATTENTION TO THE PROBLEM OF THE OVER-SUPPLY OF BRANDY,
TO WHICH MANY GROWERS LOOK AS A MEANS OF USING SURPLUS
GRAPES. THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR WRIEDT,
AND THE MINISTER FOR SECONDARY INDUSTRY, MR. ENDERBY, HAVE
ESTABLISHED A BODY TO REPORT TO THEM ON THE MEANS OF
ABSORBING GRAPE SURPLUSES ARISING E2EFORE ANY LONGER TERM
RESTRUCTURING OR ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMS CAN BE IMPLEMENTED.
WE EXPECT TO BE ABLE TO CONSIDER THIS REPORT VERY SOON.
IN DEALING WITH THOSE AND ANY OTHER PROBLEMS WHICH MIGHT
EXIST IN THE INDUSTRY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE GUIDED BY
THE PRINCV'-LE IT WISHES TO APPLY TO ALL PRIMARY INDUSTRIES:
THAT THEY BE SELF-SUJFFICIENT, PROSPEROUS AND EFFICIENT.
AGAINST THE GENERAL BACKGROUND WHICH I HAVE DESCRIBED,
THE BAROSSA CO-OPERATIVE WINERY LIMITED HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
SUCCESS STORIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN WINE INDUSTRY. IT CAME
INTO BEING IN 1931 WNHEN THE GROWERS IN THE VALLEY POOLED
THEIR RESOURCES TO MAKE W INE DURING THE DEPRESSION. SINCE
1953, WHEN THE KAISER STIJllL LABEL NAMED AFTER THE FLAT--
TOPPED HILL OVERLOOKING THE BAROSSA V! ALLEY WAS FIRST
USED, THE CO-OPERATIVE HAS PURSUED A VIGOROUS MARKETING
POLICY. IN ADDITION TO QUALITY BOTTLES OF WINE, IT HAS
SUCCESSFULLY MARKETED FLAGON AND OTHER POPULAR WINES. 
ONE OF ITS MOST ENCOURAGING ENDEAVOURS HAS BEEN IN
THE FIELD OF EXPORTS, LIE CO-OPERATIVE HAS A FULLTIME
EXPORT MARKETING DIRECTOR AND IS, I UNDERSTAND, NOW THE
LEADING EXPORTER OF AUSTRALIAN WIPES TO THE UNITED STATES
AND JAPAN, ITS WINES ' 30 TO MORE THAN 20 OVERSEAS MARKETS.
~ JUSTIFIABLY IT WAS ANARDED A NATIONAL EXPORT A\ WARD FOR
OUTSTANDING EXPORT ACHIEVEMENT IN 1973. 1 HOPE THAT ITS
WORK IN THIS FIELD IS TAKEN AS A LEAD BY OTHER AUSTRALIAN
WINEMAKERS. CERTAINLY THE AUJSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY
INDUSTRY AND TUlE DEPARTMENT OF OVERSEAS TRADE STAND READY
TO ASSIST IN ANY W~ ORTHWHILE ATTEMPTS TO EXPAND OUR OVERSEAS
MARKETS. ON A PERSONAL NOTE, I AM ALSO DELIGHTED AT ANOTHER
INNOVATION OF THE CO-OPERATIVE. YOU HAVE INVITED ME TO
BE THE FIRST MEMBER OF " CLU3 13" WHICH WILL ENABLE SELECTED
WINES TO BE LAID DOWN IN THE KAISER STUML CELLARS FOR
NOMINATED PERSONS. I HAVE HAPPILY NOMINATED MY GRANDSON,
ALEXANDER, TO BE THE RECIPIENT OF SOME PORT WHEN HE REACHES
HIS 13TH BIRTHDAY. THIS W'ILL SERVE AS A MATURED MEMORY OF
THE OPENING OF THE NEW KAISER STUHL WINERY CHATEAU D3Y ME
TODAY. 


AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS
The Visual Arts Board of the Australian Council&nbsp;for the Arts has embarked on an imaginative project&nbsp;known as " Art in Public". The Board believes it has a&nbsp;responsibility to provide works of art in areas that are&nbsp;culturally underprivileged. It wants these works to&nbsp;be in public places where people will see and enjoy them.&nbsp;
I am happy to announce that I have approved the&nbsp;first three projects for the " Art in Public" program.
The first of them will be in Adelaide. The Board&nbsp;will be granted $ 15,000 to commission a major piece of&nbsp;sculpture at the Regency Park Centre for Crippled Children,Adelaide. The sculpture will become an important part&nbsp;of the children's environment.
The Board will also be granted $ 10,000 towards the&nbsp;cost of erecting a fountain designed by Mr. Robert Woodward&nbsp;( the creator of the El Alamein Fountain in Kings Cross)&nbsp;at the intersection of River and Northwood Road, Lane Cove,&nbsp;and $ 5,000 for a sculpture to be placed in the&nbsp;garden surrounding the Preston City Library, Melbourne.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.


The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced&nbsp;that he had sent references to the Temporary Assistance&nbsp;Authority and the Industries Assistance Commission on the&nbsp;questions of temporary and long-term assistance for the&nbsp;Australian industry producing mushrooms and prepared or&nbsp;preserved mushrooms.
Mr. Whitlam said that both the Minister for&nbsp;Primary Industry and he had received representations&nbsp;from and on behalf of the Australian mushroom growing&nbsp;industry and after considering a report prepared by the&nbsp;Department of Primary Industry he had reached the conclusion&nbsp;that prima facie cases for the references had been&nbsp;established by the industry.
Mr. Whitlam made the point that the reference to&nbsp;the Temporary Assistance Authority was the first to be&nbsp;sent under the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973.&nbsp;Under the Act the Authority is required to report to the&nbsp;Government on the question of temporary assistance no&nbsp;later than thirty days from the date of the reference.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



R; SA 17 LiV~~ GC: 7.3' . M
March 1974
NATIONAL BROADCAST
Good evening. I want to talk to you tonight about some basic issues
of democracy, about your fundamental rights as citizens in a free
society. At the Senate elections later this year the Government
will be putting several referendums to the electors. By voting
YES in those referendums you will be doing two things: you will
be giving a new deal to local government, to the local councils
that provide many of our essential services; and you will be CfaI
Aeussttarballiisahnisn, g tfhoer tbhaes icf irdsetm octrimaet, i c anrdi ghftosr oafl l Autsitmer. a lians. All Z
There is no principle more basic to democracy than
that all people should be equal in their rights and freedomsI.
We hear a great deal about gerrymianders in Australia, about
politicians rigging the electoral system to suit their own 6--
interests. And it's unfortunately true that there have been
many examples of this practice in our history. Fo r decades
* in every State there have been wrangling and debate on this
Wquestion. And it's not just the Labor Party that complains;
the electoral laws in Queensland where the Government is dominated
by the Country Party are directed just as much against the Liberals
as they are against Labor. In every State, one party or another
is usually complaining about bias in the electoral system.
The reason for all this wrangling the reason whyv.
politicians can gerrymander electorates for their own purposes
is that there is nothing in the Constitution to stop h.
There is nothinq in the Constitution to guarantee
Parliaments must be elected directly and democratically by the
people. There is nothing to guarantee equal voting rights
for all Australians. So the Government has decided, by means
of these referendums, to allow the people to establish these ktt~ t
rights once and for all. 4
A-
7 ljf. g 
-2-
t I~~ prseut.. J n in every mainland
State Parliament, 1 Le : cL c~ -41i. par to gain
a majority of seats even if, after the distribution of preferc-nc
I it has gained much less than a majority of' votes. In every i-ousce
there are cases where some clectoratces cont-ain more than twice as
many pcople as other electorates. That's not democracy; its; nct.
justice. FThere is one House of Parliament -the Legislative
Council of New South Wales that is not elected by the people
at all; its elected by the politicians, some of them about to
retire. And country people suffer as well. as city people.
In Western Australia there are more people in the Pilbara
electorate than there are in any other electorate except one.
In the same way, votes inMount Isa are worth less than votes
Xn Brisbane. So it goes on. To use a good Australian phrase,
the system is crook. It's time we did something about it.
My Government tried to remedy this situation last
year, when we introduced amendments to the electoral laws that
would have made the size of electorates in the national
Parliament pretty much the same; much closer to the ideal
* of equality. The Senate twice rejected our legislation.
SQ we have now resolved to let the people decide this q. uestion.
If our referendums are carried it will mean that every Australian
Parliament State or Federal will be * elected directly by the
people, ahd that in each House-of Parliament any electorate will
have, as nearly as practicable, the same number of people as any
other electorate. We put this emphasis on people because registered
voters are not the only individuals who matter in a democracy;
they are not the only ones whose interests are represented ina
* Parliament. Children have no vote, but children matter;
unnaturalised migrants have no vote, but their interests matter;
many Aborigines choose not to enrol, but their rights and
welfare are important. We belie~ re that in a truly democratic
system all people matter and all people must be treated as
equal. That's the view taken by that great instrument of
democracy the United States Supreme Court. For the past ten
years, the court has ruled that any inequality in the population
of electorates in the Congress-or in the State legislatures is
unconstitutional. In Australia any elector will have tho right
to approach the High Court for a decision on any of ti: c
electoral matters. And let me remind you of this: this
particular proposal will come into operation in July 1976. That
Is, it will be the next House of Representatives and the next
State Parliament which will in each case have to comply with
this new safeguard. 
I
I -3-
4v wp'+ to ensure tha-c. 17--ions for the House
of Representatives and the Senate are neid at the same time-
Ji not just when'it suits the Government to hold them toget'her,
but always, In the eleven y'ears from 1961 to 1972 we had eighnt
national elections. That's too many it's inconvenient for
th1e people, it's bad for the working of Parliamenti and it's
too costly. The simple proposition is that elections for t * he
national Parliament should normally be held every three years
aorfni dg hatnasyl waoSyres n aatufotorrh orwbihototy h tooHfoo ku seeiostf hfeitrco eg eHtotuhhserere;. e yenToharir ss wiawlgolon ' toi rt awfsifhleolcr tt entt ahekth* ee--tem
office this year. this safeguard will come into operation
at the House of Representatives elections after next.
Furthermore, we are asking you to approve a proposal
that will make it easier to amend the Constitution in ways that
the majority of the electors approve.. Instead of requiring a
majority of voters in four States to approve a change in the
Constitution, it will be sufficient to have a majority , in
three States provided there is a majority of all the
Australian electors including Territory electors. I remind
you that that change was recommended as far back as 1958 by the
Constitutional Review Committee established by Sir Robert Menzies.
The same committee endorsed the proposal for simultaneous
elections of both Houses of Parliament. They are sensible'
proposals. Let's do something about them.
, Finally, we are asking you to give a new deal to19w
local government. For generations now, local councils have
sleawcekreadg et, h e defciennatn cicaolm murneistoyu rcheesa lttho psreorvviidcee s, b etctheirl d rocaadrse, cebnettr esi* T
and facilities for sport and recreation. These services are
best provided by local authorities, but the Constitution makes
no mention of local government. By agreeing to our
referendum, you will enable the national Government to borrow
money for local. authorities if they wish and top up their
revenuesif they wish. In this way the national Government will
be able to have direct financial dealings with local government
bodies in helping them to do the job for which they were elected.
I know this adds up to a long list of proposals, but
we would not be putting them to you unless we were convinced
of their urgency and importance. Our opponents have not only
resisted our reforms; they have done their best to preveait
you, the people, from deciding these questions for yourselves.
I ask you to keep in mind the basic principle enshrined in
our proposals; their candid and honourable purpose. They go"
beyond party politics to elementary rules of right and justice.
We seek an end to all gerrymanders, by any party, by all
politicians, for all time. I believe deeply, from life-long
conviction, that these reforms will make Australia a more just'
and dbmocratic nation a model of democracy in the eyes of our
neighbours and the world. Goodnight. 



NEWS RELEASE
NQ DATE
M/ 38 11 March 1974
APPOINTMENT OF AMBASSAD) OR TO THE NETHERLANDS
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced today the appointment of
Mr F. J. Blakeney, as Australian Ambassador to the
Netherlands to succeed Dr L. D. Thomson, M. V. O.
Mr Blakeney was born in 1913 and was educated at the Marist
Brothers Colleges, Darlinghurst and Mittagong, and the University
of Sydney. After Var service in the AMF and RAAF from 1941-45
Mr Blakeney joined the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1946.
He served in Paris from 1947 to 1949, in Moscow from 1949 to
1951, where he was Charge d'Affaires, and as Counsellor in
Washington from 1953-1956. From 1957 to 1959 Mr Blakeney was
Minister in Vientiane, Saigon and Phnom Penh.
From 1962 to 1968 he was Ambassador to the Federal
Republic of Germany and Head of the Australian Military Mission
in Berlin. Mr Elakeney served again in Moscow as Ambassador from
1968 to 1971. He has held a number of senior positions in the
Department and is currently First Assistant Secretary of the
Defence Division. Mr Blakeney is married with one daughter. 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Press Statement No. 202
11 March 1974
FLOODS
I am profoundly concerned at the renewed flooding
in Queensland and New South Wales and the plight of many
families. I extend the Government's sympathy to all those
affected by the floods.
I have sought immediate and up-to-date reports
on the flood situation. The Leader of the Country Party,
Mr. Anthony, has drawn my attention to the situation in
Lismore and Murwillumbah It is tragic that further flooding
should occur so soon after the recent devastation in Queensland
and Northern New South Wales. I have agreed with the Minister
for Defence that the defence forces will again provide all
possible immediate assistance during the present emergency.
No effort will be spared to ensure the safety of
life and the supply of necessary food and shelter. I assure all
victims of the latest flooding that the same assistance and
guarantees of long-term aid for flood relief and restoration
that we have pledged to the earlier flood victims will be
extended to the victims of the latest flooding.
This will be provided, where necessary, through
co-operation with the State authorities.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



1_,) AU8TR A L A(
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 203
12 March 1974
PRIMARY INDUSTRY REFEREN~ CES SENT TO THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE
COMMDISSION
The Prime Minister announced toda-Y' that three references
dealing with: the apple and pear stabilisation plan
the dried vine fruits stabilisation plan
bovine brucellosis and tuberculosis slaughter
compensation
have been sent to the Industries Assistance Commission on 11 March
1974 for inquiry and report.
Because of legislation requirements there is a need
for these references to be enquired into and reported upon by
the Commission as soon as possible.
The apple and pear stabilisation plan expires with
the 1975 scason. It is anticipated that this will be a relatively
complex enquiry and a report will be needed before 31 August 1975
to allow for any necessary negotiations with industry and legislation
to apply to the 1976 harvest. Similarly considerations apply to
the dried vine fruits stabilisation plan which also expires with
the 1975 season and will require a report before 31 August 1975.
In the case of the bovine tuberculosis scheme there is an agreement
with the States that it is to-be reviewed before 30 June 1976.
The brucellosis slaughter compensation scheme has been recommended
by the Australian Agricultural Council and in order that the
Government can consider the proposal further a report will be needed
from the Commission in time for the Government to consider and,
if necessary, introduce legislation effective from 1 January 1976.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
12 MARCH 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen. I haven't got anything to
volunteer to you. Is there anything you want to ask me?
QUESTION: I refer to the return of power of the Labor Government
in Britain and your previously unsuccessful attempt to get
support from the Heath Administration for Australia's argument
with the French over nuclear testing in the Pacific. Have you had
any contact with the new Foreign Secretary, Mr Callaghan, about the
proposed French tests this year, if not, would you expect to get
more sympathetic support from the new Administration than from the
previous encumbrance at 10 Downing Stre et?
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't had any communications with the new
British Government yet. I do think that they will be more positive
on this matter than the previous administration.
QUESTION: Sunday night in your address to the nation, you were
talking about the five referenda which you said would be held
at the same time as the Senate election. In viewof what's been
happening in the Senate, does this mean that the Senate election
will not be held until it is possible to hold the 5 referenda.
Alternatively, will you hold the referenda after the Senate election.
PRIME MINISTER: No, the proposal all along has been to hold the
referendums at the same time as the Senate election. That was
stated more than 6 months ago at the Constitutional Convention
in Sydney, and it has been stated on several occasions since then.
My broadcast and telecast on Sunday night dealt with the four
referendums for which bills have now been twice passed by the
House of Representatives and once rejected by the Senate. The
broadcast and telecast didn't deal with the Constitution Alteration
( Inter-Change of Powers) Bill because while it has gone through
the House of Representatives it hasn't yet been voted on by the
Senate. If the Senate rejects that bill then that referendum
couldn't be put to the people. The other referendums can all be
put to the people because, even if the Senate twice rejects them,
there has been the necessary double passage by the House e
Representatives. QUESTION: But if the Senate does not reject them in time for perhaps
the date you were thinking of for the Senate election, would you
then hold the Senate elections back?
PRIME MINISTER: It is quite clear that the Senate knows that these
referendums are to be held together with the Senate election
and if there was any delay in the Senate we would make it clear
that that would be regarded as a failure to pass and we could ther....
QUESTION: You would go to the Governor-General on this?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, yes, as the Constitution provides. The
Constitution has always made it possible for the Governor-General
to put a referendum to the people if it has been twice passed by
the House of Representatives and twice rejected by the Senate.
The Senate can't prevent a referendum being put to the people in
those circumstances. 
-2-
QUESTION: You say the Constitution makes it possible for
Sir Paul Hasluck to do that. Hlow certain are you that he would take
this view. Is it mandatory for him to take the view~ that you
have suggested?
PRIME MINISTER: I am certain the Governor-General would act on
the advice of his Attorney.
QUESTION: Even if the Senate approves the referendum on the
exchange of powers, it's not possible now for you to have that
referendum in conjunction with the Senate election before May 12,
and the likelihood of the Senate having rejected a change in the
Standing Orders is in fact a delay of about another month. Do you
now have any hope whatsoever of putting back the Senate election
until June to have that referendum with it?
PRIME MINISTER: The Senate election doesn't have to be held until
the end of June because the Senators who will be elected will take
office on 1 July. Ordinarily Senate elections, like House of
Representatives elections, are held on Saturdays. So, accordingly,
it would be possible to have the Senate election on the last
Saturday in June. I'd add that I would expect certainly hope
that the Senate would pass the Constitution Alteration ( Inter-Change
of Powers) Bill because this bill was approved, in principle, in
fact applauded by the Premiers of N. S. W. and Victoria. Also, by
the Premiers of South Australia and Western Australia
and the Attorney-General who was leading the Tasmanian delegation
at the Constitutional Convention last September. And while the
Premier of Queensland didn't endorse the proposal he didn't reject
it either. Since then the seven Parliamentary draftsmen, the
Commonwealth, the six State ones and all the Attorneys-General,
the Commonwealth and the six State ones, have considered and approved
the text of the bill which I introduced and which the House of
Representatives passed. This was promised at the Constitutional
Convention six months ago, so it would be a gross breach of faith
if the Opposition parties in the Senate were to delay that bill.
You mention the call of the Senate. Under the Standing Orders of
the Senate such a call takes place on the third reading. If, on
the second reading, the Opposition Senators were to vote &amp; qainst
the bill then, of course, there would never be any third reading,
there would never be any call of the Senate, so one would know I
expect the fate of that bill on the second reading.
QUESTION: What's the date of the Senate election?
PRIME MINISTER: That depends on the dates on which the Senate passes
any of the five bills for rererendums ,.. hich are before it or the
date on which it rejects any of the four which it has already
rejected once. I should add that if the Senate this time passes any
or all of those four which it previously rejected, then two months
must elapse before those referendums which it approves are put to
the people. If it rejects those all of them the second time
then -there is no minimum period before they are put to the people. 
QUESTION: I was just wondering what your reaction was to the apparent
reluctance by the A. C. T. U. Executive to co-operate in the
introduction of some skilled car workers from the Philippines to
Australia as permanent settlers, and further if you feel that this
decision may have caused some misgivings in Manila about
PRIME MINISTER: I am discussing Mr Cameron, the Minister for
Labor, Mr Grassby, the Minister for Immigration, and I are discussing
this matter with the officers of the A. C. T. U. next Friday morning
in Sydney.
QUESTION: Just following on that que~ tion. Do you still believe
that they should be allowed to come to Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I will make no more statements on this matter until
Friday morning.
QUESTION: Do you remain committed to completely abolishing the means
test on old age pensions in the life of this parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: You know what I have said in the policy speech.
QUESTION: Do you have any plans to visit the flood areas of N. S. W.?
PRIME MINISTER: I am seeing if I can arrange my program to go there.
QUESTION: We understand there is an Interim Report from the
Henderson Inquiry into Poverty received by the Government. I wonder
when that report will be released?
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't discussed it in Cabinet yet. It hasn't
been circulated in a submission to Cabinet yet. I would expect
that it would be released this session.
QUESTION: There has been discussion over recent days by Mr Crean
the Treasurer, on the question of restructuring the tax scale.
He said today he would do it. Do you believe this should be done
in this year's Budget.
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't discussed this. There has been no
submission to Cabinet on this matter.
QUESTION: To take you back to David Solomon's question. Were you
saying that the only influence on you on what date you decide to
have the Senate election was whether or not you could hold the
referenda on the same day?
PRIME MINISTER: We shall hold the referendums on the same day,
and I can't say what that day is yet because the Senate still has
the bills for the referendums before it.
QUESTION: Would you give favourable consideration to any suggestion
that the federal Government should enter the life and general
insurance field? 
PRIME MINISTER: I think there are much greater ar-gulnts for the
federal Government entering the general insurance fild than fuc
it entering the life assurance field. Life assurance is 3enera). y
mutual and there is a fair amount of competition on the terms thet
are available. I do believe it is important that the Australian
Government should enter into the general insurance field mjost
of the State Governments have already entered it. It is a field
which io dominated still by foreign companies.
QUESTION: The West Australian and the federal Government
co-operated on feasibility studies of the West Australian log of
the national pipe grid. This report has been presented and
has been available for some time but hasn't been released. When
do you expect that this report will be made public?
PRIME MINISTER; I didn't think it w-s available yet.
QUESTION: Well it has been widely leaked in West Australia and
it has been presented to the Government.
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't know it had.
QUESTION: Abolition of the means test, Prime Minister. Would you
counternance any slowing down in the abolition of the means test
beyond the lifetime of this Parliament.
PRIME MINISTER: As you know, before the last elections both the
Liberal Party and the Labor Party committed themselves to the
abolition of the means test in the lifetime of this Parliament.
QUESTION: Mr Gorton indicated in 1970 that the Commonwealth would
pay all legal costs if the StaLes took the Seabed issue to the
High Court. Is this your intention also?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't considered that. We have given no
undertakings on that. The States, you will remember, acted without
consulting the Australian Government on some matters in this field
when they petitioned the Queen to refer certain matters to the
British Privy Council. And, as the Queen stated in bhr : peech
opening the Parliament, both the British and her Australian
ministers advisedher not to do so.
QUESTION: I am wondering how you reconcile the referendum proposal.
to make all electorates equal in numbers of people with your past
adherence to the principle of " one vote one value". If you still
adhere to " one vote one value", will you be extending the franchise
if the referendum is passed?
PRIME MINISTER: The referendum bills, you remember, guarantees
that everybody who is 18 or more shall have a vote for every House
of Parliament in Australia not only the two federal Houses of
Parliament but all the State Houses of Parliament including, of course
the Legislative Council of which isn't elected directly
by the people at all. So, there will be no extension of the franchise
The Bill itself guarantees the franchise to people who are 18
or above except where there are laws restricting the franchise in the
case of people of unsound mind or serving prison terms. Any such
restrictions, like any other applications of that Constitutional
proposal, are left to the High Court to determine. Anybody who has
a vote or believes he should have a vote will be able to approcuh the
High Court under this referendum proposal, so there will be no
extension of the franchise involved in the referendum proposals. 
QUESTION: But what about the question of " one vote one value"?
PRIME MINISTER: My view on this has been expressed for 10 years
in the Parliament 10 years and 1 month. Ever since the Warren
Court, the Supreme Court of the United States, laid down that
principle. The Australian Constitution borrowed from the United
States Constitution the provision that in determining the number
of members in the House of Representatives from the various States
one should take into account the respective population of those
States. Now, the U. S. Supreme Court, for ten years now, has said
that one also equates the population of districts, as they call
them, within each State, and that is what we are doing in this
referendum proposal. We say that the population is what is considered
in determining how many members there will be in the House of
Representatives from each State. And we therefore say that in
consistency there ought also to be regrard paid to the population
in determining the respective size of the electorates inside each
State. I have said this for over 10 years now.
QUESTION: Has it been established, and are you satisfied that
there was no cover-up of the Perkins Affair by your staff?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly I am satisfied. I am surprised that you
are making that insinuation. People made it in the Opposition
parties in the House of Representatives to their discredit and in
breach of the customs and courtes * ies of the House, mentioned the
name of one of my advisers a contemptible action. Now, I hope
you are not suggesting that any of them have done it but, in case
you are, or in case any of the viewers have such a suspicion, then
it is their duty as well as their option to give any evidence for
that suspicion to the Crown Solicitor or to the A. C. T. Commission. 1--
of Police. As you know, there have been persons arrestect arribincj
from the incident of Thursday week and also there have been some
summonses issued but I am not sure whether they have all been
served or if all the perscns concerned have been arrested. But once
it was known that there might have been facts not disclosed in the
undefended proceedings before the Canberra courts then the
Attorney-General, immediately, through the Secretary of his Department
had the Crown Solicitor for the A. C. T. and the Police Commissioner
for the A. C. T. look into this matter. As a result there have been
summonses issued and some at least of them have been served and
the persons concerned arrested.
QUESTION: I was just wondering whether you would make a categorical
declaration now that you will adhere to the schedule that you
proposed to abolish the means test in the lifetime of this Parliontent?
PRIME MINISTER: I have answered enough questions on this already.
I won't make any further statement on-it. I believe what I hav&amp;. said
is quite clear, but what I have said I am not going to repeat.
QUESTION: You have saved me the trouble of asking a question,
Prime Minister.
PRIME MvINISTER: That doesn't deter many of you because my observation
of these conferences is that you all want to get your own pers,:? nal
reply to the same question. 



EMBARGO: 8.00PM THURSDAY 14 MARCH 1974
GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE FIFTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF
THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS IN AUSTRALIA,
WENTWORTH HOTEL, SYDNEY,
14 MARCH 1974
I HOPE YOU WILL NOT THINK IT TOO PROVOCATIVE OF ME
IF I BEGIN MY ADDRESS TO THIS DISTINGUISHED COMPANY OF
CAPITALISTS BY QUOTING THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO.
THE LAST TIME I SPOKE TO SUCH A LARGE AND POWERFUL
GATHERING OF BUSINESSMEN WAS IN MELBOURNE LAST YEAR
AT A SEMINAR WITH THE INTRIGUING TITLE OF " FUTURE SHOCK".
I LEARNT MY LESSON ON THAT OCCASION: WHERE BUSINESSMEN
ARE CONCERNED, IF YOU CAN'T BEAT ' EM, SHOCK ' EM.
So I COMMEND TO YOU THE FOLLOWING QUOTATION 
-2-
THE BOURGEOISIE, DURING ITS RULE OF SCARCE ONE
HUNDRED YEARS, HAS CREATED MORE MASSIVE AND MORE
COLOSSAL PRODUCTIVE FORCES THAN HAVE ALL PRECEDING
GENERATIONS TOGETHER, SUBJECTION OF NATURE'S
FORCES TO MAN, MACHINERY, APPLICATION OF CHEMISTRY
TO INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE, STEAM NAVIGATION,
RAILWAYS, ELECTRIC TELEGRAPHS, CLEARING OF WHOLE
CONTINENTS FOR CULTIVATION, CANALIZATION OF RIVERS,
WHOLE POPULATIONS CONJURED OUT OF THE GROUND
WHAT EARLIER CENTURY HAD EVEN A PRESENTIMENT THAT
SUCH PRODUCTIVE FORCES SLUMBERED IN THE LAP OF
SOCIAL LABOUR?
THAT FINE TRIBUTE TO CAPITALISM WAS PAID BY MARX
AND ENGELS OVER A CENTURY AGO. A SYSTEM THAT CAN EVOKE
SUCH PRAISE FROM ITS WORST ENEMIES CANNOT BE TOO BAD.
TODAY, VERY FEW OF US HAVE MUCH TIME FOR MARXIST THEORIES,
BUT WE HAVE TO ADMIT THAT THE AUTHORS OF THOSE WORDS
PERCEIVED VERY CLEARLY THE ENORMOUS POWER AND PRODUCTIVE
POTENTIAL OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE, AND OF COURSE THEIR
REMARKS HAVE INFINITELY GREATER FORCE TODAY, SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, HARNESSED AND DIRECTED BY PRIVATE CAPITAL,
HAVE BEEN THE MAINSPRING OF ADVANCED WESTERN SOCIETY,
WITH ALL ITS RICH BLESSINGS FOR MANKIND; AND THE
" SUBJECTION OF NATURE'S FORCES TO MAN" HAS PROGRESSED SO
RAPIDLY THAT THE ISSUES IT RAISES ARE NO LONGER THOSE OF
ECONOMICS OR SOCIAL JUSTICE ALONE, THEY CALL IN QUESTION
THE VERY SURVIVAL OF OUR CIVILIZATION, / 3 
3-
IBEGIN ON THIS SOMEWHAT PORTENTOUS NOTE BECAUSEI
BELIEVE THAT IT IS IN THE CONTEXT OF SUCH URGENT CONTEMPORARY
REALITIES THAT WE MUST LOOK AT THE ROLE OF THE MODERN COMPANY,
AND THE PART IT PLAYS IN SHAPING THE KIND OF SOCIETY WE DESir,:.,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, DESPITE MARX AND DESPITE MALTHUS,
NO ONE FORESAW THE ENORMOUS PRESSURES AND COMPLEXITIES THAT
WOULD OVERTAKE THE MIXED, FREE ENTERPRISE ECONOMY OF THE
PRESENT DAY. OVER-POPULATION WAS STILL A MATHEMATICAL
ABSTRACTION. THE DEPLETION OF THE EARTH'S RAW MATERIALS AND
NATURAL RESOURCES HAD BARELY BEGUN. THE PRESERVATION OF NATIONAL
INTEGRITY AND INDEPENDENCE WERE IDEALISTIC THEORIES LARGELY
IRRELEVANT IN A WORLD COLONIZED B~ Y EUROPEAN POWERS. THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE TO THE PUBLIC INTEREST,
THE GROWTH OF AUTOMATION, THE NEED FOR MANPOWER AND TRAINING
POLICIES THAT TAKE ACCOUNT OF GROW4ING EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES,
THE TECHNICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESSES OF THE MODERN CONSUMER
SOCIETY ALL THESE THINGS WERE UNKNOWN, AND ALL OF THEM
PRESENT CHALLENGES TO THE MODERN INDUSTrRIALIST UNDREAMT : OF
IN PAST GENERATIONS.
As IN SO MANY AREAS OF CONTEMPORARY LIFE, THE GREAT.
ACTIVE PRINCIPLE OF MODERN BUSINESS IS CHANGE; THE INEVITABIILITY
OF CHANGE AND THE NEED TO ADAPT TO CHANGE.-AND THIS CHANGE
NOT SOMETHING IMPOSED FROM ABOVE BY GOVERNMENTS; IT ARISES
FROM DEEP SOCIAL AND HUMAN FORCES TO WHICH GOVERNMENTS M'UST
ADAPT JUST AS MUCH AS BUSINESSMEN. ITS IMPLICATIONS MUST BE
FACED BY GOVERNMENTS AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE ALIKE.
WE AR-E ALLIES, WE ARE PARTNERS, IN THAT TASK. 1 4 
-4-
A FEW FIGURES WILL DEMONSTRATE THE SCALE OF THE
CHALLENGE BEFORE US* AND HOW RAPIDLY EVEN RECENT PREDICTIONS
SEEM LIKELY TO BE INVALIDATED BEFORE THE END OF THIS CENTURY.
ABOUT 150 YEARS AGO 80% OF THE POPULATION HAD TO WORK THE
LAND IN ORDER TO PROVIDE ENOUGH FOOD FOR ALL. ( THIS IS
STILL THE PROPORTION IN CHINA.) TODAY IN THE UNITED
STATES ABOUT 5% OF THE LABOUR FORCE PRODUCE MORE THAN
ENOUGH FOOD FOR ALL AMERICANS AND FOR MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
ABROAD. A REASONABLE PROJECTION INDICATES THAT BY 1980
IT WILL REQUIRE ONLY 2.5% OF THE WORKFORCE IN THE WESTERN
WORLD TO PRODUCE THE FOOD WE NEED. THE SAME TREND IS
APPARENT IN OTHER PRODUCTION INDUSTRIES. THE CONTAINERIZATION
OF FREIGHTI THE MECHANIZATION OF MINING, THE DEVELOPMENT OF
COMPUTERS ALL THESE TRENDS ARE AFFECTING THE COMPOSITION
OF THE WORKFORCE AND THE LIVES OF ORDINARY PEOPLE.
IN THE U. S. A. MANUAL WORKERS NOW MAKE UP ABOUT ONE
THIRD OF THE LABOUR FORCES AND IN THE EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL
COUNTRIES ABOUT ONE HALF. THE PROPORTION IS STEADILY
SINKING IN ALL INDUSTRIAL NATIONS. BY-THE END OF THE
CENTURY TECHNOLOGY COULD BRING ABOUT AS DRAMATIC A
REDUCTION IN ALL LABOUR AS WE HAVE ALREADY EXPERIENCED
IN AGRICULTURE. AT THE SAME TIME THE RESOURCES OF THE
WORLD ARE BEING DEPLETED AT A RATE THAT MAY LEAVE SOME
BASIC METALS EXHAUSTED WITHIN 30 YEARS. 
THIS IS THE CHALLENGE FOR GOVERNMENTS. THIS IS THE
CHALLENGE FOR ALL THOSE IN CONTROL OF OUR GREAT INDUSTRIES
AND PUBLIC COMPANIES. I THINK BUSINESSMEN ARE ALREADY
BEGINNING TO RECOGNISE CHANGES AND ADAPT TO THEM. VERY FEW
DIRECTORS OR BOARDS OF COMPANIES TODAY WOULD REGARD THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY AS BEING SOLELY TO THE INTERESTS OF THEIR
OWN COMPANY OR ITS SHAREHOLDERS, REGARDLESS OF THE INTERESTS
OF SOCIETY. MANY OF YOU IN THIS ROOM ARE DIRECTORS NOT
OF ONE COMPANY BUT OF TWO OR SEVERAL COMPANIES; YOUR EXPERTISE
AND EXPERIENCE CAN BE APPLIED ACROSS A WIDE RANGE, IN A
MULTITUDE OF INDUSTRIES, SINCE YOU RECOGNISE THAT THE BUSINESS
WORLD IS A DIVERSE AND DYNAMIC COMMUNITY IN WHICH MANY PUBLIC
AND PRIVATE INTERESTS, EVEN NATIONAL INTERESTS, ARE
REPRESENTED. THERE ARE TWO LESSONS WE MUST DRAW FROM THIS. ONE IS
THAT BOARDS OF DIRECTORS CAN NO LONGER BE REGARDED AS
DYNASTIES OR SELF-PERPETUATING ELITES. THE BIGGEST AND MORE
SUCCESSFUL CORPORATIONS ARE OFTEN THOSE WHICH DRAW DIRECTORS
FROM OTHER ORGANISATIONS, BRINGING TOGETHER FRESH TALF'" TS
AND NEW IDEAS. AND THE SECOND LESSON IS THAT DIRECTORS OF LARGI
COMPANIES MUST BE HELD PUBLICLY ACCOUNTABLE FOR THEIR DECISIONS
IF COMPANIES TAKE DECISIONS THAT AFFECT NOT JUS-f THE14SELVE
OR THEIR CLIENTS BUT A WIDER COMMUNITY -TO SAY NOTHING OF
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY WE MUST EXPECT THEM TO EXPLAIN AND
JUSTIFY THOSE DECISIONS. 
-6
WE DO NOT EXPECT THEM TO PRESENT A MONOLITHIC FRONT, ANY
MORE THAN WE EXPECT THE MODERN POLITICAL PARTY TO PRESENT
A MONOLITHIC FRONT; IREGRET THAT THERE IS STILL A TENDENCY
IN AUSTRALIA TO REGARD UNITY.-OR IN A NARROWER SENSEI
UNANIMITY AS MORE VIRTUOUS IN A'POLITICAL PARTY THAN
INTEGRITY OR VIGOUR OR THE FREE FLOW OF IDEAS.
CONTENTION, EVEN DISSENSION, ARE NEEDED IN THE
BOARDROOM JUST AS MUCH AS IN PUBLIC LIFE, FOR IT IS ONLY
THROUGH CONTENTION AND FREE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS THAT WE CAN
REACH INFORMED AND MATURE JUDGEMENTS. YOU WILL ALL BE
FAMILIAR WITH A RECENT INCIDENT INVOLVING A DIRECTOR
OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION. I SHALL
HAVL MURkL TO SAY L-ArLfl AL3) LJ ' 11iL A. 1. ID. C., BUT LET ME SAY
THIS MUCH NOW: 11Y CHIEF REGRET ABOUT SIR JOHN DUNLOP'S
RESIGNATION WAS NOT SO MUCH THAT THE A. I. D. C. LOST A
RESPECTED PROTAGONIST FROM THE BOARD OF THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH
WALES, BUT RATHER THAT THE OLDEST AND ONE OF THE GREATEST
PUBLIC COMPANIES IN AUSTRALIA COULD FIND* NO ROOM IN ITS
BOARDROOM FOR A DISSENTING VOICE. I BELIEVE THAT PRIVATE
COMPANIES HAVE NO LESS AN OBL. IGATION THAN DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNMENTS TO JUSTIFY THEMSELVES IN PUBLIC. ONE OF THE
GREAT VALUES OF THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL, WHICH
THIS GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED, IS THAT FOR THE FIRST TIME WE
RECOGNISED AND ENACTED THE PRINCIPLE THAT PRIVATE ENTERPRISE
SHOULD BE ACCOUNTABLE TO PUBLIC OPINION FOR DECISIONS THAT
AFFECT THE PUBLIC INTEREST. " OPEN GOVERNMENT" I IS NOT ENOUGH;
It
WE ALSO NEED OPEN BUSINESS a s s17 
-7-
THE TRUTH IS THAT COMPANIES NOW HAVE TO OPERATE
MUCH MORE CLOSELY WITH GOVERNMENTS IN EVERY WAY, THIS IS
CERTAINLY TRUE OF THE GREAT INTERNATIONAL CORPORATIONS,
BUT IT IS NO LESS TRUE OF COMPANIES OPERATING WITHIN
NATIONAL BOUNDARIES, IT WOULD BE A MISTAKE, HOWEVER, TO
REGARD THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN ITS RELATIONS WITH THE
PRIVATE SECTOR AS ONE MERELY OF RESTRAINT OR CONTROL,
TRUE ENOUGH, A SOCIETY IN WHICH EVERYBODY DOES WHAT HE
LIKES IS INCONCEIVABLE, ANY SORT OF HIGHLY DEVELOPED
ORGANISATION IMPOSES UNAVOIDABLE CONSTRAINTS ON THE DRIVES
OF THE INDIVIDUAL, YET I PREFER TO REGARD GOVERNMENT
AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR AS COLLABORATORS RATHER IHAN
RIVALS, THEY WORK BEST WHEN THEY WORK TOGETHER, 
-8-
THE UNIVERSAL TREND IN THE MODERN WORLD IS TOWARDS
MORE INTIMATE AND MORE INTRICATE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE. IN JAPAN, FOR EXAMPLE,
THIS RELATIONSHIP IS INSTITUTIONALIZED IN A NETWORK OF
OFFICIAL CONTACTS BETWEEN INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT; THE POLICIES
OF ONE ARE FOR ALL PRACTICAL PURPOSES THE POLICIES OF THE
OTHER. IN THE SCANDANAVIAN COUNTRIES, NOTABLY IN SWEDEN,
WHERE STATE SUPERVISION OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS PERHAPS
MOST RIGID, GOVERNMENTS AND FREE ENTERPRISE CO-OPERATE TO A
MARKED DEGREE; ENORMOUS STRIDES TOWARDS A SUPER-WELFARE
STATE HAVE BEEN ACCOMPLISHED WITHOUT ANY NATIONALIZATION OF
MAJOR INDUSTRIES, INDEED THOSE INDUSTRIES ARE AMONG THE MOST
EFFICIENT AND PROSPEROUS IN THE WORLD. IN THE UNITED STATES,
WHICH HAS FOR LONG ENFORCED THE MOST RIGOROUS ANTI-TRUST
LAWS OF ANY COUNTRY IN THE FREE WORLD, WE HAVE SEEN IN RECENT
YEARS GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE PRICES AND INCOMES
MECHANISM TO A DEGREE THAT NO ONE WOULD HAVE CONTEMPLATED
EVEN 10 YEARS AGO. IN OUR OWN REGION, WE HAVE THE RECENT
EXAMPLE OF TWO GREAT AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES, l. P, AND C. S. R.,
MAKING TRADE AGREEMENTS WITH CHINA. I NEED HARDLY LABOUR
THE POINT THAT THE OLD RIGID CONCEPTS OF FREE tENTERPRISE, ThiE
OLD-FASHIONED RIVALRIES BETWEEN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS, T" E
NOTION THAT GOVERNMENTS AND BUSINESSMEN ARE NATURAL ENEMIES
WORKING IN SEPARATE COMPARTMENTSARE DEAD AND BURIED. ,. 1,1/ 9 
8A
I CAN GIVE YOU A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE WAY MY OWN
GOVERNMENT HAS BROKEN THROUGH SOME OF THE RIGID IDEOLOGICAL
BARRIERS THAT SURROUNDED ECONOMIC AND MONETARY POLICY,
IT CONCERNS THE BANKS. FOR A LONG TIME IT WAS ACCEPTED
THAT A LABOR GOVERNMENT SHOULD AVOID TOO MUCH USE OF MARKET
FORCES IN GOVERNING THE ECONOMY. YET THE FACT IS THAT NO
PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS USED THE MECHANISM OF THE
MONEY MARKET MORE THOROUGHLY AND MORE SUCCESSFULLY AS A BASIC
TOOL OF ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT, WE HAVE ELEVATED THE STATUS
AND IMPORTANCE OF THE TRADING BANKS IN AUSTRALIA TO A POSITION
THEY HAVE NOT ENJOYED FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS. WE DID THIS BY
REMOVING THE CEILING ON BANK INTEREST RATES FOR NEGOTIABLE
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT. IN THAT WAY WE ENABLED THE BANKS
TO COMPETE VIGOROUSLY FOR FUNDS ON THE MONEY MARKET.
fNSTEAD OF BEING THE FIRST INSTITUTIONS TO FEEL THE EFFECTS
OF NECESSARY MONETARY RESTRICTIONS, THE BANKS ARE THE
BENEFICIARIES; OTHER INSTITUTIONS ARE FORCED TO COMPETE
WITH THEM. I SUGGEST THAT THE EXTRAORDINARY SUCCESS OF OUR
FEBRUARY LOAN, WHICH ATTRACTED $ 509 MILLION IN CASH SUBSCRIPTIONS,
IS EVIDENCE OF THE NEW ROLE WE HAVE GIVEN TO THE BANKS.
THE PRIVATE BANKS FOR SO LONG ANATHEMA TO LABOR GOVERNMENTS
ARE BACK ON TOP, I WELCOME THE FACT, THEY ARE GREAT IIISTITUTIONS
MY ONLY REGRET IS THAT I HAVE YET TO HEAR ANY ACKNOWLEDGFMENT
FROM THEM OF THE FACT THAT A LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS RESTORED THEIR
-POSITION AS THE-DOMINANT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN THIS COUNTRY.
I AM AFRAID THAT IT IS ONLY WHEN COMPLAINTS ARE BEING HEARD
THAT YOU CAN BANK ON THE WAILS. / 9 
-9-
WHATEVER THE BANKS MAY THINKI PUT IT TO YOU
THAT THERE ARE NOW CLOSER CONTACTS BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND
BUSINESS IN THIS COUNTRY THAN EVER BEFORE AND THEY ARE
GENUINE CONTACTS, NOT TOKEN GESTURES, NOT WINDOW DRESSING.
WHAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO -AND SUCCEEDED IN DOING IS DRAW
BUSINESSMEN OF THE HIGHEST CALIBRE INTO THE PROCESSES OF
DECISION MAKING AND POLICY FORMATION. THERE ARE LEADING
BUSINESSMEN ON MANY OF THE EXPERT AND INDEPENDENT BODIES
WE HAVE SET UP TO ADVISE THE GOVERNMENT ON POLICY MATTERS.
NOW YOU MAY THINK THAT IS A FAIRLY OBVIOUS THING TO DO,
BUT IT WAS NOT A PRACTICE THAT COMMENDED ITSELF TO OUR
PREDECESSORS. CONSIDER WHAT HAPPENED TO THE VERNON COMMITTEE,
WHICH WAS APPOINTED BY SIR ROBERT MENZIES IN FEBRUARY 1963
TO REPORT ON FUTURE GUIDELINES FOR ECONOMIC POLICY, ITS
REPORT WAS DELIVERED IN MAY 1965, IT WAS TABLED IN AUGUST
1966, IN OTHER WORDS, IT WAS SUPPRESSED BY THE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENT FOR 15 MONTHS; ITS ADVICE WAS IGNORED.
I TAKE PRIDE IN THE FACT THAT THE FOUR SURVIVING
MEMBERS OF THAT COMMITTEE HAVE ALL RENDERED DISTINGUISHED SERVICE
TO THIS GOVERNMENT AND TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE SIR JAMES
VERNON AS HEAD OF THE INQUIRY INTO THE POST OFFICE,
SIR JOHN CRAWFORD, AUTHOR OF THE REPCRT ON WHICH THE
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION WAS BASED; PROFESSOR PETER
KARMELI HEAD OF THE INTERIM SCHOOLS COMMITTEE AND AUTHOR OF
THE REPORT INTO EDUCATIONAL NEEDS; AND MR, KENNETH MYERI
A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF THE NATIONAL LIBRARY. 
10
WE HAVE ASKED MANY OTHER PROMINENT BUSINESSMEN TO
PARTICIPATE IN INQUIRIES INTO ASPECTS OF GOVERNMENT POLICY,
IMENTION A FEW: MR. R. KINGSFORD-SMITH, CHAIRMAN AND
MANAGING DIRECTOR OF HAWKER DE HAVILLAND, A MEMBER OF A
WORKING GROUP TO STUDY THE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY; MR. K. S. HEDLEY,
A MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY;
MR. N. M. GOW, A MEMBER OF THE TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION
COMMITTEE; MR. D. YENKEN AND MR. KEITH'VALLANCEI MEMBERS OF THE
TASK FORCE ON THE NATIONAL ESTATE; MR. JACK HANNES,* MANAGING
DIRECTOR OF HANIMEX CORPORATION LIMITED, A MEMBER OF THE
INTERIM COMMISSION ON CONSUMER STANDARDS; MR. G. POLITES,
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF EMPLOYERS
FEDERATIONS, AND SIR THOMAS WARDLE OF PERTH, MEMBERS OF THE
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT. SIR THOMAS
WARDLE IS ALSO A MEMBER OF THE INTERIM ADVISORY BOARD OF THE
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE AGENCY. WE HAVE APPOINTED FOUR NOTED
BUSINESSMEN MR. L. R. DUDLEY, MR. G. P. HAMPEL, MR, GEORGE
JOHNSON, AND MR. C. H. GRACE TO THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION. WE HAVE REAPPOINTED SIR BRIAN MASsy-GREENE AS A
DIREC-TOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANKING CORPORATION AND AS A
MEMBER OF THE-MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES ADVISORY COUNCIL.
OF COURSE I CANNOT UNDERTAKE THAT ALL THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THESE BODIES WILL BE ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT, BUT THEIR
MEMBERS CAN BE ASSURED OF THIS: THEIR ADVICE WILL BE PUBLISHED
AND PUBLISHED PROMPTLY. IT-WILL NOT BE SUPPRESSED OR FORGOTTEN.
IT WILL CONTRIBUTE TO A CLIMATE OF OPEN PUBLIC DEBATE. IT ' A ILL
BECOME PART OF THE DECISION MAKING PROCESS. SO LET US HEAR NO
MORE ABOUT LACK OF CONSULTATION. No OTHER GOVERNMENT IN
FRAMING ITS POLICIES HAS DRAWN SO WIDELY AND REWARDINGLY ON
THE SERVICES OF BUSINESSMEN. 
11
IWANT TO DEAL IN A MOMENT WITH THREE PARTICULAR ASPECTS
OF GOVERNMENT POLICY WHICH CONCERN You. BUT FIRST, I HAVE ONE
MORE GENERAL OBSERVATION, ASK YOU TO REMEMBER THAT A GREAT
DEAL OF WHAT THE GOVERNMENT IS ATTEMPTING TO DO HAS ALREADY
BEEN ATTEMPTED AND ACHIEVED IN OTHER WESTERN COUNTRIES IN SOME
CASES, MANY DECADES AGO. SOME OF YOU MAY RECALL THAT LAST
NOVEMBER, BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL CONDUCTED A SEMINAR IN CANBERRA
AT WHICH THE POLICIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WERE EXAMINED
FROM THE VIEWPOINT OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS COMMUNITY.
WE WERE HONOURED ON THAT OCCASION BY THE PRESENCE OF MRiORVILLE
FREEMAN, WHO SERVED WITH DISTINCTION IN THE KENNEDY AND JOHNSON
ADMINISTRATIONS AND WHOSE NAME IS RESPECTED THROUGHOUT THE
BUSINESS WORLD. LET ME READ TO YOU SOME OF THE CONCLUSIONS REACHED
By BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL ABOUT THE POLICIES OF THIS GOVERNMENT.
IF I WERE-WRITING THE REPORT MYSELF I MIGHT EXPRESS THESE VIEWS
WITH RATHER MORE ENTHUSIASM, BUT THEIR GENERAL DRIFT WILL BE
CLEAR TO You. BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL SAID THIS:
MANY OF ITS PROGRAMS ( THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS)
WILL MERELY BRING AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION AND PRACTICES
INTO LINE WITH THOSE IN FORCE IN THE U. S. AND WESTERN
EUROPE. ITS SOCIAL SECURITY REFORMS ARE SIMILAR TO THOSE
IN FORCE IN MANY WEST EUROPEAN COUNTRIES FOR SOME YEARS;
ITS NEW ANTITRUST LAWS ARE MODELLED ON THOSE OF THE U. S.,
WITHOUT BEING SO SEVERE AS THE U. S, LAWS; ITS PROPOSED
SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION WILL ALSO BE MODELLED ON
U. S. LINES, BUT ITS REGULATIONS WILL BE LESS COMPLEX;
SIMILARLY, IF THE GOVERNMENT PROCEEDS WITH PROGRAMS FOR
WORKER PARTICIPATION IN MANAGEMENT, THESE WILL-BE MODELLED
ON SWEDISH AND WEST GERMAN PRACTICES. 
12-
WHILE THE GOVERNMENT HAS INTRODUCED SOME ECONOMIC
PLANNING, THIS IS LESS RIGOROUS THAN EVEN THE
PLANNING OF THE UK GOVERNMENT TODAY, THE MAIN
EXPRESSION OF THE GOVERNMENT'S NEW THRUST WILL BE
IN GREATER EXPENDITURE ON SOCIAL SERVICES, AND IN
GREATER REGULATION OF BUSINESS, RATHER THAN IN
STATE OWNERSHIP,
THE REPORT THEN MAKES SOME MODERATELY KIND REFERENCES
TO ME AND SOME OF MY COLLEAGUES, THE " KEY FIGURES" IN THE
GOVERNMENT, IT SAYS, ARE " PRAGMATIC MODERATES WHO EMPHASISED THAT
THEY WELCOMED AND ENCOURAGED CONTINUED OUTSIDE INVESTMENT
IN AUSTRALIA, ALTHOUGH SUBJECT TO CERTAIN NEW GUIDELINES,,,,"
THE REPORT GOES ON:
ALL AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL PARTIES AND THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY AGREE THAT POPULAR SENTIMENT DEMANDED AN
END OF THE OPEN DOOR POLICY TOWARD FOREIGN INVESTMENT
WHICH PREVAILED UNTIL LATE 1972; THE FIRST STEPS
TO END THAT POLICY WERE IN FACT TAKEN BY THE
PREVIOUS LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT,
FINALLY, WITH SINGULAR SHREWDNESS AND GOOD
JUDGMENTI THE REPORT CONCLUDES: " IT IS LIKELY THAT THE
WHIITLAM GOVERNMENT WILL REMAIN IN POWER FOR SOME TIME TO COME,"
I MUST SAY THAT I HAVE A VERY HIGH OPINION OF BUSINESS
INTERNATIONAL, I HOPE THAT OPINION IS SHARED BY ALL OF YOU,
RADICAL WE MAY BE, DETERMINED WE MAY BE, VIGOROUS WE CERTAINLY
ARE; BUT THERE IS NOTHING IN OUR POLICIES TOWARDS BUSINESS
THAT WOULD BE CONSIDERED NOVEL, IMPETUOUS OR UNPRECEDENTED IN
ANY OTHER WESTERN COUNTRY, ,/ 13 1 
13
IN OUR APPROACH TO BUSINESS WE HAVE THREE BASIC
OBJECTIVES. WE WANT TO ENSURE, FIRST OF ALL, THAT
THE PRIVATE SECTOR REMAINS BUOYANT, PROSPEROUS AND
EFFICIENT. WE WANT TO ENSURE THAT AS FAR AS POSSIBLE
THE OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES AND
RESOURCES REMAIN IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS, AND WE WANT TO
ENSURE THAT THE AFFAIRS OF AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES, AND
THE SECURITIES INDUSTRY ITSELF, ARE SUBJECT TO FAIR AND
REASONABLE LAWS, APPLIED UNIFORMLY ACROSS THE NATION IN
THE INTERESTS OF INVESTORS, CONSUMERS, SHAREHOLDERS,
BUSINESSMEN AND THE COMMUNITY AT LARGE.
LET ME DEAL WITH THE LAST POINT FIRST. THE GOVERNMENT
IS PLEDGED TO LEGISLATE FOR A NATIONWIDE COMPANIES ACT.
THE QUEST FOR UNIFORM COMPANY LAW IN AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN A
LONG AND SORRY STORY OF FRUSTRATION AND DISAPPOINTMENT
YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT A MEETING OF ATTORNEYS-GENERAL
IN 1959 RESULTED EVENTUALLY IN THE PRODUCTION OF A MODEL
DRAFT BILL IN 1960, Now WHILE THAT INITIATIVE LED TO
CERTAIN REFORMS IN COMPANY LAW AND TO A MUCH GREATER
MEASURE OF UNIFORMITY, CONSIDERABLE DIFFERENCES REMAINED
IN THE LAWS BETWEEN DIFFERENT STATES. THEY WILL ONLY BE
REMOVED BY NATIONAL LEGISLATION. FOR MORE THAN 60 YEARS,
HOWEVER, ATTEMPTS AT A UNIFORM COMPANY LAW WERE HAMPERED BY A
HIGH COURT DECISION IN 1909, THE COURT GAV. E A HIGHLY RESTRICTIVE
INTERPRETATION OF THE CORPORATIONS POWER OF THE COMMONWEALTH
UNDER THE CONSTITUTION. THAT DECISION WAS EVENTUALLY OVERRULED
BY A UNANIMOUS JUDGEMENT OF THE COURT IN SEPTEMBER 1971.
THE WAY WAS THEN OPEN FOR LEGISLATION ON A NATIONWIDE SCALE. ./ 14 
14
WE HAVE HAD ONE STRIKING DEMONSTRATION OF THE
OBSTACLES TO UNIFORMITY WHEN LAWS OF THIS KIND ARE LEFT
TO THE STATES, IN THE EARLY 1960s, FOLLOWING THE FAILURE
OF CERTAIN PUBLIC BORROWING CORPORATIONS, VICTORIA INTRODUCED
A COMPANIES ( PUBLIC BORROWINGS) ACT WHICH CAME. INTO OPERATION
ON 1 FEBRUARY 1964. NEW SOUTH WALES AND QUEENSLAND FOLLOWED
IN JULY 1964, SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA IN
JANUARY 1965 AND TASMANIA IN JANUARY 1967, THUS IT TOOK
NEARLY THREE YEARS BEFORE ALL AUSTRALIANS HAD THE PROTECTION
OF THIS LEGISLATION, WHILE DIRECTORS, LAWYERS AND ACCOUNTANTS
SOUGHT TO KEEP TRACK OF DIFFERENT LAWS FROM PLACE TO PLACE,
YET A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, SEIZED WITH THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS
REFORM, COULD HAVE DONE THE JOB AT ONCE,
ONE OF THE FEARS THAT IS SOMETIMES EXPRESSED ABOUT
NATIONA LEGISLATION IS THAT IT WILL SOMEHOW BECOME A VEHICLE
FOR SOCIAL REFORM RATHER THAN REMAIN A MERE PIECE OF ENABLING
LEGISLATION, I DO NOT SEE WHY WE SHOULD BE ASHAMED OF
SOCIAL RLFURIM, WE TAKE ALTOGETHER TOO NARROW A VIEW OF COMPANY
LAW IF WE INSIST THAT IT CONFINE ITSELF TO THE TECHNICALITIES
OF ADMINISTRATION, AGAIN, IT IS TOO NARROW A VIEW TO INSIST
THAT ONLY DIRECTORS, SHAREHOLDERS AND CREDITORS HAVE AN
INTEREST IN THE ACTIVITIES OF A COMPANY, NO LAW IS DEVOID CF
SOCIAL CONTENT, THE RECENT BRITISH WHITE PAPER ON COMPANY
LAW REFORM SAID THIS: 
15
" A BOARD OF DIRECTORS HAS TO RECONCILE SEVERAL
INTERESTS, OF WHICH PROFIT IS THE MAIN BUT
CANNOT BE THE ONLY ONE. ANY COMPANY MUST
BEHAVE AS A RESPONSIBLE PART OF THE SOCIETY
IN WHICH IT EXISTS. THIS REQUIRES COMPANY
DIRECTORS, ON BEHALF OF THE SHAREHOLDERS,
TO DISCHARGE THEIR SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES
AS WELL AS TO PROTECT THEIR LEGITIMATE INTERESTS."
IACCEPT THAT VIEW. ICOMMEND IT TO YOU. IN AUSTRALIA
WE WILL IN DUE COURSE HAVE COMPANY LEGISLATION WITH A
SIMILAR SOCIAL CONTENT. ONLY AN AUSTRALIAN CANUTE WOULD
ATTEMPT TO STEM THAT TIDE. TO RESIST THE INTRODUCTION OF
NATIONAL COMPANIES LEGISLATION BECAUSE OF ITS POSSIBLE
SOCIAL. CONfFNT IS TO BE BLIND TO THE DYNAMICS OF LAW AND
THE NEEDS OF TilE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC.
WE SEE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SECURITIES AND
EXCHANGE COMMISSION AS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF OUR DRIVE FOR
UNIFORM CUMFANY LAW. IREMIND YOU THAT OUR OPPONENTS ARE
AS FULLY COMMITTED AS WE ARE TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
COMM ISS IuN, WE STILL AWAIT THE REPORT OF THE SENATE
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMITTEE, WHICH WAS ESTABLISHED
IN MARCH 1970. IN THE MEANTIME, HOWEVER, CABINET HAS
AUTHORISED THE ATTioRNEY-GENERAL TO PREPARE LEGISLATION
FOR A c~~ i~ INAND THAT WORK IS GOING FORWARD WITH
ALL POSSIBLE SPEED, 16 
16
I TURN NOW TO ONE OF THE GREAT AND ABIDING
THEMES OF MY GOVERNMENT'S PHILOSOPHY. I HAVE SAID
THAT ONE OF OUR PRINCIPAL OBJECTIVES IS TO MAXIMISE
AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR INDUSTRIES
AND RESOURCES. AS YOU KNOW, THE GREAT INSTRUMENTS
WE ARE DEVELOPING FOR THAT PURPOSE ARE THE AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AND THE ASSOCIATED
NATIONAL INVESTMENT FUND, WHEN I SAY THAT THESE ARE
OUR OBJECTIVES, OUR POLICIES, IT IS IMPORTANT TO
REMEMBER THIS: THEY WERE INTRODUCED AND DEVELOPED
IN RESPONSE TO A CLEAR AND UNEQUIVOCAL PUBLIC DEMAND.
THERE WAS NO MISTAKING THAT DEMAND. THERE ARE CERTAIN
ISSUES IN POLITICS, CERTAIN CURRENTS OF POPULAR FEELING,
THAT IMPINGE ON THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF ALL PARTIES AND
HELP SHAF. A CONSENSUS OF THOUGHT AND ACTION.
OUR OPPONEivTS RECOGNISED THOSE PRESSURES. THEY KNEW
AS WELL AS ' E DID THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WERE NO
LONGER WILLING TO SEE THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY FALL
INCREASINGLY INTO FOREIGN HANDS. THEY ESTABLISHED
THE WE IN TURN HAVE RESOLVED TO EXPAND AND
STRENGTHEN IT. THE A. I. D. C. WAS BORN OUT OF A
REALISATION THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR A SPECIALISED
INSTITUTION CAPABLE OF MOBILISING AND CHANNELLING CAPITAL
OFTEN IN LARGE AMOUNTS INTO NATIONALLY IMPORTANT
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BY COMPANIES OWNED AND CONTROLLED
IN AUSTRAL. IA. OUR PROPOSALS WILL REMOVE UNREALISTIC
RESTRICTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN PLACED ON THE CORPORATION SINCE
ITS INCEPTION, THEY WILL ENABLE IT TO CARRY OUT MORE
THOROUGHLY AND MORE EFFICIENTLY THE TASK EXPECTED OF IT. 
17
IN ALL THE CRITICISM I HAVE HEARD OF THE CORPORATION
AND THE NATIONAL INVESTMENT FUND, I HAVE YET TO HEAR
ANY SERIOUS CRITICISM OF THEIR FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVE.
THERE IS, AFTER ALL, NOTHING SURPRISING) NOTHING NARROW
OR XENOPHOBIC, IN THE DEMAND FOR GREATER AUSTRALIAN
PARTICIPATION IN THE CONTROL OF OUR ECONOMIC DESTINY.
SO IF I TAKE TIME TO DEAL WITH YOUR ANXIETIES AND
CRITICISMS, LET IT NOT BE THOUGHT THAT I AM ON THE
DEFENSIVE. NOT ONLY DO I BELIEVE IN MY HEART THAT OUR
PROPOSALS ARE RIGHT AND OVERDUE: I BELIEVE THAT YOU,
AS GOOD AUSTRALIANS, AS BUSINESSMEN OF PRIDE AND INTEGRITY,
BELIEVE IN YOUR OWN HEARTS IN THE NEED FOR THESE REFORMS.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER THAT OUR PROPOSALS ARE
AS MUCH CONCERNED WITH MAXIMISING INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT
GENERALLY AS THEY ARE WITH MAXIMISING AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP
AND CONTROL IN THAT DEVELOPMENT. A. I. D. C. IS ONLY ONE OF
MANY INSTITUTIONS THAT CAN AND DO PROVIDE DEVELOPMENT
FINANCE. SIR ALAN WESTERMAN, THE EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
OF MADE THIS POINT SUCCINCTLY IN A SUBMISSION
TO THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN OWNERSHIP AND
CONTROL, SIR ALAN SAID:
" I DO NOT SEE THE BASIC QUESTION AS BEING
WHETHER A. I. D. C. OR SOME ALTERNATIVE MECHANISM
IS 7HE BEST WAY TO FINANCE DEVELOPMENT AND
GET MORE AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION IN IT.
I DO NOT BELIEVE FOR A MOMENT THAT A. I. D. C.
COULD DO THAT JOB ALONE. THERE ARE A VARIETY
OF GOVERNMENTAL POLICY MEASURES AND INSTITUTIONS
THAT DO OR COULD HAVE A ROLE 
18
To ME THE REAL QUESTION IS WHETHER
THERE IS A ROLE FOR A SPECIAL KIND OF
INSTITUTION SUCH As A. I. D. C. WHICH, DIRECTED
NOT JUST TOWARDS NORMAL SHAREHOLDERS I OBJECTIVES
FOR A PARTICULAR PROJECT BUT TO THE WIDER
NATIONAL OBJECTIVES SET FOR IT, WOULD ACTIVELY
PURSUE THOSE OBJECTIVES ( AND-ONLY THOSE OBJECTIVES)
THROUGH ITS OWN COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AND
NEGOTIATIONS IN THE MARKET PLACE. IT HAS ALREADY
BEEN ACCEPTED BY PARLIAMENT AND I BELIEVE THE
COMMUNITY GENERALLY THAT A. I. D. C. IS TO HAVE
THAT ROLE. IF THIS IS SO I WOULD HOPE THERE SHOULD
BE NO OBJECTION TO IT BEING PROPERLY EQUIPPED FOR
THE JOB."
THE POINT IS MADE BY SOME CRITICS THAT THE EXPAN SION
OF A. I. D. C. WILL LEAD TO INCREASED COMPETITION AMONG
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FOR AVAILABLE DOMESTIC SAVINGS,
RESULTING IN HIGHER INTEREST RATES AND A DIVERSION OF
FUNDS FROM ESTABLISHED INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS SAVINGS
BANKS, BUILDING SOCIETIES AND LIFE OFFICES. NOW AS FAR
AS I AM AWARE, THERE IS NOTHING IN ECONOMIC THEORY WHICH
SAYS THAT THE ADVENT OF A NEW FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY, OR
THE EXPANSION OF AN ESTABLISHED ONE, WILL PUSH UP INTEREST
RATES, IN FACT, IF NEW SAVINGS ARE GENERATED AND FUNDS
DIVERTED FROM INDIVIDUALS WHO MIGHT OTHERWISE HAVE INVESTED
DIRECT, IT MAY HELP TO REDUCE THE AVERAGE COST OF MONEY IN
THE COMMUNITY. WE BELIEVE THAT INTENSIFIED COMPETITION FOR
FUNDS Ar,, ONG FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES WILL MAKE THESE INSTITUTIONS
MORE COST-CONSCIOUS AND INNOVATIVE, AND THAT IN TURN WILL
REDUCE THE MARGINS BETWEEN THEIR BORROWING AND LENDING RATES. 
19
IT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION THAT THE ADDITIONAL
FUNDS CHANNELLED INTO RESOURCE-DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRIAL
PROJECTS SHOULD BE DIVERTED ULTIMATELY FROM LESS ESSENTIAL
PURPOSES, SUCH AS HIGH-RISE CITY BUILDINGS, RATHER THAN
FROM HOME-BUYING OR PUBLIC AUTHORITY S-PENDINGa
ANOTHER POINT MADE BY OUR CRITICS IS THAT THE NEW
A. I. D. C. AND THE N. I. F. WILL BE ATTEMPTING TO SATISFY
NEEDS WHICH ESTABLISHED INSTITUTIONS ARE ALREADY SATISFYING
ADEQUATELY. MY ANSWER IS THAT ESTABLISHED INSTITUTIONS
HAVE NO OBLIGATION AND EVEN LESS INCLINATION TO
PURSUE NATIONAL POLICY OBJECTIVES SINGLE-MINDEDLY AND
PURPOSEFULLY. AI. I), C. WAS ESTABLISHED TO HELP FINANCE
NATIONALLY DESIRABLE INDUSTRIAL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT;
TO PROMOTE MAXIMUM PRACTICABLE AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION
IN IMPORTANT ENTERPRISES, AND TO HELP FIL L
GAPS IN THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL MARKET. THE INEW L-LGISLATION
WILL ENABLE THE CORPORATION TO FULFIL THESE NATIONAL
RESPONSIBILITIES MORE EFFECTIVELY. REMEMBER, IF ANY
AUSTRALIAN INVESTOR WANTS TO BUY A SHARE DIRECT IN A
LISTED PUBLIC COMPANY, THERE IS NOTHING IN OUR PROPOSALS
TO STOP HIM OR TO AUTHORISE A. I. DIC. TO FORCE HIM TO
INVEST THROUGH THE INSTEAD. THE TROUBLE IS THAT
IT IS NOT ALWAYS PluSSIolL E AUSTRfALIANS TO. INVEST IN
FOREIGN-OPERATED ENTERPRISES, ESPECIALLY WHEN THEY ARE SET
UP AS SUBSIDIARY PRIVATE COMPANIES OR EVEN AS BRANCHES OF
THE OVERSEAS CONGLOMERATE. 
20
AND EVEN WHERE IT IS POSSIBLE TO INVEST, UNLESS THE
INDIVIDUAL HOLDING IS A VERY BIG ONE IT WILL COMMAND
NO EFFECTIVE SAY WHATEVER IN SEEING IHA~ lI E COMPANY
FOLLOWS POLICIES IN THE INTERESTS OF AUSTRALIA.
IN SHORT, IT HAS LITTLE OR NOTHING TO DO WITH A. I. DoCs
OBJECTIVES$ IN AN4Y CASE, IT IS NOT THE JOB OF A. I. DsCs TO DISPLACE
AUSTRALIAN EQUITY INV'ESTMENT OF THAT KIND. IT IS DESIGNED
TO ADD TO IT, BY DISPLACING SOME OF WHAT WOULD OTHERWISE
BE FOREIGN INVESTMENT. IT SHOULD THUS BE ABLE TO DO A LOT
TO STRENGTHEN THE AUSTRALIAN SAY IN THE DIRECTION OF
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES. THERE IS
CERTAINLY NOTHING IN OUR PROPnFA. S TH~ AT * VvLL. DEP~ IRIVE N. I. F.
BONDHOLDERS, PROTECTED AS THEY ARE BY A SUPERVISORY COUNCIL,
FROM ANY OF THE PRACTICAL BENEFITS OF OWNERSHIP THAT THEY
WOULD ENJOY BY SMALL IPORTFOLIO'I HOLDINGS OF SHARES LET
ALONE FROM INVESTMENT VIA A UNIT TRUST OR INVESTMENT
COMPANY OR A LIFE OR PENSION FUND. FAR FROM DIVERTING
EQUITY FUNDS FROM STOCK EXCHANGES, OUR PROPOSALS WILL
CREATE A NEW EQUITY INSTRUMENT ( THE INVESTMENT BONDS)
TRADED ON THE EXCHANGES, AND RAISE FUNDS FOR EQUITY
INVESTMENT FROM MANY ORDINARY PEOPLE WHO WOULD NEVER
THINK OF INVESTING THROUGH THE STOCK EXCHANGE. 
21
WHEN THE A. I. D. C. WAS FIRST PROPOSED BY SIR JOHN
MCEWENI IT WAS REGARDED IN SOME QUARTERS AS A DANGEROUSLY
RADICAL CREATION, SOME MEMBERS OF THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT
SAW IT AS A SACRED DUTY TO FIGHT THE AIDC, AS PART OF
THEIR HOLY CRUSADE AGAINST SOCIALISM, I BELIEVE BUSINESSMEN
TODAY ARE OUTGROWING THESE INSTINCTIVE PREJUDICES; YOU ARE
SHREWD ENOUGH TO JUDGE ANY GOVERNMENT MEASURE ON REALISTIC
AND FACTUAL GROUNDS, THE FACT IS THAT THE SAME PEOPLE WHO
COMPLAIN TODAY ABOUT " NATIONALIZATION BY STEALTH MADE THE
SAME CHARGE AGAINST THE MENZIES GOVERNMENT'S BANKING
LEGISLATION IN 1957, WHAT IS STEALTHY OR FURTIVE ABOUT
OUR PROPOSALS? I HAVE BEEN ADVOCATING THEM PUBLICLY FOR YEARS,
THEY HAVE BEEN OPENLY DEBATED INSIDE AND OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT,
OUR INTENTIONS ARE CLEARLY EXPRESSED IN THE LEGISLATION,
THE WHOLE OF AIDC,' s ACTIVITIES ARE SUBJECT TO AUDIT,
ITS ACTIVITIES CAN BE SCRUTINISED BY THE PARLIAMENT,
IF MY YEARS IN PUBLIC LIFE HAVE TAUGHT ME ONE THING,
IF THE EXPERIENCE OF WESTERN GOVERNMENTS IN ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT HAS PROVED ANYTHING IN RECENT YEARS, IT IS
SIMPLY THAT THERE ARE NO LONGER ANY CLEAR-CUT OR USEFUL
DISTINCTIONS TO BE DRAWN BETWEEN FREE ENTERPRISE POLICIES ON THE
ONE HAND AND INTERVENTIONIST POLICIES ON THE OTHER, FOR ALL
THEIR SLO3ANS AND CATCHCRIES, POLITICAL PARTIES OF ALL SHADES1
IN ALL COUNTRIES, NOW ACCEPT THAT DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS
MUST CO-OPERATE WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR IN THE RUNNING OF
A MIXED ECONOMY, / 22 
22
BOTH SIDES HAVE A COMMON CONCERN, A SIMPLE CONCERN
TO ENSURE THAT THE SYSTEM WORKS, WHO IS DOCTRINAIRE
ON THESE ISSUES? WE WHO SEEK CO-OPERATION, OR THOSE WHO
INSIST THAT NO CO-OPERATION IS POSSIBLE? WHO ARE THE DOGMATISTS
AND REACTIONARIES? WE WHO ACKNOWLEDGE THE REALITY OF CHANGE,
OR THOSE WHO FEAR CHANGE OF ANY KIND? WHO ARE THE IDEOLOGUES?
WE WHO REMAIN FLEXIBLE, CANDID IN OUR AIMS, PRAGMATIC IN OU7
APPROACH, OR THOSE WHO BELIEVE THAT THE ENORMOUS PROBLEMS OF
MODERN INDUSTRIAL ECONOMIES, AND THE THREAT THEY POSE TO
SOCIAL HARMONY AND JUSTICE, WILL BE SOLVED BY 19TH CENTURY
SLOGANS OF LAISSEZ-FAIRE CAPITALISM? ONCE IT MIGHT HAVE
BEEN POSSIBLE TO HOPE THAT THE CHALLENGES OF AUTOMATION,
OF POPULATION, OF RESOURCES DIPLOMACY, OF INFLATION,
OF POLLUTION, OF NATIONAL OWNERSHIP, WOULD SOMEHOW SOLVE
THEMSELVES IF LEFT ALONE, NO ONE BELIEVES THAT NOW,
THE PROBLEMS ARE INESCAPABLE; AND IF THERE IS ANY
CONSOLATION IN FACING SUCH TESTING AND UNCERTAIN TIMES,
IT IS IN THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THE GREAT CREATIVE EPOCHS IN
HUMAN AFFAIRS HAVE BEEN EPOCHS OF CHANGE AND TRIAL, 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 205
18 March 1974
COCKBURN SOUND SHIP REPAIR FACILITIES FOR STUDY
( Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam
and the Premier of Western Australia,
the Hon. J. T. Tonkin, M. L. A.)
An independent study to examine ship repair
requirements, both commerical and naval, on the West Australian
coast, is to be commissioned early this year.
The Australian and West Australian Governments will
commission a j-udy of the possibilities of long term, staged
development of future ship repair facilities in Western Australia.
The two Governments recognised that joint naval and
commercial ship repair facilities could raise practical problems,
but agreed also that separate facilities which ultimately could
be developed to complement each other might be feasible.
Invitations to undertake the study will be issued to
selected tenderers later this month.
Tenderers will be asked to examine the economic and
engineering feasibility of establishing commercial ship repair
facilities in Western Australia. They will also be called upon
to examine the feasibility of joint planning for the development
of commerical ship repair facilities along with the Royal Australian
Navy's long term proposals for extending naval ship repair facilities
at HMAS STIRLING, Garden Island, W. A.
Representatives of-the two Governments, at a meeting
in Canberra last week, agreed on details of the study, which was
expected to be completed in about six months and cost between
$ 20,000 and $ 30,000. The cost would be shared equally between
both Governments. The study will be managed jointly by representatives
of both Governments.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 19 MARCH 1974
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't any announcements to make to you. You had
quite a number given to you by my colleagues after the Cabinet meeting
yesterday. There are some others to be announced but they require
notification to Premiers and meetings of the Executive Council so I
can't do those yet. Are there any questions?
QUESTION: I quote from a very penetrating article in today's " Age"
which I believe is part of your Bible. It concerns President Nyerere' s..
and it says that Nyerere holds some political prisoners and I want
to ask you whether you will now give an undertaking on behalf of
the press people of the world that you will raise the question of
political prisoners with President Nyerere?
PRIME MINISTER: I raise, with any Head of Government or State,
matters which affect the relations between Australia and his country.
obviously, this is one of the things which affect relations. I
understand that whenever I go to any country where there are, or are
thought to be, political prisoners that I will be asked questions
about it. As you know I do not go into details about discussions I
have with Heads of State or Heads of Government. No Head of State
or Head of Government does so. I would say this, however, that
Tanzania is one of the most admirable states in the continent of
Africa in the way it is governed. I notice there is a question on
notice and there was also a question without notice from a man whose
consistent scrutiny or even ill-will towards Tanzania are known to
you all. Now the fact is that President Nyerere is the senior member
of the Commonwealth after President Makarios. He was the senior
member of the Commonwealth present at the last Commonwealth Heads of
Government Meeting in Ottawa, last August. In Tanzania there is more
freedom than there is in practically any country in Africa, north,
south, east or west.
QUESTION: Last week after his talks with you, Mr Tonkin was very
confident about the outcome of the Alwest project. Can you say what
reasons he may have had for feeling confident at that stage and what
may have happened in between to change the Government's decision?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government had made no decision on the matter
until yesterday. You will remember that about a month ago we decided
that we would call for reports from the Interdepartmental Committee
on Foreign Takeovers, from the Minister for the Environment and
Conservation and the Minister for Urban and Regional Development on
the Alwest project. It was quite clear in view of the strong report
from the Interdepartmental Committee on Foreign Takeovers that the
Government couldn't, I don't believe any Government could have waived
the variable deposit requirement. The variable deposit requirement has
never been waived yet. This was far from being the most meritorious
application, and there were other features in the environmental field
which gave great misgivings. The Alcoa project is possibly damaging
to Perth's water supply. One could not, without very great
safeguards, be party to permitting an expansion of such projects. You
know the requirement that we made there. We say that the agreement
between the Western Australian Government and the joint venture it
should be amended to provide the detailed environmental investigations / 2 
-2-
to be carried out under the supervision of the Department of the
Environment and Conservation at the joint venturers expense and the
cost of any steps necessary to arrest and/ or correct significant
environmental degradation revealed by continuing investigations be met
by the joint venturers. There is a generally accepted principle now
that the polluter pays. If there is no pollution then no payments are
required. Nevertheless, we know that close to Canberra here the evil
that can flow and the expense to the taxpayers that can arise from
failure by Governments to supervise mining operations. Captains Flat
was mined by a company which left a very great number of slag heaps
there; they are now poisoning Canberra's water supply but the Company
that did it has gone into liquidation. That means the Australian
taxpayer will now have to pay to clean up the mess left by the
company which did its work, made its profits, and then disappeared.
Now Alcoa's operations in Western Australia are causing misgivings
about Western Australia's water supply. Water is the most precious
resource that Western Australia has. I don't believe that the Australian
Government, without whose permission no export can take place from
Australia, can lend itself light-heartedly or without proper
consideration to a further degradation or possible degradation of the
environment. The report of the Department of the Environment and
Conservation has been tabled in the library. There are not enough
copies to distribute to you yet but I guess the West Australian could
get one.
QUESTION: He was so confident after his talks with you that
PRIME MINISTER: I surely don't have to repeat to you that the
Government has considered this twice. The first time was to set these
inquiries in train. The second time was when those inquiries came
in, and the two reports which it is proper to release have been
released.
QUESTION: Would you also consider releasing the IDC report on
foreign takeovers and tabling it in the Library.
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Why not?
PRIME MINISTER: I would have thought that more than any newspaper
yours would realise why. The reason is that companies seeking
exemption from the variable deposit requirement give confidential
information to the Interdepartmental Committee on Foreign Takeovers.
The information which they give is of very great interest to their
competitors. Quite obviously, therefore, one wouldn't without their
positive approval release that information. This is not the first
time that two of the joint venturers, BHP and Reynolds have sought a
lease over bauxite deposits. They combined in making application for
Gove; another combination won, but nobody has suggested, certainly
nobody from any financial paper has hitherto suggested that the
information given in those circumstances should be released.
QUESTION: Could not an abridged edition of the Interdepartmental
Committee report be produced to eliminate the confidential information.
If not, what can the Government do to inform investors, both
overseas and Australian, what its general policies are on matters of
this sort? / 3 
PRIME MINISTER: This can be seen from the decision by the Government.
The Government's decision incorporates the recommendation of the
Interdepartmental Committee on Foreign Takeovers. These were the
words of the Government decision, in effect, which has been conveyed
to the West Australian Government and also to BHP on behalf of the
joint venturers. " The Australian Government agrees that the project
should go ahead providing that the parties, other possible
participants, and the Western Australian Government are able to agree
upon arrangements which esr".... and then I will just now read the
requirements which concern ownership and management. I have already
given you one about the environmental aspects. The ones about foreign
ownership are these: " That the mining operation remains at all times
at least 51 per cent Australian-owned and managed by an Australian
shareholder". And, then, in respect to the refinery aspects the
refinery operations: " That Reynolds invite the Australian Development
Corporation to organise further Australian participation in the
alumina refinery on the basis that any Australian participants in
the refinery would be admitted to the venture on terms and conditions
no less favourable than those applying to prospective overseas
participants and on the basis that Australian participation would be
given preference over foreign participation in the event that known
bauxite reserves prove to be insufficient to support the expansion
of capacity that would be required to accommodate both Australian and
foreign requests for participation." And secondly " that if BHP waives
its ten year option over the refinery or if BHP fails to exercise the
option within 10 years of the date of commencement of the operation
of the refinery, Reynolds transfer the option to the AIDC or to an
interest or group nominated by the AIDC and that the option so
transferred remain current until the expiration of 12 years after the
date of the commencement of the operation of the refinery." Now those
are the recommendations of the Interdepartmental Committee on Foreign
Takeovers and the Government accepted those strong recommendations word
for word. But we can't obviously give the commercial data upon which
the recommendation was made.
QUESTION: Will the next taxation concessions on housing interest
apply to the gross or net incomes of those eligible and could you
estimate the cost to the Government of this concession?
PRIME MINISTER: The proposal flows from the following sentences in
my policy speech, and then I will give the particular answer which
you want, that particular section. " We propose that a limited tax
deductibility be available for interest payments. This tax concession
will be concentrated amongst the groups which bear the greatest
burden. All taxpayers whose actual income is $ 4000 or below will be
entitled to deduct 100 per cent of their interest rate payments.
The-percentage of total interest payments which is deductible will
be reduced by 1 per cent for every $ 100 of income in excess of $ 4000."
Now you ask what will be the income. It will be the actual net income.
QUESTION: Cost to the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Ask the Treasurer that. I think it's here but it
will take a bit of time to look it up.
QUESTION: Will you support any diplomatic moves made by the new
United Kingdom Government that may be opposed to the build up of
the American base at Diego Garcia. 4 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. It is in the context, as Senator Willesee
said when you and I were in Burma, that we don't believe that it helps
the littoral States of the Indian Ocean for there to be great
power rivalry. We would hope that there would be an agreement
between the United States and the Soviet Union to restrict their
build-up.
QUESTION: Have you made any representation to the United States
on this matter, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I have discussed it with their representatives
here. I haven't raised the subject but it has come up in conversation
QUESTION: Did you put this point of view to the new British
Government? PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Did Cabinet receive a report on the Superphosphate Bounty
from the joint Caucus committee and, if so, was any action taken
on this?
PRIME MINISTER: You know what I haven't got the text of it
here, but you would know the resolution that was passed by the joint
Caucus committees on this subject. The only change which has been
recommended by the Cabinet is that the facilities.... I think the
original resolution was that any industry which thought itself
disadvantaged by the expiry of the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act
at the end of this calendar year could ask that the Industries
Assistance Commission consider forms of assistance appropriate to its
needs, and that the facilities of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics
and other departments be made available to any such industry to
help it prepare its case to the Industries Assistance Commission.
The Cabinet believes that that should be the facilities of the BAE
or through it of relevant departments should be made available to
any industry to help it prepare its case. We believe that it is
appropriate for the BAE, an economic body, to be the appropriate body
for members of the public to approach rather than departments which
have to advise ministers.
QUESTION: This will in fact rule out the Superphosphate Bounty as
such though?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope so.
QUESTION: Two questions on the housing interest deductibility scheme
two points on that. Many houses, of course, are owned jointly
by married couples both of whom are working. In that case how will
the interest be deducted, will it be deducted from say just the
main breadwinners net income or will it be split. And the second
point, will it apply just to the first house people own or to the
house in which they are living at the time?
PRIME MINISTER: It will apply to the aggregated actual incomes of
a couple. It will apply to whatever residence is their principal
residence or a loan to extend the accommodation at their principal
residence. 
QUESTION: Is actual net income is that different from net taxable
income?. PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Quite apart from the merits of whether or not the
Superphosphate Bounty should be retained, how do you reconcile your
attitude towards it with what appears to be a contradiction in the
party platform which says the provision of fertilizer subsidies or
words to that effect.
PRIME MINISTER:. The provision in the party policy is in general
terms. It does not purport to say in what years or in what amounts
there will be bounties or subsidies. It might be appropriate to
point out that no Government has done more in a rational sense
to assist the primary industries. This year's Budget spends
million more on primary industries than last year's Budget. The changes
in expenditure are in two fields in particular. First of all we
believe that money should be spent on promoting markets where it is
possible to sell goods. Our predecessors did it the other way around.
They sai6, if you produce anything we will try and find a market
for it. We say, we try to ascertain the markets which are available
and then let the public know, the producers in particular know, where
those markets are, what size they are. And my Government, through
Dr Patterson and Dr Cairns, has found more markets ones we never had
before or bigger entry to ones we already had than any other Government
before. We have done more trade agreements in our fifteen months
in office than our predecessors did in the last fifteen years.
Secondly, where welfare criteria are involved, i. e. where the taxpayers
are being asked to subsidise people because otherwise they are
suffering hardship we are concentrating the assistance on those who
need the assistance most. We are helping people to get proper sized
farms or if they can't get a proper sized farm or if they don't believe
there is a future for them in the industry, we are helping them to get
out of the industry. Our predecessors, by contrast, followed the
practice of giving a subsidy or a bounty per unit of production.
Therefore, the bigger the producer was the more subsidy he got, so
that it meant that people who needed it least or not at all got most.
Those who needed it most, got least or sometimes nothing. Now we
are bringing about a rational allocation of resources and our attitude
towards tariffs, for instance, in the secondary industry has been a
very enlightened one and the primary industries who were always
complaining about the featherbedding which Country Party leaders used
to give to secondary industry are now finding that they have a
Government which heeds their pleas where those pleas are rational.
We have done more in the rational way a responsible way for
producers, primary and secondary, than any Government in Australia's
history. QUESTION: Are you concerned that companies like AMP may be influenced
by the abolition of the bounty to decrease the amount of investment
they make in primary production? / 6 
PRIME MINISTER: My heart bleeds for the A. M. P. and its sufferings at
the end-of the Superphosphate Bounty. I agree with what Sir John
McEwen said when the Superphosphate Bounty was cancelled previously.
You will remember that the Labor Party introduced the Superphosphate
Bounty in 1941, just before the Pacific War. And during the wartime
there was price control, there was a loss of overseas markets and
there were also, in the middle forties, some very bad climatic conditions
and the industries needed assistance, but in the three postwar years
incomes in primary industry rose by an average of 38 per cent a year.
That was the case in 1949/ 50, 1948/ 49, 1947/ 48, and relying on this
the new Liberal/ Country Party Government with Sir John McEwen, as
he now ias minister for Commerce and Agriclture, brought in a bill
to cancel the Superphosphate Bounty. He brought it in in November
1950; he made it retrospective to the end of June 1950 and he pointed
out that there was no purpose now in continuing the bounty for the
two purposes for which it had been introduced. One, to educate people
into the advantages of fertilizers. The other was to help them in
lean times. He pointed out that everybody knew the advantages of
fertilizers and things had never been so prosperous. Now relying on
the same arguments, strengthened as they have been, we are allowing
the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act to expire at the end of this
calendar year because in the last three financial years the average
income of primary producers has risen not by 38 per cent as it had
when Sir John McEwen cancelled it previously, but by 48 per cent. And
if we were to extend it for another three years, we would be committing
the taxpayer to find $ 200 million. Now our taxes can be spent for
better purpose than that. Our Government has found markets which our
predecessors lost or never acknowledged and we are helping people
in the primary sector who need it most.
QUESTION: In Opposition, Prime Minister, we were familiar with your
criticisms of inequities in taxation deductions. We heard you point
out that your driver paid, in fact, twice as much for health
insurance as you did.
PRIME MINISTER: The disparity is even greater now because my income
has gone up more than his has since we came into Government.
QUESTION: Now that you are in Government, what are you going to do
about this in such matters as child endownment that have been
brought to your attention by Professor Ronald Henderson's report.
PRIME MINISTER: The Government hasn't considered Professor Henderson's
first report.
QUESTION: Will the Indian Ocean play an important part in your talks
with the President?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect so, I don't think necessarily a
predominant part. As you will realise, President Nyerere and I saw
quite a lot of each other during the 10 days we were in Ottawa at the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and he was very happy to
visit us. One of the first Foreign Ministers to visit Australia
after the change of Government was the Foreign Minister of Tanzania,
Mr Malecela. He is coming with the President on this occasion.
Of course, the Indian Ocean will be one of the things which we will
be discussing. I think I can say without any qualification whatever
that every littoral State in the Indian Ocean hopes that there will be
no escalation or great power rivalry in the Indian Ocean. The Indian
Ocean has been mercifully free of it. We don't want to launch it now. 



7
1 4 NQ DATE
M/ 41 21 March' o
INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ELIMINATION
OF RACIAL DISCRIIIINATION
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr Whitlam, today reaffirmed the Government's opposition to
racial discrimination and its commitment to the basic principles
of freedom and dignity for all people regardless of race, sex,
language, religion or ethnic origin.
Mr Whitlam said that in 1966 the United Nations General
Assembly had proclaimed 21 March as the International Day for the
. Elimination of Racial Discrimination in commemoration of the
Sharpeville tragedy. The aim was to draw world attention to the
urgent need to eliminate racial discrimination wherever it existed.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government would continue to
condemn the apartheid policies of the South African Government, but
he did not see the day simply as an occasion to point to the
shortcomings of others. It was also an opportunity to examine
where Australia itself was headed.
Mr Whitlam said that on 21 November last, the Government
had introduced into the Senate two Bills, the Racial Discrimination
Bill 1973 and the Human Rights Bill 1973, both of which had
impori-.! it implications for the prevention and elimination of all
forms of racial discrimination in Australia.
These Bills would be re-introduced in Parliament in an
amended form in the Autumn session.
The proposed legislation on racial discrimination would
implement the terms of the . International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which the
Government would ratify.
This Convention recognised that any doctrine of superiority
based on racial differences was fundamentally false, morally 
indefensible and without any social justification,. The Racial
Discrimination Bill condemned racial discrimination as being
unlawful and provided administrative machinery as well as legal
sanctions to prevent and eliminate racial discrimination as far
as possible. Mr Whitlam said that the Bill provided for an Australian
Race Relations Commissioner, and a Race Relations Council. Their
functions would be to promote understanding and tolerance between
racial and ethnic groups.
The Racial Discrimination Bill was a major step in
Australia's program to implement the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, launched by the United Nations
on 10 December 1973. Australia welcomed the Decade as a positive
and necessary means of tackling the problem.
Mr Whitlam said that other action taken by the Government
' to counter racial discrimination included contributions, totalling
$ 25,000 in 1973/ 74, to the United Nations Educational and Training
program for Southern Africa, the United Nations Trust Fund for
South Africa and the United Nations Fund for Namnibia.
By its actions and votes at the 28th Session of the United
Nations General Assembly in 1973 the Government had clearly
indicated its resolve to help to eliminate all forms of racism and
racial discrimination. 



Press Statement No. 207
21 March 1974
AMENDMENT OF THE NORTH WEST CAPE AGREEMENT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, as Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and the United States Ambassador,
Mr. Marshall Green, today signed and exchanged Notes relating
to amendments to the 1963 Agreement on the North West Cape
Naval Communication Station. The exchange of Notes represents
the first step by the Australian and United States Governments
in giving effect to the arrangements reached as a result of the
negotiations conducted by the Minister for Defence, Mr. Barnard,
with the United States Government in Washington in January.
Three amendments are contained in the Notes. The first
provides for the Station to be operated as a joint facility by
the armed forces of the two Governments. The second will have
the effect of reducing exclusive land rights at North West Cape;
the United States would retain exclusive rights to a communications
building only. The third limits the Australian Government's
financial responsibility for its participation in the joint facility.
The Prime Minister said the Government proposed, following
consideration by the Cabinet, to introduce the necessary amending
legislation to the United States Naval Communications Station
Agreement Act ( 1963). It was intended that this be done, if
practicable, during the current sittings of the Parliament.
The amended Agreement would come into force after legislation
had been enacted and instruments notifying the approval of the
two Governments exchanged.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



6
A At
NQ DATE 21 1arch 1974
APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIA'S FIRST WOMAN AMBASSADOR
The first appointment of a woman career diplomat as an
Australian Ambassador overseas was announced today by t} n
Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
Mr Whitlam. She is Miss Ruth L. Dobson, at present Counsellor at the
Australian Embassy in Athens. She is to become Australia's
first resident Ambassador to Denmark, succeeding Dr LoD. Thomson,
who, until now, has been dually accredited from The Hague.
Miss Dobson is one of 35 women diplomats in the Australian
foreign service, most of whom have been recruited by the
Department of Foreign Affairs since 1970.
Twenty currently occupy positions overseas, including two
other senior posts, Deputy High Commissioner at the Australian
High Commission in Zuva and Counsellor at the Australian Embassy
in Rome. Mr Whitlam said that he regarded the first appointment of a
woman career diplomat to an ambassadorial position as an important
development in the growth and capacity of Australia's foreign
service. Her appointment, the Prime Minister added, also underlined
Australia's wish to strengthen its relations with Denmark
which had always been strong and cordial, and the importance
Australia attached to its relations with the enlarged European
Economic Community, of which Denmark had become a full member
in January 1973.
Miss Dobson, who was born in Sydney, was educated at
Frensham School, Mittagong, and the University of Sydney where
she obtained a rA degree. She joined the Department of Foreign
Affairs in 1943 and was attached to the then Division of Post
Hostilities and the United Branch as a research officer. 
She was integrated into the diplomatic service in 1957
and from 1961 to 1963 served at the Australian High Commission
in Wellington. She was promoted to First Secretary in 1962
and was the Department's Conference Officer from 1964 to 1965.
Later, Miss Dobson was seconded to the Governor-General's
staff as private secretary to Lady Casey, and from 1967 to 1968
served as First Secretary at the Australian Embassy in Manilaø
She was promoted to Counsellor in 1970 and during 1971 was in
charge of the Department's Western Europe Section in Canberra. 



t-A A NNO DATE
M/ 44 23 March 1974
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO 50TH ECAFE CONFERENCE
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mro Whitlam, announced today that the Minister for
Science and Minister Assisting the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Morrison, would lead the Australian Delegation
to the 30th session of the UN Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East ( ECAFE), to be held in Colombo, Sri Lanka,
from 27 March to 8 April.
Mr. Whitlam said that the annual sessions of ECAFE
reviewed the economic and social situation in the region and
the commission's activities throughout the previous year. The
commission's future priorities and work programs were also
decided at these sessions.
The session would provide a valuable opportunity for
cons. ideration by member countries of the fundamental economic
and social problems of the area. It was envisaged that a new
development strategy for ECAFE would be discussed at the session.
In keeping with its policy of encouraging economic, social and
political co-operation in the Asian and Pacific region,' the
Australian delegation would play a constructive role in this
work. Mr. Morrison would make the Australian statement in the
session's general debate.
As in previous years, the delegation would include
officers of the Departments of Foreign Affairs, Overseas Trade
and the Treasury. 



EMBARGO: 6 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING CEREMONY AT THE NEW A. B. C. BUILDING COMPLEX,
COLLINSWOOD, ADELAIDE, FRIDAY 29 MARCH 1974
It is almost 42 years since the Australian Broadcasting
Commission was founded with the requirement that it " shall
broadcast from the national broadcasting stations adequate
and comprehensive programs, and shall take in the interests
of the community all such measures as in the opinion of the
Commission are conducive to the full development of suitable
broadcasting programs". At this time the Commission began its
operations in South Australia from an old stone building in
Hindmarsh Square the first freehold property " acquired" by
the A. B. C. in Australia. Today the Commission is able finally
to house itself in Adelaide in up-to-date adequate accommodation,
The new ten-storey administration, radio and orchestral
studio complex here at Collinswood is spacious and, among other
things, fully airconditioned. The building will provide vastly
improved accommodation for all administrative and program
departments, News, Technical Services, Publicity, " TV Times",
Staff Association and Credit Union Offices. Large studios for
the South Australian Symphony Orchestra and for light
entertainment programs and two smaller studios for drama and
general production are already fully operative. Hindmarsh
Square ill be completely vacated by late this year when the
last A. B. C. units have moved into this new building.
It is appropriate that such a long-needed development
is taking place in 1974. For it appears that this year will
be one of great modernisation for the A. B. C. It is only about
two weeks since the Minister for the Media, Senator Doug
McClelland, tabled in the Federal Parliament the document which
provides for modernisation.
I refer, of course, to the report prepared by the
Management Consultants, McKinsey Company. The report suggests
a number of important recommendations for the future development
of the A. B. C. These ' range from management organisation to
program output. By the nature of its charter, the Commission itself
will take the final decision on acceptance or otherwise of
the McKinsey Report recommendations, although inevitably the
government will be involved if these proposals require
amendments to existing legislation. There is, however, one
simple decision, involving both the Commission and the
government which has already been made and the importance of
which can easily be overlooked. This is the decision to make
the McKinsey Report public. When the company made a similar
study of the its report there was not published.
Both the A. B. C. and the Government decided that the British
precedent should not be followed in the handling of what is
after all a report for Australians about their national
broadcasting system.
Looking beyond the needs of Australians generally,
the government and the Commission decided that it was important
for the staff of the A. B. C. 6,700 people that they should have 
-2-
ready access to the report. It is too important a document
about too important an institution involving too many people
for it to remain the subject of rumour and speculation.
In as much as mora~ le problems may exist within the A. B. C.,
I trust that our action in publishing the report indicates
a desire and a willingness for the staff to participate in
the debate that flows from it. Indeed, it is interesting that
the first through discussion, including an interview with the
A. B. C. Chairman, took place on an A. B. C. program, " This Day
Tonight". It was especially appropriate for this program
to open the debate fully and, dare I say it, even with some
relish. While there may be a need for modernising the A. B. C.,
" This Day Tonight" and its sister program, " Four Corners"
symbolises the need for the durability of certain basic
principles in the operation of the organisation. They, more
than any other programs, have been the subject of controversy
arising out of these principles. Simply stated, they have
been central to the debate about the independence and freedom
from political interference of the organisation. They have
involved men and women whose determination to maintain
independence and to resist interference deserves high praise.
There will, of course, be some argument about the extent
to which the independence and freedom of the A. B. C. have been
threatened. I know that previous Chairmen of the A. B. C. have
stated that such trends have always been exaggerated. I will
say now, however, that those trends have at times been real,
although some of them have been implicit rather than stated.
I have only to mention what happened in the 1960s when an
interview of a former French Premier, M Bidault, was banned
to establish my point. I have only to mention what happened
to " The Quiet Mutiny", a program about Vietnam produced
by an Australian, John Pilger, and what happened about " End
of Dialogue", a program on apartheid in South Africa, to
support my point.
I would mention in this context the disquiet I expressed
in a speech in 1971 about what I saw as a new means of potential
unilateral censorship. I spoke then about the dangers of applying
too rigidly a policy of not allowing a point of view to be put on
the A. B. C. if the opposing point of view was not presented more
or less at the same time. I pointed out that it would be absurd
for the one point of view not to be put simply because its opponents
chose to remain silent. By all means, they should be given the
opportunity to speak but, by no means, should their decision to
remain silent enable the stifling of the viewpoint which they oppose.
" It is wrong that politicians of either Party should in effect be
able to censor a debate by refusal to appear," I said then. 
-3
Pressure against the A. B. C. has always involved means
other than direct approach or intervention. A public statement,
even if unaccompanied by action, can in itself be a source of
pressure, designed to frighten men and women engaged in the
delicate task of presenting information about matters of public
controversy. I have no reason to revise my suspicious views
of the motives of a former Postmaster-General who could say:
" I think in some programs there is not what I would call a
proper balance, which gets very close to leading to bias on
the program and I don't merely say political bias."
I see no reason to revise my suspicions of the motives of
the same man who said in the same statement that the Australian
Broadcasting Commissioners should preview controversial programs
of programs that were likely to be controversial. I certainly
see no reason to revise my suspicions about one Reverend.
parliamentarian who thought the answer to the problem was to
come up with his own set of guidelines for the A. B. C.
I have never made any secret of my great admiration for
a former Labor Prime Minister, John Curtin. In talking about the
I find again that on this, as on so many other subjects,
what he had to say made profound sense. It is worth quoting
at some length a statement he made on 12 April 1945. He said
then:-" The Government recognises that the intent of the
Australian Broadcasting Act is to create a position
of special independence of judgment and action for
the national broadcasting instrumentality. This is
inevitably the case because of its highly delicate
function in broadcasting at public expense news
statements and discussions which are potent influences
on public opinion and attitudes. As the legislation
provides, this peculiar function calls for an undoubted
measure of independence for the controlling body of
the national broadcasting instrumentality which cannot
be measured by the constitution of other semi-governmental
boards or agencies which do not impinge on the tender
and dangerous realms of moral, religious, aesthetic
and political values. In the last resort, the healthy
and beneficent functions of national broadcasting
and the maintenance of public confidence in the system
must rest, in all matters touching these values, solely
on the integrity and independent judgment of the persons
chosen to determine and administer its policy, and not
on either review by, or pressure from, any sources
outside it, political or non-political. This principle
holds good in spite of the necessary responsibility of
the Commission to Parliament through the Minister, for
the legitimate use of its funds under the terms of the
Act, and all the sections of the Act should be read in
the light of the above general intent of Parliament to
the establishment of the Commission." / 4 
4
Those principles hold good today. Those principles,
after a period of questionable activity, are being applied
again today. I can affirm from this platform that, since it
came into office sixteen months ago, the present government
has not sought to interfere with A. B. C. programs. I can affirm
that, in that time, we have not sought to suppress any program
or determine its contents. Indeed, I can point to one major
instance where the present government has created the opportunity
for fuller debate of public issues. It has been the practice
of Prime Ministers to make occasional broadcasts to the nation
about major matters of public interest. Inevitably those
broadcasts have involved at times statements which the Parties
opposed to those Prime Ministers would dispute vigorously.
When I was Leader of the Opposition, I never had the opportunity
to gain a similar forum for the statement of contrary views.
The present Leader of the Opposition has such a forum. In
the last sixteen months the A. B. C. has acceded to every request
he has made for the right to reply to any Report to the Nation
which I have delivered.
I talked earlier about the need for durability of
basic principles, even at a time of modernisation. My Government
is firmly committed to those principles of independence and
freedom from political interference. We have sogght to maintain
and enhance them for the A. B. C. since we came into office.
It is our hope that we will establish such a strong precedent in
this way that no future government will dare to deny them, that
no future government will dare to belittle the competence and
judgment of honest men or worse, to seek to drive them from the
organisation. 



1II
THE SENATE v THE PEOPLE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME IINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM.,
TO THE LABOR WOMEN'S CONIFERENCE OF THE A. L. P.,
TRADES HALL, SYDNEY,
SUNDAY 31 MARCH 1974
THE SENATE ELECTION ON 18 MAY WILL BE THE FIFTH
SENATE ELECTION SINCE I HAVE BEEN LEADER OR DEPUTY LEADER
OF THE PARTY; IT WILL BE THE EIGHTH SENATE ELECTION,
AND THE ELEVENTH ELECTION FOR EITHER HOUSE, SINCE I
BECAME A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT. I HOPE YOU WILL NOT
THINK IT MERE GALLANTRY ON MY PART IF I CLAIM TO HAVE
A LONGER MEMORY OF POLITICAL EVENTS THAN MOST OF THE
LADIES IN THIS ROOM. THE FACT IS THAT I CANNOT RECALL
A MORE IMPORTANT SENATE ELECTION THAN THE ONE WE FACE NOW.
THE ISSUES AT STAKE, THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PARLIAMENT,
FOR THE PEOPLE, FOR DEMOCRACY ITSELF, WILL BE CRUCIAL
AND FAR-REACHING, FOR THE FIRST TIME, AND PERHAPS FOR
THE ONLY TIME, WE WILL BE FIGHTING A SENATE CAMPAIGN
OF GENUINE AND HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE. 
-2-
I SAY THIS NOT MERELY BECAUSE OF THE REFERENDUMS
TO BE HELD WITH THE SENATE ELECTION, IMPORTANT AS THESE
REFERENDUMS ARE. CERTAINLY THEY WILL GIVE AN ADDED
MEANING, AN ADDED DIMENSION, AN ADDED ZEST TO OUR
CAMPAIGN. RATHERj I BASE MY CLAIM ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE
OF THIS ELECTION ON THE UNIQUE AND SPECIAL CHARACTER
OF THE ISSUES OR RATHER, THE CENTRAL ISSUE.
THIS WILL BE A CAMPAIGN, NOT JUST FOR THE SENATE,
BUT ABOUT THE SENATE. THE PEOPLE WILL BE PASSING
JUDGMENT ON THE ROLE, THE RECORD AND THE RELEVANCE
OF THE SENATE ITSELF. THEY WILL BE PASSING JUDGMENT
ON THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE AND THE RECORD AND
MOTIVES AND CREDIBILITY OF THE OPPOSITION AS A WHOLE-FOR
MAKE NO MISTAKE, THIS WILL BE VERY MUCH AN ELECTION ABOUT
THE OPPOSITION, IT IS THE OPPOSITION WHOSE PERFORMANCE
IS IN QUESTION. IT IS THE OPPOSITION WHOSE GOOD FAITH
AND EFFECTIVENESS WE MUST EXAMINE. IS IT UNITED?
IS IT BELIEVABLE? DOES IT SPEAK WITH ONE VOICE?
IS IT MOTIVATED BY CONCERN FOR THE NATIONAL INTEREST
OR MERELY BY SPITE, BY RESENTMENT AND A LUST TO RETURN
TO POWER? THE RECORD OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THIS ELECTION
WILL BE OF GREAT IMPORTANCE; THE RECORD OF THE OPPOSITION
AND THE RECORD OF THE SENATE WILL BE OF SUPREME
IMPORTANCE, IT IS THAT RECORD THAT I WANT TO EXAMINE
TODAY. IT IS A PATHETIC AND CONTEMPTIBLE RECORD;
IT IS A PATHETIC AND CONTEMPTIBLE OPPOSITION,
e p ,/ 3 
-3-
IN DECEMBER 1972 SIXTEEN MONTHS AGO THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ELECTED A LABOR GOVERNMENT WITH A
DECISIVE MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
THE POLICIES ON WHICH THE GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED HAD BEEN
CLEARLY STATED, THEY HAD BEEN FORMULATED OVER MANY
YEARS IN THE PUBLIC DECISION-MAKING FORUMS OF THE PARTY,
MOST OF THOSE POLICIES WERE PUT TO THE PEOPLE NOT ONCE,
BUT TWICE, IN THE ELECTIONS OF 1969 THERE WAS A SWING
OF MORE THAN 6% TO THE LABOR PARTY, IN 1972, WHEN A
SIMILAR PROGRAM WAS SUBMITTED TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
THERE WAS A FURTHER SWING TO LABOR OF THE ORDER OF 2,7,%
THOSE TWO ELECTIONS SAW AN EMPHATIC AND RE-ITERATED EXPRESSION
OF PUBLIC CONFIDENCE IN THE POLICIES OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT,
IN THE MONTHS SINCE THE LAST ELECTION THE GOVERNMENT
HAS ACTED WITH ALL POSSIBLE SPEED TO IMPLEMENT THE
POLICIES FOR WHICH THE PEOPLE VOTED,
WE HAVE MADE GREAT PROGRESS TOWARDS A MORE JUST,
MORE PROSPEROUS AND MORE HUMANE SOCIETY, MUCH OF OUR
PROGRAM HAS BEEN IMPLEMENTED,. IWE HAVE DONE MANY
THINGS THAT WE PROMISED TO DO; WE HAVE DONE NOTHING THAT
WE DID NOT PROMISE TO-DO, IT IS TRUE THAT THERE HAVE BEEN
UNFORESEEN FRUSTRATIONS AND UNPREDICTABLE DISTRACTIONS;
BUT FOR THE MOST PART ACTING WITH GOOD FAITH, ACTING
WITH DETERMINATION AND VIGOR, BY SHEER HARD WORK AND
A VOLUME OF PARLIAMENTARY BUSINESS THAT SURPASSES ALL
RECORDS WE HAVE SOUGHT TO DISCHARGE IN FULL MEASURE
THE TRUST PLACED UPON US BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, a / 4 
4
FOR ALL OUR ACTIVITY, FOR ALL OUR DETERMINATION
TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE PEOPLE'S WILL, THERE ARE GREAT
AND IMPORTANT THINGS WE HAVE BEEN PREVENTED FROM DOING,
THE SENATE HAS BLOCKED AND DELAYED, AMENDED AND
FRUSTRATED SIGNIFICANT PARTS OF OUR PROGRAM,
NOW THERE ARE TWO THINGS ABOUT THE SENATE
THAT I ASK YOU TO REMEMBER. THE FIRST IS THAT NO PARTY
HAS A MAJORITY IN THE SENATE, iJO PARTY, AS THE SENATE
NOW STANDS, CAN CLAIM A MANDATE IN THAT CHAMBER,
IT IS TRUE THAT THE COMBINED NON-LABOR PARTIES
THAT CURIOUS COLLECTION OF FRUSTRATED LIBERALS,
COUNTRY PARTY BACKWOODSMEN, SPLINTER GROUPS AND
DISAFFECTED INDEPENDENTS WHO SUPPORT THEM
CAN MUSTER A MAJORITY; OF COURSE THEY CAN,
BUT IT IS MEANINGLESS TO SUGGEST THAT THIS CONSTITUTES
AN OPPOSITION MAJORITY IN THE TRUE SENSE, OR THAT ANY
MANDATE EXISTS FOR A POLICY OF OBSTRUCTION. 
AND THAT BRINGS ME TO THE SECOND ESSENTIAL
FACT ABOUT THE SENATE AS IT STANDS, THE SENATORS WHO
HAVE BLOCKED AND FRUSTRATED THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM
WERE ELECTED YEARS BEFORE THE GOVERNMENT IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, HALF OF THEM WERE ELECTED IN
DECEMBER 1967; THE REST OF THEM WERE ELECTED IN
DECEMBER 1970, TRULY THEY ARE VOICES FROM THE PAST;
TRULY THEY ARE YESTERDAY'S MEN, YET THESE SENATORS,
SOME OF THEM ELECTED U YEARS AGO, PRESUME TO SIT IN
JUDGMENT ON A GOVERNMENT WHOSE POLICIES HAVE BEEN
TWICE ENDORSED BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WITHIN THE
PAST 42 YEARS, I CAN THINK OFNO MORE FLAGRANT
ANACHRONISM THAT THIS, I CAN THINK OF NOTHING THAT
MAKES A GREATER MOCKERY OF A SUPPOSEDLY DEMOCRATIC
LEGISLATURE, 
-6-
I HAVE SAID THAT THE PERFORMANCE AND
CAPACITY OF THE OPPOSITION IS CENTRAL TO THIS
SENATE CAMPAIGN, SIXTEEN MONTHS AGO THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE PASSED JUDGMENT ON OUR OPPONENTS AS A GOVERNMENT;
ON 18 MAY THEY WILL HAVE THEIR FIRST OPPORTUNITY TO
JUDGE THEM AS AN OPPOSITION, I MUST SAY THE PROSPECT
IS A DAUNTING ONE, FOR THE LIFE OF ME I CAN'T DECIDE
WHETHER THEY ARE WORSE IN OPPOSITION OR WORSE IN
GOVERNMENT. AT LEAST THEY CAN'T DO AS MUCH HARM
IN OPPOSITION, IN GOVERNMENT THEY ARE EXPERT IN
DAMAGING THE COUNTRY, BUT IN OPPOSITION THEY HAVE
A POSITIVE GENIUS FOR DAMAGING THEMSELVES,
ON BALANCE I THINK I PREFER THE LATTER, ,/ 7 
-7-
I KNOW SOME OF YOU MUST BE AS CONFUSED AS I
AM ABOUT RECENT EVENTS IN THE OPPOSITION PARTIES,
THE FACT IS THAT WE HAVE NEVER HAD A MORE CONFUSED,
MORE DIVIDED, MORE DISCREDITED OR MORE DEBILITATED
OPPOSITION THAN WE HAVE NOW, I THINK WE CAN BEST
APPROACH THEIR PROBLEMS ON A STATE BY STATE BASIS
THAT IS A GOOD SENATE PRINCIPLE, AFTER ALL BUT
THERE ARE ONE OR TWO GENERAL QUESTIONS TO CLEAR UP
FIRST, FOR EXAMPLE, WHICH PARTIES BELONG TO THE
OPPOSITION AND WHICH DO NOT? I AM NOT CLEAR WHETHER
THE DLP BELONGS TO THE OPPOSITION, MR ANTHONY
APPARENTLY THINKS IT DOES, BUT SIR CHARLES CUTLER
IN NEW SOUTH WALES THINKS THE DLP IS FINISHED,
NEVERTHELESS, THE DLP HAS MERGED WITH THE COUNTRY
PARTY IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND QUEENSLAND, AND WHAT
IS THE POSITION OF THE AUSTRALIA PARTY, WHICH MR SNEDDEN
HAS INVITED TO JOIN FORCES WITH THE LIBERALS?
OF COURSE IT WAS AN EXCELLENT IDEA AND IT WAS WELL
RECEIVED BY EVERYONE IN THE LIBERAL PARTY EXCEPT
MR MALCOLM FRASER, MR FRASER DECLARED THAT THE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIA PARTY AND LIBERAL
PARTY WERE " TOTALLY UNBRIDGEABLE". SENATOR
HANNAN SEEMS TO THINK THAT THE DIFFERENCES IN THE
LIBERAL PARTY ARE ALSO TOTALLY UNBRIDGEABLE, I,/ 8 
0
SENATOR HANNAN HAS FORMED HIS OWN PARTY TO GET RID OF
THE TRENDIES IN VICTORIA, AND FIR STEELE HALL HAS FORMED
HIS OWN PARTY TO ATTRACT MORE TRENDIES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
I AM STILL NOT SURE WHETHER LIBERAL VOTERS IN QUEENSLAND
WILL BE VOTING FOR THEIR OWN SENATE TEAM OR FOR A JOINT
TICKET WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY OR IS IT THE INATIONAL
COUNTRY PARTY? OR THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE, AS THEY CALL
IT IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA?
I MUST SAY THERE ARE SERIOUS DILEMMAS FOR
OPPOSITION SUPPORTERS IN THIS SITUATION; IF THE DLP
MATES WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY AND THE AUSTRALIA PARTY
MATES WITH THE LIBERALS AND THE LIBERALS MATE WITH THE
COUNTRY PARTY, DOES THIS MEAN THAT THE DLP HAS MERGED
WITH THE AUSTRALIA PARTY? DOES SENATOR HANNAN SUPPORT
THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE? DOES GORDON BARTON GIVE HIS
PREFERENCES TO THE IIATIONAL LIBERAL PARTY? DOES
MALCOLM FRASER SUPPORT STEELE HALL? DOES THE DLP GIVE
ITS PREFERENCE TO CUTLER OR COURT CHARLES THE FIRST
OR CHARLES THE SECOND? IT MAY SIMPLIFY MATTERS IF I
LIST ALL THE OPPOSITION PARTIES, NOT NECESSARILY IN ORDER
OF IMPORTANCE. AT LAST COUNT WE HAD THE LIBERAL PARTY,
THE COUNTRY PARTY, THE LIBERAL COUNTRY LEAGUE, THE
NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY, THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE, THE
NATIONAL LIBERAL PARTY, THE DLP, THE AUSTRALIA PARTY
AND THE STEELE HALL PARTY, I HEARD MR ANTHONY SAY THE
OTHER DAY THAT HE WANTED A SINGLE ANTI-SOCIALIST ALLIANCE
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. I CAN ONLY SAY THAT AT THE RATE
THINGS ARE GOING, WE'LL SOON HAVE MORE ANTI-SOCIALIST
PARTIES THAN ANTI-SOCIALIST SENATORS. / 9 
DOES ANYONE SERIOUSLY SUGGEST THAT THIS
SQUABBLING COLLECTION OF BITTER AND DISAPPOINTED MEN,
THESE BRAWLERS AND BACKBITERSi TRENDIES AND NON-TRENDIES,
PHONY PROGRESSIVES AND UNREPENTANT REACTIONARIES, HAVE
ANY CLAIM TO THE CONFIDENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE?
WHO SPEAKS FOR THE OPPOSITION? WHO LEADS THE OPPOSITION?
YOUR GUESS IS AS GOOD AS MINE. JUDGING FROM THE PRESS
IN RECENT WEEKS, THEIR MOST PROLIFIC AND CONSISTENT
PROPAGANDIST IS SIR ROBERT M'ENZIES. ONLY LAST WEEK
PlR fICMAHON WAS-LAMENTING IN THE PRESS THAT HE WISHED
HIS PARTY HAD DONE AS MUCH FOR EDUCATION AS WE HAVE.
NIOT LONG AGO HE SAID IT WAS A GREAT PITY THAT HIS
GOVERNMENT HAD NOT ABOLISHED CONSCRIPTION AND SET UP
THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION. I REMIND YOU THAT
WHEN THE LEGISLATION FOR THAT COMMISSION WAS BEFORE THE
PARLIAMENT THE LIBERALS SUPPORTED IT WHILE THEIR SO-CALLED
ALLIES IN THE COUNTRY PARTY OPPOSED IT. AND IF YOU TAKE
THAT OTHER GREAT LANDMARK IN THE GOVERNMENT' S FIRST YEAR
OF OFFICE OUR ADDITIONAL GRANTS TO SCHOOLS IT
WAS THE COUNTRY PARTY THAT SUPPORTED IT WHILE THE LIBERALS
VOTED AGAINST IT. WHAT UNITY! WHAT A COALITION!
WHAT A COMMENTARY ON AN OPPOSITION THAT IN 16 MONTHS
HAS PRODUCED NOT A SINGLE NEW POLICY, NOT A SINGLE FRESH
AND CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA. VIE ALL KNOW WHAT 111R SNEDDEN
IS AGAINST[ HE IS AGAINST EVERYTHING.. BUT WHAT IS
MR SNEDDEN M~? / lo 
10
HE'S FOR REDUCED GOVERNMENT'SPENDING, BUT WHAT
GOVERNMENT SPENDING DOES HE WANT TO REDUCE?
HE DOESN'T SAY. HE SIMPLY WANTS US TO SPEND MORE
ON DEFENCE, MORE ON UNNECESSARY SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTIES,
MORE ON PRIVATE SCHOOLS THAT ARE ALREADY WELL OFF,
THE CONSISTENT THEME OF THE OPPOSITION IS A NEGATIVE
THEME. THE CONSISTENT VOICE OF THE OPPOSITION IS A
WHINGER'S VOICE. THEY ARE A PARTY OF NARKS AND KNOCKERS
AGAINST EVERYTHING AND IN FAVOUR OF NOTHING.
I BELIEVE THERE IS A CLEAR REASON FOR THE CHRONIC
DISUNITY AND DISARRAY IN THE OPPOSITION PARTIES. AND IT
IS THIS: THEY HAVE NOT ACCEPTED THE FACT OF THEIR DEFEAT.
THEY GO ON BELIEVING THAT THE VERDICT OF THE PEOPLE IN
DECEMBER 1972 WAS A TEMPORARY ABERRATION; THAT SOONER
OR LATER NO MATTER HOW DIVIDED THEIR RANKS, HOW BARREN
THEIR IDEAS, HOW MUDDLED THEIR POLICIES ON BASIC ISSUES
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WILL RETURN THEM TO OFFICE. THEY
HAVE A DEEP CONTEMPT, NOT ONLY FOR THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE,
BUT FOR THE GOOD SENSE OF THE PEOPLE. THEY BELIEVE THEY
CAN FLOUT THE CLEARLY EXPRESSED WISH OF THE ELECTORATE FOR
A PROGRAM OF ORDERED CHANGE AND SOCIAL REFORM, FOR
ENLIGHTENED POLICIES TOWARDS OUR NEIGHBOURS, FOR SOCIAL
JUSTICE AT HOME AND MORE MATURE AND INDEPENDENT POLICIES
ABROAD, ,/ 11 
11-
THE SENATE HAS BEEN'THE GREAT INSTRUMENT
FOR THIS CAMPAIGN OF OBSTRUCTION. SINCE WE TOOK OFFICE
THE SENATE HAS REJECTED 15 BILLS, DEFERRED ANOTHER
AND AMENDED 21, I LIST THE 15 BILLS THEY HAVE
REJECTED:
COMMONWEALTH ELECTORAL TWO BILLS;
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION;
REPRESENTATION TWO BILLS;
LAND ACQUISITION ( AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY);
SEAS AND SUBMERGED LANDS ( ROYALTY ON MINERALS);
HEALTH INSURANCE;
HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION;
AND, FOUR CONSTITUTION ALTERATION BILLS.
IT IS NOT DIFFICULT TO FIND A COMMON THEME IN THEIR
OBSTRUCTIVE TACTICS. THE OPPOSITION MAY LACK A COMMON
VOICE BUT IT HAS NEVER LACKED A COMMON CAUSE; AND THAT
CAUSE IS THE DEFENCE OF VESTED INTERESTS. ,/ 12 
12-
IN DEFENCE OF THESE VESTED INTERESTS THEY
REJECTED THE DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL ELECTORATES,
THEY COMPLAIN ABOUT INDUSTRIAL UNREST IN THE COMMUNITY,
YET THEY BLOCKED OUR ATTEMPTS TO MODERNISE AND
DEMOCRATISE THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT AND PROMOTE THE
CONDITIONS FOR GENUINE INDUSTRIAL STABILITY, THEY
SOUGHT TO DENY REPRESENTATION IN THE SENATE TO THE
PEOPLE OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY; THEY SOUGHT TO DENY TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS TO NATIONAL REVENUES AND BORROWINGS,:
THEY PRESERVED FOR FOREIGN MINING INTERESTS THE RIGHT
TO EXPLOIT OUR OFF-SHORE RESOURCES; THEY FOUGIIT TO
PRESERVE THE INEQUITY AND INEFFICIENCY OF AN ANTIQUATED
HEALTH SERVICE, BY SHELVING THE TRADE PRACTICES BILL
THEY LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO MONOPOLIES AND CARTELS TO FIX
PRICES, ORGANISE CARTELS AND EXPLOIT THE AUSTRALIAN
CONSUMER, BY SHELVING THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL THEY BLOCKED THE MOST
EFFECTIVE INSTRUMENT FOR ENSURING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF
OUR INDUSTRIES AND DEVELOPING NEW INDUSTRIES, THEY HAVE
LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO FOREIGN TAKEOVERS AND FOREIGN
CONTROL OF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, YET FOR ALL THE
LEGISLATION I HAVE MENTIONED THE GOVERNMENT HAD A
CLEAR MANDATE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, 
13
DESPITE THE EFFORTS OF THE SENATE TO OBSTRUCT
OUR REFORMS, THERE IS ONE AREA IN WHICH THEY ARE POWERLESS,
THEY HAVE BEEN UNABLE TO PREVENT US PUTTING OUR REFERENDUM
PROPOSALS TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AT THE SAME TIME AS
THE SENATE ELECTIONS, THIS WAS NOT FOR WANT OF TRYING,
THE SENATE WAS DETERMINED THAT WHATEVER THE SENATE MIGHT
THINK OF OUR REFERENDUMS, THE PEOPLE WOULD BE DENIED
AN OPPORTUNITY TO DECIDE THE ISSUES FOR THEMSELVES,
THE CONSTITUTION, HOWEVER, ENABLES REFERENDUMS TO BE
PUT TO THE PEOPLE EVEN IF THE SENATE OBSTRUCTS THEM.
THAT IS WHAT WE ARE DOING, OUR REFERENDUMS ARE
DESIGNED TO GIVE A NEW DEAL TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
TO ENTRENCH IN THE CONSTITUTION THE BASIC DEMOCRATIC
RIGHTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, I SUMMARIZE WHAT
OUR PROPOSALS SEEK TO ACHIEVE:
1. i, To ENTRENCH THE RIGHT TO VOTE FOR ALL
ADULT CITIZENS IN BOTH STATE AND AUSTRALIAN
ELECTIONS,
2, To ESTABLISH THE DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE FOR
BOTH THE AUSTRALIAN AND STATE PARLIAMENTS
THAT MEMBERS SHOULD REPRESENT EQUAL NUMBERS
OF PEOPLE,
3, To ENSURE THAT STATE UPPER HOUSES ARE ELECTED
DIRECTLY BY THE PEOPLE, / 14 
1' 4
4. TO GRANT CITIZENS IN THE l'IlORTHERN TERRITORY
AND THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY THE
RIGHT TO VOTE IN REFERENDUMS.
TO ENSURE THAT THE PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA
REFLECTS THE POPULAR WILL AT THE TIME-THAT THE
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA DETERMINE THEIR GOVERNMENT,
THE SECOND BROAD OBJECTIVE OF OUR REFERENDUM
PROPOSALS IS TO BALANCE THE FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES. OF
THE THREE LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT. THREE FURTHER PROPOSALS
WILL REMOVE CONSTITUTIONAL OBSTACLES TO THE RATIONAL
CO-ORDINATION OF INTERGOVERNMENT RELATIONS.
THEY WILL ENABLE US:-
1. TO FACILITATE THE REFERENCE OF LEGISLATIVE
POWERS FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO THE
STATES AND VICE VERSA IF BOTH-AGREE THAT THE
OTHER LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT WOULD EXERCISE
THOSE POWERS MORE EFFECTIVELY.
2. TO ENHANCE THE ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT BY
EXTENDING THE PROVISIONS IN THE CONSTITUTION
WHICH GOVERN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT' S
RELATIONSHIP WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AS WELL.
3. To INVOLVE THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE MORE CLOSELY
IN DETERMINING THE BALANCE OF FUNCTIONS BY
FACILITATING ALTERATIONS TO THE CONSTITUTION. 
15
NOW TWO OF THESE PROPOSALS THE ONE FOR SIMULTANEOUS
ELECTIONS OF THE SENATE AND THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AND THE ONE FACILITATING AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
WERE RECOMMENDED 1C YEARS AGO IN THE REPORT OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE SET UP UNDER SIR ROBERT
MENZIES. THEY COULD HAVE BEEN PUT TO THE PEOPLE
AND THEY SHOULD HAVE BEEN PUT TO THE PEOPLE AT ANY
TIME SINCE THEN. THE PROPOSAL TO FACILITATE AMENDMENTS
TO THE CONSTITUTION WAS CLEARLY EXPLAINED IN THE REVIEW
COMMITTEE'S REPORT IN THESE TERMS:
A CLEAR MAJORITY OF THE ELECTORS WHO
VOTE AT A REFERENDUM ARE IN FAVOUR OF A PROPOSED
LAW, THEIR WILL SHOULD NOT BE FRUSTRATED BECAUSE
SEPARATE MAJORITIES OF ELECTORS HAVE NOT BEEN
OBTAINED IN A MAJORITY OF THE STATES, IT IS,
IN THE COMMITTEE'S OPINION, MORE IN ACCORD
WITH DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE AND THE DEVELOPMENTS
SINCE FEDERATION THAT IT SHOULD BE SUFFICIENT
TO OBTAIN SEPARATE MAJORITIES IN AT LEAST ONE
HALF OF THE NUMBER OF STATES': / 1G 
1G
THAT IS THE PURPOSE OF OUR REFERENDUM.
INSTEAD OF REQUIRING A MAJORITY IN FOUR STATES OUT
OF SIX, A MAJORITY OF ALL THE PEOPLE. THE TWO THIRDS
MAJORITY IS UNREASONABLY HIGH. IN THE WORDS OF THE
CONSTITUTION REVIEW COMMITTEE, IT MEANS THAT
" FOR EVERY STATE IN WHICH THERE IS AN ADVERSE VOTE
THERE MUST BE A FAVOURABLE VOTE IN TWO STATES
A CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE HAS TO BE SUPPORTED NOT
ONLY BY A MAJORITY OF STATES BUT BY TWO THIRDS
OF THE STATES."' / 17 
17-
OUR REFERENDUM ON EQUAL ELECTORATES THAT IS,
ELECTORATES HAVING THE SAME NUMBER OF PEOPLE RESULTS
FROM THE SENATE'S FAILURE LAST YEAR TO PASS OUR
LEGISLATION FOR ELECTORAL REFORM, THE SENATE TWICE
REJECTED OUR BILL TO REDUCE THE PRESENT DISPARITY
IN THE SIZE OF ELECTORATES, HIAD THIS LEGISLATION BEEN
PASSED OUR REFERENDUM WOULD NOT BE NECESSARY,
IN THE SAME WAY, IF THE PREMIERS LAST YEAR HAD ACCEPTED
OUR PROPOSAL TO GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS
TO THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES OF THE NATION, OUR
REFERENDUM ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT WOULD NOT BE NECESSARY,
EVERY ONE OF OUR REFERENDUM PROPOSALS IS A CONSEQUENCE
OF THE FAILURE OF THE STATES OR THE SENATE TO AGREE
TO MEASURES FOR WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAD A MANDATE,
OR THE FAILURE OF OUR PREDECESSORS TO PUT REFORMS
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WHICH WERE APPROVED IG YEARS
AGO BY AN ALL-PARTY COMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION, / 1I; 
1
So LET ME SUMMARISE THE ISSUES AT STAKE ON
18 MAY, THEY ARE CLEAR AND SIMPLE ISSUES AND THEY
INVOLVE QUITE BASIC QUESTIONS OF DEMOCRACY, HAS THE
SENATE THE RIGHT TO OBSTRUCT A PROGRAM CLEARLY ENDORSED
BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE? CLEARLY IT HAS NOT,
SHOULD A SENATE ELECTED IN 1967 AND 1970 BE ALLOWED TO
OBSTRUCT A GOVERNMENT ELECTED IN 1972? CLEARLY IT SHOULD NOT,
SHOULD AN OPPOSITION GUILTY OF THIS OBSTRUCTION
AN OPPOSITION BEREFT OF LEADERSHIP AND DEVOID OF PURPOSE
BE ENCOURAGED TO PURSUE ITS OBSTRUCTIONIST TACTICS
FURTHER? IT SHOULD NOT, SHOULD A SENATE THAT
HAS DONE ITS BEST TO PREVENT THE PEOPLE DECIDING
BASIC QUESTIONS OF DEMOCRACY BE ENTITLED TO THE
PEOPLE'S CONFIDENCE? IT SHOULD NOT, / 19 
19
THESE ARE NOT ACADEMIC OR TECHNICAL QUESTIONS,
THEY AFFECT THE ESSENTIAL RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE
AND THE PEOPLE ON 18 MAY WILL BE ABLE TO DECIDE THEM,
I LOOK FORWARD TO THIS CAMPAIGN, PERHAPS, LIKE ME,
YOU HAVE FOUND SENATE ELECTIONS IN THE PAST SOMEWHAT
ARID AND POINTLESS AFFAIRS, THE REASON HAS BEEN
THAT NO CRUCIAL ISSUES WERE INVOLVED; NO GOVERNMENT'S
FUTURE WAS AT STAKE; NO BROAD POLITICAL PRINCIPLE
WAS TO BE RESOLVED, ON 13 MAY THE REAL ISSUE,
THE REAL PRINCIPLE, WILL BE UNMISTAKABLE, IT IS
WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS COUNTRY IS TO BE
RESPONSIBLE TO THE PEOPLE WHO ELECTED IT, OR
WHETHER IT IS* TO REMAIN AT THE MERCY OF A SENATE
ELECTED YEARS BEFORE, AND DOMINATED BY THOSE
WHO HAVE FORFEITED ALL CLAIM TO BE A UNITED AND
CREDIBLE OPPOSITION. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,#
THE [ ION, E. G. WHITLAV1, M. Pe.,
TO THE 43RD CONFERENCE OF THE
INTERNATIONAL WOOL TEXTILE ORGANISATION,
SOUTHERN CROSS HOTEL, MELBOURNE,
MONDAY, 1 APRIL 1974
I AM DELIGHTED THAT AUSTRALIA IS HOST FOR
THE FIRST TIME TO A MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL WOOL
TEXTILE ORGANISATION. IN AN INDUSTRY RENOWNED FOR
ITS INTERNATIONAL LINKS AND ORGANISATIONS INDEEDI
CAN THINK OF NO INDUSTRY THAT SURPASSES YOURS IN
THIS RESPECT THE I. W. T. O. IS THE LARGEST AND MOST
IMPORTANT ORGANISATION OF WOOL TRADERS, PROCESSORS
AND TEXTILE MANUFACTURERS IN THE WORLD. YOU REPRESENT
26 NATIONS IN EVERY HEMISPHERE, IN EVERY CONTINENT.
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT AUSTRALIA, AS THE WORLD'S
LARGEST PRODUCER OF WOOL, SHOULD BE THE VENUE FOR
YOUR CONFERENCE. YOUR ORGANISATION HAS BEEN IN
EXISTENCE FOR NEARLY HALF A CENTURY, YET IT WAS ONLY
IN THE LATE 1950' S THAT AUSTRALIA BECAME A FIRM MEMBER.
SO WE HAVE NORMALIZED OUR RELATIONS WITH THE I. W. T. O.
I AM GLAD WE HAVE; AND IF I MAY SAY SO, IT IS HIGH
TIME YOU WERE HERE AS OUR GUESTS, ON BEHALF OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT I WELCOME YOU ALL MOST CORDIALLY. 
-2-
THERE IS ANOTHER REASON WHY THIS CONFERENCE
SHOULD BRING SPECIAL SATISFACTION TO THE WOOL INDUSTRY IN
AUSTRALIA, NOTHING COULD SYMBOLIZE MORE VIVIDLY THE VITALITY
AND RESILIENCE OF THIS GREAT INDUSTRY IN ALL ITS PHASES,
PRODUCTION, MANUFACTURING AND MARKETING, I HARDLY NEED
REMIND YOU OF THE GLOOM AND FOREBODING IN THE AUSTRALIAN
WOOL INDUSTRY ONLY TWO OR THREE YEARS AGO, MANY WOOLGROWERS
WERE LEAVING THE LAND, MANY OF THE HISTORIC NAMES, PLACES
AND COMPANIES IN THE INDUSTRY WERE IN JEOPARDY, DECLINING
PRICES, COMBINED WITH THE EVER-PRESENT HAZARD OF DROUGHT,
WERE TAKING THEIR TOLL, TODAY THE PROSPECTS ARE MUCH
BRIGHTER; THE INDUSTRY HAS RECOVERED ITS TRADITIONAL
CONFIDENCE, I BELIEVE YOUR CONFERENCE WILL REFLECT AND
STIMULATE THE NEW MOOD OF BUOYANCY AND OPTIMISM IN THE
INDUSTRY, IT WILL REMIND US THAT NATURAL WOOL REMAINS THE
SUPREME FIBRE, AND WHATEVER THE PROBLEMS AND FLUCTUATIONS
YOUR INDUSTRY MUST FACE, ITS UNDERLYING STRENGTH IS BEYOND
QUESTION. P/ 3 
-3-
You ARE ALL AWARE OF THE SUPREME IMPORTANCE
OF WOOL IN THE HISTORY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THIS
COUNTRY, DESPITE A GREATER DIVERSITY IN AUSTRALIA'S EXPORTS
AND A GREATER DIVERSITY OF PRODUCTION WITHIN PRIMARY INDUSTRY
ITSELF, WOOL STILL HOLDS ITS PLACE AS A COMMODITY OF
ENORMOUS IMPORTANCE, ALTHOUGH SHEEP NUMBERS HAVE DECLINED
MARKEDLY IN RECENT YEARS, AUSTRALIA PRODUCES ABOUT ONE-THIRD
OF ALL THE WORLD'S WOOL AND ABOUT HALF OF THE SUPPLIES
ENTERING WORLD TRADE, OUR OWN WOOL TEXTILE INDUSTRY IS
OF CONSIDERABLE SIGNIFICANCE, THEWOOL YARN AND
BROADWOVEN FABRIC INDUSTRY PRODUCES GOODS WORTH $ 129 MILLION
A YEAR AND EMPLOYS MORE THAN 12,000 PEOPLE, NEVERTHELESS,
ABOUT 90% OF OUR WOOL IS EXPORTED, CLEARLY WE HAVE A
VITAL INTEREST IN THE PROSPERITY OF THE WOOL TEXTILE
INDUSTRY OVERSEAS, WOOL PRODUCERS AND WOOL USERS HAVE A
COMMON INTEREST, THEY HAVE THE SAME ULTIMATE CONCERN FOR
THE SUPREMACY OF THEIR BASIC RAW MATERIAL AND THE GROWTH
OF WORLD MARKETS, I BELIEVE THIS CONFERENCE WILL GIVE
ALL OF US SUPPLIERS, PROCESSORS, MANUFACTURERS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR DIRECT AND VALUABLE PERSONAL CONTACTS
WHICH WILL BENEFIT THE INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE, / 4 
-4-
WHAT I FIND ENCOURAGING IN THE AIMS AND
FUNCTIONS OF YOUR ORGANISATION IS THE EMPHASIS YOU GIVE
TO ORDERLY MARKETING, YOU SEEK TO BRING A PLANNED AND
RATIONAL APPROACH TO THE WORLD TRADE IN WOOL, YOU
PROVIDE A COMMON MEETING POINT FOR COMMERCIAL WOOL
INTERESTS AND ENCOURAGE UNIFORM COMMERCIAL PRACTICES
IN THE WOOL TRADE, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SHARES
THOSE AMBITIONS AND APPLAUDS THEM, WE RECOGNISE
YOUR NATURAL INTEREST IN THE WAY RAW WOOL IS MARKETED
HERE IN AUSTRALIA, FOR THAT REASON WE HAVE MADE USE
OF MEETINGS OF YOUR ORGANISATION TO EXPLAIN THE GOVERNMENT'S
WOOL RESERVE PRICE POLICY TO THE INTERNATIONAL WOOL TRADE,
WE INTEND ALSO, AS YOU KNOW, TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL
AUSTRALIAN WOOL STANDARDS MONITORING UNIT; AND THE
VALUE AND PURPOSE OF THAT UNIT HAS BEEN EXPLAINED AT
SESSIONS OF YOUR ORGANISATION, 
IT WILL HELP YOU IF I SAY SOMETHING MORE ABOUT
OUR PLANS FOR WOOL MARKETING IN AUSTRALIA, FOR YEARS THE
WOOL INDUSTRY HAS BEEN SUBJECT TO FLUCTUATING MARKETS AND
UNCERTAIN PRICES, OUR PREDECESSORS REQUESTED THE
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION TO REPORT ON THE WOOL
MARKETING SYSTEM, WE RECEIVED THEIR REPORT IN FEBRUARY
AND IMMEDIATELY'MADE IT PUBLIC, THE OPPORTUNITY NOW
EXISTS FOR A FULL AND OPEN PUBLIC DISCUSSION OF THE
REPORT BY ALL INTERESTED PARTIES, BRIEFLY, AS MANY OF
YOU WILL KNOW, THE REPORT RECOMMENDED THAT THE. lWOOL
CORPORATION ACQUIRE ALL EXPORT WOOL AND SELL IT IN
THE WAY IT THINKS BEST EITHER AT AUCTION OR UNDER
CONTRACT; THAT THE CORPORATION HAVE POWER TO ALLOCATE
AMOUNTS OF WOOL TO BE SOLD; AND THAT IT SHOULD STABILIZE
THE PRICE OF WOOL BY ESTABLISHING A FLOOR PRICE OR EVEN
A CEILING PRICE WHERE NECESSARY, THESE RECOMMENDATIONS
ARE BROADLY CONSISTENT WITH THE POLICY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, WHICH STATES THAT THE WOOL
CORPORATION " WILL BE EMPOWERED TO ACQUIRE AND/ OR
MARKET THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL CLIP," 
-6-
THE CORPORATION'S REPORT IS NATURALLY A
CONTROVERSIAL ONE, MANY PEOPLE HAVE CONGRATULATED
THE CORPORATION ON THE WORK IT HAS DONE; OTHERS
HAVE BEEN HIGHLY CRITICAL, IT WOULD NOT BE
APPROPRIATE FOR ME TO DISCUSS THE DETAILS OF THE
REPORT TODAY, IT IS CLEARLY RECOGNISED THAT ITS
IMPLICATIONS ARE FAR REACHING AND IF IMPLEMENTED
WOULD CHANGE SIGNIFICANTLY THE TRADITIONAL
AUSTRALIAN WOOL MARKETING SYSTEM, THE RECOMMENDATIONS
ARE BEING CLOSELY EXAMINED BY MY COLLEAGUE, THE
MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR WRIEDT, AND
INTERESTED PARTIES CONCERNED WITH WOOL MARKETING,
SENATOR WRIEDT HAS MADE IT CLEAR THAT, JUST AS HE HAD
NO INTENTION OF HURRYING THE CORPORATION INTO COMPLETING
ITS REPORT, HE HAS NO INTENTION OF HURRYING A DECISION
UPON IT UNTIL EVERYONE HAS STUDIED IT CAREFULLY, s17 
-7-
SENATOR WRIEDT HAS ALREADY DISCUSSED THE
REPORT WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF WOOLGROWERS, WOOLBUYERS
AND WOOLBROKERS. HE WILL BE KEEN TO LEARN OF THE
REACTION OF YOUR ORGANISATION AS AN INTERNATIONAL BODY
REPRESENTING THE WOOL INDUSTRY. I EXPECT THE GOVERNMENT
TO DECIDE ITS POLICY ON THE REPORT LATER THIS YEAR AFTER
SENATOR WRIEDT BRINGS PROPOSALS BEFORE THE CABINET,
WE HOPE THE NEW ARRANGEMENTS WILL OPERATE FROM THE MIDDLE
OF NEXT YEAR. I AM SURE SENATOR WRIEDT'S SUBMISSIONS
WILL TAKE ACCOUNT OF THE VIEWS OF ALL THOSE WHO HAVE
DISCUSSIONS WITH HIM. I URGE YOU TO ENSURE THAT HE
RECEIVES YOUR REACTIONS, AT THE SAME TIME, I HOPE
THE DEBATE ON THE MOST APPROPRIATE WOOL MARKETING SYSTEM
WILL NOT BE BASED ON THE SELF-INTEREST OF INDUSTRY GROUPS
BUT WILL BE DIRECTED AT ENSURING THE FUTURE ECONOMIC
STABILITY OF ALL CONCERNED, FROM WOOLGROWERS TO FINAL
PROCESSORS. / 8 
-8-
THERE IS ANOTHER WAY IN WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
CAN ASSIST THE LONG-TERM WELFARE OF THIS GREAT INDUSTRY,
THAT IS BY ENCOURAGING WOOL RESEARCH AND PROMOTION,
MY GOVERNMENT HAS ANNOUNCED A THREE-YEAR SCHEME FOR
THIS PURPOSE BEGINNING IN 1974-75 WE WILL CONTRIBUTE
$ 61,400,000 OVER THE THREE YEARS, I AM GLAD TO SAY
THAT LEGISLATION FOR THIS PROGRAM WAS INTRODUCED IN
THE PARLIAMENT LAST MONTH, BROADLY OUR PURPOSE IS
THAT THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD ASSUME GREATER FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RESEARCH, WHICH BENEFITS THE NATION
TO'T
AS A WHOLE) AND T44E GROWERS FUNDS, COLLECTED THROUGH
THE WOOL TAX, WILL BE DIRECTED MORE TOWARDS PROMOTION,
THE BUDGETS FOR PROGRAMS OF RESEARCH AND PROMOTION FOR
EACH OF THE 3 YEARS COMMENCING IN 1974-75 HAVE BEEN
DEVELOPED IN CONSULTATION WITH THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL
CORPORATION AND, THROUGH THE CORPORATION, WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL WOOL SECRETARIAT, WITH THE COMMONWEALTH
SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION, AND
WITH THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS, 
-9-
WE BELIEVE THAT WHILE RURAL PRODUCERS BENEFIT
DIRECTLY FROM MANY OF THE RESULTS OF RURAL RESEARCH, THE
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY IN GENERAL ALSO BENEFITS IN MANY
WAYS, BENEFITS ACCRUE, FOR EXAMPLE, THROUGH MORE
ASSURED FOOD AND FIBRE SUPPLIES AS A RESULT OF
PRODUCTIVITY INCREASES IN THE RURAL SECTOR, FURTHER,
RESEARCH PROGRAMS IN AGRICULTURAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
OFTEN HAVE BROAD IMPLICATIONS FOR THE QUALITY OF THE
ENVIRONMENT GENERALLY, AND FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF THE
PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY OF RENEWABLE RESOURCES,
RECOGNISING THAT THE BENEFITS OF RESEARCH ARE SO
WIDELY DISTRIBUTED, THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED THAT IT WOULD
BE APPROPRIATE FOR A GREATER SHARE OF THE COST TO BE BORNE
BY A CONTRIBUTION FROM PUBLIC FUNDS THAN HAS BEEN THE
CASE IN THE PAST, IN OTHER WORDS, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
DECIDED TO INCREASE ITS SHARE OF THE COST OF THE RESEARCH
PROGRAMS FINANCED FROM THE WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND,
ACCORDINGLY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONTRIBUTE THREE QUARTERS
OF THE COST OF APPROVED PROGRAMS OF WOOL RESEARCH, TO BE
FINANCED THROUGH THE. WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND, DURING THE
SECOND AND THIRD YEARS OF THE FORTHCOMING TRIENNIUM,
WOOL PRODUCERS WILL BE ASKED TO FINANCE THE REMAINING ONE
QUARTER, IN ORDER THAT THERE IS ADEQUATE WARNING OF
THESE CHANGED ARRANGEMENTS, THE PRESENT COST SHARING
ARRANGEMENT WILL BE CONTINUED FOR 1974-75, .1./ 10 
10
WITH REGARD TO WOOL PROMOTION, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
CAREFULLY STUDIED THE PROMOTION ACTIVITIES OF THE
INTERNATIONAL WOOL SECRETARIAT AND THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL
CORPORATION, IT IS AGREED THAT THERE ARE STRONG ECONOMIC
ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF WOOL PROMOTION EXPENDITURE AND THE
BENEFITS OF PROMOTION DO SPREAD TO GROUPS OTHER THAN
WOOL GROWERS, IN ADDITION, THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES
THE NEED FOR CONTINUAL DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT OF
THE TECHNICAL PROCESSING PROPERTIES OF WOOL AS A FIBRE AND
THE PROMOTION OF THESE ADVANTAGES AT ALL STAGES IN THE
MARKETING CHAIN, IN THIS WAY THE DEMAND FOR WOOL IS
INFLUENCED, BOTH ABSOLUTELY AND IN RELATION TO COMPEToING
FIBRES, WE BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT THE BENEFITS FROM
PROMOTION ACCRUE MORE DIRECTLY TO PRODUCERS THAN TO
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY, AND ACCORDINGLY WOOL
GROWERS THEMSELVES SHOULD MAKE THE MAJOR FINANCIAL
COMMITMENT TO PROMOTION EXPENDITURE, ON THIS BASIS
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO FINANCE ONE QUARTER OF
THE PROJECTED WOOL PROMOTION BUDGETS, LEAVING TO WOOL
GROWERS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF FINANCING THE BALANCE,
AGAIN, IN ORDER TO ENSURE ADEQUATE ADVANCE NOTICE OF
THE CHANGED ARRANGEMENTS FOR FINANCING THE PROMOTION
PROGRAMS, THE GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED TO DEFER IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE NEW FUNDING BASIS UNTIL 1975-76, ACCORDINGLY, FOR
1974-75 THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONTINUE TO CONTRIBUTE ON AN
EQUAL BASIS WITH WOOL GROWERS TOWARDS THE COST OF BOTH
RESEARCH AND PROMOTION, I ./ 11 
11
AUSTRALIA IS FULLY COMMITTED TO THE GROWTH AND
PROSPERITY OF THE WOOL INDUSTRY, WE WANT TO REMAIN A
DEPENDABLE SUPPLIER OF WOOL TO THE MARKETS OF THE WORLD,
WE WANT FAIR PRICES FOR OUR WOOL AND A STABLE SYSTEM
OF MARKETING, THIS INDEED IS OUR POLICY FOR THE SUPPLY
OF ALL BASIC RAW MATERIALS TO OUR CUSTOMERS OVERSEAS,
WE BELIEVE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL INDUSTRY WILL
PROSPER BEST IN THE CONTEXT OF STRONG RURAL INDUSTRIES
GENERALLY, ALL OUR POLICIES HAVE BEEN DIRECTED TO THAT
PURPOSE, OUR CURRENCY REVALUATIONS AND TARIFF POLICIES
HAVE, I BELIEVE, HELPED TO RESTRAIN INCREASES IN THE COST
OF FARM EQUIPMENT, OUR INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
HAS BEEN SET UP TO EXAMINE CLAIMS FOR ASSISTANCE FROM
ALL INDUSTRIES PRIMARY AND SECONDARY, WE WANT RURAL
INDUSTRIES THAT CAN STAND ON THEIR OWN FEET, THAT ARE
STRONG AND ADAPTABLE, THAT ARE BUSINESSLIKE AND
EFFICIENT, THAT CAN MEET THE CHALLENGE OF UNCERTAIN
MARKETS AND FLUCTUATING PRICES WITHOUT RELYING
EXCESSIVELY ON GOVERNMENT HANDOUTS AND TAXPAYERS'
SUBSIDIES, ONLY IN THIS WAY CAN WE CREATE GENUINELY
STRONG AND EFFICIENT RURAL INDUSTRIES, A1 
11A
PERHAPS I CAN SUM UP MY GOVERNMENT'S
BROAD INTENTIONS BY QUOTING A STATEMENT BY THE
AUSTRALIAN WOOLGROWERS' AND GRAZIERS' COUNCIL,
THE COUNCIL HAS SAID THIS: " THE MOST IMPORTANT
LONG-TERM STEP THE GOVERNMENT CAN TAKE IS TO IMPROVE
THE EFFICIENCY OF NATIONAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION BY
ENCOURAGING THE EXPANSION OF LESS PROTECTED INDUSTRIES
IN THE ECONOMY ( WHETHER PRIMARY OR SECONDARY) AND
DISCOURAGING THE GROWTH OF THOSE INDUSTRIES WHICH
CAN ONLY PRODUCE WITH THE HELP OF MASSIVE LEVELS
OF ASSISTANCE EITHER SUBSIDY OR TARIFF, THIS WILL
INCREASE THE LEVEL OF REAL ECONOMIC GROWTH FOR THE
BETTERMENT OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY,. I SUGGEST
THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS DOING JUST WHAT THE WOOLGROWERS'
AND GRAZIERS' COUNCIL SUGGESTED, I BELIEVE OUR
POLICIES WILL BENEFIT THE GREAT RURAL INDUSTRIES
OF THIS COUNTRY AND THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AS A WHOLE, / 12 
12
WE HAVE GREAT FAITH IN THE FUTURE OF THE WOOL
INDUSTRY, WE ARE DELIGHTED THAT SO MANY OF ITS
LEADING MEMBERS AUSTRALIA'S GREATEST CUSTOMERS
ARE WITH US THIS WEEK, GOVERNMENTS AND ECONOMISTS
ALONE CANNOT SOLVE THE PROBLEMS OF AN INDUSTRY OR
UNDERSTAND THEM AS WELL AS THE MEN AND WOMEN
DIRECTLY INVOLVED, THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE FOR
PERSONAL CONTACTS BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS IN REACHING
UNDERSTANDINGS AND CREATING THE CONDITIONS FOR
GENUINE AND LASTING PROGRESS, I WISH YOU EVERY
SUCCESS IN YOUR IMPORTANT DISCUSSIONS AND HAVE GREAT
PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN THE 43RD INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL WOOL TEXTILE ORGANISATION, 



i.) AUSTRALIA LL
Y' 55 z(" c PRESS STATEMENT NO. 210
2 April 1974
RELEASE OF TARIFF BOARD REPORT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released the
Tariff Board's Report on Propylene Oxide Derivatives.
He said the Government's decision on the report is expected
to be announced within a few weeks.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEM~ ENT NO. 209
2 April 1974
ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY
The Australian Government has approved a project to provide
major protection for the Australian livestock industry.
It has decided to build a laboratory complex, to be called
the Animal Health Laboratory, at Geelong, Victoria.
The capital cost of the complex is expected to be $ 56 million.
This spending will begin in 1976/ 77 and will be spread over five
years. The laboratory will help provide protection on a national
basis for one of our most important rural industries.
The Australian livestock industry had an estimated gross
value of production in 1972/ 73 of $ 3,000 million. In the same
year the industry's exports were worth an estimated $ 2,000 million.
The laboratory complex will provide protection by performing
the following functions:
" diagnosis of exotic animal disease,
" testing of vaccines required for exotic disease control,.
" research on major virus diseases in Australian animals,
" the production of foot and mouth vaccine if required.
The laboratory complex will be established on the Geelong
Rifle Range, which is owned by the Australian Government.
Compensating arrangements will be made as required for organisations
disadvantaged by the project.
The Australian Health Laboratory will be administered and
operated by the C. S. I. R. O. on behalf of the Australian Government.
Following the establishment of the laboratory a consultative
committee, consisting of C. S. I. R. O. and departmental representatives,
will be formed to assist in the determination of priorities and to
ensure effective liaison on policy matters.
The Consultative Committee will provide an essential link
with the Animal Quarantine Branch of the Department of Health for
the testing of livestock in the proposed off-shore High Security
Animal Quarantine Station. / 2 
-2-
The Commuittee will also provide a liaison channel for
special research, training, diagnosis and epidemiology with the
proposed Bureau of Animal Health in the Department of Primary Industry.
At full operation, the Animal Health Laboratory will employ
a staff of 170 including 25 scientists.
Its annual operating costs will be approximately $ 3 million.
The laboratory would play a vital role in minimising the
impact on the Australian economy of an outbreak of foot and mouth
or other introduced animal disease.
' Should an outbreak of exotic disease occur, the existence
of the laboratory would be vital to any eradication program and would
be an important factor in persuading Australia's trading partners
that eradication had been achieved.
It will also provide a facility for carrying out special
testing for potentially valuable livestock held in quarantine
before they were allowed into Australia for breeding programs.
It will also be a valuable facility for research on virus
diseases endemic in Australia, several of which affect man as well
as livestock. Final design of the laboratory followed a study tour of
overseas microbiological security establishments by a government
evaluation team.
The Geelong site, currently the Geelong Rifle Range, was
chosen following extensive consideration of a wide range of
alternative sites.
The final choice was made on the advice of the Cities
Commission in the light of the Government's policy of developing
specific growth centres and with the approval of the Victorian
Government. A comprehensive environmental impact statement for the site
accompanied the Cabinet submission.
The Department of the Environment and Conservation which
assessed this statement noted the amount of technical detail
supplied and advised that it was satisfied that the environmental
issues of the proposal had been adequately covered.
Because of the extreme precautions built into the design,
there will be no risk to Australian livestock.
The laboratory complex will be technically the most
sophisticated major structure in Australia and the most modern
animal diseases laboratory in the world.
It will operate as a series of integrated engineering systems,
which provide isolation from the external environment. / 3 
-3-
It features multiple fail-safe devices and procedures
including air locks, shower locks, filter systems of many kinds
and sophisticated waste disposal apparatus.
All air entering or leaving the laboratory will be specially
filtered. The air leaving the high hazard area will be heat steriliscd
to kill virus particles.
Solid wastes will be destroyed or rendered sterile.
Operation of the complex will have no detrimental effects
on the environment. In accordance with overseas practice, the keeping of
susceptible livestock will not be permitted in a buffer zone one
mile in radius around the laboratory.
This will include sheep, cattle, pigs, goats, horses, fowls,
turkeys, geese and ducks.
The Victorian Government has agreed to the relocation of the
trotting and dog-racing track currently in the vicinity by the
time the laboratory is complete in 1981.
The buildi4ng has been designed by a group of specialists
formed within the Department of Housing andConstruction who have
worked in close consultation with C. S. I. R. O. and an expert from
the Department of Health. BACKGROUND INFORMATION
The impact of an outbreak of foot and mouth disease in the
livestock industry would be immediate and far reaching. Much of
our trade in meat and other livestock products would cease and it
would be many months, even years, before normal trade was resumed.
There are many other livestock diseases exotic to
Australia, some as potentially devastating as foot and mouth disease,
others less so, but all capable of seriously affecting our livestock
industries. While Australia has a remarkable record of success
in remaining free of these diseases, there is no certainty that
this situation can be sustained for ever.
It is difficult to escape the conclusion that sooner or
later a major exotic disease of livestock will penetrate our
quarantine barriers. If this were to happen, Australia' s veterinary
authorities would be severely handicapped at present by the
absence of a laboratory possessing a great enough degree of
microbiological security to enable highly infectious material
to 1-c handled in complete safety without risk of escape.
If vaccination became necessary for control and eradication of a
disease, the Animal Health Laboratory would be involved in testing
the potency and safety of the vaccines used. / 4 
4
The Laboratory would be absolutely essential for the
enormous amount of work needed not only to eradicate the
disease but also to demonstrate to other countries that
eradication had been successful. If a situation arose where
overseas trade in meat or some other livestock products had
been suspended as a result of an outbreak of a major disease,
the absence of such a facility could seriously prejudice the
early resuantion of trade with our trading partners.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 2 APRIL 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, some of the Cabinet decisions
yesterday have already been announced. Mr Crean has done so and
Mr Daly has done so. I, myself, will be issuing later in the day
a statement on the Animal Health Laboratory. In brief, we have
approved a project to provide major protection for the Australian
livestock industry. We will establish at Geelong a laboratory
complex and an Animal Health Laboratory at an estimated cost of
$ 56 million. This will provide a vital protection against animal
diseases for one of Australia' s most important industries.
Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Why was Senator Gair appointed Australian Ambassador
to Ireland and, secondly, was this opposed by officials at the
Department of Foreign Affairs who would have liked to see the
position filled by a career diplomat rather than a politician?
PRIME MINISTER: The Department of Foreign Affairs wasn't asked for
a view on it and, of course, didn't presume to express a view on it.
But members of Parliament have been constantly appointed to diplomatic
posts including Ireland. You remember Sir Hugh Roberton was appointed
as Ambassador to Ireland. Other serving members of Parliament who
have been appointed as ambassadors have been Sir Percy Spender
to the United States, Sir Howard Beale to the United States,
Mr Joe Gullett to Greece, Mr Dan Mackinnon to the Argentine, Uruguay
and Peru, and Mr Gordon Freeth to Japan. Members of Parliament who
have been appointed as High Commissioners have been Sir Thomas White
to Britain, Sir Eric Harrison to Britain, Sir Alec Downer to Britain,
Dr Donald C~ rieron -to New Zealand, Dame Annabelle Rankini to New Zealand
and Sir Hubert Opperman to Malta. Then there have been Consul-Generals
Sir Josiai Fran':. is to New York and Mr Roger Dean to San Francisco.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlain, did you appoint Senator Gair because of his
-Cact, diplomacy and agreement with your Government's policies or
so that jou could win another Senate seat in Queensland?
PRIME MINISTER: I would agree with what M Siiedden said about
Senator Gair on the 4th October: " Senator Gair is a very experienced
anid very senior politician. He has, in fact, been a very great
Australian". My attitude to Senator Gair has Always been same.
QUEJSTION: Can I repeat Mr Oakes' second part of his question?
DO yo~ t hope to win the sixth seat in Queensland?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. No, I correct that; the fifth.
QIJZ-TION: I hav~ e a message from Brisbane. It states that the
qucuensland Premier he may have done this already but in Parliamniet
today he intends to announce that the Queensland Government and the
P-apua New Guinea Government have agreed to retain the present
boundiaries. Are you aware of this, and what are'your comments?
PRIME MINTSTER: I haven't heard.
QUESTION: Do you h-ia"' e dn coneo'ns to ina] e on Russia's request for
consideration of a joint Lide in Australia? 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: You are referring to a proposal that some Soviet
scientists made in February for the establishment of a joint
Australian/ Soviet station. The proposal is that the station would
be used for purposes of photographing space objects and contributing
to a study of the characteristics of the atmosphere. That was the
way the proposal was put. The proposal is currently under study in
appropriate departments. No advice has been given to Ministers on
it, and Ministers have not considered it.
QUESTION: Was the decision to appoint Senator Gair taken while
you were Acting Foreign Minister in Senator Willesee's absence?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Did the initiative come from yourself?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Was Senator Willesee consulted and what was his view
on the appointment?
PRIME MINISTER: The appointment was made while I was Acting
Foreign Minister. Senator Willesee knew before he went away and,
of course, he has known since he has returned.
QUESTION: Will Cabinet mak3: the decision on whether there should
be a Russian base here and when do you expect that decision to be
made? PRIME MINISTER: Well Cabinet might, but it might not. It depends
on what the Ministers concerned feel about it. I wouldn't imagine
that there is any particular hurry. I beiieve there have been such
proposals put to our predecessors too, bucz as often happened in
those days, no decision was reached.
QUESTION: Did the Irish Government express any reservations about
a second political appointment to be Ambassador in Ireland.
PRIME MINISTER: No, the Irish Government made no comment on the
appointment. The Irish Government in fact gave its agre'teit very
rapidly.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, has Senator Gair officially accepted the
position?., PRIME MINISTER: Yes. He hasn't, I understand, resigned from the
Senate yet.
QUESTION: On the Senate election. What would you expect the
state of the parties to be in the Seiiate after the election. How
many seats do you expect to pick up?'
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't worked a( A this out. It may be that matters
are in a state of flux. There may aven be some rearranging of
various tickets.
QUESTION: What other appointments have you offered to members of
the Senate after the Senate elections? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: I have to wait until other governments have
indicated their agreement. Seriously, there have been no discussions
on any such matters.
QUESTION: Do you welcome the States access to a consumption ti. x
as the High Court determined it yesterday. And will you be vacatinq
the field of Commonwealth sales tax to allow the States access to
a growth tax which you have always advocated or will you be cutting
back on your commonwealth grants to the States?
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't studied the judgment yet and the other
States, apart from Tasmania, have not considered legislation on this
subject yet. Tasmania wil, as a result of the judgment, presumably
be bringing in fresh legislation. As a matter of general attitude,
however, a consumption tax, a consumer tax, is one which is quite
appropriate for States to levy in a Federal system. There has been
very much doubt and hesitation hitherto by the States in ' imposing
such taxes because there have been a great number of decisions by
the High Court on the Commonwealth's exclusive power to levy excise
duty. There has been doubt as to what taxes would be excise
duties. The High Court decision yesterday clarified this matter
quite considerably.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, in reference to your policy of accepting
only skilled or professional workers from Asia, do you think that
might cause a brain-drain from these countries that would generate
as much antagonism as the White Australia policy.
PRIME MINISTER: It might. It well might. I take this opportunity
to comment that many newspaper articles on this and other immigration
matters refer to a " migrant drive". The Government is conducting
no migrant drive. What the Government has done is to make arrangements
for the same method of assessing skills, industrial skills, which
hitherto, have applied to Europe, including Turkey, to the
ascertainment of industrial skills in S. E. Asia, the South Pacific
and Latin America and, accordingly, if people in those other countries
nearer to us now seek to migrate to Australia, their skills will be
able to be determined at home instead of being referred to Australia.
Ile are, in other words, as regards industrial skills making thiv S. vne
arrangements for our neighbourhood and our hemisphere as h4Ve be en
made for some years past in respect to Europe.
QUESTION: Is the Government prepared to pay compensation Lo mining
companies that are not able to go ahead and develop reserves that
they have vacated because of decisions in relation to the environment,
Aboriginal land rights, Aboriginal welfare? Would such compensation,
if it were to be paid, be based on E': oenditures they have incuirred
in vacating the reserves, or would it be related to their expectations
of profits, if they were allowed tco go ahead and develop them?
PRIME MINISTER: There might be legal implications in any answer I
have to that, so you will understand that I won't answer it. The
general situation is that for the last 20 years, under legislation
introduced by one of the Menzies Governments, uranium in the Australian
territories and there are very great deposits of uranium in the
Northern Territory; we don't know of any in Canberra or Jervis Bay
belong to the Australian Government. And accordingly we have suggested
to companies which have contracts to supply uranium overseas that
they can fulfil those contracts from uranium deposits owned by the / 14 
-4-
Australian Government in various parts of the Northern Territory.
We are not prepared to allow any companies to exploit uranium from
Aboriginal reserves until Mr Justice E. A. Woodward has given a
further report on Aboriginal land rights in the Northern Territory.
QUESTION: Mr Prime Minister, I understand that during your
forthcoming visit to Europe, you are going to visit Yugoslavia. ' Viiis
will be the first ever visit of an Australian Prime Minister to
Yugoslavia? Considering also the fact that there are a quarter of
a million Australians of Yugoslavian origin, do you expect that
your visit will improve better the relationships between the two
countries, and whether some tangible concrete matters will be
discussed? PRIME MINISTER: I have had many invitations from heads of Government
or heads of State in Europe to visit their countries. Among them
there is an invitation from Yugoslavia. Accordingly, when I visit
Europe, I intend to visit Yugoslavia. The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia
visited Australia a year ago and therefore it is proper that I should
reciprocate his visit on my first visit thereafter. I know the
contribution that Yugoslavs have made to Australia, because I believe
that in my electorate there are more people who were born in Yugoslavia
or whose parents were born in Yugoslavia than any other electorate
in Australia.
QUESTION: There is a considerable concern that meat prices are
dropping seriously. A number of abattoirs have been forced to lay
of f staff due to the virtual disappearance of export sales. The main
problem seems to be an over-valuation of the Australian dollar against
the American dollar and the Yen. Is the Government concerned about
this situation?
PRIME MINISTER: I will not make any conm f-t in public on matters of
valuation of the currency. Nobody in this job would. If prices
are falling overseas, we might even get them to fall at home.
QUESTION: Will the Government give asylum to an American war desertcr,
currently under detention in the country, and what is the general
attitudes of the Government on at least another ten deserters believed
to be in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government hasn't considered this mat-6* er and I
have only had a very passing discussion about it with my colleagues.
You might forgive me however if I express a tentative view. The man
concerned has an Australian wife and Australian born children. I don't
believe it is possible that in those circumstances he would be
deported.
QUESTION: Presumably you will hope that the DLP will be killed as
a force in the Senate on May 18. Do you hope that?
PRIME MINISTER: I would believe that, there will be one member of the
DLP in the next Parliament after the Senate elections.
QUESTION: Has this hope or belief influenced your decision to
appoint Senator Gair to Ireland?
PRIME MINISTER: There are DLP candidates standing in several States.
I would not think that any of them have strong prospects of re-election. 
QUESTION: You said in the House this morning you hoped that
Senator Gair would be in Dublin in July. When exactly will he take up
his appointment?
PRIME MINISTER: Before July. I am not sure. I would think about
the end of June. As you know our diplomats in various posts find it
useful and agreeable for them to have a visit by the Prime Minister
or the Foreign Minister because it brings them quite intensely into
governmental circles at their posts.
QUESTION: Can you tell me why Professor Ronald Henderson's report
on poverty was not released yesterday as expected?
PRIME MINISTER: Because it is proper to release it in Parliament while
Parliament is sitting.
QUESTION: Can you tell us, is there still time between now and
May 18 to have the sixth vacancy elected in Queensland?
PRIME MINISTER: The Queensland Government if the Queensland Legislative
Assembly is not sitting, or the Queensland Legislative Assembly,
if it is sitting, can made an appointment to fill a casual vacancy.
The replacement is made at the first election, Federal election,
after the occurrence of the casual vacancy in the State. The balance
of Senator Gair's term will be taken by the person elected on 18 May.
QUESTION: That depends on when Senator Gair retires. Do you know
when that will be?
PRIME MINISTER: 1.
QUESTION: Can I clarify a point in answer to my earlier question?
When I asked you whether you had had any negotiations referring to
overseas posts, what I was getting at specifically is: Have you
had any discussions with Senator Negus or any other independent
senators regarding the possibility of standing for President after
the Senate elections?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't and if I had I wouldn't tell you. 



AtA
~ AUS tL IAgL
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 211
2 April 1974
TORRES STRAIT MARINE PARK
The Prime Minister, Mr whitlam said tonight that he wrote
to Mr Bielkc Petersen in December 1972 suggesting that Papua New Guinea,
Queensland and Australian officials hold discussions, but
Mr Bjelke Petersen had said he could not see that any good purpose
would be served by such a meeting.
Since then, Ministerial and official discussions have
been held between the Australian and Papua New Guinea Governments.
There have been consultations with the Torres Strait Islanders and
discussions have been arranged between the Torres Strait Is~ landers
and the coastal peoiple of Papua New Guinea.
Arising out of these discussions, proposals have been
put forward for an agreement between the Government which would
protect the environment of the Torres Strait and the way of life
of the Isltinders and the coastal people. Queensland officials have
been kept informed of these proposals. As the issues have not yet
been discussed between the Australian and Papua New Guinea Governments,
it is not possible to conclude whether such an agreement would heacceptable
to the Governments and the peoples concerned. The Australian
Government is hopeful that the concept of an environmentally protected
area can contribute to a satisfactory settlement.
The Prime Minister said that in view of the Premier's
changed attitude hie would again invite the Queensland Government to
take part in official discussions with the Australian and Papua New
Guinea Governments with a view to reaching an agreed settlement.
The Prime Minister-stressed, however, that negotiations
on such a settlement could only be undertaken by the two Governments
concerned that is Papua New Guinea and Australia. Papua New Guinea
is not able to reach a separate agreement with Queensland and this
is understood and accepted by Mr Somare.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 212
1 APRIL 1974
GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO ATTEID MEMORIAL
SERVICE FOR PRESIDENT POMPIDOU
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, HIS EXCELLENCY SIR PAUL HASLUCK,
WILL LEAVE TONIGHT TO REPRESENT AUSTRALIA AT THE MEMORIAL SERVICE
FOR THE LATE PRESIDENT POMPIDOU TO BE HELD IN PARIS ON SATURDAY.
THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA WILL BE ADMINISTERED IN
SIR PAUL'S ABSENCE BY HIS EXCELLENCY SIR ROHAN DELACOMBE,
THE GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 216
April 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION TO REPORT ON
RURAL RESEARCH AND PROMOTION
The Prime Minister announced today that he had forwarded
two references to the Industries Assistance Commission on the
question of Australian Government assistance in financing rural
research and the promotion of rural products.
Mr. Whitlam said that the references were in accordance
with the statement made by Dr. Patterson as the Minister representing
the Minister for Primary Industry, when introducing the Wool Industry
Bill 1974 on 14 March 1974, to provide for financing wool research
and promotion during the three years beginning with the year 1974/ 75.
The Government has decided to ask the Commission to report on rural
research and promotion generally before the announced three year wool
promotion scheme expires in 1976/ 77. The Government's policy in
relation to the continuation of wool research and promotion beyond
June 1977 will be determined in the light of the report of the
Commission. Mr. Whitlam said that expenditure by the Government on rural
promotion. in 1973/ 74 will be about $ 15.7 million on wool and about
$ 1.2 million on promotion overseas of meat, dairy products, apples
and pears, canned fruit, dried vine fruits, eggs, wine and honey.
Expenditure on wool research alone in 1973/ 74 was expected to be
about $ 6 million.
The Commission has been asked whether funds should continue to
be provided by the Australian Government to finance, or assist in
financing rural research and promotion of rural products ( including
processed products) and, if so:-
What should be the nature and extent of the
assistance provided by the Australian Government, and
What criteria should be used in determining and
apportioning such expenditure.
For the purposes of both inquiries, fisheries and fisheries
products have been included within the scope of the references.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 217
8 April 1974
TARIFF BOARD REPORT CIGARETTE PAPER
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that the Government has accepted the recommendation of
the Tariff Board in its report on Cigarette Paper.
The report covered cigarette tissue paper for use
in the manufacture of cigarettes, cigarette paper or
cigarette papers, but excluded cigarette papers in leaves
or booklets containing a number of loose leaves.
Implementation of the recommendations will mean
that the products covered by the report will be dutiable
at 20%. At present the existing rate of duty for most
cigarette paper is 37.5% General plus 7.5% primage. The
Board also recommended that filigrained ( patterned or embossed)
cigarette tissue be admitted duty free under by-law, and
that cigarette paper from New Zealand be admitted duty free.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 219
8 April 1974
ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR THE DAIRY INDUSTRY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that the Australian Government is prepared to invest
substantially in the dairy industry during the next two
years to help it towards long term stability.
When it was agreed in July last to phase out the
dairy bounty, this Government undertook to introduce
restructuring measures which would best help the dairy
industry and the smaller dairy farmer.
Cabinet yesterday approved a program of assistance
to the dairy industry, the cost of which could amount to
the order of $ 28 million over the next two years.
Later today Senator Wriedt will explain fully the
details of the program. However, one important aspect I
would emphasise is that loans made to cream suppliers to
assist in the change over to whole milk supply will be
interest free.
I am confident these measures will be of great
long term benefit to the dairy industry in meeting the
changing world demand for dairy products.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
8 APRIL 1974
Opening statement by the Prime Minister.
The people of Australia should be very clear about how,
why and by whom their country has been suddenly plunged into a grave
and unprecedented Constitutional crisis. Beyond all the manoeuvring
and mud-slinging of the last week, one basic fact lies behind this
crisis: a group of Senators elected in 1967 and 1970 proposes to
deny the Australian Government, elected for three years in 1972, the
right to govern and the power to govern.
Money is the sinews of Government. The taxpayers' control
over their money through their elected representatives is the foundation
of parliamentary democracy. Under our Westminster system, this control
is firmly lodged in the Lower House the people's House.
It is precisely for this reason that, in Australia, whichever
party has the majority in the House of Representatives forms the
Government of Australia,
It is precisely for this reason that the Australian
Constitution sets rigorous limits upon the powers of the Senate to
amend money bills.
Now, a group of Senators is proposing to reject Bills
approved by the people's House which would enable the elected
Government to carry out its program and carry on the business of
Government. This has never before happened in Australia. It is a
step fraught with the very gravest implications for democratic
Government in Australia. It strikes at the roots of the Australian
democratic system. It is fraught with the gravest implications for
the Senate itself.
It is precisely because of these grave implications that
responsible political leaders of all Australian parties have hitherto
rejected such a proposition out of hand.
The situation whereby one party controls the House of
Representatives the Government and another party controls the
Senate is by no means unusual in Australia. What is absolutely new
is that an Opposition should attempt to use an outdated majority in
the Senate to deny the elected Government the money it needs to carry
out its program. Not until the election of a Labor Government, after 23 years
of coalition rule, has such a course been threatened. Why?
Not until the present leadership of the coalition arrayed
against the elected government has any elected Australian Government
been held up to continuing ransom by this threat of denying it the
money it must have to govern. Why? / 2 
-2-
They have already done this 4 times. They threatened it
in April a year ago. They threatened it in October. Again in November
they threatened to deny all Australian schools the vastly increased
sums of money the Australian Government is making available. And now
again they are threatening to reject Bills needed to pay Australian
Public Servants, needed to provide pre-school education child care,
to assist the States with health programs, to help child migrant
education, to assist the States with the cost of home care services,
to give relief in connection with the recent national disasters, to
promote apprenticeship training, to give assistance for isolated
children, needed to give emergency help to the apple and pear industry.
The Government was elected to carry out a program. The
Liberals, the Country Party, the have combined and conspired
in the Senate to deny it the money to carry it out.
There are two basic questions the people are entitled to
have answered. Why has responsible leadership of all Australian
parties always hitherto rejected this course? And why is the present
Opposition leadership prepared even to contemplate so unprecedented and
perilous a course?
The reason why a responsible Senate must, at all times,
exercise the utmost restraint but above all exercise restraint on
legislation dealing with the Taxpayers' money has been splendidly put
by Sir Robert Menzies. He was writing in 1968 about what would happen
if the Senate were to stand on technical legality but use mere numbers
to reject measures approved by the House of Representatives.
Sir Robert Menzies said:
" This would create an impossible situation and
would make popular government unworkable"....
" It would be a falsification of democracy if on
any matter of government policy approved by the
House of Representatives, possibly by a large
majority, the Senate representing the States
and not the people, could reverse the decision....
otherisTe a Senate Opposition whose party had just
been completely defeated at a general election
would be in command of the Government of the nation.
This would be absurd, as a denial of popular
democracy."
That was Sir Robert Menzies' principle in 1968. He states exactly
what is now happening in Canberra. There could be no clearer statement
on the principle now at stake. There could be no clearer evidence
of the decline in the standards and principles of Sir Robert Menzies'
successors. What a falling off was there, my countrymen. Why then
have his successors turned their backs on the principles of their
former leader, their founder? Why are they proposing this
falsification of democracy?
Let me put the events of last week in their proper perspective.
An election for half the Senate is due to replace that half of the
Senate elected in 1967. 
-3-
Of course among those Senators up for election are those who
have been involved in a course of unparalleled obstruction of legislation
the people elected us to implement. They have prevented us introducing
universal health insurance. They have prevented us enacting industrial
legislation designed to reduce industrial disputes. They have held up
our legislation on restrictive trade practices and monopolies and
consumer protection crucial in our fight against inflation. They have
stalled in order to sabotage our plans to increase the effectiveness
of the Australian Industry Development Corporation. Last week they
rejected the Petroleum and Minerals Authority Bill our basic
instrument for ensuring the effective development of our energy and
mineral resources and to maximise the ownership and control of those
resources by Australians. They have even rejected our proposal for
a Federal Superior Court, a proposition first advanced by no less an
authority than the Chief Justice, Sir Garfield Barwick. Now this is
not particularly a Labor measure. A Bill to set up a Superior Court
was introduced in 1968 by a former Liberal Attorney-General, now
Mr Justice Bowen. In his second reading speech, he said:
" Since 1961, a very considerable amount of work has
been done, first by Sir Garfield Barwick as
Attorney-General, then by the present Minister for
Immigration ( Mr Snedden) when he was Attorney-General
I mention this to illustrate the pettiness, the meanness,
the mindlessness, the bloddy mindedness of it all. They rejected Bills
to enable us to put to the people referendum proposals to enhance
Australia's democratic processes that is, if they had had their
way they would not even allow the people of Australia to have the
chance of passing an opinion on these proposals.
The Senate elections due next month would allow the people
to pass their judgement on this record of obstruction. Yet the
complexities and complications of Senate elections are such that no
party, neither the Government nor the Opposition, can be reasonably
assured of gaining a majority in the Senate. It was therefore my duty
to consider all means, consistent with propriety and the national
interest to reduce the instability built into this situation.
Last * Tuesday I announced the appointment of Mr Gair, who had
been last elected to the Senate in November 1970, as our Ambassador
to Ireland. The effect of Mr Gair accepting this appointment was to
create an additional Senate vacancy to be elected by the people of
Queensland next month. That was its sole political effect and,
politically, its sole intention, to give the people of Queensland an
opportunity to elect 6 Senators instead of just 5; not, be it noted,
to give any person, party, or Parliament the power to decide who would
represent Queensland in the Senate, but to give the people of Queensland
the opportunity to have their say. By contrast, the Premier of
Queensland has tried to forestall that possibility to deny that
opportunity by himself nominating a replacement for Mr Gair. He has
said in effect, that the party representation in the Senate should
reflect what the people of Queensland thought in 1970, not what they may
think or decide themselves in 1974.
There is one remarkable aspect of this matter. For all the
bombast of the past week, no-one in the Opposition has had the temerity
to state that the new Ambassador to Ireland is unfit to hold the post.
/ 4 
-4-
So what is the objection? Not surely, that a serving
Member of Parliament was appointed to a diplomatic post or an office
of profit under the Crown. I have here a list which shows countless
such appointments by our predecessors.
Is the objection that the Ambassador is not of my political
persuasion? Was I wrong therefore to confirm Mr Gordon Freeth, a
defeated Liberal Minister, or Dame Annabelle Rankin, a former Queensland
Liberal Senator, in their posts in Tokyo and Wellington when I became
Prime Minister? If someone will say plainly that the Ambassador is unfit
for the post, I imagine Mr Gair will take his recourse at law.
In the meantime, I can only conjecture that the Opposition believes
that a man who was fit enough to maintain them in power for a generation,
a man who was fit enough to exercise decisive influence on both the
home and foreign policies of their administration, is somehow unfit to
represent this country in Ireland.'
So we come to this; Senators who have indulged in deliberate
obstruction of the elected Government, its program, its mandate, now
propose the ultimate obstruction refusal of the money needed to carry
on the people's business. When the Liberals discussed such a course
last October, the President of the Senate himself, the distinguished
Sir Magnus Cormack A Liberal warned his colleagues that they would
be committing suicide. What he meant, what he well understood, was
that the people of Australia would never forget or forgive so blatant
and fundamental a denial of democracy, a falsification of democracy,
as Sir Robert Menzies puts it; and that sooner or later the people
themselves would choose to destroy an institution which had proved
itself so irresponsible, so potent an instrument for the destruction
of Australian democracy. I think Sir Magnus Cormack is correct in
his judgement. If he is, then Senators are proposing to sign the
death warrant of the Senate. However that may be, they must not be
allowed to sign the death warrant of Australian democracy. This is
what Liberal members of integrity like Mr Killen and Mr Hamer are
concerned about that the control of the people's money must rest in
the people's House, that the people's House should be answerable to the
people about the spending of their money, and that their money should
not be at the disposal of the pressure groups and the monied interests,
notably foreign monied interests, to whom these Senators and their
leaders, their parties are so acutely responsive and, indeed, indebted.
Mark these words:
" They have refused to recognise the umpire's decision.
They have used their Senate majority to slow down the
machinery of Government. They have done violence to
our legislative program. What we ask for is a fair
chance to carry out our policy in the sound Australian
phrase, a fair go."
Again, these are not my words; they are the words of
Sir Robert Menzies, at the double dissolution in 1951. 



/ i
8 April 1974
NATIONAL ANTHEM
Please find attached copies of the results of the
National Anthem poll which the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam,
incorporated in Hansard this morning. 
BLOOD-I 12651744t40-REPS. DAILY--615--
NA. TIONA, ANTHEM PI( EFERENCES
( Expressed as pcrcci tages)
Tune Song of ' Advance
Australia' Australiii, Fair'
Ne\ s South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
Australia 8.3 ( 2.1)
9.2 ( 2.4)
10.9 ( 2.2)
47.6 ( 1.2)
17.8 ( 1.8)
14.6 ( 3.6)
18 6( 10.0)
12.3 ( 14.0) ' Waltzir'. Ma ilda'
15.7 ( 1.8)
23.6 ( 1.8)
20.4 ( 2.1)
21.8 ( 2.2)
21.4 ( 1.9)
14.6 ( 4.5)
23.9 ( 11.0)
19.4 ( 10.0) ' Olicr'
13.1 22.2 ( 1.9)
14. S 1)
8.7 ( 4.2)
12.6 13.9 ( 4.4)
26.9 ( 10.3)
8.2( 21.0)
13.6 51.4 19 6 15.4 ( 1.6)
BLOOD-11265/ 74/ 4/ 340--REPS. DAILY-6/ 4-6/ 5-
NATIONAL ANTIIHI'. M PREFERENCES
( Expressed as percentages)
Tune ' Song of ' Advance
Australia' Australia Fair' ' Waltzing Matilda'SOther
BLOOD--1126517441340 REPS. DAILY--614-6/ 5-
NATIONAL ANTIIEM PREFERENCES
( Expressed as percentages)
Tune ' Song of ' Advance
Australia' Australia Fair' ' Waltzing Matilda'Other
15.7 45.9 24.7 13.7 ( 4.4)
13.8 48 4 21.0 16.9 ( 4.8)
11.6 48.9 22.2 ( 4 1) 17.2 ( 4.7)
1S1 .7 49.1 23.9 15.2 ( 5.6)
11 .9 47 4 24.6 16.1 ( 5.9)
1 I. 8 ( 5 4) 51.2 ( 2.11 20.4 16.6. ( 4.7)
11.2 52.4 18.6 17.8 ( 5.3)
12.2 52.8 17.2 17.8 ( 5.4)
10.1 16.8) 5' I ( 2 4) 18.3 19.5 ( 5.3)
9. ( 8 5a 15.9 19.0 ( 6.6)
8.7 57. 14.1 20.1 ( 5.2)
12.3 ( I 50.0 21.0 16.7 ( 1.8)
18.3 50.8 18.8 12.1
17 0 50 8 19.0 13.3 ( 4.4)
15.5 50.5 19.9 14.1 1)
14.8 49.3 22.7 13.2
15 5 51. 9 20.3 ( 4 8) 12.3 ( 5.9)
15.3 52.7 19.4 12 6 ( 5.4)
13.0 53.5 17 8 ( 4.91 15. 7 ( 5.4)
13.2 54.7 17.9 14 2 ( 5 9)
12.5 56 3 15.0 16.1 ( 6 2)
1 11.2 60.1 12.4 1 ( 1i. 6)
10.5 56.0 14.3 19.2 ( 4.4)
14.8 52.7 18.3 14.2 ( 1.8)
Age group
Age group
Males
Females 18-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69 Total
18-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69 70-1 Total 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 221
9 April 1974
RELEASE OF INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released the
Industries Assistance Commission report on Paper. He said that
this was in accordance with his earlier statement on 19 December
1973 that reports of the Industries Assistance Commission which
would not cause damaging speculation would be made public as
soon as they are printed.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government's decision on
the'report will be announced at the earliest practicable date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 1 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. ZZ 2.
April 1974
PROVISION OF ASSISTANCE TO PARTIES IN PRICES JUSTIFICATION
TRIBUNAL INQUIRIES
For some time now it has been apparent that provision
should be made to assist in the presentation of cases in
the consumer interest at Prices Justification Tribunal
inquiries. It is important that adequate presentations be
made to the Tribunal so that it will have all relevant aspects
of the matter before it during its deliberations. I pay
tribute to the quality of the Tribunal's past reports and
do not in any way question the ability of the Tribunal to take
full account of the public interest in all its inquiries.
The arrangements that will now take effect are intended
solely to assist the Tribunal in this onerous task.
In the first place, the Government will, in approved
circumstances, provide assistance in the form of information
and advice to parties making a general public interest case to
the Tribunal. Requests for such assistance should be
forwarded to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
which will make any necessary inquiries from other Government
agencies and communicate as appropriate with the party
concerned. In addition to this, the Government will, in
appropriate cases, provide assistance with the cost of
preparation and presentation of submissions to the Tribunal.
In this respect the following arrangements will now operate:
A prerequisite for assitance is that the applicant
has been granted leave by the Tribunal under Section
of the Prices Justification Act to take part as a
party in an inquiry.
Applications may be made on the following grounds:
that the applicant represents the interests
of a substantial number of consumers;
( ii) that the applicant is capable of effectively
representing the interests of consumers before
the Tribunal; 
-2-
( iii) that it is desirable that the applicant take
part in the inquiry in order that the interests
of consumers will be adequately and effectively
represented before the Tribunal;
( iv) that the cost to the applicant of taking part in
the inquiry would impose a burden on it that
it ought not fairly be required to bear;
and that in all the circumstances it is reasonable that
assistance be granted.
Any assistance may include financial assistance. A
determination will be made of the contribution to be
made towards the applicant's costs of the inquiry and
the extent of the costs that the applicant should be
left to bear. Assistance may be granted either
unconditionally or subject to conditions.
The determination whether assistance is to be granted,
and if so, the amount of such assistance will be made
by the Prime Minister or by a Minister designated by him.
A person or organisation desiring assistance should make
application to the Prime Minister setting out the following
information: an indication of intention to apply for leave to
take part in an inquiry;
( ii) if an organisation, particulars of the organisation
and the nature of its membership;
( iii) a statement of financial capacity;
( iv) a short statement of the purpose of intervention
in the inquiry;
al estimate of the costs likely to be incurred
in the inquiry; and
( vi) a request for a stated contribution towards costs
with reasons for that request.
An application will finally be determined once the applicant
obtains the leave of the Tribunal to take part in the inquiry.
Applications in relation to participation in past as well as
current or future inquiries by the Prices Justification
Tribunal will be considered on the same basis.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
THURSDAY 11 APRIL 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, I announced in the House of
Representatives last night that the Governor-General had agreed that
there should be a simultaneous dissolution of the Senate and the House
of Representatives. He required to be assured on two matters. First
that there would be supply for the public service until the election,
and the other that the electoral machinery was adequate to conduct
the elections on any date that he determined. I this morning gave
His Excellency those assurances and he has agreed that there should be
an election for both Houses on 18 May. The timetable is that the writs
should issue on Saturday 20 April, the nominations should close on
Monday 29 April, the polling day on 18 May and the writs must be
returned on or before 29 June. As you know the Governors of the States
issue the writs for the election of senators and the Governor-General
will be approaching the Governors with a view to obtaining their
consent to the same timetable for the purposes of the election. On
April the Governor-General will also issue writs for the Referendums
to be submitted to the people on 18 May. The four referendums will be
Simultaneous Elections between the two Houses; for the Mode of Altering
the Constitution; the Democratic Elections and for Local Government
Bodies. Perhaps I should say that the referendum for Simultaneous
Elections is all the more relevant on this occasion because when there
is a double dissolution the term of senators elected at it dates from
1 July preceding. So the senators who will be elected as the Constitution
stands at the moment would have their terms dating from 1 July 1973.
If this referendum is carried then their terms will date from the day
of the election. You will remember that's what happened in 1951 when
there was last a double dissolution. The senators had in effect two
and five year terms whereas the House of Representatives was permitted
to have three years. So the way to bring them together will be achieved
if this referendum is carried.
QUESTION: Where will you make your policy speech and when?
PRIME MINISTER: This is still being arranged it will be announced by
Mr David Combe, the Secretary of the Australian Labor Party. I would
expect it will be in Sydney and about three weeks. before the polling
date. QUESTION: Do you envisage any major changes in policy~ any new policy
initiatives at all when you do make your speech?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government's policies are clear. It's because the
Government's policies have been delayed and frustrated in the Senate
that this election is taking place. The principle forms in which the
folicy will be carried out are already in bills which have been before
he Senate. As you know, six of those bills have been twice rejected
by the Senate. Three of them are on electoral matters, although they
were all mentioned in the government's policy speech which I delivered
in November 1972, and, of course, in the Australian Labor Party's
published platform before the 1972 elections. Then there are two bills
to carry out the health insurance scheme which was detailed in my policy
speech in November 1972 and incidentally in November 1969, and is also
in the Australian Labor Party's published platform; and finally the
Petroleum and Minerals Authority Bill which is in accordance with my
policy speech and the Australian Labor Party's publi -, hed platform. 
-2-
Those are six bills which have already been twice rejected by the
Senate. So people know quite clearly what we will do when we are
re-elected in those six basic matters. On top of that the Senate
has rejected bills to make the industrial organisation and settlement
of disputes easier in Australia, carrying out, incidentally, a
program which the industrial Court recommended as of the utmost
urgency in February 1969. Our predecessors did nothing about it
and the four States concerned, all three of them Liberal States,
have not hitherto co-operated in that five-year-old urgent plan.
So that's one. Then there is Workers' Compensation for Public
Servants; there is the Superior Court of Australia Bill,
incidentally carrying out a proposal which Sir Garfield Barwick
made and got through Cabinet when he was Attorney-General in 1961,
which Mr. Snedden when he was Attorney-General also worked on, and
which Mr. Justice Bowen when he was Attorney-General actually
introduced in the form of a bill in 1968. Mr. Justice Bowen, as
you know, has paid tribute to what the Chief Justice and Mr. Snedden
have done in working on this bill. When we bring it up its rejected,
and it was on the Senate Notice Paper, but they hadn't got round
actually to a vote of rejecting it a second time. Then there is the
Trade Practices Bill, including, of course, proposals which were put
by former Liberal Attorneys-General Greenwood and Bowen and Hughes;
and it also has consumer protection, which we added. Then there
was the proposal for interchange of powers at a referendum between
the Australian Parliament and the State Parliaments, which five of
the six Premiers welcomed last September. Then there is the
Australian Industries Development Corporation Bill and the National
Investment Fund Bill which accompanies it. They've been rejected.
And then I suppose there are some lesser ones which I needn't worry
you with. Land acquisition in the Australian Capital Territory and
seas and submerged lands royalties on minerals all these have been
rejected once the last one actually has been rejected twice but
all the others were waiting for rejection. Now when we're elected
we will bring those bills in. So the clear lines of our policy are
already known. By contrast I suppose one could say that the Liberals
resent it if anyone discloses any drafts of their policies.
QuIESTION: What is your prediction as to the outcome of the election
for both Houses and secondly, what do you think are going to be the
major issues in the election?
PRIME MINISTER: It will be very difficult. I think it will be
unlikely that we can get more than 30 senators or all the parties
opposed to us in the Senate can get more than 30 senators. That being
the case, if the Senate were again to reject any of these six bills
upon which the Governor-General has granted the dissolution, there
would be a joint sitting of two Houses and if there was an absolute
majority in favour of the bills at such a joint sitting they would become
law. Clearly there will be a more ample majority in the House of
Representatives than one could ever hope in the Senate. At a joint
sitting then I would expect all these bills to go through. The
major issues will be these matters which we in accordance with our
platform and my policy speech and which we have introduced into the
Parliament and where we have been frustrated by the Senate. In six
cases, these matters have been twice rejected by the Senate. There
are over six matters where there has been a rejection by the Senate
and a clear intention to reject when they came on to a vote one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. 
-3-
QUESTION: The Senate has been the cause of the current situation?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: If you do win the elections will you intend to carry
out Labor Party policy of abolishing the Upper House?
PRIME MINISTER: I've been asked that before. It is not a high
priority. It would require a referendum and this is one referendum
which would have to be carried in each of the six States. No
alteration of the Constitution which affects the representation of
a State can be carried without the approval of the electors in that
State. Clearly since each State is represented in the Senate any
abolition of the Senate proposal would have to be approved by the
electors in each State. There was no commitment in my policy speech
to put such a referendum. I do not propose to put it in my policy
speech in a couple of weeks' time.
QUESTION: Could you tell me: have you an opinion, political or
legal, about the Australia Party's move in the High Court?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that the Australia Party's move in the
High Court has great constitutional merit. I tried to get the
Australian Labor Party to take the same move when the last
distribution was under way in 1968. We couldn't find the money
to mount the challenge. Unquestionably in the United States such
a challenge would succeed. The Australia Party is trying to have
the High Court give the same interpretation to the Australian
Constitution as the Supreme Court of the United States has given
to exactly the same words in the United States Constitution. One
of the referendums which we are putting to the people, the
democratic elections one, is to write into the Constitution of
Australia the interpretation which the United States Supreme Court
has given the Constitution of the United States. Nobody, however
critical he may be of other aspects of the United States Constitution,
has ever asserted that the United States Supreme Court decisions
of the last ten years have done other than build democracy,
congressional democracy, in the United States. The United States
Congress, for better or for worse, now thoroughly represents the
United States people. That's as a result of the interpretation given
by the U. S. Supreme Court to the U. S. Constitution in case after
case over the last ten years.
QUESTION: Will the Australian High Court be able to delay the
election? PRIME MINISTER: I doubt it. What has happened I don't want to
appear too dogmatic on matters like this because obviously the
High Court has the jurisdiction, the duty, in these matters but
what has happened in the United States Supreme Court where challenges
have been made close to an election, as this challenge is being made,
is to require an assurance that any decision will be applied at the
next election. The United States Supreme Court has not delayed an
election while any such challenge has been heard. 
-4-
QUESTION: Two questions actually on behalf of the gallery:
would you repeat the undertaking that you gave at the last election
to meet us regularly in Canberra for a press conference on Tuesdays?
PRIME MINISTER: I have carried/ 6ut every promise I made before the
last elections. I faithfully carried this out. I've enjoyed it,
if you enjoy it and repeat the request I will comply.
QUESTION: I repeat the request.
PRIME MINISTER: I comply.
QUESTION: Senator McManus forecast yesterday that because of
disunity amongst the Opposition parties, Labor might be returned
in the House and win a majority in the Senate. Now if his forecast
goes slightly astray and you win a majority in the Senate but find
yourself in a minority in the House, how would you deal with the
legislation of a Liberal/ Country Party Government coming before
a Labor majority in the Senate, legislation with which you had
fundamental objection? How would you deal with supply bills, if
circumstances arose which you saw in the same light as the Liberal,
Country Party and D. L. P. parties have seen last week?
PRIME MINISTER: The second question is utterly hypothetical, clearly.
The first matter concerns a prediction by Senator McManus. I think
he was correct.
QUESTION: Mr. Snedden has undertaken that if he is elected, in his
first Budget he will cut income taxes by $ 600 million a year. Will
you match that promise?
PRIME MINISTER: I shall not.
QUESTION: Will you tell me what attitude you will take towards
taxation? PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Snedden, of course, had scarcely made the
promise before it was . rejected by Mr. Anthony, who asserts that
he will be the Treasurer if there's any change of Government. You'll
remember quite clearly that Mr. Anthony has said that he will be
non-commital on any such proposal. Please don't ask me questions
about my opponents' policies when they are not clear among themselves.
This at least was a specific one by part of them. It was not made
before it was disowned by the other one.
QUESTION: To clear up your answer to a previous question: In the
new House exactly what majority do you expect to have and which seats
do you think you could pick up and which could you lose?
PRIME MINISTER: How many seats we pick up will depend partly on the
candidates, and there has been some speculation on that. I'm clearly
not going to suggest what seats we could lose, but I don't believe
that we will lose any seats.
QUESTION: To what extent can any Federal Government control the
rate of inflation in Australia at the moment? 
PRIME MINISTER: Where an Australian Government, the Commonwealth
Government, can affect inflation my Government has taken the
appropriate action. There are, however, two fields where the
Australian Government cannot take action. There are some components
of inflation where the States can take action and the Australian
Government cannot. One very clear example is land prices.
It is open to every State to control, to regulate, land prices.
And in times of inflation people invest in land because they
believe it's one form of investment where the inflated price
of land will keep pace with inflation elsewhere. People believe
that it's a sound investment. When there's inflation people
speculate in land. Every State Government could stop it. The
Australian Government can only stop it in the Territories. You'll
notice that in Canberra the rise in land prices which we inherited
has been brought to a halt. There are other aspects of inflation
which in the case of trading countries cannot be stopped by those
countries without stopping their trade. And the present fact is
in the world that all the trading countries Australia, Japan,
the United States, Canada, Britain, Western Europe are suffering
greviously from inflation. They are trading with each other they're
importing each other's inflation.
QUESTION: Do you think you will be announcing any new antiinflationary
initiatives during the campaign?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't expect so. I notice that Mr. Snedden
has already said that he would abandon or reverse all the antiinflationary
steps that we have taken. And these are antiinflationary
steps which everybody has praised us for taking.
It took some courage to make some of them, but we took them.
QUESTION: Do you think a floating exchange rate would be a good
thing in this situation?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm the head of Government and I will not
speculate on matters of currency. No head of Government can
speculate on the rate of exchange between his country's currency
and any other country's currency. I gather that Mr. Snedden has
said that we should cut the link between the Australian dollar
and the U. S. dollar. Mr. Anthony has supported that proposition.
His motive is very clearly to devalue the Australian dollar.
I believe that would be an utterly irresponsible and highly
inflationary measure. The Australian dollar is not overvalued.
It has appreciated in value very greatly under my government.
It was because it was undervalued under our predecessors,
particularly when Mr. Snedden was Treasurer, that there was so
much hot money coming into Australia. That was producing
inflation, and it was buying up our assets on the cheap. It
would be highly irresponsible to devalue the Australian dollar.
QUESTION: Will you be making any fresh promises in your policy
speech?
PRIME MINISTER: There will be developments of initiatives we've
already taken and there will be many commitments in the light
of expert advice which we have received in the meantime. For
instance, only yesterday we had the report of the Kangan Committee
on Technical and Further Education. There will be reports quite
soon concerning Data and Statistical matters from Professor Crisp. 
-6-
There will also be a report on retraining schemes from a committee
under Professor Cochran. These are matters where you can expect
that we will make commitments. But in other matters I would expect
that there will be more details on questions such as pre-schools,
day care, child care and also on house insurance. Clearly the
shortcomings of house insurance have been very greatly brought to
mind by the fact that people who were flooded in Brisbane in
particular. Ipswich and other places, found that their policies
didn't cover them against floods. Even the Treasurer of Queensland
had taken out house insurance on the house for which he had got a loan
from an insurance company and he found they hadn't covered him
against flood. He was left high and dry in that respect at least.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, will you be moderating your views for
Sydney's second airport. Will it be at Galston?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter, as you know, is under consideration.
I see in one of the papers that Mr. Snedden has said that if there
was a change of government that government would extend the
operations at Mascot. I believe that, and I commend Mr. Snedden
for being so frank about it, this is the first time he has been
prepared to commit himself on this issue. He wouldn't find that
the Premier of New South Wales would support him on that. The
fact is that no electorate in the vicinity of Mascot will support
a party which is committed to expanding operations at Mascot.
Everybody knows that.
QUESTION: Could you elaborate on your plans for the rest of today
and the Easter weekend? For example, are you still intending
to go to Cairns to have a rest and work on your policy speech?
PRIME MINISTER: I am going to Cairns. I doubt if it will be a
rest. I will be working on my policy speech. My ministers have
already provided me with suggestions as to the way to present
our policies, to present the further development of the policies
to which we have been committed and which we have done our best
to implement hitherto and, also, of course, summaries of what
we have already achieved. My present plan is to attend a meeting
of the Administrative Committee of the New South Wales Branch
of the Australian Labor Party at about 3 o'clock this afternoon.
I will then touch down at Brisbane. I will meet Lord Mayor,
Clem Jones, there. He has commitments in Rockhampton tomorrow;
I'm taking the opportunity to discuss various issues relating
to the forthcoming election with him on the way between Brisbane
and Rockhampton. And then I will arrive in Cairns tonight.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, when you saw the Governor-General
yesterday did you put before him all those matters that you read
out to us earlier about what the Senate has done?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Or was your advice based mainly on the events of
yesterday? PRIME MINISTER: I followed the precedent that Sir Robert Menzies
set in the letter of 1951 to Governor-. General McKell. Sir
Robert Menzies referred to one bill, the Commonwealth Bank Bill,
on which there had been two rejections by the Senate. He did
in fact then go on to list the course of obstruction by the Senate. 
I -7-
My list was, of course, very much more formidable.
QUESTION: During the last election campaign, when you didn't
have control of the Senate anyhow and it didn't matter, you
promised that there would be no change in the first-past-the-post
voting system during the life of the still present Parliament.
I wonder now that there is some chance that you may get control
of the Senate and the thing becomes feasible if you would outline
your intentions in that regard?
PRIME MINISTER: You are quite right. There was no promise
to the people in this respect at the last elections and therefore
when we brought in our various electoral bills we made no promise.
We made no provision for first-past-the-post voting. There will
be no amendments of the electoral laws under my government in the
next Parliament other than those which are set out in the policy
speech.
QUESTION: On the question of inflation and the economy, which
will be major issues in the campaign, how do you reconcile the
rate of inflation today running at around about 14 per cent
with the five or six per cent of your predecessor?
PRIME MINISTER: There are two reasons. We inherited some
policies which were just made for inflation. The currency was
undervalued and furthermore the last Snedden Budget in 1972
encouraged inflation. There was a very great deal of domestic
money infused into the economy and of course that, added to the
overseas funds coming in, just produced the inflation. Since
then the imported inflation has grown because in 1973 all the
countries I mentioned earlier have much higher inflation than
they had in 1972. If, however, we had not taken our steps to
upvalue the Australian currency to regulate the flow of loan
funds from overseas by having the variable deposit requirement,
if we hadn't taken steps such as that and the unpopular but
inevitable interest rate increases, then our inflation would
be very much worse.
QUESTION: Assuming you are returned to office and assuming either
Mr. Young or Mr. Hawke are also elected, would you hope that either
or both of them would be in your next Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: I only have one vote in the Caucus so I'm not
going to answer a question like that. I've never run tickets
for Executive or for Cabinet. The Caucus will be able to make
up its own mind between all those who nominate themselves.
There are two things required: when the Caucus has its first
meeting aspirants nominate themselves and then in a secret ballot
everybody, including the aspirants, have to state whom they think
they should have as the Government of the country.
QUESTION: Do you think the 16 months period was sufficient
for your government to show its paces?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I think we've set a very good pace and
I think the people have been encouraged and exhilarated by it.
There is unquestionably a very much greater interest in politics
in Australia among Australians than there was 16 months ago.
And there is unquestionably a very much greater interest in
Australia among the countries of the world than there was 16 months
ago. 
-8-
QUESTION: I was wondering why the Government in the Senate
let the Opposition parties off the hook last night in voting
on the Appropriation Bills?
PRIME MINISTER: They didn't let the Opposition off the hook;
they impaled them on it. Because when this adjournment motion
was moved by the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, this
hypocritical schoolboyish motion, and when that motion was
supported by the Leader of the Country Party in the Senate
and by the Leader of the D. L. P. in the Senate, the very next
speaker was the Leader of the Government in the Senate, and
he moved that the question be put. He said: Let this be
resolved immediately. If the question is not put, that is,
if you won't vote on supply, this will be taken by the Government
as a refusal of supply. A vote was taken immediately to put the
question, the vote was defeated. That meant the question could
not be put; the amendment moved by the Leader of the Opposition,
the Leader of the Liberal Party in the Senate, the vote couldn't
be taken on what he moved. That mean we couldn't proceed with
supply in the Senate. The Senate wouldn't debate or vote on
supply. Thereupon we did two things: we put in the House of
Representatives immediately the remaining supply bills, the ones
which enable a Government to carry on after 1 July and sent those
to the Senate and they got to them at I o'clock. At 7.30 I
waited on the Governor-General and by 8.30 I told the House of
Representatives, and the Leader of the Government in the Senate
told the Senate, what the Governor-General's intentions were.
And after a great deal of humming and harring about dates and
that sort of thing, which are not their responsibility, the
Opposition senators then voted supply, all of them; but they
were not going to vote, they had refused to vote on it. They
refused supply; the tactics were obvious. There was no humming
and harring; we put them on the spot immediately, we impaled
them on the hook at once. They refused supply to the Australian
Government elected 16 months ago the first time that any
Opposition has ever threatened it in the Senate.
QUESTION: Would you do the same thing if~ jou were in opposition?
PRIME MINISTER: This is an utterly hypothetical question.
It is a totally unlikely situation. ' I think that the Australian
public are anxious to have a Government which will get on with th~ e
job. That is, they want to elect senators who will be cf the same
mind, the same date as members of the House of Representatives.
QUESTION: What is the state of the A. L. P. funds? Is there plenty
to carry out an unlimited campaign or will there be some
restrictions? PRIME MI* rISTER: There h, . ve never been unlimited funds. I'm
assured, I believe, there aren't on this occasion, but
contributions will be thankfully received; they will be in
a good cause, and people know that what we promise we shall do
our best to perform and in a new Parliament we will be able to
perform more promptly, more fully. 



I TT q
PRESS RELEASE NO. 22
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam today released the text of his
correspondence with the Governor-General, Sir Paul Hasluck,
about the dissolution of the Twenty-Eighth Parliament on ThursdaZy.
Mr. Whitlam's letter to Sir Paul of April 10 road:
" I write, further to our discussions, to advise you that a situait. c
has arisen between the Senate and the House of Representatives
not only provides the conditions precedent to the exercise of th.
dissolution power vested by the Constitution in the Governo: r-Gen:
but also represents an unprecedented interference in the processes
of popular and democratic government through the. denial by the Se
to a Government elected in December 1972 the money it needs to cairr y
out its program.
In the view of the Government the situation now can be resolved o::,. ly
by a double dissolution of Parliament in accordance with the
provisions of Section 57 of the Constitution and an appeal to the.
electors of Australia.
The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to recommend that'you
exercise the power of the Governor-General under Section 57 and
dissolve simultaneously the Senate and the House of Representatives.
I now set out the grounds on which I make that recomruendation
The provisions of the Constitution for a double dissolution are sctout
in the first paragraph of Section 57 which reads
" 57. If the House of Representatives'passes any proposed
law, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes
it with amendments to which the House of Representatives
will not agree, and if after an interval of three months
the House of Representatives, in the same or the next
session, again passes the proposed law with or without any..
amendments which have been made, suggested or agreed to by
the Senate, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or
passes it with amendments to which the House of Representat" ive'
will not agree, the Governor-General may dissolve the Senate
and the House of Representatives simultaneously. But such
dissolution shall not take place within six months before the
date of the expiry of the House of Representatives by efflu::-':"
of time." 
I submit that the record of the Senate since the Labor Government
took office in December 1972 is such that all the conditions
justifying a double dissolution have been established progressively
over a period of time.
In recent months the Senate has twice rejected, failed to pass
. or unacceptably amended several proposed laws which are integral
parts of the Government's program ofreform and development,
endorsed by a majority of electors on 2 Decem.; ber 1972.
The manner in which the Senate has dealt with these proposals
brings them directly within the provisions of Section 57 and
your power to dissolve both Houses.
The bills which brought these proposals before the Parliament are:
Commonwealth Electoral Bill ( No. 2) 1973
Senate ( Representation of Territories) Bill 1973
Representation Bill 1973
Health Insurance Commission Bill 1973
0 Health Insurance Bill 1973
Petroleum and Minerals Authority Bill 1973
The first three bills listed above provide for electoral reform,
an objective to which the Government is deeply committed, and which
it is pursuing also with the proposed referendum on democratic
elections. The Australian Labor Party's Platform on Constitutional matters
makes this clear. It proposes amendment to the Constitution:
" to ensure that the House of Representatives and each
State House of Parliament is composed of members
directly elected from electorates in each of which
the number of people is as nearly as practicable the
same."
The Platform also contains a plank to the effect that:
" The Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory be represented by Senators with full voting
rights."
It is against this background that the three electoral bills were
introduced last year.
The Commonwealth Electoral Bill ( No. 1973 seeks to ensure that
electorates are more equal in population, and therefore more
democratic, by varying the permitted difference in enrolment from
the existing one-fifth to one-tenth. This is a matter that was
before the Parliament in 1971 when my colleague the Hon. F. M. Daly
introduced a private member's bill entitled " Commonwealth Electoral
Act 1971" on 1 April 1971. The then Government did not allow the
bill to proceed. S. 3/ 
The Senate ( Representation of Territories) Bill 1973 seeks to
Sestablish for the people of the Australian Capital Territory and
the Northern Territory the right, long-held by their fellow
citizens in the States, to representation in the Senate. The
proposal is that each Territory should have two Senators with
full voting rights.
The Representation Bill 1973 is a companion bill to the Senate.
( Representation of Territories) Bill 1973. It seeks to-amend the
Representation Act to exclude Territory Senators from the formula
for determining the number of members of the House of Represent. ativos
to represent the States.
These three bills have all twice failed to pass the Senate. Their
progress in the Parliament is su! oj. arised below and set out in I
detail at Attachment
Commonwealth Electoral Bill 2) 1973
passed by the House of Representatives on 4 April 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate on 17 May 1973
passed by the House of Representatives for the second
' time on 23 August 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate for the second
time on 29 August 1973.
Senate ( Representation of Territories) Bill 1973
passed by the House of Representatives on 30 May 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate on 7 June 1973
passed by the House of Representatives for the second
time on 27 September 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate for the second
time on 14 November 1973.
Representation Bill 1973
passed by the House of Representatives on 30 May 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate on 7 June 1973
passed by the House of Representatives for the second O i r
E 1 c r
I
r
j i
c-. L
. I il( I'
time on 27 September 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate for the second
time on 14 November 1973.
I submit to Your Excellency that the way in which these three.
proposed laws have been dealt with by the Houses passed by the
House of Representatives, failed to pass the Senate, again passed
by the House of Representatives after an interval of three months
in the same session and again failed to pass the Senate undoubtedly
bring them within the provisions of Section 57 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, a situation now exists in which Your Excellency has..
Power to dissolve the Senate and the House of Representatives
sinultaneously.. .4/ 
4k~
The two Health bills I have listed were treated in the sane-
The Health Insurance Commission Bill 1973 proposes the estabiJ. h t
of a statutory authority to plan and develop an orgonisationi t
administer the Government's health insurance program.
The Iiealth-Insurance Bill 1973 provides for payments for n. edical
benefits, hospital and other specific services.
These bills are designed to implement proposals contained in
Chapter XI of the Platform of the Australian Labor Party and
outlined in my election policy speech on 13 November 1972.
Their progress in the Parliament is summarised below; and set out
in detail at Attachment''
Heauth Insurance Commission Bill 1973
passed by Che House of Representatives on 11 December 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate on 13 December 1973
passed by the House of Representatives for the second time
on 4 April 1974
refused a second reading by the Senate for ' the second time
on 10 April 1974.
Health Insurance Bill 1973
passed by the House of Representatives on 11 December 1973
unacceptably amended by the Senate on 12 December 1973
passed by the House of Representatives for the second time
on 4 April 1974
refused a second reading by the Senate on 10 April 1974.
Heare again, a situation now exists in which Your Excellency has
power to dissolve the Senate and the House of Representatives
simultaneously. The Petroleum and Minerals Authority Bill 1973 to which I have
already referred also comes within the provisions of Section 57.
This bill seeks to empower the Authority to explore and develop
petroleum and mineral resources and assist in advancing the
Government's policy of promoting Australian ownership and controlof
our natural resources and resource industries. The creation of
an authority to achieve these purposes is foreshadowed in Chapter:..
VIII of the Platform.
Its progress in the Parliament is summarised below and
detail at Attachment set out in' r
5/ 
Petroleum and Minerals Authority Bi3. 1973
pissed by the House of Representatives on 12 December 1973
failed to pass the Senate on 13 December 1973
refused a second reading by the Senate on 2 April 1974
passed by. the House of Representatives for the second time
on S April 1974
refused a second reading by the Senate for the second time
on 10 April 1974 by means of an amendment ( Attachment
which in effect would defer the Bill for a period of 6 months.
These six proposed laws are all of importance to the Govenri. ment,
and on this basis I submit to Your Excellency that the
constitulional requirements for a double dissolution of Parliament
have been met.
wish, -in addition, to draw to your attention further evidence to
. shiow that the Senate has delayed and obstructed the program on the
Sb asis of which the Government was elected to office in December
1972.
. Of 254 bills put before the Parliament in the first session of the
twenty-eighth Parliament, twenty-one-have been rejected, s" tcod
aside or deferred by the Senate. Most of these embodied proposals
considerable importance and, in many cases, were put forward in
fulfilment of the Party Platform and of promises made to the electcrs
" in. my policy speech.
In addition to those bills which I have already identified as
,' providing a basis for a double dissolution, I set out in Attachment
a. summary of the handling in the two Houses of other measures
S: which have in one way or another been the subject of unreasonable
Siobstruction in the Senate.
. I.. summarise the main features of these measures below:
Conciliation and Arbitration Bill 1973
This bill is a significant attempt to transform industrial
relations in Australia and to ensure that policies and
procedures for handling labour relations were suitable for
tSh e current situation. The Government's objectives were
set down in-my policy speech.
i Compensation ( Commonwealth Employees) Bill 1973
' The purpose of this bill is to provide for improvements
in the legislation governing workers' compensation for
employees of the Australian Government and its authorities.
It accords with the Platform of the Australian Labor Party.
Superior Court of Australia Bill 1973
This bill would establish a new Federal Court, an institution
S first mooted by a previous Government more than a decade ago
Sand referred to in both your speech opening the Parliament on
S 27F ebruary 1973 and in Her Majesty's Speech on 28 February
S1974. It was foreshadowed in my policy speech.
S:. 
-6-
In this connection I bring to Your Excellency's attention
the words of the then Attorney-General in the House of
Representatives when introducing the Commonwealth Superior
Court Bill 196 on 21 November 1968
Si " This Bill is the first step in putting into effect the
proposal, outlined by me in the House last year, to set
up a new Federal court, to be called the Corm;. ronwealth
Superior Court. Complementary ' legislation for the
Samendment of a number of Acts will also be necessary and
S will be introduced at a later time. The project is not
new. Since 1961, a very considerable amount of work ! h. as
been done, first by Sir Garfield Barwick as Attorney-General.
then by the present Minister for Immigration ( Mr. Snedden)
when. he was Attorney-General, and more recently by myself,
. on proposals for the establishment of a new court to relieve
i and forestall the pressures of the existing arrangements for
the exercise of the Federal jurisdiction. I pay tribute
Shere to the foundation work done by my predecessors. ou this
S. project."
Trade Practices Bill 1973 ( No. 2)
This bill proposes improved control of restrictive trade
practices and monopolies and protection of consumers. The
proposal was foreshadowed in my policy speech and in Chapter
V of the. Platform of the Australian Labor Party.
Constitution Alteration ( Inter-change of Powers) Bill 1974
' This bill is intended to facilitate an interchange of powers
between the Australian and State Governments as discussed and
agreed in principle with five of six heads of State Parliament
delegations to the Australian Constitutional Convention in
September 1973.
S The Australian Industry Development Corporation Bill 1973
.,. This bill would allow the Corporation access to increased
funds with the objectives outlined in my election policy and
the Platform of the Australian Labor Party; Chapter VIII.
It would facilitate our policy objective of increasing the
pp roportion of Australian ownership in important national
i ndustries.
National Investment Fund Bill 1973
This bill proposes establishment of a fund to be administered
by the Australian Industry Development Corporation which will
, provide the means of financing the new functions of the
Corporation.
'.. Two other measures which have been obstructed by the ' Senate are:
Lands Acquisition ( Australian Capital Territory) Bill. 1973
Seas and Submerged Lands ( Royalty on Minerals) Bill 1973 
-7-
alzoo recall that Your Exceii-encv'h; ar acceptce6 t1hz&amp;'.
1~ contained in my letter of 21. iarch 19, that14, using the 1 2r.
~/ provided for in oecftion 3-28 in the case oc' re--hoti. n Cx C
, Ioustes, folo;* inqproposed Constitution A: Ltec. rai: ii~ J .. UUs 2 i
to the people on 1P, I-lay because of their rejection b% 7 t1e*" Cc
Cons titution Al1teration ( Si5uTultarieous E-lcc. tions) 2
Constitution A] teratio-n* ( iodc ' of Altering -the Con: tituti
1974
Constitution AlteratCion ( IDe.' iiocratic Eicc,' ions) 10,71
Constitution Altcration ( Local Governjmnt LBodies) 1974
The attempts of the S~ nate to prevent theso ronosals V,-ng P
to the electors is further e-vi] e1nce ofJ dJ. ay orLt,, in a
part of tjhe Senate.
Secondly, I draw to Your Excellency's attcntion the paorition
upon imy Govern. cnrA by -the 0ppositioI iparties in fai1inzg
. Appropriation Bill ( No. 3) 1973-74
Appropriation Bill ( No. 4) 1973-74
Appropriation Bill ( No. 5) 1973-74
( For details of consideration by the House of Rpeet~ ie
and the Senate see Attachment
Briefly, the effects of the Opposition's decisions are that f~~
for the payment of salaries ( Appropriation Bill ( No. 3)
will be exhausted by the end of this month and that fund. r--for c~ c-rit.: in
capital works, payments to or for the State~ s and other p~~
including some elements of pensions anid like pay'ments, l
-to run short as early as the end of this month ( Appronprx t o a i312
( No. 4) 1973-74 and Appropriation Bill ( No. 5) ( 1973-74)
Appropriation Bill ( No. 3) was introduced into the Ihouse of
jRepresentatives by the Treasurer on 12 March 1974. The second
reading speech was delivered that day and debate tookr place on
19 March 1974. No indication was given by the Opposition parties;
that.. they would reject it in the Senate.
3 Appropriation Bill ( No. 4) 1973-74 and Appriation Bill ( No.
1973-74 were introduced into the House of Representativcs by the
Treasurer on 2 April 1974 and the second reading speech wa s
delivered on that day. When debate was resumed on 4 April 197,',
the Leader of the Oinosition, the Rt. Hion. 3.1-1. Sneciden, indical: cdl
that the Bills would be opposed in both the H-ouse of Representatives-0
and the Senate.
lie went on to say that if the Bills failed to pass both Houses
there must be a dissolution of the House of Representatives.
( House of Representatives Hansard, page 1048). Hle continued
" Then we w,. ould make appropriate arrangements for the
moneys to be made available after the Prime M1-inister has
announced a dissolution of this House..." ( Hansard, page
J-U~ q) 
.1
I I draw to Your Excellency's attention my response on. b.. i: f of
the Government to this threat
" If the Senate rejects any money bill the first time
the Senate would have rejected a money bill in thi
history of our nation I shall certainly wait upon thl.-
Governor-General and I shall advise the Governor-Gn--o al
not merely to dissolve the House of Representative-:;, but
to dissolve the Senate as well.", ( Hansard, page 1.054).
SI took this course to impress upon the Parliament the ' seri'cu. ne
of the actions the Opposition were proposing.
They were not only without precedent, but in my view they go tothe
very lheart of the operation of our Parliamentary ssyste of
government. It is, I suggest, unthinkable that the Upper Hous e comprc: ing
SSenators elected six and a half and three and a half yci.::: s ago
Sshould seek, in respect of bills coming within the scope of
o Section 53 of the Constitution ( text attached), to impose its
will . on the Lower Icus. e, a House elected only sixteen months ago
and in which the Government, composing the majority, has not beer.
defeated in a division.
This afternoon Appropriation Bills Nos. 3, 4 and 5 were brought
on together in the Senate. The Opposition moved, that the, debate
be adjourned. When the Minister in charge of the bills ., moved
that debate be resumed at a later hour this day, the Leader of
the Opposition in the Senate moved an amendment . that the debte
should not be resumed " before the Government agrees to submit
*-itself to the judgement of the people at the same time as the
forthcoming Senate election". This ammedment was supported in.
the Senate by the Leaders of the Australian Country Party and the
' Australian Democratic Labor Party.
The Leader of the Government in the Senate then. stated
is clear that the Opposition is again, by this
' ridiculous and hypocritical device, endeavouring to
avoid voting on the measure itself.... To put an end
to it, I tell you that I intend to move that the question
be put, and if that question is not carried if it is
defeated"-the Government will treat that as a denial of''
supply.
The motion that the question be put was lost Ayes 26 Noes 31..:
I must, therefore, advise Your Excellency that the Senate has by.
its attitude brought about a position where the normal operations
of government cannot continue.
I would expect, however, that appropriate arrangements could be
concluded with the Opposition parties following a decision by you
on dissolution of the Parliament. 9/ 
4 -he iiiaters I have referred tthe Govc7rnrielnt, ': Ih a
, fanapproved kby a majority of electors, has bundelay, 2.: az:.
.,; s1trated by a S~ ic tC ViC.. ic piL C a IC Olfli Cxun i at.
variance with that elected at the latest poll.
* Ib ty tish e tiimhe~ theo) f situatSieonna t waas ndre stohlev aHdo uasne d o thise rscnaanie bes" 1) asseuicc
dissolved and nc-w elections called.
it is* appropriate tLhat, having regard to the ccnti_-)' nuin-g Xn". r a r; gE c
of the Senate, to w,. hich regretfully I can see no prospO., c. ts of
nnmprovecment in the foreseeable future, the whole of th:. e a,-1urtv :
* the House of Rre:-sta'tivo-_ s should no01w su b-1i4 hmcv toth
electors. Only in this way can the obstruction of the Senate in the fgac e of
the reform policies of my Gover-nment be dealt with.*
In my letter of M--arch I proposed that there be an election for
half of the Senate on 18 Mlay 1974. Your E;., tellcmcy agrccod with-
. thatL course and asked State Governors to take the necessary. st1eps.
* I shall propose, if Your Excellency accepts my recommendation that
tthhee red abtee oa n dwouhbiclhe deliesscotilountiso nf, o r tob omtha k. eH oluasietes r a an d retchoeim mfo_ r-refrnedlu'ation on
should be held.
This will avoid the further possible indonvenicnce to electors of ' a
later election, will permit the referendum proposals to be Put as
already detZEermined, and will of course result in the savin'g of
conside'rable public expoaznse..
Your Excellency will recall that the power of double dissolutioñ
under Section 57 of the Costitution has been exercised on two
previous occasions leading to elections on 5 September .1914 ayjd. t
28 April 1951.
In 1914 the -Ehen Prime Minister ( Mr. Joseph Cooh) was wor-; king witLb
an evenly divided House of Representatives and a Senate ' in which
the Opposition parties were in clear majority..
The grounds of his approach were basically that the Govornment wa s
unable to function because the Parliament had beco-1' e unworkable,
particularly through obstruction in the Senate. The Governor-GenerLal
accepted the point that a dissolution of the House only might well
* not resolve the political situation and that, a situation under.
Section 57. of the Constit-ution being in existence, a dissolution
Of both Houses should be ordered.
In 1951, the Prime Minister ( Mr. R. G. M. enzies) advised the Governor-
General that there was one Bill the Commr~ onwealth BanK Bill-
* which represented an important part of the Government's policy, and
had been rejected by the Senate in such a way as to bring Section 51
into operation.. 
lie mentioned that there had been difficulties with the Senate in
relation to other proposed laws and that this indicated a
continuing conflict between the two Houses. The Governor-General
accepted his advice and granted a dissolution of both Houses.
It is the Government's view that the present circumstances arc
analogous to those in which the earlier dissolutions were granted,
and that the range of obstruction of important policy measures is
probably wider than in 1914 and certainly wider . than in 1951.
On the question whether Section 57 of t ib Constitution is applicable
in respect of more than one proposed I am attaching a joint
opinion by the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General ( Attachment
As Your Excellency will see, their advice is in the
affirmative. I shall be available to Your Excellency fpl discuss these matters
and any other aspects which you would widl\ to examine.
My recommendation to you is, however, I have said, that you
dissolve the Senate and the House of ARc-ptesentatives simultaneously,
with a view to holding elections for both Houses and conducting the
four referendums all on the same day."
The Governor-General's reply of April 11 read!
" I have carefully considered your letter of Apri., 10 and the
supporting documents concerning the situation which has arisen
between the Senate and the House of Representa'tives.
I have also kept in mind our discussions yesterdAy morning and
evening when you called on me at Government House.
It appears to me that the requirements of the firl1 paragraph of
Section 57 of the Constitution in respect of a dodble dissolution
have been satisfied with regard to the folloing proposed laws
Commonwealth Electoral Bill ( No. 2) 1Yi3
Senate ( Representation of Territories). Bill 1973
Representation Bill 1973
Health Insurance Commission Bill 1973
Health Insurance Bill 1973
Petroleum and Minerals Authority Bill 1973.
In reaching this view I have accepted the learned Opinion of the
Attorney-General on the requirements for the exercise of the
Governor-General's power under Section 57. and the Joint Opinion of
the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-Geheral on the question
whether Section 57 is applicable to more than one proposed law. 11/ 
-11-
As it is clear to me that grounds for granting a double dissolution
are provided by the Parliamentary history of the six Bills listed
above, it is not necessary for me to reach any judgment on the wider
case you have presented that the policies of the Government have
been obstructed by the Senate. It seems to me that this is a matter
for judgment by the electors.
Having received your assurance that adequate provision exists for
the carrying on of the Public Service in all its branches from now:
until the assembly of the new Parliament and that the electoral
machinery is in a condition to allow the holding of an early
election for both the Senate and the House of Representatives, T am
prepared forthwith to dissolve the Senate and House of Representatives
simultaneously under the provisions of Section 57 of the Constitution." 



. AJAUSTRALIA PRESS RELEASE NO. 228
APRIL 1974
The Leader of the Opposition's confused and
confusing grab-bag of economic policies is a model of
irresponsibility and a receipe for inflation. It would
seem that the Opposition believes the economy is slack
rather than fully extended. If so, Opposition spokesmen
are the only individuals to make this claim for many months.
When the Labor Party was elected by the people
in December 1972, there was unemployment and there was a need
for stimulatory Government action. In the year 1972, the
growth rate of gross non-farm products was only 3 per cent.
Action by the Australian Labor Government increased the
growth rate in 1973 to 7 per cent and eliminated unemployment.
During the year 1973, male employment rose by 2.9 per cent and
female employment by 8.2 per cent more than double the rate
of growth in the previous twelve months. The Australian Labor
Government is not willing to fight inflation by deliberately
creating unemployment. In my Policy Speech of November 1972
I undertook that the restoration of genuine full employment
would be our first priority. We achieved this objective and
we do not regret it.
During the year, as inflationary forces gathered
momentum throughout the world, the Government took a series of
measures to restrain the forces of inflation. International
events ensured that inflation during the last year would be
greater than in the previous year. Nevertheless, they would
have been greater still if the Government had not taken these
measures each of which was caused by the Opposition at the
time. The best economic advice available to any Australian
government led to revaluations of the Australian dollar, the
per cent across-the-board tariff cut, the gradual tightening
of monetary policy and the significant cuts in public expenditure
from the recommendations of the Coombs' Task Force. This advice
had, in many cases, been tendered to the previous Liberal/ Country
Party Government but they did not have the political courage to
accept it. 2/ 
-2-
It is perhaps understandable why the Opposition
should, for short-term political reasons, have criticised each
and every one of these actions as they were made. However, it
is totally irresponsible for the Opposition to undertake to
reverse virtually all of these decisions at a time when they
seek to present themselves to the Australian people as a
credible, alternative government. The Opposition's policy
would constitute an act of vandalism against the economy from
which it would take many years to recover.
I completely reject the impression the Opposition
seems to convey that the growth of the Public Service has been
abnormally high. The rate of growth has in fact been lower than
in three of the last few years of Liberal/ Country Party government.
The Leader of the Opposition is simply misleading the Australian
people when he implies that there is significant scope for
economies in this area. If we set aside the people employed in
Defence and in the non budgetary expenditure of the Post Office,
the total amount to be spent in 1973/ 74 on salaries by the
Australian Government is only $ 782 million, and all other
administrative expenses only $ 358 million. If they slash the
Public Service by 25 per cent, they would still not be close
to their figure of $ 600 million, which has been plucked out of
the air as an electoral tax bribe.
I also reject Mr. Snedden's assertion that only the
private sector is ' productive". Public investment in roads,
schools and public transport is essential for the health of our
economy. Mr. Snedden' s unspecified cuts on " capital works" will
seriously inhibit economic development as well as social welfare.
The increase in interest rates was an effect of the
Government's decision to reduce excessive liquidity in the
economy one that will be reversed as soon as the threat of
excessive liquidity has disappeared. The Opposition's undertakings
to remove the variable deposit requirements will release
a flood of foreign money into this country which can only increase
inflation. To undertake to remove domestic monetary restrictions
at the same time can only be described as irresponsible. The
seeds of our present inflation were sown when the Liberals allowed
unprecedented growth in money at an annual rate of 34 per cent
in th1e last six months of 1972. We are only now beginning to
recover from their neglect.
At a time of inflation, a Government must take some
tough decisions. I believe our Government in its tariff cuts,
revaluations, interest rates and implementation of the Coombs'
Task Force recommendations has shown that it is capable of
taking tough decisions which offend powerful vested interests.
Mr. Snedden's extraordinary series of undertakings constitute
a sell-out to every vested interest that has been affected by
our decisions. We well remember how fundamentally Mr. Snedden's
economic policies changed when he moved from Minister for Labour
and National Service to the Treasury when he changed his advisers,
he changed his policieb. Now he has lost his advisers, he has
lost his policies. His confused series of undertakings are
completely negative. He simply wishes to reverse decisions the
Australian Labor Government has made. Australians may well ask
we know what Mr. Snedden is against -but what is he for? At a
time of iritlation, the Australian people need a Government with
political courage. At the very outset of this campaign, it is
clear that the Opposition has none.
CANBERRA. A. C. T._ 



EMBARGO: 7.30 p. m.
NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TUESDAY, 16 APRIL 1974
On 18 May we Australians will take part in an historic
expression of the will of the people. There is to be an election for
both Houses of the national Parliament, for the House of Representatives
and for the whole of the Senate. Further, you are being asked to
approve certain proposals to enshrine in the Australian Constitution
some basic democratic guarantees. I freely acknowledge the burden
of decision all these matters impose upon you. In the next four weeks
I shall be asking you all to think deeply on the profound issues
involved. And on 18 May I shall ask you to spend 5 minutes in the
voting booth 5 minutes for the future of Australia.
Tonight I want simply to tell you how the present
situation has come about how the Government you elected less than
1 years-ago was robbed of the power to govern effectively by
senators you elected, some 3h years ago and others 6 years ago. It is
now clear that these senators and our opponents in general the
innumerable parties and factions which make up the Opposition and
presumably represent the alternative government never really accepted
your verdict of 2 December 1972. They were never prepared to give our
government a fair go, a chance to carry out the program you endorsed.
The Leader of the Opposition in the Senate let the cat out of the-bag
well and truly last Wednesday when he stated that the Opposition in
the Senate embarked on a course some 12 months ago to bring about a
House of Representatives election. And as early as April a year ago,
they first threatened to put this decision into effect by rejecting
a money bill. In each of the three sessions of the 28th Parliament,
the threat has been made. It was made good at last on Wednesday.
A chance majority in the Senate a majority reflecting
deisions you made in elections in 1967 and 1970 put into their hands
a powerful weaposi to bring about the end of the Government you elected
only 17 months ago. In the five weeks the Australian Parliament has
sat this year the Liberals, the Country Party and the D. L. P. have
combined to defeat the Government on 42 out of the 43 occasions when
votes were taken in the Senate. Many bills the senators rejected or
stalled or sabotaged were crucial parts of the program I put to you
in the election campaign of 1972.
You, the people, will now be able to use the rights which
the Constitution gives to settle many of the matters upon which the
Senate has twice rejected bills passed by the House of Representatives.
Four of these bills were for referendums to alter the
Constitution. The Senate opposed your having a vote on any of these
issues, even those recommended as far back as 1958. But where the
Senate twice rejects referendum proposals, the Constitution gives you,
the people, the right to vote on them regardless. / 2 
-2-
Then there are the six bills on which the Governor-General
has said that the Government was entitled to have a dissolution of
both the Houses. Two of these bills were to fulfil the program of
universal health insurance which I put to the people in 1969 and 1970
and 1972. Another was to establish the Petroleum and Minerals Authority;
it will give Australians a share in the control and ownership of those
resources which hitherto the taxpayer has spent over $ 50 million a year
in subsidising investors to discover and keep. By your votes you can
assure the passage of these measures.
There are another nine bills which the Senate has rejected,
all bills ' which we promised at the last elections to introduce.
I shall specify two of them, both of which, remarkably enough, had been
originally introduced by Liberal or Country Party ministers. One of
the bills was to extend the Trade Practices legislation, first
conceived by Sir Garfield Barwick in 1962 and introduced by Mr Snedden
in 1965; my government proposed to outlaw price fixing by collusion
between companies. Three times since September the Senate has refused
even to debate this bill. Another bill -was to expand the resources
of the Australian Industry Development corporation in order to increase
the proportion of Australian ownership in important national industries;
this the Senate shelved.
Thus, step by step, month by month, our opponents
established a pattern of obstruction and violence to our legislative
program. But until last week they baulked at the ultimate obstruction,
the refusal to supply the Government with the money it needs to govern.
Sure they had threatened it 3 times, but backed away at the crunch.
Well might they hesitate on the brink of such a constitutional disaster.
A basic principle of democracy is that the control over the people's
money must lie firmly in the people's House, the House of Representatives.
This is why those who command a majority in the people's House form the
Government of the country, whether or not they have a majority in the
Senate. No less an authority than Sir Robert Menzies has properly
branded such action by the Senate as a falsification of democracy.
Yet such were the depths of their bitterness, their resentment at your
refusal to trust them any longer with your affairs that they were
prepared to do this: last week they did it.
Accordingly, I had no choice but to ask the GovernQr-General
to dissolve a Parliament which had become unworkable, a Parliament in
which the fundamental conditions for effective responsible government
of this country had ceased to exist. And so on this matter, in
Sir Paul Hasluck's own words in reply to my request, the people of
Australia are to pass their judgement on 18 May. We are to have a
fresh parliament, a contemporary parliament, a parliament which will
reflect the wishes and the hopes of the Australian people in 1974, a
parliament which no longer will be dominated by the men of yesterday.
Despite the Senate obstruction of the past 16 months, the
Government you elected for 3 years in 1972 has succeeded in carrying
out to a remarkable, unprecedented extent the pledges we gave to you.
I venture to say that no elected Government in modern history has so
promptly, so amply fulfilled so much of its undertaking. It has been a
Government of achievement, purpose and vigour. Australia never stood
so high in the world. At home the herculean task of clearing away the
accumulated dead wood of 23 years has been set in train with vigor and
compassion. Our schools have been given a new deal. The whole system
of social welfare is being transformed. We have begun with a will to
rebuild our existing cities and build new ones. 
-3-
What is the alternative to our record? The men who never
really accepted your decision of 1972 now ask you to reverse that
decision. They offer you no policies, no believable policies. Their
leader dares not unveil his own party's supposed platform. He makes
vague promises about tax cuts which are promptly repudiated by his
master, the Leader of the Country Party. The man who as Treasurer,
produced Australia's worst unemployment for a decade, produces an economic
hodge podge dragged out of him bit by contradictory bit by journalists.
It has been properly described by the leading financial writers and
journals of Australia as a recipe for disaster. The Opposition in
reality offers only a return to the same policies, the same men, the
same attitudes that you so firmly rejected in 1972. They are united
in only one thing, hatred, there is no other word for it hatred
of the Whitlam Government and indeed hatred and contempt for the people
who elected us. This is a coalition of hate.
My fellow Australians, I do not conceal from you that the
times ahead will require strong leadership and tough decisions. We
are sharing in vast world problems which at bottom represent a crisis
of confidence in democracy itself. In such times, in such a crisis,
how could you conceivably trust the men who have just done such violence
to Australia's own democratic process? In 1972 I came before you with
the most detailed, and comprehensive program ever placed before the
Australian people. In the weeks to come I will not be putting forward a
new program but rather the new dimensions and the expanded fruits of the
program we have been trying to implement. I seek your support in
the fullest sense, not just your votes, but support and help and
co-operation from you the people of Australia in the great business of
leading this nation towards the fulfilment of its unlimited promise.
Do not turn back; do not turn your back upon the future of Australia. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 229
18 April 1974
AUSTRALIA'S NATIONAL ANTHEM
" Advance Australia Fair" will be played as the Australian
National Anthem at this year's official Anzac Day ceremony in Canberra.
The Prime Minister announced this in Canberra today.
Mr. Whitlam said he had asked the Minister for Defence to
instruct the Armed Services to play " Advance Australia Fair" on all
appropriate occasions. He had also written to other Ministers
asking them to give similar instructions to all departments and
Government bodies for which they were responsible.
These arrangements were being made following the National
Anthem poll conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
The results of the poll, which he announced in Parliament on 8
April, clearly indicated that a majorityT of Australians wanted
" Advance Australia Fair'as the National Anthem.
Mr. Whitlam said the poll result accurately reflected
the will of the people. Opinion polls had shown for many years
that an increasing majority of Australians as many as 80 per centwanted
a distinctive Australian anthem to replace " God Save The
Queen". He had promised such an anthem during the last election
campaign. The survey by the Bureau of Statistics was the most
thorough and exhaustive ever conducted. The sam--le was 30 times
as large as the average private opinion poll. Mr. Whitlam said
the enormous response to last year's national anthem competition,
for which more than 1,200 entries were received, showed the depth
of public feeling on this issue. Australia now had a distinctive
and familiar anthem with strong traditional associations.
He stressed that the survey related only to the music
of " Advance Australia Fair". i Words for the tune existed but they
were not regarded as part of the official anthem. The Government
had always taken the view that it was the music that mattered.
Mr. WhitJlam. said he hoped that at all Anzac Day
ceremonies, the opportunity would be taken throughout Australia
to play " Advance Australia Fair" in recognition of the people's
wishes. He added that on occasions when the Queen was present,
or when it was especially important to acknowlege our links with the
Queen as Queen of Australia and Head of the Commonwealth, "' God Save
The Queen" would be Played as well as the National 1\ nthem. 



J~ AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER PESS STATEMENT NO. 232
19 April 1974
MR SNEDDEN'S ECONOMIC POLICIES
Mr Snedden has now patched together another bewildering
instalment of the Opposition's economic policy.
From all the backtracking, confusion and deception
evident in his statement one thing stands out: The Opposition's
economic policies would give an intolerable boost to inflation.
Let it never be forgotten that my Government inherited
from the Liberals a sick economy with massive unemployment and
severe inflation. The seeds of that inflation were sown in Mr Snedden's
own disastrous Budgets of 1971 and 1972.
On top of that, in common with every major and trading
industrial nation, Australia last year faced an unprecedented
upsurge in world inflation.
The Government took a whole series of decisions last year
to restrain inflation, including tariff cuts, revaluations, monetary
measures and trade practices legislation.
Every one of those measures was opposed by Mr Snedden.
The Liberals in the Senate refused even to allow debate on the trade
practices bill. Now he puts forward a policy that would increase inflation
still further. He proposes to remove restrictions on the inflow of
capital and release a flood of foreign money into the country.
His proposed $ 600 million tax cut so strenuously resisted
by Mr Anthony is equally irresponsible at this time. It is contrary
to all economic practice and good sense. It is the opposite of
everything the Liberals themselves did to reduce inflation when they
were in office. / 2 
-2-
Naturally we are in favour of reducing taxation for those
who carry the most severe tax burden. We have pledged to restructure
the tax system to help those on low and middle incomes. We will do
it when the time is right, not as an ad hoc election gimmick but
only after thorough study.
Mr Snedden will create further confusion by his talk about
interest rates. For months he has been promising to cut interest
rates. He has now backtracked on his promise.
In effect, he now says that interest rates would be cut
when inflation is reduced. He has acknowledged that the Government's
interest rate policy is justified as an anti-inflationary measure.
Mr Snedden has also backtracked on his vague talk about
a pay and price freeze. He knows such a freeze would not work.
He has backtracked on the question of reducing Government
expenditure. He no longer says he would cut expenditure. He merely
says the rate of growth would be reduced.
He gives no clear indication of where reductions would be
made. The great welfare and education policies initiated by my
Government would be at risk.
Mr Snedden's only firm commitment is to hand the national
pipeline system over to private developers. This is a doctrinaire
concession to the Liberal Party's backers. It would make no
difference to inflation whether the pipeline was built with private
or public capital. The public will be left to speculate on which parts of
Mr Snedden's economic policies are approved by the Country Party and
the D. L. P. The chorus of confusion and contradiction on this subject
will further diminish public confidence in the Opposition's policies
and motives.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



A ) TIRAI A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS RELEASE NO. 233
22nd April 1974
THE OPPOSITION PROMISES
Australians will not be fooled by the extravagant Liberal tax cut
promises. They have been through it all before.
Voters still remember the promise to cut income tax in the Liberal
policy speech for the 1969 elections.
This promise was allegedly fulfilled in the 1970 Budget with in
income tax cut of $ 290 million.
In the same Budget, however, indirect taxes and charges were
increased by $ 240 million.
Seventy per cent of Australian families were worse off because
of the direct and immediate consequences of that Budget, and the
poorer the family was, the worse it was affected.
Only the top 30% of income earners benefited on balance from the
Liberal decisions.
Liberal promises in this area tend to be totally illusory, and in
the present instance, threaten devastating consequences for the
Australian economy.
Voters in 1969 had not been promised increased duties on petrol,
cigarettes and wine, nor higher postal charges, nor increased sales
taxes across a wide variety of goods including all cosmetics
and consumer durables.
A further imposition was an increase in company income tax which
was immediately passed on in prices.
This year we are promised a tax cut three times the size of that
in the 1969 policy speech. The Liberals have carefully avoided
any undertakings that a repetition of the 1969 promise will not
take place this year. 2/ 
-2-
Australians will not be fooled a second time by Liberal thimble
and pea trick promises.
At a time of inflation, the only way the Liberals could pay for
their $ 600 million income tax cut would be by again savagely
increasing indirect taxes on cigarettes, petrol, beer, postal
charges, cosmetics and consumer durables. This is what they did
in 1970 when they tried to fulfil the income tax cut promises of
their 1969 policy speech.
This is what they would have to do again in 1974.
In an attempt to conceal the inflationary effect of their income
tax cut promise and to distort its objective as a mere electoral
bribe, Opposition spokesmen have suggested that a tax cut would
moderate wage demands.
I am unaware of any economist who has suggested that such an
effect would flow automatically from a tax cut.
However, some have argued that it should be one of a number of
measures in a prices and incomes policy.
Mr. Snedden has not suggested any other measures.
Indeed, the effect on wage demands of such a tax cut would be
more than offset by the huge increases in indirect taxes which
are the hidden slug.
These unannounced policies would affect wage earners much more
severely than any other section of the community.
A Liberal Budget would clearly provide an extraordinary stimulus
to inflation. Mr. Snedden will obviously have to deny any intention
to increase indirect taxes, but Australians will remember what
happened in 1970.
This is the way of Liberal promises; what they give with one
hand they will take with the other.
What they did in 1970 they would have to do again in 1974. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS RELEASE NO. 235
23 April 1974
STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE
Cabinet today considered the policies to be pursued in future
by the Australian Government in times of str'icl-lviral change. The
details of the manpower program are currently being finalised by the
Cochrane Committee, but the broad outlines of the ultimate scheme
are clear. In the area of structural adjustment assistance to
firms the Interdepartmental Committee has now reported and the
Government has accepted their advice.
Assistance to Individuals
In the case of employees affected by structural change a combination
of income maintenance, retraining and re-location expenses is to be
allowed for. As foreshadowed in the case of the 25% tariff cut
procedures, displaced employees are to be paid an amount equal to
their average weekly earnings for the previous six months subject
to a limit of 1 times average weekly earnings for a period of
up to six months. As an alternative there will be available, on
a voluntary basis, an early retirement scheme. In addition, there
will be a comprehensive retraining program designed to equip
employees with relevant skills. During the training period
generous income maintenance is to be provided. Details of the
retraining and the removal aspects of the scheme must await the
Cochrane Committee Report.
The scheme will be administered sufficiently flexibly for owners
of small scale enterprises to be treated, if they so desire, as
employees. Where it is possible, in terms of a simple set of
criteria, for an employee to prove that he is unemployed as a
result of a structurai change induced by Government policy,
these benefits will supersede the usual unemployment benefits.
The program will be administered flexibly and humanely by the
Departments of Labour and Social Security. It will be of
particular benefit to residents of country towns and to persons
currently employed in declining industries.
Assistance to Firms
Assistance to firms in the Secondary Industry area will be
administered by a special Adjustment Assistance Agency responsible
to the Minister for Secondary Industry.
Structural adjustment assistance is an innovation in industrial
policy for Australia. The Government has decided to continually
monitor the program at IDC level with a view to deciding whether
the criteria for assistance decided upon today are adequate. In
particular, the IDC will be charged with deciding, from time to
time, whether structural adjustment due to Govdrnment initiatives
should constitute the sole basis for justifying assistance. .2/ 
-2-
The scheme will involve closure grants where relevant,
consultancy grants to help firms adjust to changed circumstances
when that is relevant, or loan guarantees.
Criteria for Assistance to Firms
The criteria for eligibility for individual firms will be
that the structural change had adversely affected, or
was adversely affecting, the firm to the extent of
rendering a significant separate part of its assets
incapable of economic production; or that the desired
change was unlikely to occur at a reasonable speed and
at a reasonable economic cost without assistance to
the firm; and
that the firm had taken reasonable steps for self-help,
but that this was unlikely to enable complete adjustment
by the firm that the firm was unable to obtain
finance on reasonable terms and conditions from normal
commercial sources); and
that generally-available measures had been utilised to
the full but were inadequate.
Consultancy grants for firms will be available on the basis of
consultancy cost to a maximum of $ 10,000.,
Closure compensation payments to firms will be subject to the
following'conditions: closure compensation to be paid in respect of the loss in
value of fixed assets and stocks rendered unproductive
by the structural change and incapable of economic use
elsewhere in the firm or an associated firm.
claims for compensation to be within one . year of the
occurrence of the structural change;
payments to be on the basis of 85% of the difference
between the written-down value of the assets for taxation
purposes and their realised sales value.
Loan guarantees will be available to firms as a special measure
and subject to the following conditions:
the provision of such guarantees to be covered by legislation;
the concurrence of the Treasurer to be obtained;
in relation to a particular line of activity loan guarantees
to be subject to appropriate conditions 4nd should not be
available in addition to closure compensation.
This program will supersede all programs currently in existence. 3/ 
Since coming to office, the Labor Government has been concerned
to improve the allocation of resources in the Australian economy.
It has sought to do this for two main reasons:
inefficient allocation of resources, especially if it is
due to unduly high tariff levels, induces high cost
industries to proliferate, with attendant injustices to
consumers; and
( ii) an economy built on an inappropriate structure, given
its resource base and pattern of skills, adjusts to
changes in the economic climate too sluggishly.
Good economic management in Austr~' lia will from time to time,
therefore,' dictate Government-inspired moves which will require
resources to move.-from one use to another. We have seen this
in the past year in the revaluations and tariff cuts announced
by the Government. In future, there will be similar transfers
of resources needed to accommodate the Government's urban,
regional, defence and technological goals.
For sound economic and social reasons, the Government realises
a mechanism is needed both to promote and make easier the process
of structural change. Worthwhile economic development will be
more rapid if a scheme exists to promote, via various incentives,
the resource flows needed to implement the desired changes. For
a Labor Government, however, there is a more important point. If
changes are desirable in the national interest, it is essential
that the nation, not the individuals affected, should foot the bill.
Accordingly, in February 1973, the new Australian Government set in
train two events. Under the leadership of the Department of Labor
an expert group was set up to study the manpower programs essential
to an efficient and humanitarian policy of economic. change. Under
the leadership of the Department of Secondary Industry, a working
group was established to study the needs of industry in times of
structural change. Both groups were charged with the task of
evolving a set of policies which would make the process of change
more efficient, combined with the requirement that the individuals
affected by change in the national interest should not be required
to suffer financially.
Some urgent structural changes could not wait on the deliberations
of these two working groups. As a matter of principle, therefore,
whenever during 1973 the Australian Government thought it necessary
to initiate change by way of revaluations or tariff cuts it
established generous, short-term specific adjustment programs.
Notably in the case of the 25% tariff cut program, it was announced
that the appropriate assistance measures were a prelude to a more
general, permanent scheme. .4/ 
-4-
S . A eature of the Government's Adjustment Assistance
Program is that related to employers. The Government has already
spelled out its general philosophy with respect to industry.
Continuing assistance is to be provided only after detailed and
public inquiry by the Industries Assistance Commission.
Efficiency and enterprise is to be encouraged by a variety of
measures, notable among which are the establishment of a National
Management School at the University of New South Wales and the
setting up of a Small Business Bureau. The former, based on a
report commissioned by the previous Government but never acted
upon, is designed to foster new management skills in Australia,
while the latter is intended to assist businessmen in marshalling
the resources available to them.
In the context of structural change the Government's new policies
fit into the same philosophical frame-work. Emphasis is on
encouraging the process of change, rather than simply compensating
for loss of income. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 234
24 April 1974
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE POST OFFICE AND
APPOINTMENT OF A COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE PUBLIC SERVICE
The Prime Minister announced today that the Commission of
Inquiry into the Australian Post Office had tendered its report
to His Excellency the Governor-General last Friday. The
Commission was appointed in February 1973 to report on what
Changes should be made in the organisation, administration and
operations of postal and telecommunications services.
Mr. Whitlam said the Government had accepted the Commission's
recommendation that the Post Office should be independent of the
control of the Public Service Board and that separate statutory
corporations should be established to administer the postal and
telecommunications services. Each corporation would have
responsibility for organisation, staff, pay and the conditions
of its employees. The Government had also accepted the
recommeicle. tion of the majority of the Royal Commissioners that
the new telecommunication corporation should incorporate the
Overseas Telecommunication Commission.
Mr. Whitlam said the recommendation for separation of the
Post Office from the Public Service Board confirmed the view
of the Auttralian Labor Party. Mr. Whitlam recalled his
statement in his 1972 policy speech: " Australia's largest
employer the Post Office will be severed from the control
of the Public Service Board."
Mr. Whitlam said the report had been sent to the Government
Printer and would be published as soon as possible. It was a
document of some 600 pages, in two volumes. Mr. Whitlam said
he wished to express to the Chairman of the Commission, Sir James
Vernon, and his fellow Commissioners, Mr. B. J. Callinan,
and Mr. J. J. Kennedy, the Government's
appreciation of their work in undertaking this wideranging and
important inquiry and carrying it through so expeditiously. 
-2-
The Prime Minister said that with the completion of the
Post Office Inquiry, the Government was now ready to proceed
with the proposal it had announced last December to establish
a Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Public Service.
Mr Whitlam said that the Public Service Commission of
Inquiry would be commissioned immediately after the elections.
He proposed that Dr H. C. Coombs should be Chairman of the
Commission. Dr Coombs had indicated his readiness to undertake
this task. Mr Whitlam said that there had not been a comprehensive
inquiry into the Australian Public Service since 1920. There
had been recent inquiries into the British Public Service by
the Fulton Committee in 1968 and the Canadian Public Service
by the Glassco Commission in 1962. Mr Whitlam said he had
been informed that a Commission of Inquiry would be welcomed
by all the Australian Public Service staff associations and
trade unions. He had also been informed by the Public Service
Board that it would welcome a Commission of Inquiry.
Mr Whitlam reiterated the view expressed in his Garran
Oration in November 1973 that the Australian Public Service
commanded universal respect for its professionalism and
impartiality. The Government's decision to establish this new
Commission of Inquiry was evidence of its desire to continue
the process of modernising the national public administration
already begun with the reallocation of administrative functions
and the variety of other initiatives taken by the Australian
Government during the past 17 months. Work was continuing on
the proposals for reorganisation of the Departments of Supply
and Customs and Excise.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



2.3
PRIME MINISTERII PRESS STATEMENT NO. 237
April 1974
THE NATIONAL ESTATE REPORT
The Australian Government will take action to preserve the
national estate ranging from protection for natural reserves
to the safeguarding of historic buildings.
The basis of its planning for future action will be the
report of the Committee of Inquiry into the National Estate.
The Committee has just handed its report to the Minister for
Urban and Regional Development, Mr. Uren, and the Minister for
Environment and Conservation, Dr. Cass.
The Government has not yet had time to make final decisions
on the detailed recommendations of the Committee but it supports
them in principle. There are a number of matters on detailed
administrative procedures and taxation questions which must be
subjected to close scrutiny before any final conclusions can be
reached. These are now being looked at by the Government.
The Committee states as its central theme:
" The Australian Government has inherited a
National Estate which has been downgraded,
disregarded and neglected. All previous priorities
accepted at various levels of government and authority
have been directed by a concept that uncontrolled
development, economic growth and ' progress', and the
encouragement of private as against public interest in
land use, use of waters, and indeed in every part of
the National Estate, was paramount".
The concept of the National Estate was devised by my
colleague, Mr. Tom Uren. In my policy speech in December 1972,
I promised that a Labor Government would preserve and enhance
the quality of the National Estate. We have acted swiftly to
discharge the mandate given us to identify, conserve and present
the National Estate. 
-2-
In April last year, a Committee of Inquiry was appointed
with Mr. Justice Hope as Chairman. The other members of the
Committee were Mr. Reginald Walker, Mr. Milo Dunphy, Ms Judith
Wright-McKinney, Mr. David Yencken, Mr. Keith Vallance, and
Ms Judith Mary Brine.
The Committee's report runs to more than 600 pages. It
is now being printed and will be tabled in Parliament. Meantime,
because of the interest the work of the committee has aroused, I
have decided to make public the findings and recommendations of
the Committee. The Australian Government is determined that our National
Estate will no longer be degraded and despoiled. The Report
confirms that the present Government is the firstdministration
to make a commitment to identify, conserve and present the National
Estate when it says:
" We believe that the rapid growth in public concern,
involvement and interest, means that this is among
the most far-sighted decisions this Government has
made and that it will be seen as such, not only by a
large proportion of the electorate of today, but
particularly by younger people and Australians of the
future." I am pleased to see that the Report rejects the widelyaccepted
notion that preservation of the environment has a
socio-economic basis, that conservation is a " middle-class"
issue. The Committee affirms that this assumption is not true
and that the conservation of the National Estate is the concern
of everyone. It punctures once and for all the illusion that
the National Estate is the preserve of the privileged. The
forces which threaten our National Estate often bear most heavily
on the less previleged through the loss of parkland, familiar
city-scapes and even dwellings. The Report makes it clear that
often it is the less-privileged who are the most active in working
to preserve the best features of our present way of life. The
pillage and neglect of the National Estate aminishes us all in
equal measure.
The Committee has devoted a great deal of work to defining
with precision the components of the National Estate. The breadth
of the National Estate as defined by the Committee is impressivethe
elements of the cultural-and natural environment which are:
of such outstanding world significance that they need
to be conserved, managed and presented as part of the
heritage of the world;
of such outstanding national value that they need to
be conserved, managed and presented as part of the
nation as a whole;
of such aesthetic, historical, social and cultural,
ecological, or other special value to the nation
or any part of it, including a region or locality,
that they should be conserved, managed and presented
for the benefit of the community as a whole. 
This comprehensive definition of the National Estate includes
elements of remarkable diversity and richness. The range of the
National Estate extends from great National Parks to such homely
parts of our heritage as paddlesteamers and a Chinese Joss House.
I do not want to comme nt in detail on the specific
recommendations, except to say that the Government regards it
as a most important and comprehensive document. The findings
and recommendations will be studied most intensively in the
months ahead.
The Report directs particular attention to the role of the
Australian Government in nurturing the National Estate. it
suggests a number of new tasks which the Government should
undertake. I want to make it clear that my Government has not been
idle in its approach to the National Estate. Mr. Uren has
announced grants for National Estate projects in all States
out of a National Estate allocation of $ 2.5 million in the last
Budget. Grants have also been made to assist a number of
conservation groups to meet administrative costs. The
Hope Committee assisted the Government in determining the
allocation of these funds. Now the recommendations of the
Committee will greatly assist the Government in putting National
Estate financial programs on a firm and continuing basis.
The work of Mr. Justice Hope and his Committee deserves
the highest praise. The Government is also grateful for the
help and co-operation given by State and Local Government
authorities, by a host of voluntary organisations, and by
hundreds of individuals in developing and refining the concept
of the National Estate.
The Report of the National Estate Committee is a
recognition of the great physical and cultural endowment we
have inherited. By acting now with firmness and decision we can
ensure that future generations will not lead their lives content
with what we have spoilt.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 240
26 April 1974
THE CONSUMER AND COLOUR TELEVISION
The Prime Minister today referred to recent press reports
that consideration was being given by Government agencies to the
application of import quotas to Japanese colour television sets.
The Prime Minister said that these reports did not reflect the
Government' s attitude.
The Government believed that the Australian consumer
deserved free access to Japanese Pal television receivers subject,
of course, to the tariff protection given to the local industry by
the Government after the Tariff Board reported on consumer electronic
equipment and components late last year. The tariff on these goods
is at a relatively high level of 35%. This is the basis upon which
negotiations with AWA and AEG-Telefunken are proceeding.
The Prime Minister said that two of the main objectives of
the tariff assistance provided to the Australian consumer electronics
industry are to provide the Australian consumer with
a wide range of cheaper electrical goods,
including colour television sets; and
to provide the basis for greater specialisation
in the relevant sections of the Australian industry
with consequent benefits for the nation as a whole.
Mr Whitlam said that in its report on the consumer electronics
industry late last year the Tariff Board had said
" At the recommended-rates of duty on components and
complete receivers the Board believes that local
manufacturers in a rationalised industry would
dominate the medium to large screen size market for
colour television. It is in this segment that the
majority of demand is expected to occur. The
recommended duties are not expected to cover the
cost disabilities of Australian manufacturers
producing the small screen sizes of television
receivers."
Mr Whitlam said that imports from Japan were expected to play
a major role in meeting consumer demand for the smaller-screen sized
sets., / 2 
-2-
He said that the negotiations with AWA and AEG-Telefunken
were an integral part of a total policy aimed at greatly improving
the position of the Australian consumer, particularly in the early
years of colour television. The Government's policy which provides
appropriate protection for Australian workers and industry, would
benefit Australian industry by encouraging it to specialise in areas
where it is best able to operate.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



4JJI4USTRALI( A., L PRESS STATEENT NO. 241
26 April 1974
PRICE INCREASES BY TASMANIAN BRE7ERIES PTY. LTD.
I have been given notice by The Cascade Brewery
Co. Limited on behalf of its subsidiary company Tasmanian
Breweries Pty. Ltd. specifying the prices at which the
company proposes to supply certain goods and services as
from 26 April 1974.
The company's notification, dated 24 April, is in
the following terms:
" In accordance with Section 18 of the Prices
Justification Act 1973 we wish to advise that our
subsidiary accepts the determination of the Tribunal
and as from 26 April 1974 will sell its products at
the prices listed hereunder:
Bulk BeerKilderkin Gallon
Firkin Gallon
Packaged Products740 ml Bottled Ale
740 Stout
740 Canned Ale
370 Bottled Canned
Ale Stout $ 4.08 per dozen
4.17 It
4.42 I
2.54
Canberra, A. C. T. $ 29.60 17.30 15.60 9.05 



EMBARGO:. 8.00 P.! fi.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP, FOR THE
OPENING OF THE ANNUAL ART EXHIBITION AT ST PATRICK' S COLLEGE,
STRATHFIE. LD, FRIDAY, 26 APRIL 1974
I was assured when I accepted your invitation to open this
exhibition that I could make my speech " as political as you like".
Since we are about to start an election campaign I am happy to
accept your assurance and take you at your word. The question is:
should I make a political speech about art or a political speech
about education? Like St. Patrick's College, we have an excellent
record in both. We have almost doubled Australian Government
assistance to the arts and we have almost doubled Australian
Government assistance to education. Some of the schools we have
assisted are famous schools; some of the paintings we have bought
are famous paintings. At least one of them is very famous. A year
ago everyone had heard of St. Patrick's College but not everyone had
heard of Jackson Pollock. Perhaps there are more votes in education.
Solet me make a " political speech". Let me make this
statement wihout qualification: Education is the greatest single
achievement of the Labor Government. The prospects for education,
the prospects for our children, have been utterly transformed. Look
back to the situation before we came to office. There were vast
deficiencies in the States' education budgets; inequalities between
pupils, inequalities between schools, inequalities between States and
regions, were deeply and hopelessly entrenched. Working-class parents
were taxed so that money could be poured into wealthy schools that
needed assistance least. The Australian Government was giving nothing
not one cent to the recurrent costs of government schools. Whole
areas of education were neglected. Primary schools were downgraded in
favour of secondary schools. Needy secondary schools were downgraded
in favour of prosperous secondary schools. University fees were
restricting tertiary education to those who could afford it, Teachers'
colleges were ignored. Pre-schooling as a right of every Australian
child was practically unheard of. Technical education was the
Cinderella of the system.
On top of that on top of that gross pattern of neglect and
impoverishment education was bedevilled by a futile controversy
over " State aid". The Liberals' twin shibboleths of State aid and
State rights embittered and delayed every rational attempt to give
a new deal to Australian children. We have given that new deal. In
17 months we have scrapped the accumulated deadwood of ad-hoc grants,
patch-up subsidies and makeshift aid programs initiated by our
predecessors. We have given a new charter to the children of
Australia. The old obsession with State aid has been buried for good.
And remember this: State aid was as much an obsession of the right
as it was of the left, as much a preoccupation of government school
supporters as non-government school supporters. Where are the DOGS
now? I have not heard a word from them in this election. The DOGS
have had their day! The prejudice and negativism they promoted and
represented the bitterness they shared with their opponents at the
opposite extreme have disappeared. We have lifted the whole debate
on education out of a miasma of irrelevance and sectarianism. The
beneficiaries are the children of Australia and the generations of
children to come. / 2 
-2-
What must strike any impartial observer of this debate is
the cynical opportunism of the Liberals. For years they decried any
attempt to improve the condition of our schools as an interference
with the rights of States. How often they told us that education
was a " State responsibility". When our programs for increased grants
to schools the Karmel funds came before Parliament last December,
the Liberals voted against them. They opposed the legislation. They
opposed the whole concept cf needs by insisting that we make extra
funds available to A-category schools that needed the money least.
Because of their doctrinaire attachment to the wealthiest schools
they threatened to block our entire program of reform, to prevent
promised funds going to the States even Liberal States for their
education programs, and to hold up the Australian Schools Commission
unless we agreed to stack it with their friends and supporters.
The Country Party and I give credit for this saw the folly of the
Liberals' ways. They voted for our measures while the Liberals
opposed them. I am not sure whether these events were more important
as a commentary on the Liberal attitude to our children's future or
as a commentary on Opposition unity.
I ask you to look at the attitudes of the Liberals now and
contrast it with what they were saying only five short months ago.
Five months ago they voted against our proposals. Today they say
they would match them! Now that an election is coming on, the Liberals
have discovered the value of our reforms. They promise to keep the
Australian Schools Commission if returned to power. They promise to
make the same funds available to schools. Of course, they also
promise to cut back or reduce the growth of Government spending.
The people will have to decide which promise they believe. I simply
ask whether anyone can believe a party or trust a party that within
the space of five months can change its mind completely on an issue
of such radical importance as the education of our children.
So here is the Liberal record on education; 23 years of
neglect, one year of obstruction, six months of silence, and two weeks
of contrition. For a generation they did nothing for the schooling of
the majority of Australian children. Their indifference and contempt
blighted the education of thousands of Australians. They condemned
Australian children to overcrowded classes, ill-equipped and understaffed
schools. They neglected the needs of disadvantaged schools
and isolated children. They neglected the needs of teachers' colleges.
Every other area of tertiary education received some support often
tardy and grudging support but teachers' colleges got nothing.
They particularly neglected the needs of the Catholic sector in both
primary and secondary education. Their aid to Catholic schools failed
to recognise the areas of greatest need and acknowledge the genuine
difficulties of the Catholic system. / 3 
All that has been changed by our legislation. As a result
of our legislation Catholic schools, both primary and secondary,
whether systemic or not, receive recurrent assistance in direct
relation to their needs.
Our program of funding schools according to their needs.
replaces the old system of across the board per capita grants. The
introduction of the new program means that Catholic schools throughout
Australia will receive a total of $ 123 million for the years 1974 and
1975 instead of the estimated $ 76.4 million which would have been
available had the old per capita grants been maintained at the rate
which applied in 1973. New South Wales Catholic schools will receive
$ 47 million under this arrangement. These schools would have received
approximately $ 29 million under the per capita scheme operated by
the previous Government. It has been particularly unfair that some
Catholic school principals have criticised the Labor Government, which
has increased its grants for secondary schools, while making no
criticism of the N. S. W. Liberal Government whose grants for secondary
schools are much lower than those of the State Governments of
Queensland and Victoria.
In the case of non-systemic non-government schools like
St Patrick's College, the Karmel Committee made individual estimates
of the needs of each school, classifying them into eight categories,
ranking from H to A, in ascending order according to the level of
recurrent resources available to pupils at these schools.
St Patrick's was classified as Category G, indicating that the school
should receive recurrent grants at the rate of $ 85 per primary pupil
and $ 130 per secondary pupil in 1974 and $ 120 per primary pupil and
$ 190 per secondary pupil in 1975. As a result of these grants it
is estimated that your school will receive approximately $ 140,000 in
1974 and $ 203,000 in 1975 a total of $ 343,000 for the two years.
Had the previous government' s policy continued, and had the rate of
per capita grants remained unchanged, the school would have received
an estimated $ 220,000 for the two years. In effect, the operation of
the present scheme has resulted in an increase of 56% in recurrent
funds available from the Australian Government to St. Patrick's College.
Let me say a word about the treatment of disadvantaged
schools. We have recognised that certain schools are so deprived
and needy that they are entitled to assistance of a special kind,
apart from the normal criteria of need applied to other schools.
Catholic disadvantaged schools throughout Australia will receive an
additional $ 2.45 million during the 1974/ 75 biennium. Of this,
$ 890.000 will be provided for Catholic schools in New South Wales.
In addition, the Australian Government will make available $ 3.76 million
to disadvantaged schools to undertake building projects in 1974 and 1975.
Of this amount $ 1.3 million will be allocated to New South Wales.
This program was introduced by the present Government. There was no
comparable program of assistance to disadvantaged schools under the
previous Government. ./ 4 
Finally, a word about Catholic and other non-government
teachers' colleges. Because of the neglect of these colleges in
the past, the Commission on Advanced Education has conducted an inquiry
into their needs and recommended support for them. The recommendations
are designed to give assistance by way of recurrent funds for 1974
and 1975. They are in two parts. Firstly, there is a basic provision
for each college which will enable it to meet in reasonable measure
the planned growth for 1974 and 1975, on the assumption that the
proportion of religious in the total staff remains as indicated in
the college submissions. Secondly, the Commission has recommended
an additional sum, over and above that allowed for in the basic
provision, to finance the replacement of religious by lay staff where
necessary. In New South Wales, the Commission has recommended support
for the Catholic College of Education on condition that by the end
of 1975 it has its completed plans for amalgamation with the Good
Samaritan Teachers College and a new institution is set up on a
suitable site. The Commission has also recommended support for
other teaching institutions, including the Catholic Teachers College
at Worth Sydney, the Guild Teachers' College and the Good Samaritan
Teachers College at Glebe Point.
Two weeks ago I wrote to Archbishop Carroll in these terms:
" As part of its education policy, I indicated that my
Government would support teachers' colleges in the same way as all
other tertiary institutions.
" The necessary measures have already been taken to include
government teachers' colleges fully under advanced education
arrangements, and in response to the request made to it last year the
Commission on Advanced Education has recently submitted a report on
financial provision for approved " private" teachers' colleges. The
Government is in the process of dealing with this report which
recommends that approved private teachers' colleges should receive
assistance with recurrent costs from 1 January 1974.
" I am writing to assure you that support will be provided
as soon as the normal parliamentary processes allow. The conditions
of support will be along the lines discussed with the colleges by the
Commission during its investigations and will be directed towards
the rational development of the institutions within the overall
tertiary program." I commend the great contribution of the Catholic system to
the education of Australia's children. For the first time, under this
Government, their true needs and just entitlements have been recognised.
As a result of our policies, Catholic education can look forward to a
secure and prosperous future within a secure and prosperous educational
system. The Christian Brothers have done much to raise the standards
of teaching in our schools and set a proud example of selfless
dedication to the interests of our children. This fine school, with
its fine traditions, exemplifies the best in Catholic education. Your
annual art exhibition is evidence of a lively concern for the cultural,
intellectual and spiritual health of your pupils and the community you
serve. I wish your exhibition every success. I have great pleasure
in declaring it open. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS AND
INQUIRY CENTRE, PITT STREET, SYDNEY, FRIDAY 26 APRIL 1974
One of the great themes that led to the election of the
Australian Labor Party in 1972 was the need for a new openness in
Government. For too long before we came into office, Australian
Governments had operated on the assumption that they knew best,
that the people had no right to be kept fully informed of their
activities. For too long Government decisions had been taken against
a background of secrecy. The people weren't given the facts to
enable them to judge adequately the worth or otherwise of official
decisions which could have momentous, and even tragic, results
for the community. No issue has symbolised this failure in the last
decade more than Vietnam. The people weren't told the whole truth
about this bloody and mistaken war. Yet despite the absence of
Government honesty and frankness, their sons were sent to fight
in that quagmire, to be wounded-and some cases killed.
The failure to communicate with the people took many other
forms. All too often, our predecessors suppressed documents and
reports on which their actions were based, all too often they delayed
the publication of these documents for into intolerable periods.
Their purpose was clear: to prevent the people from having a
proper chance to evaluate their performance.
My party, my Government has been determined to reverse
the secret practices of the past. In my policy speech in 1972 I said:
" We want the Australian people to know the facts, to khow the needs,
to know the choices before them. We want them always to help us as
a government to make the decisions and to make the right decisions."
To achieve this objective, I pledged that a key channel for
communication between the Parliament and the people would be a number
of expert commissions making regular reports and recommendations
on new spending. I made it clear that we would promptly publish
their findings, so that all interested people could know what was
proposed and comment upon those proposals.
On this, as on the rest of the program which I outlined
in my 1972 policy speech, the Government has sought to do what it
promised. In the last 17 months, a number of special bodies have
been established to examine and deal with the needs of Australia
and Australians over a wide range of activities. The Schools Commission,
for example, has been the agent for the transformation of education
in Australia. The Hospitals and Health Services Commission has
provided a framework for a new Commonwealth involvement to meet the
health needs of the community. The Social Welfare Commission has
begun the mammoth task of meeting and co-ordinating social services
throughout the country. As these and other new bodies have reported
to the Government, we have promptly tabled their findings in the
Parliament. We have made it possible for the people to be fully aware
of their recommendations and the reasons behind them. In the first
year alone, 39 reports on inquiries instituted by the Government were
presented to the Parliament, not including reports from Parliamentary
Committees or reports on inquiries instituted by the previous
government. 
-2-
We have proved ourselves as the first Government in a
generation to be frank with the people. We have been the first
Government in a generation to share our decisions and the reasons
for them openly with the whole community. We pledge to continue
on that path, to persevere in the creation of a new tradition of
openness in Government.
In the last week our opponents have suddenly discovered
the words " open government". This discovery has come in the midst
of their rush to produce a brace of policies so that they can pretend
that they have a coherent program. Their spokesmen have promised
that they would publish " wherever practicable" reports, reviews
and other materials concerning Government decisions. Just what does
" wherever practicable" mean? On their past performance it would
mean nothing more than that they would publish such documents only
when it suited their purpose, only when they would face no embarrassment,
only when their decisions had been made and foisted on the community.
I defy anyone to believe that such words have any more meaning,
coming from the same men who suppressed one Government report for
years. In 1958 the Liberal-Country Party Government received the
report of the Morshead Committee on the re-organisation of the
Defence group of departments. A succession of Liberal-Country Party
leaders refused to publish that report. It was finally tabled on
the 30th May 1973 by the Labor Minister for Defence. The parties
that talk so much about the defence needs of Australia weren't prepared
to share with the public vital documents on the administrative needs
of this area. The parties who now expect you to believe that they
want open government for 15 years cloaked that report in secrecy. They
are no more credible when they talk of open government than they are
when they pull out of the hat any of their other hasty and
ill-considered policies.
The only Government that can be trusted when it makes such
a pledge is the present one. It made that pledge 17 months ago and
it has stood by it. If people want the opportunity to share knowledge
and information with the National Government, they have only to give
us a fair chance to continue to honour that pledge.
Open government, of course, must mean more than simply
tabling documents in Parliament and then printing them. It is
vital to our democracy that that be done. But we must go further than
that. The present Government has recognised that there are many
interested and concerned people who will still never have the chance
to see and study those documents if we do not give them wider
dissemination. Many people are not familiar enough with the processes
of Government to know how to get a copy of a government report if it
is only available in Canberra. We want to ensure that Government
publications are not confined to the highly educated, the highly
informed or people with established contacts with Government. If a
Government publication is of interest to any person or group, then the
access to that person or group to that document should not depend on
education or wealth or influence. / 3 
-3-
Similarly, in areas beyond publications, we want to
enable all people to know what the Government is doing, to know
what services are available to them. It is no use if the Government
provides a service and no-one is aware of its existence. Our
predecessors' Health Insurance Subsidy Scheme for low-income earners
is an excellent example of a service of which the very people whom
it was supposed to help overwhelmingly remained ignorant. The
subsidy was supposed to be available; only 4 in every 100 people
who should have been eligible for it received any benefit from it..
That is the importance of this Government P ublications
and Inquiries Centre. By establishing the Centre the Government is
taking the initiative to provide readily accessible means for people
to know what it is doing.
The necessity of getting government to the people is not
unique to Australia. Britain tackled it during the last war by
establishing Citizens Advice Bureaux, Canada has for several years
had a network of regional Inquiry Centres; the United States has
information centres operating in major cities. So last year when
the Australian Government approved a proposal of the Minister for
the Media ( Senator Douglas McClelland) to set up Publications and
Inquiry Centres in the cities and main provincial areas, it was
answering a need to bridge a knowledge gap of Australians.
It should be clear that this centre fulfills two separate
functions. Publications of the Australian Government are sold here
at the lowest price to clear only overheads and publishing costs.
The bookshops are also selling agents for the publications of other
governments. The Inquiry Centre is a different matter. It provides
services free. The public is invited to submit enquiries personally
or by telephone about any aspect of Australian Government activity.
It is not expected that final answers may be provided for all questions
at the centre. Many of the simpler ones can be dealt with on the spot,
but where specialised knowledge is required the inquiry officer will
ref er to an appropriate contact of ficer in the Department concerned f or
the answer. Should the inquiry be more complex, a Central Reference
Unit which is being established in Canberra will search out the
information and return it back to the Inquiry Office by telex or
telephone. The first publications and inquiry office began operating
last year in Canberra. Since then Adelaide and Perth have been added.
After Sydney will come Brisbane, Hobart, Melbourne and Darwin. They
will be extended to the major provincial areas including Albury-
Wodonga, Newcastle, Wollongong, and Townsville. Until these
provincial centres are established, mobile bookshops and Inquiry Centres
are being commissioned to tour rural areas. The first is ready for the
road now. Some of the capital cities including Sydney and Melbourne
have had Government Bookshops for up to six years. But until now they
have not been street level operations designed to engender the
greatest public interest. The relocated shops have immediately shown
sales increases of between 150 and 250 per cent. This alone points
up the need of the public for better access to Government affairs. / 4 
-4-
The inquiry function is also being widely utilised. The
established centres are each already handling more than 30 inquiries
daily and when fully operative the network is expected to deal with
over half a million requests for information by telephone,
correspondence or personal applications in a year.
This new Centre will provide the public in Sydney with
a convenient point of initial contact and is real evidence of our
initiatives towards open government. 



i~) AUS R ALl A~ y
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 239
26 April 1974
BY-LAW POLICY
The Prime Minister announced today that following discussions
with a wide range of industries and industry associations, the
Government had decided to publish a Green Paper on by-law policy
under which goods enter Australia free of duty where local products
are not suitably equivalent or reasonably available. The Green Paper
would draw together the options available to the community in this
important area of policy.
The Prime Minister said that he welcomed the co-operation
which had been so readily given by industry to the work of the
interdepartmental group, chaired by his Department, which is
examining the matter. The Government has in mine' that the Green Paper
will provide a basis for further industry comment and community
discussion. The Prime Minister mentioned that by-law entry accounts
for about 25 per cent of all imports. The implications of any
change in the system are therefore very far-reaching.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



EMDARGO: 3.00PM TUESDAY 30 APRIL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, TO AN
ELECTION CAIMPAIGN MEETING AT SPRINGVALE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
VICTORIA, TUESDAY 30 APRIL 1974
Labor is a national party. The Labor Government is a
truly national government. We are the only party whose policies
are directed, not to sectional interests, not to privileged
minorities, but to the welfare of all Australians. For this
reason it was natural and inevitable that we would be the
first party to recognise that the true interests of the majority
of our people would best be served by an attack on the growing
problems of our cities. That was the central and winning theme
of our campaign in 1972. It is the basis of all our major programs
and policies in 1974.
To say this is not to suggesL that we are concerned only
with the cities. Of course we are not. It is merely to recognise
that the greiL majority of our people live in the cities, and that
p; li. ies for cities are therefore policies for peoile. All our
plans fcr a richer and fuller life for pee all our hopes
and ambitions for their future, for the quality of their lives and
their children's lives are bound up with our plans for the cities.
I ask you to keep in mind what this word " cities" implies in the
context of our policies it means better-schools, better transport,
better housing, better health services, better working conditions,
a more beautiful and orderly environment. It means an end to urban
sprawl, an end to squalor, an end to inefficient and dilapidated
public transport, an end to much of the ugliness that has characterised
tlhe working and living conditions of our people for too long.
As in so many areas of political life, our initiatives
f. or the cities have set the pace for all political parties.
For what did " the cities" to the Lib-ral and Country Parties
in 1972? For the Country Party they meant hostile c; icentrations
of power; " city" was a dirty word, and still is a dirty word.
For the Liberals, the cities meant one of two scquare miles of
office blocks and financia; l institutions, the centres of corporate
wealth and power. They had plenty of policies for the insurance
companies and stockbrokers who made up the Liberal concept of the
city. But for the millions of Australians who lived in tho suburbs,
especial]. y in the fast growing outer suburbs, who yearned for a better
deal in education, housing, transport, sewerage, health services and
so many other things, the Liberals had nothing to offer at all.
How gratifying it is that the Opposition is now putting forward
policies for the cities how gratifying, yet how cynical! / 2 
2.
How empty and belated their promises are now.
The men who ignored the cities for 23 years, who left them
to the tender mercies of land sharks, property speculators
and developers, who tolerated generations of urban sprawl,
ugliness and inefficiency, who did nothing about the great
and growing problems of high land prices, run-down transport,
unsewered suburbs and inadequate health care these men now
come before you with their so-called policies for the cities,
policies flung together three or four weeks before a national
election which they have forced on the people by a gross
violation of constitutional principles. Of course our Iopponents
have " policies" for the cities. They dare not run away from
this issue any longer. Their policies, insofar as they amount
to anything at all, amount to no more than a continuation of
the programs my Government has initiated and pursued during
the past 17 months. I merely ask: whom should you trust
to carry out these policies? The men who spurned them for so
long, and have indeed done much to frustrate them during my
Government's period of office; or the men who worked for
years to create and propound these policies, and who see them
as a basic and central ingredient of our whole political
philosophy? In my policy speech in 1972 1 said that " a national
government which cuts itself off from responsibility for the
nation' s cities is cutting itself off from the nation's real life".
In its direct involvement in cities the Australian Government has
entered the mainstream of Australian life. We want to remould,
modernise and revitalise our cities; and ~ to do that we want to
remould, modernise and revitalise the relations between the three
levels of government national, local and State. The national
government must accept at least as much responsibility for cities
and centres as the national governments of comparable countries
already do. At last we have a national government which is doing
just that. We also have a national c:'-7ernment which is determined
to see that local government the area of government closest to
the people and closest to their needs should have the opportunity
and the financial resources to carry out their responsibilities.
for the benefit of the cities, for the peop ' le, of Australia.
Our referendums to be held with the election on 18 May will
enable us to make grants direct to local government bodies
who request-them. We want to make local government. a genuaine
partner in the federal system. This proposal has t1' rof
the overwhelming majority of local government as~.. n
and councils throughout Australia.
Let me recall some of the g~ reat things we undertook to
do in attacking the problems of the cities and improving the lives
of their people. From the outset we set about this task with
speed, with vigour and with determination. 
I 3.
I promised in 1972 to establish a Department of Urban
palnadn sR egfioor naela chD evceiltyo pmaenndt rteog ioann alaynsd e, t o raedsveiasrec h thaen d ncatoi-oonradlinate
government on grants for urban purposes. The Department was
established as soon as we came to power. It is functioning
with great effect under the leadership of Tom Uren.
I promised that we would request the Grants Commission
to recommend the amount of national government assistance
required to remove the inequality of servicing developing
regions. We have carried out that promise. One of the first
acts of the new Parliiut. len. t enpow. ered the Grants Commission to
make grants to local government for this purpose i: 1 the same
way that it has traditionally recommnended grants needed to
remove inequalities between the States.
I promised that one of 1he functions of the Department of
Urban and Regional Development would be to conserve the National
Estate, our national and man-made heritage. We have established
a committee of inquiry on the National Estate and have received
its report. Our first Budget provided an initial $ 2.5 million
to be applied to the preservation of the national estate.
I promised that we would make grants to the State
Ilousing Commissions for welfare housing purposes conditional
on the funds being spent on housing communities which
provide a safe, pleasant, modern and civilised environment.
Our Budget raised the allocation for welfare housing by
26 per cent. The national government has assumed virtually
full responsibility for this important field.
I undertook through the establishment of a
Schools Commission that the national government would accept
direct responsibility for schools, whose welfare bears
directly on the quality of life in the cities. I pointed
out that the previous Government's system of per capita
grants to non-government -chools -ilone did nothing to help
tl-e stabli u: L ent r-f new Catholic schools in gro': ing areas
such as this a-. i no incUlti\' es for the reduction of
class sizes or for the training of teachers in existing
Catholic schools. It left existing Government schools
as deprived and overburdened as ever. Through the Schools
Commission the national government has accepted a continuing,
comprehensive commitment to all schools on the basis of needs
and priorities. We have almost doubled national government
expenditure on education.
I saiO w determined that every child in Australia
; oucli have tie same opportunity then enjoyed only by children
in Canberra to a full year's pre-school education from qualified
staff in proper buildings. The Budget allocated $ 10 million
foi ani early start for the redemption of this promise and we
are providing a further $ 8 million to help in the construction
and operation of child-care centres. 
I promised a vigorous attack on the backlog of sewerage
in our major cities. $ 30 million was provided in the 1973/ 74
* Budget to make a start on overcoming this backlog. Discussions
are under way'with the States to develop a continuing longterm
program beginning in 1974/ 75.
I promised special help for the new developing regions
of our cities. As a result, $ 8 million was provided in the
1973/ 74 Budget to provide urgent assistance to local government
bodies in the western sectors of Melbourne and Sydney.
I pledged an all-out drive to create new cities and
regional growth centres. The Australian Government has offered
financial assistance to the States for a program of development
of twelve new growth centres in sub-metropolitan and regional
locations. An amount of $ 33 million was * provided in the 1973/ 74
Budget. We have made a bold and encouraging start with the*
new city of Albury-Wodonga. This is an outstanding example
of co-operation between the Victorian, New South Wales and
Australian Governments.
I promised a vigorous campaign to upgrade the standards
of urban public transport. We are providing $ 32 million this
year to the State Governments for urban public transport
improvements. We are proposing to provide another $ 41 million
to complete projects comnmencing this -vear. Half the money
has been allocated for the acquisition of new railway rolling
stock, buses and trains. Additional new railway tracks will
be built in Melbourne to relieve congestion and increase
the capacity for express services operating to outer suburban
areas. Fundamental to our plans for better cities is'an attack
on the crippling problem of land prices. The cost of land is
the greatest single component in the cost of a home and the
greatest impediment to a fair deal for the average homebuyer.
We pledged to set up Land Commissions with the help of the
States to buy up large tracts of residenthial land in new
suburbs and towns and sell them at fair prices as fullyserviced
building blocks. The anti-Labor States have stalled
on this proposal. They have dithered and blocked our planswhile
the cost of buildingx land has contiruee to soar. Who
are the interests who benefit front this obstruction? They
are the land speculators, the profiteers and developers who
have grown fat on the savings of young Australian families.
Their interests, and their interests alone, have been served
by the dilatory and obstructive tactics of the anti-Labor
States. Remember that the States have all the powers they need
to control the soaring price of land. The anti-Labor States
refuse to use them. And all the time land is becoming
increasingly expensive further beyond the reach of the average
wage earner. In Melbourne the average cost of a block of
land is $ 13,000; in Sydney it is $ 18,000. In fAelbourne the
rate of inflation in the cost of land more than doubled in
1973. It increased by 46 per cent, while average earnings 
Sby 12 per cent. The cost of land in Melbourne now
'. esents 60 per cent of the cost of a home. It takes the
. ivalent of 22 months' wages to buy an average block of
in Melbourne and 32 months' wages in Sydney. The Li bera. L
Governments have done absolutely nothing to check this
jndalous profiteering in the price of land. They have
, eat powers at their disposal. They have done nothing.
My Government established its Land Commission program
to attack this urgent problem. We are determined to provide
land at prices people can afford. We will not tolerate the
increasingly common spectacle of thousands of young homeseekers
being turned away from land auctions in Melbourne and Sydney
while prices. soar beyond their reach. In the first part
of our program, we offered the Victorian Government $ 30 million
for a land acquisition program the highest amount for any
State. New South Wales was offered $ 28 million, the Queensland
Government $ 6 million, the Western Australian Government $ 6 million
and the Tasmanian Government $ 1 million. Only in South Australia
has the Government taken appropriate action to attack land
price.-s, and their legislative steps have done much to
stabilise the price of land. They have also sjigI1d an agreement
with ry Government they are the first State to do so
for the establishment of a Land Commission. What a contrast
with the anti-Labor States! In New South Wales where
land prices are at catastrophic levels the Askin Government
has refused to accept our offer. In Brisbane where land
price inflation is running at 100 per cent a year, the highest
in Australia the Queensland Government has also rejected our
offer. In Western Australia a hostile Upper House prevented
the recent Labor Government from accepting our Land Commission
proposal. And under Hamer nothing happens. There could be
no better example of State Government obsuruction at the expense
of the people in Australia's cities.
Despite all the Liberal talk a. out the cities, their
sudden discovery of the plight of city dwellers, their lastminute
conversion to the cause of the cities, their record
on land prices shows where their real interests lie.
Here is an area where the Liberal/ Country Party State
Governments have great and undoubted powers. They have
refused to use them. We will be judged by our record and
performance. Let the homeseekers and young families of
Australia judge the Liberals by theirs.
In the light of their miserable and obstructive record,
. iho can take their last-minute promises seriously? They are
vague and unspecified promises. Over all their promises
for the cities, for education, health and welfare hangs
the equally vague and unspecified commitment to cut. back on
Gov-enment spending. The people of Aus-alia can be sure of
one thing: if the Liberals were to cut back on spending, they
would make their cuts in the only area where econo.: ies w.:. uld
be meaningful that is, in the essential and histric
programs my Government has undertaken to improve our citiz:;
and make them worthy places for ustralian people. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 243
April 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S LETTER TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced tonight
that he had written to the Town Clerks and members of each
local government body in Australia about the forthcoming
referendum on local government.
Mr. Whitlam said that it was important that each
local government organisation knew the real facts about
the referendum which would be put to the people on May 18.
Mr. Whitlam said that if the referendum was carried the
Australian Government would be able to make funds available
directly to local government both by way of grants and by
loans at lower interest rates, so that urban and rural councils
and other local government bodies could be freed from the
financial straightjacket of the past.
Mr. Whitlam said that he had urged each local
government body to give support in theirarea for a YES
vote on May 18. He said he had also forwarded to each
local government body copies of his many speeches on local
government and its financial relations with the national
Government. CANBERRA. A. C. T. Fr 



EMBARGO: 7.30 P. M.
ii MI 7,
A. B. C. BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP,
TOBEBROADCASTONTUESDAY,_ 30_ APRIL_ 1974_____
Last night, for the second time in 17 months, I put to you,
the Australian people, the program of the Australian Labor Party.
For the second time I delivered my policy speech in the civic
centre of a suburb which symbolises so many of the problems
which my party and my Government have been determined to solve.
Australia regrettably abounds in areas like it, areas where the
residents have had to suffer inadequate transport, overcrowded
hospitals and inferior and uncoordinated community services.
In 1972 the Australian people looked to us as the only political
party in Australia which had considered and devised comprehensive
programs to deal with those shortcomings.
That was 17 months ago. Since then we have taken giant steps
towards dealing with the problems of our nation. For the first
time in a generation Australia has had a Government dedicated to
equal opportunity for all its citizens. For the first time
Australia has had a Government determined to promote Australian
ownership and control of Australian industries and resources.
For the first time Australia has had a Government determined to
reduce inequalities between regions.
Nowhere has this new and vital presence been more keenly
felt than in our schools and other educational institutions.
In our first Budget, we nearly doubled the amount of money for
Government and non-Government schools tHiroiqhout Australia.
We have abolished fees for tertiary~ education. We have approved
a massive injection of finance for technical education. We have
been the first national Government to provide significant funds
for the care and education of pre-school children.
We have not yet been given a fair chance to implement all
of the program I put to you for the 1972 elections. A number of
those programs \; ill grind to a halt and be abandoned if we are not
given that chance. That is what the election on 18 May is all
about: whether the programs, the new hope of 1972 should be
fulfilled; whether the vigour and enthusiasm for change and
improvement, released through your decision in 1972, should be
replaced by the old lethagy.
There is a striking similarity of background, not just of
content, between the speech I delivered last night and that which
I gave in 1972. Neither speech contained piecemeal or unconsidered
policies. All of our policies have been researched, not just by
politicians but by independent experts. All have been given the
widest possible dissemination. That process has taken time, in
some cases as much as 7 years. But it has twice enabled me to
stand before you as the leader of the only party with a coherent
and consistent plan for our development. 
-2-
What a contrast with our opponents. They forced a premature
election and then discovered they had to make up some policies
on which to fight it. Bit by bit, you have had to watch their
ideas and whims dribble out of hastily convened and divided meetings
held behind closed doors. Even then you have had to listen to
their spokesmen tell you that they have not been able to cost these
so-called policies.
The same men who cannot put a price on their hasty and
unconsidered plans expect you to believe them when they say
they will cut taxes. It is all too similar to 1969 when they
promised to cut your income tax but did not tell you that they
proposed increased duties on petrol, cigarettes and wine, higher
postal charges, and increased sales taxes.
This is the choice you face on 18 May. It is a clear choice
between our careful planning and thei. r patchwork of last-minute
promises and gimmicks. It is a choice between the continuation
of your new aspirations for Australia or a return to the stale
ideas of yesterday. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 242
April 1974
COMMITTEE ON INTEGRATION OF DATA SYSTEMS
The Prime minister today released the Report prepared
by the Committee on Integration of Data Systems.
The Prime Minister recalled that in December 1973 he had
appointed a Committee to advise on the general principles and
administrative arrangements which would enable the Government to
integrate the various departmental data systems servicing related
areas of its social and economic policies. The membership of the
Committee comprised Professor L. F. Crisp ( Chairman), Mr. B. Brogan,
Mr. K. L. Brown, Mr. R. Jolly and Professor C. S. Wallace.
The Prime Minister outlined in brief some of the-major
repommendations put forward by the Committee. These included
the recommendations that:
1. The Australian Bureau of Statistics should be
established as a central statistical authority
and be administratively autonomous with the
Statistician having the status and power of
a Permanent Head;
2. the Bureau should be responsible to, and the
Statistician should make an annual report to
Parliament through the Treasurer;
3. the Bureau's continuing program and planned
priorities should be subject to annual scrutiny
by a representative National Statistics Advisory
Council which should have the duty of advising
the Treasurer conc erning them. The Council will
include representatives of various groups, such as
Trade Unionists, Employers, Universities and Civil
Liberties organisations. The Chairman of the Council
should be independent both of the Public Service and
organised economic or social interests;
4. the membership and functions of the existing annual
Conference of Federal and State Statisticians should
be extended to improve it as a vehicle for articulation
of State statistical needs and priorities; / 2 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement 244
April 1974
OPPOSITION POLICY SPEECH -STATEMENT BY THE
PRIME MINISTER
Mr. Snedden's policy speech is a document of gross
political irresponsibility a document of desperation and
deception. He produces a host of vague, uncosted, contradictory
promises. They are wildly inflationary promises.
He refuses to provide any estimate of the cost of his
promises. The Australian people are entitled to this information.
He refuses to say clearly and unequivocally what areas
of government spending he would cut in order to reduce inflation.
The Australian people are entitled to this information.
Behind Mr. Snedden's vague and ominous talk of hard
decisions lies a threat to every initiative my Government has
undertaken in education, welfare, transport, the cities.
Mr. Snedden's only definite proposal for curbing inflation
is to call a meeting. Even then he refuses to tell us what he
would propose at such a meeting. He does not say because he does
not know. He deliberately deceives the people when he says the
Labor Government has raised taxes. We have not raised taxes.
The fact is that the average wage earner in 1973 was better off
after taxes than in 1972.
For all Mr. Snedden's scare talk and hysteria, Australians
know that they have never been more prosperous. They have full
employment and high wages. The economy is buoyant. The dollar is
one of the world's strongest currencies. Our trade is booming.
Company profits are at record levels. The latest price figures
show that our policies to control inflation the world-wide problem
of inflation are working. It would be tradgic if the good progress
we have made were to be undone by Mr. Snedden' s reckless and
irresponsible bid for power.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE HOBART 1 MAY 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Gentlemen before I answer your questions,
I thought I might touch on one matter. I noticed that in
the Mercury and also in the northernpapers in Tasmania,
that the principal item was to this effect. " Pensions promise,
immediate rise if LCP wins." I regret to say that the heading
conveyed only half the story. At least the full story gives us
part of the answer to the question of where Mr Snedden will
cut government spending and the answer is he would cut pensions.
I was able to obtain today a copy of this glossy publication by
the Liberal Party and under the heading of policies towards
pensioners and the elderly the relevant passage is " as soon as
economic circumstances permit',' not immediately, but as soon as
economic circumstances permit, " we guarantee that aged, invalid,
widows pensions, war and widows pensions, and other weekly social
service and repatriation benefits will in future be adjusted
automatically every half year to changes in living standards".
Now if that had been the policy since the last election pensions
would now stand not at $ 26 a week but at $ 23 a week because the
$ 3 a week increase from the $ 20 which the pension stood at when
my government was elected represent the increase to adjust to
changes in living standards. What my government has done has been
to increase the value of the pension towards 25% of average weekly
male earnings. That's why the $ 20 pension which we inherited has
not just gone up to $ 23 a week which the Liberal's platform proposes
but to $ 26 a week. The pension has been increased by the Labor
Government by 30%; about twice the amount required to maintain
it in terms of changes in living standards. We believe that the
pension ought to be adjusted in terms of average weekly male 
2.
earnings so that if the general community shares in increased
prosperity in the community the retired people, the pensioners,
similarly should share in that increased prosperity. Now I
thought I should correct that impression that is given by the
heading in the Tasmanian papers straight away.
QUESTION: The keynote of Mr Snedden's address last night was
that the Whitlam experiment had failed. How do you feel about that?
PRIME MINISTER: The Whitlam experiment has succeeded wherever it
has been given a chance. Where administrative action was required,
we've acted promptly, fully and effectively.
QUESTION: You accepted the term. Explain that Sir.
PRIME MINISTER: Well of course it was a change for Australia.
After 23 years of Liberal/ Country Party government. But we came in
17 months ago on a 3 year program. After 17 months there has to
be an election for the House of Representatives again but this time
there will be an election for a contemporary Senate as well.
Administratively the experiment is fully-fledged. Legislatively
it has been hamstrung very greatly by an outdated Senate elected
three and a half and six and a half years ago.
QUESTION: As you well know we have representatives of the local
press here as well as-the National press. I know that there are
important Tasmanian issues that some people want to ask you.
QUESTION: Sir Frank Packer died today. He's been a long time
political opponent of the Labor Party. What's your reaction to his
death and will it have any effect on the coming election. Question
two, has his role with the development of this country been
beneficial or harmful?
PRIME MINISTER: It's too soon for me to attempt or presume
to make an assessment of Sir Frank Packer's contribution to our
country or to the media. He had for many years a very great
influence on the daily press in Sydney. He disposed of his papers 
3.
there about three years ago. He retained control of the most
successful of the weekly women's papers. He also of course had
a dominating interest in two of the mainland television stations.
He had been involved in the media all his life, his father before
him. He had never supported the Australian Labor Party or any
Australian Labor Party Government, Federal or State. Personally,
I found him a vigorous character and we treated each other I think,
with good humour and mutual respect, however much we disagreed with
each other, on matters of policy. But I respected him. I believe
he respected me and I share in the distress of his widow and his
son at his passing.
QUESTION: Has he affected your platform in the election.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that Sir Frank Packer's
publications these days had any influence politically.
QUESTION: Nor the Liberal Party at all?
PRIME MINISTER: His television stations. I think that television
cannot be manipulated so readily for political purposes by the owners
of the television stations. If you have a newspaper then you are
a prisoner of the owner's policies. If you don't like the newspaper
you can't go out and buy another. But if you don't like a
television program you can always switch to another.
QUESTION: The future of the Australian Cowhide Works in the
( unclear) near Hobart depends on the decision of your Government.
Is tariff protection for the industry still going to be continued?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a report which I've received from the
Industries Assistance Commission. It is being printed. As soon
as it's printed it will be published as all the Industries
Assistance Commission and formerly the Tariff Board reports have
been published since I became Prime Minister. I am the Minister
in charge of protection but in accordance with the general British
Parliamentary system which we inherited in Australia and which until 
the Senate cut off supply to my Government had always been applied
in the Federal Parliament it is inappropriate for governments to
make decisions during the currency of an election campaign. The report
I hope will be available by the time of the election and it will be
one of the first matters which will be considered by my government
after the election. In the meantime the report in typed form has
been made available to the companies concerned.
QUESTION: If the Labor Party was to win a majority in the
contemporary Senate but lose to a majority in the House of
Representatives would it seem fit to reject supply?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not contemplating that eventuality. But my
own strong opinion has always been that the Senate should not attempt
to reject supply. This matter did arise in the first year when I
was leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. That was in
1967. You will remember that there was an increase in postal and
telegraph charges in the 1967 budget. The Senate had previously by
a combination of the Australian Labor Party and the DLP disallowed
regulations which had been made increasing postal and telegraphic
charges whereupon the Holt Government introduced those charges in
the form of legislation in the budget and there was a move in the
Federal Parliamentary Labor Party, the Caucus, to vote against those
bills and the budget of which they were a part. I successfully
resisted that move. My view has always been that the Senate should
not cut off money for a Government which has a majority in the House
of Representatives.
QUESTION: Based on the precedent of the last four weeks has it
changed your view at all?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it was an evil precedent. I wouldn't
change my view.
QUESTION: Do you think your Party may change its view. 
PRIME MINISTER: I would try to persuade them not to. It would
be tempting obviously in the circumstances which you suggest but my
view has been consistent all along. When this was advanced in the
Party in 1967 I successfully overcame the idea.
QUESTION: Can you conceivably see a situation in which the Labor
Party would do to reject Supply if the Liberal/ Country Party had a
majority in the House of Representatives?
PRIME MINISTER: There would be many people who would want to
follow this wrong precedent. I would not be among them.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, in view of the High Court decision which
has upheld the validity of the tobacco tax in Tasmania would the
Labor Government seek to come to some arrangement with the States
where they can have a growth..( unclear) or would the Government
be having let Tasmania and presumably the other States go ahead
and trying to levy the tobacco tax or the consumption?
PRIME MINISTER: My Government doesn't object to the States having
a growth tax. In fact we completely support the fact that they do
have a growth tax in the payroll tax ard'they are using it. What
we object to is the income tax being levied by any Government other
than the Australian Government. But this particular matter of the
tobacco tax, the consumer tax, was resisted by my Government in
the High Court. The State Governments, including the Liberal State
Governments, supported the idea that States should be able to levy
such taxes. My Government resisted the idea. We didn't win. I
should say that there are other taxes where, such as death duties
and road taxes and there used to be land taxes, which were levied
both by the Federal Parliament and the State Parliaments. As a
result of a decision made at a meeting of the Constitution Convention
Committee A which I chaired a month ago officials of my Government
and of the State Governments are looking at the operation of these
taxes which are levied by both Federal and State Government in
Australia so we are very happy to work means of seeing that the taxes 
Federal and State Governments levy in Australia are fair in their
incidence and economic in their collection.
QUESTION: Would you like to see an arrangement at least whereby the
States would agree to drop consumption tax in return for some
concession from the Commonwealth.
PRIME MINISTER: What the States do in this matter is their affair.
The High Court has ruled that it's a matter for the States. We were
against them ruling that way but we didn't succeed so what the States
do with their Constitutional powers is a matter for the States.
Quite clearly we were against it but we didn't succeed.
QUESTION: Sir, the Committee of Inquiry into national estate. I
have the recommendations of this Committee that you handed down
last week recommended that Tasmania ( unclear)... until further
impact surveys are being conducted. Is that recommendation going
to become part of your policy of your Government?
PRIME MINISTER: My Government's policy is that Perhaps it
will help you if I read what was said in my policy speech on this
matter. I quoted what Mr Hope, who presided over the Committee
on the National Estate said about this matter. He stated...
It's in the section of my policy speech dealing with the government.
QUESTION: Sir, while you're looking for those
PRIME MINISTER: Well, if you don't mind, I think I've found it.
This is what Mr Justice Hope said. The Constitution gives the
Australian Government power to control the export of goods and in
particular the export of minerals and timber. It can require that
it can be satisfied that the exploitation of mineral or timber
resources or the manner or extent of that exploitation will not
adversely affect the environment before giving a licence to exploit
and on that recommendation by Mr JusticejHope's Committee I stated,
our Government will exercise that power regularly and effectively
on the basis of skills and independent advice. And what I pointed out 
7.
was that from now on where there are to be any private projects
involving export of minerals or timber we would like to see a joint
environmental impact statement compiled by officials of my
Government and officials of the State Government concerned and then
in the light of that joint environmental impact statement we would
decide whether we would permit the export of products of that
mineral or timber project. It is so as to ensure that people
investing in such projects will know where they stand. Up till
now under the policy of our predecessors, they took no interest
in the environmental aspects although constitutionally the Federal
Government certainly has that responsibility and in our belief should
exercise it.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, the Inquiry suggested that which you
have said now... ( unclear)
PRIME MINISTER: I said you will notice from now on, that is, for
new projects. I don't believe that we should disallow projects
which had been allowed to commence under the old policy. But we
want to insist on this from now on.
QUESTION: Most of the causes of Tasmania's economic problems
is generally regarded to be as ( unclear) mainly. And your Government
undertook 17 months ago the revenues. Do you think we are any better
off now than when we were before the last election.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. We have appointed a Royal Commissioner to
enquire into and report upon these matters. I think it was last
November I announced Mr J. F. Nimmo, who had been the senior official
of the Federal Treasury and then became Secretary of the Department
of Housing and is now a member of the Grants Commission should be a
Royal Commissioner to look into the impact of transport costs on the
Tasmanian economy. And one of the things he will look into is the
question which I raised at the meeting I had with John Coates
during the last House of Representatives Campaign in the Town Hall. 
8.
I said that it would be a reasonable thing to expect and to work
towards that freight costs say per mile between Hobart and any of
the mainland capitals should be no greater than freigh costs between
any of those capitals. You depend entirely on shipping for your
heavy exports and accordingly, Mr Nimmo, the Royal Commissioner, is
looking into this very matter. In addition there is Mr Summers,
the former Secretary of the Department of Transport who is a Royal
Commissioner looking into the general aspects of the maritime
industry. And this means that he will be suggesting to us what
improvements need to be made and the laws covering our ports and
our coastal shipping and our international shipping.
QUESTION: Tasmania's two tertiary education colleges are about
a mile away from one another in Hobart. Will a Labor Government
consider establishing an autonomous tertiary education body in
Launceston or in the north or alternatively moving the Advanced
College of Education headquarters to Launceston.
PRIME MINISTER: I would wait for any recommendations on these
matters to come from the two bodies concerned. There is a
universities commission and there is a commission on advanced
education. I wouldn't act without advice from those bodies on
these matters. You will notice that we sought the advice of the
Commission on Advanced Education concerning an additional grant
for the Hobart College of Advanced Education. When we got the
recommendation we immediately acted upon it. I was asked to open
the Hobart College of Advanced Education last year and the
representations were made to me at that time. I said I will have
the Commission on Advanced Education examine it straight away.
They did. When their report came in we acted upon it. Now
similarly I was asked to open a month ago the new Technical College
at Burnie. There again we acted on the recommendations of this
interim committee, the Kangan one, on technical and further
education. The whole of our course of action depends on expert 
advice made available to the public. We've done it in the tertiary
field up till now in Tasmania. I'm sure we'll continue to operate
that way.
QUESTION: It just seems tha the expert advice recommends the
establishment of two academic institutions within a mile of one
another while half of the State's population isn't served upon by
this body, that there must be something wrong with it. Perhaps
a political decision rather than an expert decision.
PRIME MINISTER: This is not a political decision. These
Commissions are not subject to political direction. They recommend
what they like. There can be a political decision. There can be
a political decision later on to reject their advice. We have never
rejected the advice of any of these expert bodies in the educational
field. The Schools Commission, Universities Commission, the
Commission on Advanced Education, the Interim Committee on technical
and further education, we have accepted it in every case. The public
knows what the advice is and we've acted on it. I mean this is a
powerful case, what you say, what you're inferring. Then people
ought to put it to these Commissions.
QUESTION: One of the points is that in the north of the State
we've had disastrous floods there in the last week or so. Will the
Federal Labor Government consider giving disaster aid grants to the
area? PRIME MINISTER: We arranged that two days ago didn't we Mr Barnard?
Mr Barnard and I were discussing this two days ago. We have decided
to give assistance forthwith in the same way as we did when Mr Barnard
was Acting Prime Minister for northern New South Wales and Queensland.
You will get the same range of assistance promptly. Mr Barnard will
give you the details. I'm not sure how much has been published in
this respect.
QUESTION: The Labor budget this year, would it be an adapted
budget or a surplus budget? 
PRIME MINISTER: A surplus one I expect. I don't think a deficit
budget would be appropriate this year. There was a deficit budget
in 1972 and again in 1973 and I don't think it would be appropriate
in 1974.
QUESTION: The amount of growth the Labor Party has been playing
in the Commonwealth is considerably increased. I'll re-phrase that.
You will be cutting back on the rate of growth of expenditure in
certain areas if you do budget with a surplus. Can you give us an
idea of some of those areas which you will be cutting back.
PRIME MINISTER: The Commonwealth Government's expenditure is
rising more slowly than the public expenditure in Australia. Your
own newspaper, The Age, Melbourne, which . I trust is widely read in
Tasmania, had an excellent article by Mr Ken Davidson, its economics
editor today, who used to be formerly in that position with The
Australian. And he pointed out that the percentage of the domestic
product, the gross domestic product, which isbeing spent by the
Commonwealth Government this year is less than the amount being
spent by the Commonwealth Government out . of the gross domestic
product lAst financial year and the financial year before that.
Actually my Government is spending a smaller amount of the gross
domestic product than was spent by the McMahon Government when Mr
Snedden was Treasurer.
QUESTION: But Mr Prime Minister there is no way out of this to
the point that you how you expect to have a surplus without increasing
your revenue than if you cut the growth of expenditure
PRIME MINISTER: Revenue is going to increase. We all expect that.
Mr Snedden says it will. I say it will. There's no dispute between
the contestants that the revenue is going to increase. I don't
expect to reduce the projected expenditure by the Australian Government
in the next budget. I don't know what reductions there would be in
expenditure by any alternative Government. They're not precise in 
11.
this matter. We obviously would not cut projected expenditure in those
fields where my Government has increased expenditure by the Australian
Government namely in Education, Health and Urban affairs.
QUESTION: Will you be able to find a surplus with the doctrine of
the ( unclear) report on hospitals and the bureau of roads
PRIME MINISTER: I expect so. Incidentally on hospitals I mentioned
in Launceston at the Launceston Press Club today; I don't know if you're
all aware of it; that two or three months ago I suggested to the
Premier that we should go halves in the cost of erecting and operating
a new Launceston general hospital and that we should bear the whole of
the cost of finishing and operating the new women's hospital in Hobart.
I point out that under the Constitution since the 1946 referendum the
Australian Government has got the responsibility jointly if you like
with the State Governments of providing hospital benefits and
medical and dental services.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, are you worried about the extent. of the
number of informal votes in the coming election and could this have
an effect on the Labor victory especially in the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm obviously worried at the complexity of the
Senate ballot papers in every State. I don't believe there has ever
been such a large number of candidates for the Senate in any State
as there will be on this occasion and a vote is wasted unless the
voter fills in a number in sequence in every square on the Senate
ballot paper as well as in every square on his House of Representatives
ballot paper. The order in which he fills in the numbers is his
choice but unless he fills in a number in every square in whatever
order he himself wishes then his vote is informal. His time in the
polling booth which will be a very long time on this occasion will
have been wasted. I believe that informal votes will not be as
numerous as they would have been if there had bben election for the 
Senate alone. Now on the last three occasions 1964, 1967 and 1970,
there has been an election for the Senate alone and the percentage of
informal votes has been higher than it used to be on those occasions
such as 1961 and 1958 and 1955 when elections for the Senate took
place on the same day as elections for the House of Representatives.
I believe on this occasion since people will be more polarised
between the major parties, the Labor Party, the Government on one
hand and the Liberal and Country Party coalition sometimes standing
on different tickets as they are here; sometimes on the same ticket
as in New South Wales. There will not be the same dispersion of
votes among candidates or parties who have no colleagues in the House
of Representatives. I think people will probably concentrate more
meaningfully on how they pass their Senate votes this time and I
would expect that they will follow the how to vote cards they receive
from Party supporters at the polling booths.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I wonder if you could read the Labor
Government's provision on Life Assurance. Will the $ 1200 tax
deduction ever be made and does the Government intend to continue
the increase of tax on life assurance which the Life'Officers
Association claimed earlier this week to reduce the bonuses
( unclear)
PRIME MINISTER: That was a thoroughly dishonest advertisement.
People who take out insurance policies knwo very well that the
insurance companies ahve been them over the years handover
fist. I think premiums are at the rate of 4% return on investments.
Everybody knows the life assurance socieits are cleaning up twice
or three times that mmount. They are putting money into city
real estate which gets them very much more than the percentage
that they put into premiums. The fact that premiums are so low,
is not the fault of my government. Premiums were:' far too low under
our predecessors too. But we are intent on insuring that people who 
13.
put their money to life assurance policies, particularly under the
encouragement of fedraal legislation such as the 1,200 dollars per
year which you mention. The people who do that will get a proper
return on their investment. But they wil share in their return
on the very profitable investments, tnat life assurance policies
amek. I would point out that we are also going to stt up an
Australian Government Insurance Office This will write policies
in general, marine, fire insurance, and natural disasters.
I believe people have been very disillusioned in Australia in the
floods which appeared in Qld. and Northern NSW and now in northern
Tasmania, to find that their properties are not covered against
such natural disasters. The only house insurance companeis who
do cover them are those under the War Service Homes Scheme,
the Defence Services Homes Scheme. We have decided to see
therefore that the advantages of the Defence Services Homes Scheme
are made available to everybody who likes to take out a policy with
the new Australian Governmnt Insrance Office. This will save a
very great deal for home owners and home buyers. They have been
getting a very raw deal up until now. And most of the companies
concerned have been wned overseas.
QUESTION: In your earlier answer on a surplas budget, you said you
expected to go combined surplas budget, a with adoption of the
Bureau of Raods Report and also a Unclear.. Can we take it from
that that you will be accepting those reports and also do you agre
with budgeting the surplas ought to have an effect on reducing
inflation. PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I think to budget for a surplas or a balance
budget, still more if you budget for a surplas, wouldcounter inflation.
As to the Bureau of Roads Report, we are discussingthat with the States 
14.
and with local government. It is the first time that there has ever
been a discussions about the Commonwealth's assistance for roads
with local government. The Bureau of Raods suggested it and we have
been having these discusions. The discussions naturally have been
suspended after the oncoming of the election. As I said in my
policy spech they will be resumed after the election. Meantime
however, we have decided to bear the whole cost of the national
highways proposals by the Bureau of Roads. Not 80% but 100%.
And as far as Tasmania is concerned of course, few will remain in
the preferrd positions as it has always been in regards to these
grants. That is the Bureau's recommendations for Tasmania will be
confirmed. All that we have decided otherwise is to bear the whole
cost of the national highways scheme. ( QUESTION UNELEAR)
That has not been considered, but I expect it will be accepted.
I go further than the Sax Report as I have pointed out to you.
with what I have said already about the Launceston general and
the Hobart's womens hospital. Incidentally one doesn't know
what needs to be done in Victoria. Because the Victorian government
wouldn't co-operate with the Sax Committee. The Hospitals and
Charities Commission in Vic. was prevented from giving evidence,
or supplying information to the Sax Committee on hosptials and
health services. We will use our own constitutional responsibilities.
As I sais, since 1946 the Australian Parliament has been entitled
to provide medical and dental services and in Victoria where the
State Government has not co-operated we will procide health centres
and in some of the areas particularly the outer suburbs where there
are not satisfactory hospital facilities available for the families
in that area we will build the hospitals.
QUESTION: First, when you are teturned with a stronger vote in
both chambers of P arliament, will you take urgent steps to improve
the voting system by giving an optional method on'preferential 
and secondly, will you take more urgent steps to make it impossible
ever again for any party combination to indulge in this
subservive conscriosy against the Parliamentary system.
PRIME MINISTER: The last one would be largely overcome
if the first of those referendums we have put in is carried.
you will remember hhat that referendum provides for there to be
an election for the whole of the half of the Senate whenever
there is an election for the House of Reps. This is till more
urgent now because on 18 May the Senators who are elected will
take office from 1 July 1973. The House of Reps. members
elected will take office for three years from the day that the
House meets which will be July 1974. So there will be the same
position that there wa in 1951 where the Senators dated from 1
July 1950 and they are there for e had to be another elec tion
for the Senate in about April or Mya 1953 whereas the members
of the House of Representatives didn't have to come up for election
until April or May 1954. So it is very important to have the
sycronisation of the two houses and that being the case if on
any future occasion, the Senate were to refuse supply to the
government which had am majority in the House of Reps the House of
Rpes could go to the people and the senior half of the Senate would
also automatically go to the people and the junior half of the
Senate will have their term reduced by that amount. They would
be going on 3 years time instead of whatever time was still left
ot them. So that position would be largely cured if that first
referendum has a majority of YES votes in four of the States,
as well as in the whole country. Now certainly the Senate ballot
paper ought to be simplifire. It ought to be enough to cast a
valid vote if the vote fills in as many sqaures as there are
vacancies in the Senate. If for instance as usually happens, 
16.
there are five Senators to be elected, then it ought to be a valid
vote if the voter fills in numbers 1 to 5 against 5, six if there
is to be elected, against 6. The maximum is 18 at the moment,
if he fills in 10. The present position makes for the most
complicated ballot paper in the world. Then you mention about
optional preferential. That is not an own preferred form of
voting, in Australia in the 60 years or more fedeally, we have
had the preferential voting system. It puts a premium on
complexity. It ought to be possible in my view for people to
indicate their preferences among all or as many as they like
with the candidates they put up. That is if a person believes
his first choice mightn't win, well let him number 2 against the
person who he would rather get in if his first man can'
t get in. But my party has no declared policy on it. It used
to suppo rt the idea of first past the post. You just put x next
to the name of the person who you wanted to get in. And you couldn't
indicate a preference. But that was taken out of the party's policy
at the conference before last I think. And the matter is now in
the melting pot. My own personal preference is the optional
preferential. That is let the person's vote be valid ifx even if he
puts an x against one name of a single candidate. If however he
puts 1,23, whatever it is against as many candidates as he likes
or all the candidates then let hsi preference be adhered to.
QUESTION: What order of surplas to you contemplate?
PRIME MINISTER: I can't anticipate that at this stage.
QUESTION: Do you think
PRIME MINISTER: At least a balanced budget. 
17.
PRIME MINISTER: I am not proposing to have a deficit budget this
year as we had in our first one and Mr. Snedden's last one. 



TrT P rI S
IL i.' D CASINEY
PRIME MINISTER 2 May 1974
NAT4W~ tWAGE ' CASE
The P~ rime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today the Governmient
would co-oper-ate fully in the conference to be called by the
President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, Mr.
Justice Moore-, to discuss wage fixation measures and automatic
cost of living ad~ usttnents. He welcomed the call by Mr. Justice
Moore in yes'terdayls National Wage Case judgement for a conference
of parties to the case to discuss new wage fixation measures and
wage indexation. Ma-y parties before the National Wage hearing including
the Australian Government had expressed dissatisfaction with the
present wage erivirorartent. A conference as procposed by Mr. Justice
M~ oore could be vAluable in settling this dissatisfaction.
The overall decisions on the total wage and uminimum wage.
for men and women and the first step towards cost of living
adjustments vindicated the positive intervention by the Australian
Government in sharp contrast to the negativism of previous Liberal/
Country P~ arty administrations.
Mr. Whitlam in particular welcomed the increases awarded
to all people men and women on the minimum wage. He regretted
however that subm~ issions seeking the automatic adjustment of wages
in line with the cost of living had not been accepted at the present
time. A positive decision now about indexation would almost
certainly have led to a moderation in futxire trade union demands
for wage increases. JIe said he hoped that the introduction of such
a system would follow the conference.
The decision on the minimum wage was completely in line
with the social priorities of the Labor Government. it recogn~ ised
that there were many cases of genuine need and distress among
many wage earners in the community. 
-2-
The decision to bring the mlinimumn wage for women up
to the level determined for men was an historic one. It was
an importan~ t step towards the implementation of the principle
of equal pay for work of equal value, which the Labor Government
has consistently supported. The Government had strongly supported
the A. C. T. U. claim for an equal mtinim'umn wage for women.
The Prime Minister welcomed the vote of confidence in
the strength of the econom~ y which this part of the Commission's
decision indicates.
In their discussions on recent economic trends, the
Commission notes the strong position of the Australian economy
and draws particular attention to the strength of both consumer
demand and private capital expenditure.
While noting the arguments put by all parties, including
the Australian Government# regarding the importance at t-he moment
of inflation, the Commission indicated that none of the parties
to the case had questioned the appropriateness of the government's
counter-inflationary policies. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR 1WPRIM'E MIiNISTER F
PERTH-LUNCNEON-MEETING 2 KAY 1974
Or ALL T HE ISSUES THAT HAVE EMERGED DURING
THIS CAMPAIGN THE GREATEST OF THEM INVOLVES THIS BASIC
QUESTION: WILL AUST. RALLANS CONTINUE TO CONTROL THEIRj
OWN ECONOMIC DESTINY OR ARE W'E TO BECOME TENANTS IN
OUR OWN LAND? SEVENTEEN MONTHS APO IPUT TO THE AuSTRALIAN
PEOPLE CERTAIN PROPOSALS DESIGNED TO REVERSE THE
INSIDIOUS PROCESS BY WHICH THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT
ALLOWED CONTROL OF OUR ECONOMIC DESTINY TO PASS OUT
OF OUR HANDS. THE POLICIES OF THE OPPOSITION IN THIS 1
tRE SPECT SHOW NO REAL CHANGE, THIS ELECTION M1AY WELL B3E
THE LAST OCCASION ON wHicH AUSTRALIANS ARE ABLE TO CHOOSE
THEIR FUTURE COURSE, ' TO CONSERVE AN INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC
INHERITANCE FOR OUR CHILDREN AND OUR CHILDREN' S CHILDREN$ 
-2-
WH-EN THE AUSTRAL IAN LAnOR PARTY WAS [ N Oo p IPOSITION
PREPARED AND PRESENTED CERTAIN POLICIES BASED ON A BELIEF.
AT AUSTRALIANS; COULD, AND INDEED MUST,. CONTROL THEIR'BASIC
NDUSTRIES AND RESOURCES. LET' ME SAY TI[ S,, WE HAVE NOW HAD
/ EXPERI-ENCE OF GOVERNMENT., WfE.. A1AVE HAD ' ACCESS TO THEEXETS
AND THE INFORMATION AVAILABLE 1TO' GOVERNMENTS I AND ALL* OF'A
* MY-MINISTERS, HAVE BROADENED OUR EXPERIENCE, EXTENDED OUR
KJOLDGEAND HORIz'ON31 IY C fIWCrO0SN77 -I VA TT ER, AND
UNF I TED CONV ICTI ON* OF MYW tABINET AND OV MY PARTY, HAVE BEEN
A MEDAND STRENGTIHENED. AUSTRALIANS MUST-PRESERVE OUR
ECONOMIC INDEPENDENC-IE. WE MUST-ftEJECT. THE SEDUCTIONS OF THEoujcK
DEAL AND RESIST THE 7FMPTATIONS TO PROJF'IT' AT THE EXAPENSE
OF-OUR. CHILDREN'S INHERITANCE, WE HAVE FOUGHT. FOR OUR. 3-
INDEPENDENCE IN SEVERAL WARS, WHAT ARMS COULD NOT CONQUER,
MUST NOT BUY'i, I AEHERE TO WE STERN AUSTRALIA BECAUSE IT IS'
H THATIN RECENT Y EAR Ir THE CHO01CE IHAVE DESCRIBED HAS BEEN
MOST ACUTE# ICAME HERE PARTICULARLY TO CHALLENGE THE MOST
INSIDIOUS OF ALL PROPAGANDA IMPOSED I N THIS DEBATE. OUR OPPONENTS
H4AVE SWALLOWED THE MULTINATIONAL LIE : THAT WITHOUT UNRESTRICTED
FOREIGN INVESTMENT, CUR DEVELOPMENT IS-RESTRICTED. IDON ' T
ACCEPT THIS PROPOSITION AND IDON'T BE L IEVE AUSTRALIA COULD
1AFFORD TO ACCEPT THIS PROPOS ITIO101 w. 
' I 3-
THE QUESTION IS NOT W4HETHER WE PERMIT OVERSEAS CAPITAL
TO DO LESS THE QUESTION IS WHETHER WE CAN ENSURE THAT
AuSTRALIAN CAPITAL DOES MORE, OUR Ot1JECTIVE SHOULD BE
TO MOSILISE THE RESOURCES OF OUR PEOPLEj HUMAN AND CAPITAL,
AND THE POWERS OF OUR GOVERNMENITS, 90TH STATE AND FEDERAL,
WE'MUST SIOP THE ABILITY OF MULTINATIONALS TO DIVIDEt AND
O1ULE OUR STATE GOVERNMENTS AND PRIVATE COMPANIES#
WESTERN AUSTRALIANS SHOULD KEEP * IN MIND THE FACT
THAT M4ANY OF THE CORPORATIONS WITH WHICH YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT
DEALS HAVE A BUDGET TEN. TIMES THE BUDGET OF YOUR STATE
GOVERNMENT, AuSTRALIANS MUST UNITE 1O MOBILISE THEIR
RESOURCES'. N4o AUSTRALIAN COMPANY ALONE CAN DEAL ON THE
LEVEL OF MULTI-NATIONAL CORPORATIONS. NO AUSTRALIAN
* STATE ACTING ALONE CAN DEAL-WITH ' THEM, ONLY THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT HAS THE RESOURCES AND THE STATURE TO DO SO,
U WE'MU-ST MOB* ILI* S'E OUR RESOURCES AND OUR SKILLS.
THERE ARE FIELDS WHERE THE COMMONWEALTH ACTING ALONE CAN BE
MOST EFFECTIVE. THERE ARE FIELDS WHERE THE COMMONWEALTH
CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVE IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE S) TATES.
THERE ARE FIELDS WHERE THE COKMONWEALTH CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVE
IN PARTNERSHIP HITH PRIVATE CAPITAL, F]
F ~ j~~ jft
12 1 Ar
I I
I t t y-, jjr: 2~ R
4 U.
-v
U
I;-I'
ii
Ii II
' I 
145
WHAT WE MUST DO AS-A NAT ION 3 S TO DEVE LOP THE POLICIES AND
ESTABLISH THE INSTITUTIONS WHICH VAKE SUCH ACTION AND SUCH 1
PARINERSHIP WORK, I'l
OF THE MANY MEASURES FRUSTRATED AND BLOCKED BY
THE SENATE, TWO OF THE MO ST' SI1GNIF I CANT INVOLVE THIS
~~ ESTION, THE OPPOSITION HAS FRUSTRATED OUR PLANS TO
BROADEN THE SCOPE OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT ~ U~
SRP ORATION AND TO ESTABLISH THE PETROLEUM ANDMNLSf. kL
THORITY, OUR OPPONENTS' RESISTANCE TO THESE MEASURES l^
TO PROMOTE AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP FORMS PART OF A PATTERN o F
ENCOURAGEMENT OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP WHICH THEY SET WHEN IN
GOVERNMENT, THEY ASSERT THAT AUSTRALIAN PRIVATE CAPITAL
SHOULD BE LEFT UNIMPEDED.
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT PREPARED TO LEAVE THIS
SIC ISSUE IN THE HANDS OF THE COMPANIES AND THE MEN WHOr
KNONE OF THE RISKS NECESSARY TO OBTAIN FOR AUSTRALIA
A LARGER SHARE IN OWNERSHIP, CONTROL AND DEVELOPMENT OF
OUR NEW RESOURCES. UNDER OUR PREDECESSORS, SIXTY-EIGHT PER
CENT OF OUR ENERGY RESOURCES FELL INTO THE HANDS OF FOREIGN
COMPANIES, NOTHING CAN CONVINCE ME 7HAT THIS WAS NECESSARY. 71
VutlS tt~ f* S fl 
' I~ r CAPACITY OF THESE COMPANIES TO SHOW INITIA7IVE AllD
ENTERPRISE /% ND TO0 T AKE R ISKS CAN ONLY B E STRENGTHENED B~ Y.
MOL1i. N IUSTRALIAN RESOUIRCES AND PO WERS lNHcIs, I s wHY
WE NEE D TO EXPAND T H E ROLE OF THE AhSTRALIAN' INPDUSTRY
lkVCLOPMFmT CORPORAl ION AND ESTABLISH THE-Pu TROL EllM A ND
MINERALs AUlTHORITY. SNI C(-WE WERF ELECTED 10 GOVERNMENTW4E H-AVE.'
ALRrADY SHOWN 711E ADVANTAG-ES O F SUCH AC: TION FOR THE
F IRST TIME I N OUR HISTORY 11W-AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS*
INIERVENED P. Y SUPERV I I ON OF iNENAL EXP'ORTS TO S71, GHE
THlE BAfKGAININ( c-POWER OF OUR EXPORTERS, WE WFRE DETERMINED
THAT OUR RESOURCES WOULD NOT t SOLD ON TIfI E CHEAP. N
LONG~ ER CAN F OR E I GN BUYERS PLAY THE GAME OF DIVIDE AND RULE
T1O0 XTkA CT LOWER PRICE S FROQM OUR COM PA Nl tS~ AN D COCSION-S
FROM OUR STATE GOVERNMENTS. lIfE Or'OS IT ION s POLICY: IS
P OMINOUSLY SILENT IN THIS RESPECT. WILL THEY ABOLISH OUR
EXP'ORT CONTROL REGUJLAT IONS?.
THlE ACTIONS OF THE USTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAVE
RESULTED 114 SIGNIFICANT INCREASE, IN THE PRICE OF OUR' ) RON
ORE AND COAL EXPORTS. THE mET ULTOF, TI-S POLICY PAS
MEANT AN EXTRA $ 67 MILLION P ER A NNU M IN INCOME FROM IRON ORE
AND AN, EXTRA $% MILL10ON PEP, ANNUM IN iXPOfT INCOME FROM COAL. N
V ' I I
r .4-
j; A,
I 1'* i. 
j
IN THIS tvAY ALL JAUS7RALIAfIS INEF IT F R TPE COrJCE NTRAI I CJHs
OF OUR BARGA) NIN6 POW'ER, WIE MUcST UNITE IN I HF SAME MANNER
TO fPRCSFR 01H-4N rc HI P AND CO1NTROL Or 0 UR INDU*&gt; TRI Es
AND RESOURCES.-
DEEP OFI SMHOSCKR AT HTHTEW SNAETNIOANSARLL ASSCSANADEA. YL SREENVSEAEL ED BYC
W THE FITZGERALD REPORT, MIANY WESTERN AUSTRALIANS PROfA13LY~ 4
BELIEVED THAT 114CI R MINFRAL INDUSTRY WAS PAYING SIG; NIFICANT V
AMPOUNTS IN TAXATION, SOME OF YOU ALLFGED THAT THIS MONEY
WAS BEING DRAINED OFF T0 711E OTHER Si,-fss L n ME MAKE
T1IS CLEAR IF THFERE WAS ANY DRAIN OF 7HE WEALTH PRODUCED
IN WFSTERN AuSIRALIA 1T DID NOT GO TO THlE OTHER STATES;
IT WENT OVERSEAS* H FITZGFRALD REPORT REVEALS THAT OVER
THE LAST SIX YEARS THE IMINING COMPANIES MADE $ 2,072 MILLON
IN PROFIT, THCY RECEIVED FROM THE AuSTRALIAN TAXPAYER i
$ 341 MILL110N IN SUB~ SIDIES AND PADOL,$~ bMILLONITA
D AND ROYALTIES % MILLION LESS, AND SIXTY PER CENT OF
THIESE PkROF TS ACCRUE TO OVErSE. Zf* A0-INVESTORS, INDEED, THE
ANNUAL AMOUNT Orr PROFITS'PAYA13LE OVERSCAS fROSEL SIXFOLD IN
THE F IVE YEARS tEDING JUNE. 197 3. 
TtiE AUSTRAL I AN GOVERNMhENT IS OU! T1[) T HF
CON~ T INUAT I O' OF S I 611 I F I CANT CAP ITAL INV[ STMENT [ fI M[ N[ ING.
lii IN'E STiFNT SHOULD 1\ OT INVOLVE Lb S S E. 1T0 THE AI Of IAL
REVFNU1, NOR SHOULD. 1T PR IMAR ILY PROiMOTE FORE I Gf
PROr ITA) I. t17Y, AM AWARE orF THE BENEF I TS'IHA THE MI14 1 NG
INDUSTRY HAS 1DOL'GHT TO THEL Fsr. 11 WHOLE THRUISI of-MY
ARGUMENT IS THAT 14SIERN AU,' TRALIANS-I-IKL' ALL AUSl) TRAL IANSJ
SHUD HAVE BENEFITED MORE FROM THIS' DEVELOPMENTO WlE HAVE
-NOT TAKEN FLL1. ADVANTAGE OF OUR RESOURCES IN TERMS OF
PROM01 ING THlE WELFARE OF THE A uSTRALIAN PEOPI F 141 INTEND
TO 110 S0 I N THE FUTURE,.*.
S S 4
4 f. 
14F HAVE ALfREADY ANNOUNCED OUR 114TENTION TO EXTEND
AND STRENGTHEN THE FOREIGN TAKEOV/ ERS LEGISLATION,
THIS IS ONE Or THE MEASURES WHICH WA S FRUSTRATED BY THE
OBSTRUCTFION OF -THE %. ENATE, W4E PROPO. SE AND I ANNOUNCE -I
HERE FOR THE FIRST TIME"-THREE BASIC EXTENSIONS OF THIS
LEGISLATION1 THE MOST SERrOUS OMT-oioN IN THE* PRESENT ACT
I S THAT I T APPLIES ON[ LY TO THE PURCHASE Or SHAPES.
IT DOES NOT PREVENT AN OVERSEAS3 COMPANY BUYING ALL OR PART
OF THE ASSETS OF AN AuSTRALIAN COMPANY AS DISTINCTK.
rROM THE SfAREHOLD INGSS T HIS I S A MAJOR LOOPHOLE.
THE EFFECT OF AUYING SHARES OR BUYING ASSFTS IS THE SAME,
Ta Ecr)! THE LFGISLATION IS THAT
IT DOES NOT INCLUDE COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION RE. QUIREMENTS
FOR [ OREIGN COMPANIES PROPOSING TO MAKE SUCH A TAKEOVER
OF ASSETS, WE WILL iNCLUDEF SUCH PROVISIONS# 
' 7'
WE PROPOSE A THIRD AMENDMENT,
THE LEGISLATION DOES NOT EXTEND TO COMPANIES At-READY UNDER
FOREIGN CONTROL BUT IN WHICH THERE IS A SIGHIFICANT, MINORITY
AbSTRALIAN INTEREST, THFRE HAVE' BEEN A NlJMP[ VR OF-OCCASiONG
W4HEN THE AoST RAL IAN EQUITY fIN A VENTURE I IAS BPE[ EN DIMIIN1 SHED
BY A SHARE ISSUE OR A'SHARE SVAP, 1WE P ROP OSE THAT;
t -ON CERTAIN CRITERIA, ANY AITIMPT TO DIMIN1-1i A SIGMIF ICANT
AI sRAL IA14 INTEREST; EVENIF IT IS A lnOl-CONTROL LINMC
INTEREST, SHOULD DL MADE EXAMINABLE IN1 ACCORDANC. E WITH
THE PROCEDURES DEVELOPED BY THlE FOREIGN TAKFEcV[ R COtMMIrTEE
CONTROL OF FO0R EI G f TAKEOVERS Is0O NE ASPFCT OFI
MOICY DESIGNED TO MAX I m i s AusTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL.
TUE GOVERNMENT IN ITS At'M IN I STRAT IVE ARRANGEMENTS, 14AS CESTABL ISt
A BROADER SYSTEM OF SURVEILLANCE OF FORFEIGN INVESTMENT PROPOSAL_' i_...
NOT INVOLVING DIRECT ACQUISITION OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESSES.
' ANNOUNCED IN MY POLICY SPEECH TH-AT VIE WHOULD FORMALISE THESC
ARRANGEMENTS, WE WILL ESTABLISH A BROAD sCREENING, PROCESS1
WHICH WILL-COVER BO0TH THE FOREIGN TAKECOVERS PROCEDURES,
AS AMENDEDi AND NEW DIRECT FOREIGN I NVE STXENT. ANY. NEW
FOREIGN COMPANY PROPOSING TO SeET UP IN AoSTRALIA'FOR THE
FIRST TIME, OR ANY' FORE'IGN COMPANY PROPOSING TO EXTEND ITS
INVESTMENT INTO NElq AREAS, WILL BE REOUIRED TO APPL* Y TO 111E
Y AD HE ETILS* OF THE PROPOSED -INVESTMENT WILL BE-
,4EAURY ND T DET 04 
7 1 sIENN RCS JLElSUETA N
FRANC HE SR E ENIC ND DOEVSL L H SRTE THATD ANRE
' ROPOSIN FEGTL IHNVESTGE WICHSIS POLICIES CNORAX
AVIDACE OVERAR ALP ATIODAL tTIE GUDZ NE THEIE SE
WHIC HWILL BECEOE MOR CULA TENTOR EXPRIEC GRPOST
RINCOMPANIES ALREADY OPERFAT ! NG ' AN AUSTRALIA WILL
E EXPECTED TO CONFORM, W~ ITH THESE GUIDELINES PROORESSIVELY.
IN TH1S WAY WE WILL ENSURE TVAT THE FOREIGN INVESTMtNT
TH~ AT HAS ALREADY BEEN ALLOWED IL COFR T H
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL INTEREST AS WELL AS ANY NEW FOREIGN
INVESTMENT THAT 1S ALLUKID.-
No AusTRALIAN, NO MATTER HOW STRONGLY( HE BEL 1EVES
IN 11AE RAPID DEVCLOPMENT OF OUR l) UIRAL RESOUC
StIOULD PAY FOR THE PRI'/ lLE. G O) F liii 11,16 LXPLOITED.
THE MESSAGE OF THlE F112GEWILD REPORT IS CLEAR,
WE HAVE SOLD OURI'; ELVES SHORT IN OUR RECENT MIN) ERAL DEVELOPMENTr
Tal PEOPLE WHO HAVE SUFFERED MOST FROMi THE FAILUJRE OF THE
PREVIOU1S GOVERNMENT TO CkT TI FL I2FITS For AUJSTRALIANS9
ARE THE PEOPLE OF THIS STAII, WHERE MINEVAL t'E-VEl.. OPMENTSl
HAVE BEEN THE MOST DRAMATIC. ThE FA . ILURC I( O MAXIMI . SE
OUR REVENUE IS A FAULT OiF THE LAST FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AS
WELL. AS THE ft. CSENT STATE IGD V ERN K[ INT
THE REVE14UE wHict TrHE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
RECEIVE) t. VEN FPOh~ THE DECISIONS AI. PSEAPY ' TA KE No WILL ENABLE
US TO COMWVf CONSIDERABLE ADOUNTS TO0 EXPELORATION FOR
FURT11ER RESOURCES AND THE DFVELOPMElT OF THOSE RESOURCESBy
itHE AUSTRALIAN fOVERNMENT DIRECTLY AND 1IN PARTNERSHIP
WITli PRIVAt AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL. MUCHi OF THIS EXPENDITURE
ON EXPLORAT ION AND D) EVELOPMENT VMLL OF NECESSITY BE
rJIRCCTED TO' THE GREAT MINERAL RESOURCES IN THE wEST. OnfLY
IF THlL ' AusTRALIAN GOt-VERNMIENT PLAYS A DIRECT ROLE IN Tlic
PROVISION AND MORILIGAT ION OF CAPITAL WILL OUR RESOURCES
ttE DEVELOPED' IN A MANNER CONS I ST) ENT WII1H MAXl1MW~ AIST R AL-I At
CONT ROL AND 0OWNERSHIP. K] ' 1' S .1
iv
Q~ A. A.. 74
-A ' I
ñ 11 
THE R~ E VEFL A I) N S OF 7HC FIT ? GFRALD. kEPORT APE
pis iOWEVEtR ' T I S C! FAR FP.' M THEI P RECENT
STITE IENITS THAT THE-GUL TY MEN COF THE: PR~ EVIOUS GOV/ ERNMENT
TtHE INEi WHO At. LO'IED T F S S 1 -TUIAT 1O TO EMiERGE AAP . E
UN RElf-E N TANT THXE Y HAVE NO PLAN -NO I NT E. N 7' ON -TO
* REDUICE FORET1GN CONTROL OF OUR RESOURCES, OiN THE ATF
OF TAXAT 1O0N CON~ CE S ONNP N D LS0~ Slt THEY CONTINUE TO i~
~ CT AND TALK AS THE APOLOGISTS-OF FOREF IGN 111ING INTERESTS,
HAUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE THE RIGHT TO KNOW HOW T HE
EXTRAM INARY CRUSANC, r -) LprWt HICH MADE
AuST RAL IANS3 PAY FOR THE E$ RIVIL EGE OF BEING; E\. DL01T E D3
W4E WILL E N' 01.0A GE AND 1) EV71LOP onR M f,!" AL7
WINJ( JSTRJ-E* S BULT WE ARE EQUALL YD, k" 1NF TO MAXIMISE
THE CONTR [ ULT I CN THE SE rNDUSTR IE orMAAKE TO OUR NATIONAL
' F AT H ' A HAVE TODAY SIGNE1L1 A REFFRENCF TO THE D S RE
# Ass! ISTANCrE CO MM I S t' ASKING ! T TO INQ:) UIPE ANI' REPORT ON
THE EFF-ECT 0 r T A XATNIC 0~ ICE Sf ON SSA ND R0 LT7 IE ON THE,
DE V EL C) PMLN T A-N D EF F I C .1IVNY O THE PETROLEUM IAit N IING
I L ST R IE A i T 0 A D'yIIS E F~ H P% A ND N1W14H AT WAY0. WE
SHOULD OFFER ASSISTANCE T0 r'R IMPOSE R0Y A L T I , S ON THEE
411t J" 
S. t-THE FITZGERAL) REPORT REVEALtED TIlE SEERITY OF
THF LOSSES AND LOST OPPoRtU! ITIE I IHAT UUCO-ORDINATFL)
AND t4BUSINES5LIKE POLICY-MKAIN IN MI! lftljUG OPERATIONS
HAS ALREADY INFLICTED ON 09, THE REPORT OF THE COMMISSIOI 1
WILI ENSUIRE 1110 THE LOSSES WlILL. NOT CONTI NUE AND MY -i
GOVCRNMENT WILL CNSORE THAT THE GREAT LBENEFITS ACCRUIG
fiRM THF IEVELOPM'ENT Or OUR NATURAL RE8OirPCES ouR
NATURAL HERITAGE WILL PE SHAPIEr FAIRLY BY ALL
S -AUSTrALiANS I1N THI-1E INTERESTS OF ALL AUSTRALIANS.-



4) AUSTRALIAL
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 245
2 May 1974
EQUAL PAY FOR WOMEN
The Australian Government warmly applauds the decision of the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to bring the minimum wage for
women under Federal awards up to the level of that determined for men.
This is a significant step forward in the application of the
principle of economic remuneration for work of equal value to the award
wage structure of this country.
The Labor Government has consistently supported the adoption of
this basic human rights principle. This is an indication of the Labor
Government's consistent support for wage justice for women. It supported
the principle of equal pay for work of equal value when it sought
successfully to re-open the National Wage and Equal Pay Cases immediately
on coming to office in December 1972.
It applied the principle immediately to its own female employees
rather than phasing it in over two and a half years as allowed by the
Commission in that case.
It amended the Conciliation and Arbitration Act to delete the
discriminatory reference to a minimum wage for adult males.
It strongly supported the ACTU application for an equal minimum
wage for women.
Today's decision by the Commission is a further significant step
to the Government's goal of ratifying the International Labor Organisation-A
Equal Pay Convention ( No. 100) of 1951. There is now full compliance with
the requirements of the Convention in those areas where the Australian
Government can take action.
Three States Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania have
agreed to ratification, and consultation is continuing as a matter of
urgency with the other three States to obtain their agreement to
ratification without delay. Convention No. 100 is the only I. L. O.
human rights convention which Australia has yet to ratify, and the
Australian Government is treating its early ratification as a matter of
top priority to confirm at the international level Australian acceptance
of basic human rights for women.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
BACKGROUND: The Prime Minister is expected to make a fuller comment
on the wage decision later today. 



K. u MU I __ M
2 May 1974
S MTNIIMUM WAGE FOR FEMAL ES
( 3The Prime iMinister, Mr. Whitiam, said that the Au stUr alian
Government warmly applauded the decision of the Conciliation andl
SArbitra:: tion Commission to bring the minimum w. ac -e for wo2Ycflr uncCr
federal awards up to the level of that determined for men.
Q " This is a significant step forward in the application
of the principle of economic,; c remunera-tzion ror workP of: ecual value
to the award wage structCure of" this country.
" The Labor Government has cons1stentl y sup~ ported th e
adoptL'ion of" this basic hum-,-an righIt s p.~ Cil. Th_) i s iLs an
indication of the Labor Governmen-ti' s consistent-support f or -Ja0
" It sutpor* L. Cd the principle of equal pa vjt:~ Cr C
value when it sought successfully to re-c-Pen theNain! cecrJ
caesrme.) n comin -o o:-o 7e~ CY in
' 3tmpioyees -thapransi ng It in ova:-two an a half vears
oas allowed by the Cori-amision in that case.
" It amended the ConciliLation and Arbitration Act to d&amp; e,-t
the discriminatory reference t* o a minimioum wage for adult -males.
" It strongly supported the ACTU aolication for an equa.
minimnum wage for women.
Today's decision bv~ the Coimmissaion is a further significant
step to the Government's goal of-L rat-ifying I. L. O. 7qual Pay
Convention ( No. 100) of 1951. There iLs now -full ccoliance wt
the requirements of the convention in those areas wa,; cre the
Australian Government can take actCion.
" Three States ( Victoriai, South Au-stralIia nnd Tasmana) hv
agreed to ratification, and, consul'Cation is continuincr as amzo
ofr urgency witCh the other three Sikts to obtain their areet3
ratification Without delay. Conventio-n No. 100 is the only lLO
lHum-an Rights Convntio whi* ch TAust ralia is yc t-to rati'-_ fv, and
Au~ stralian Gover-nn is treating. ct arly : ratificaL-on as a ar
O~ cn , r " the international level&gt; zta i. r
or women. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 246
2 M4AY 1974
APPOINTMENT OF ASSOCIATES TO INDUSTRIES
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today two
further appointments of Associates to the Industries Assistance
Commission. They are Mr Sinclair, for the inquiries in
relation to EDP equipment and the Aircraft Industry, and
Mr D. F. Livingstone, for the inquiry in relation to the
Production of Gold.
Mr Sinclair is a director of Australian Paper Manufacturers
Ltd. and deputy chairman of Hecla-Rowe Ltd and Hecron Ltd. He
is also deputy chairman of the Australian Tourist Commission
and has been a consultant to the Prime Minister's Department
for the past seven years. Mr Livingstone is a geologist
and mineral economist with experience in the Bureau of Mineral
Resources and as a private consultant.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



-',) AUSTRALIA&amp;/
PRIME MINISTER 3 May 1974
APPOINTMENT OF SIR JOHN4 CRAWFORD TO INDUSTRIES
RSSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
Sir John Crawford had been appointed an Associate of the
Industries Assistance Commission, and will preside at the
Commission's inquiries into rural reconstruction and the dairy
industry. Mr Whitlam expressed appreciation for this further
service to the community by an outstanding public servant whose
dedication and objectivity have enabled him to advise successive
Australian Governments, whatever their political persuasion.
Mr Whitlam also said that the appointment of Sir John,
a'man with very considerable insight and experience in rural
industry matters, demonstrates in a practical way the benefits
which flow from the flexible structure of the Commission. This
flexibility makes it possible to appoint men o-f. eminence, or with
special insights, for the Commission's inquiries which is
especially important in cases where their other commitments
prevent them from accepting a permanent appointment with the
Commission. The Prime Minister said that this method of
appointment would be of considerable use in involving men of the
highest calibre from the business world in the work of the
Commission.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



, AU STHA LIA-,
PRIME MINISTER 3 May 1974
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, MP.
DARTMOUTH DAM
The River Murray Commission in the immediate future
will have to make a decision about letting the main contract for
the Dartmouth Dam, which will be the means of adding very
substantially to the water available to South Australia in the
years to come. The Australian Government had last year suggested that
there could be some , merit in slowing down the rate of construction
of-this project. Over the last few months, however, an appraisal
of the overall impact of the project has shown that it would not
be appropriate to slow down or defer the work. The appraisal will
be published as soon as printed. The Australian Government will
therefore facilitate an early decision by the River Murray
Commission. The Australian Government still feels the grave concern
over the management of the River Murray which I expressed at my
meeting with the Premiers of South Australia, New South Wales and
Victoria early last year. Indeed my concern has increased, since
I do not believe it can be said that the progress made since that
meeting has been such as to provide much cause for satisfaction.
I would hope that as work goes on at top speed to build the great
storage in the upper catchment of the Murray, there will be a similar
sense of urgency associated with studies that will pave the way for
the most effective use and management of this river and its associated
land resources. I hope also that there will be a serious and
concerted effort to reach agreement on the means whereby the
River Murray Commission, in accordance with modern concepts of water
management, can have a really effective role in the development
and management of the River Murray.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



, AUI'AI. I AL'-
PRIME MINISTER 3 MAY 1974
CORAL SEA WEEK GUEST OF HONOUR 1974
The Prime Minister announced today that Admiral Bernard
A. Clarey, USN ( retired), former Commander of the Pacific fleet,
will come to Australia for the Coral Sea Week Celebrations this
year. Mr Whitlam said that Admiral Clarey will be accompanied
by Mrs Clarey and that their official itinerary will begin in
Sydney on Monday 6 May. Admiral and Mrs Clarey will then visit
Canberra, Brisbane, Melbourne and Hobart. If time permits visits
to Western Australia and Adelaide will be included.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
BACKGROUND Admiral Clarey was born 4 May 1912. He graduated from
the U. S. Naval Academy in 1934. He served in Australia from both
Perth and Brisbane in submarines during World War II. He operated
in the Coral Sea area while serving in the submarines
" Dolphin" " Amberjack" and " Peto". From 1943-45 he was Commanding
Officer of the submarine " Pintado".
In his later career Admiral Clarey was Commander
2nd Fleet Atlantic 1966-67, Vice Chief of Naval Operations
1968-70 and Commander Pacific Fleet 1970-72. 



PRIME MINISTER May 1974
OFFER OF ASSISTANCE TO QUEENSLAND FOR
HOUSING RESTORATION WORK
The Prime Minister said today that he was concerned
over reports of delays being experienced by the Queensland
authorities in obtaining tenders for housing restoration works
approved under the flood relief arrangements between the Queensland
and Australian Governments.
The Australian Government, therefore, had offered the
Queensland Government assistance, by way of an Australian Government
volunteer work force of some 70 employees, to assist with flood
restoration work. The Prime Minister added that the volunteers
cbver the full range of building tradesmen and would be provided
by the Australian Department of Housing and Construction for a
period of at least three months. The work to be undertaken by
this team was likely to comprise restoration of houses in particular
defined areas in the Brisbane metropolitan area or possibly in the
City of Ipswich. The Prime Minister said that if this offer is acceptable
to the Queensland Government then the appropriate arrangements
would be decided between officers of the two Governments quickly
in order that work could be commenced as soon as possible.
CANBERRA. A. C. T_ 



Z7
. Jj\ AUSTRA IAL May 1974
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE -NATIONAL BANK SURVEY
The Survey of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and the
National Bank discloses a sound, healthy and growing economy.
Employment is high, profitability is high, trading is good
and business expectations for the future are that this situation
will continue. The survey confirms that the economic management of Australia
has been in good hands.
Where is the alleged " crisis" that Mr Snedden is trying to
sell to Australians.
Mr Snedden's scare tactics are devised to bolster this
opportunistic bid for power.
They have no foundation in expert surveys.
The survey does reveal the extent of inflationary pressures
in the economy.
The Government has taken firm action to alleviate these
pressures over the last 17 months.
Our actions to stop the flow of foreign money, to reduce domestic
liquidity, to cut tariffs and the impact of the Prices Justification
Tribunal have all worked in the right direction.
Despite the opposition of Liberal and Country Party spokesmen
to all of these measures we have persisted with them and they are
now beginning to have their effect.
The most recent statistics reveal that the rate of inflation
is beginning to slow down. We will continue to act on the best
economic advice available to the Government to finally beat the
problem of inflation.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



PRPM NUNISTER May 1974
REDUCTION OF HOME-INTEREST RATES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today said that the Labor
scheme for income tax deductibility on home interest paymenLs would
effectively-cut interest rates for home buyers by 3 percent.
It would bring home-interest rates for an average wage earner
wn to their lowest level in ten years.
The Prime Minister announced details of the scheme at a meeting
in Adaminaby in support of the Labor M. P. for Eden-Monaro, Mr Bob Whan.
* r One of the few positive undertakings Mr Snedden had given
waring this campaign was to scrap this scheme, and let interest rates for
home buyers take their course.
Every home owner whether buying a new house, or paying off
an existing dwelling would benefit from Labor's plan.
" Unlike the hasty and unclear election policies of the
Liberal/ Country Party, the Government's scheme has been carefully
costed and prepared over the past year," Mr Whitlam said.
" The legislation has been drafted and the scheme will take
effect from 1 July 1974."
" For an average wage earner with a $ 15,000 loan, it will
effectively reduce a savings bank loan with an interest rate
of 8.5 per cent down to 5.5 per cent, or a building society
interest rate of 9.5 per cent down to 6.2 percent," Mr Whitlam said.
" Mr Snedden has something different to say on interest
rates every day.
" One day he says they would go down, the next day he says they
would not go down, and then again he says they would go up before
they went down.
" On one thing, however, he is quite clear. He has promised that
he would abandon this scheme of tax deductibility for home buyers.
He is apparently more interested in what rate of interest big
business will pay than in the burden of interest rates on home
repayments for the average man.
" It is essential that the home buyer be relieved of the interest
rate burden. I said in my election speech in November 1972 that I
would bring in this scheme for home buyers. I announced in February
that it would begin from the 1st July. It is now ready." 
-2-
intee the scheme, all tax-payers whose actual income is
$ 4,000 or below will be entitled to deduct 100 per cent of their
inteestrate payments. The percentage of total interest payments
which is deductIble will be reduced by one per cent for every
$ 100 of income in excess of $ 4,000.
In addition, for new home buyers, the Labor Government would
enter into discussions with lending institutions so as to bring
about a re-arrangement of mortgage payments so that younger home
owners will pay less at a time when the demands on their income
are highest and begin to pay more later in life when they are better
able to provide higher repayments, Mr Whitlam. said.
Tables released by Mr Whitlam providing examples of the effects
of the scheme at different interest rates, different income levels
and for various society loans are attached to this statement.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 
t~)
8) ( 4
C')
C-( C) N ( N
r
rfl C) C L ' 7-4
( 7) 4 j
Cl ' J~ J
Cl ii
N N. C.
-I ' 1
LI)
. j3 C: C) ' U
dl ( J)
0 $ 4
~ 4
c: C. H
ow i 4.4 '-I
4' 3
a) i: c ai '-3
C)
r: .12
m ( 4~ 0
LL C) '. 3 i
C) C)
~ j fl
CL) IT.)'
C; 4 C!
' U ' Ii
C' j::
: 4 8
' I
' I 13 I
4--I
4-fl I
V.' c
0-l: 1; CJ~
I.-C.;
If) Cj .1-4
-43 1)
C) ~ U
i: ~ d-
4.4 C4~ a)
( 1)
.43 $. 4
C : 3
NH 0. ( 0
I.) I! I
( U3
.3 tJU
4) W ( J
o U;)
~ 4 ' 2 13
C-I
C) (' 3
u~ c~)
o c;
( 3 ( 0 14)
3 C)
42 CL)
~ U CU
j ri ca
CE C,)
N td ( U
4-'
~-4
Cd C~ C)
o r..
I
U-cJ I~) I') '&gt; 4
C ~ J C~ C)
: i Cj)
L;
toAC
c) ( N C) cc 0. L.) C-C
If) v k
1-C V
C) Li-C.)
it: 4)
C : 1 4.4 U) . J I
C: &gt; 3
C 8.
4. CL; (. 4
4-;
41 1&gt;. C)
C. ct:
LA 
THE EFFECTS OF THE SCHEME TO ALLOW INCOME TAX DEDUCTIONS ON HOUSING
LOAN INTEREST AT DIFFERENT LEVELS OF INCOME FOR A S15,000 LOAN a/
Annual Income $ 4,000 $ 6,000 $ 8,000 $ 10,000 $ 12,000
Monthly Income 333.33 500.00 666.67 833.33 1,000.00
Monthly Repayments b/ 132.45 132.45 132.45 132.45 132.45
b/ c/
Monthly Interest Repayments 118.75 118.75 118.75 118.75 118.75
Tax Rebate/ Month 28.08 32.43 28.3 20.95 11.45
New Monthly Repayments 104.37 100.02 104.15 111.50 121.00
Effective Interest Rate -6.7 6.2 6.7 7.4 8.4
Percentage of Monthly Income
Allocated to Repayments
No tax deduction 39.7 26.5 19.7 15.9 13.2
With tax deduction 31.3 20.1 15.6 13.4 12.1
a/ The $ 15,000 loan is to be repaid over a period of 25 years
b/ Based on a current rate of interest of 9 2%
c/ Refers to first year of repayment
d/ If all the tax savings were used to reduce total repayments, the reduced level of repayments
can be associated with a lower " effective" interest rate for the same $ 15,000 loan. 
THE EFFECTS OF THE SCHEME TO ALLOW FOR INCOME TAX DEDUCTIONS
ON HOUSING LOAN INTEREST
Annual Income
Mortgage Monthly Income a/
Monthly Repayments a/ b/
Monthly Interest RepaNYments
Tax Rebate per Mornth
New Monthly Repayments C/
Effective Interest Rate M% $ 4,1000
15,000 333.33 132.45 118.75 28.08
104 .37
6.7 $ 6 ,000
17,500 500.00 154.52 138.54 37.38
117. 14
6.3 $ 8,000
20,000 666.67 176.60 158.33 37.34
139.26 6.7 $ 10 ,000
22,500 833.33 198.68 178.13 31.42
167.44 7.4 $ 12 ,000
25,000 -1,000
220.75 197.90 19.08
201.67 8.4
Percentage of Income Allocated
to Repayments
No tax deduction 39.7 30.9 26.5 23.8 22.1
With tax deduction 31.3 23.4 20.9 20.1 20.1
a/ All loans are to be repaid over a period of 25 years at a current interest of 9 12%
b/ Refers to the first year of mortgage repayments.
-W c/ if all of the tax savings were used to reduce total repayments, the reduced level of
repayments can be associated with a lower " effective" interest rate for the same mortgage. 



PRESS RELEASE BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G.
WHITLAM, CLOTHING INDUSTRY
The Prime Minister announced today that the first reference
was being forwarded to the Textiles Authority within the
Industries Assistance Commission. The reference followed
discussions between the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Overseas Trade, Dr. Cairns and the Minister for Secondary
Industry, Mr. Enderby. The reference asked the Authority to
un dertake an immediate examination of the principal sectorsof
the clothing industry to ascertain whether action should be
taken under the GATT Textiles Arrangement to restrain imports
into Australia. The sectors covered were woven shirts, knitted
outerwear, dresses and related clothing products.
" It is time to find out the facts", the Prime Minister said.
The Prime Minister said that the reference followed
representations and claims by representatives of the local
clothing industry of damage from imports. Imports of some
clothing items had increased in recent months but the domestic
market had grown substantially and local production was at
high levels. Mr. Whitlam pointed out that there was a normal
sea-sonal decline in the textile industry at this time. Checks
with the Commonwealth Employment Service have revealed that
statements in the press of layoffs have been grossly exaggerated.
Since the 25% cut in tariffs was made in* July, 1973, a total of
389 persons in the textiles and footwear industries have b. een
displaced. The seasonal nature of employment in the industry
is shown by the 800 persons who were displaced in January, 1973,
550 persons in January 1974 ( an abnormal low) whilst there
was a dectease of 400 jobs in April/ May last year. The Prime
Minister said tha December, January, May and June were months
where there was traditionally a seasonal decline in employment
in the industry.
" It is ty no means clear that restraint action is necessary
at this stage and no clothing company has submitted a detailed
formal case to the Government. / 2 
0 -2-
" However, to allay any concern that may be developing about
the future of the textiles indulstry and because some people
are trying to make political capital out of the situation
without presenting the facts, the best thing to do is to have
a public inquiry to obtain any * evidence which is available
and determine whether action is necessary", said the Prime
Minister. The. Prime Minister invited manufacturers and other interested
parties to start, preparing evidence now for submission to the
Authority. The Textiles Authority would announce arrangements for public
hearings shortly. Under procedural arrangements which the
Government announced in February, the Textiles Authority is
being asked to report as soon as possible but within a
maximum period of 60 days. If action for restraints is
recommended by the Authority, urgent negotiations would then
be initiated with the exporting countries concerned.
Any employees laid off as a result of the lifting of the import
quotas or the 25% tariff cut and whose employer makes a
declaration to this effect will receive their average normal
wages over the previous six months until satisfactorily
re-employed or a period of six months has elapsed.
The Prime Minister added that if other sectors of the textiles
and apparel industries faced difficulties from import
competition, consideration would be given to sending further
references to the Textiles Authority.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. EN6MA, 17END6 MAY, 1974 



EMBARGO: 2. OOPM MONDAY 6 MAY 1974
. J ,, AUSTRALI( At&amp;-
RATIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL LABOR ORGANISATION CONVENTION
ON EQUAL PAY
The Australian Government in its submission in the 1974 National
Wage Case argued for an extension of the minimum wage to adult females.
As a result of the successful outcome of this submission and of the
submissions of the Women's Electoral Lobby, the Union of Australian
Women and the National Council of Women of Australia, the Australian
Government has now fulfilled its obligations under the I. L. O. Equal
Remuneration Convention of 1951. Before Australia ratifies the
Convention, however, the defaulting States have to agree to
ratification. The Prime Minister has sent telegrams to the Premiers of New South
Wales, Queensland and Western Australia urging that their governments
take the necessary action to enable Australia to ratify the Convention
as soon as possible. The governments of Victoria, South Australia and
Tasmania have already done this.
The Australian Government attaches the utmost importance to
ratifying this Convention. In June 1901 the federal Parliamentary
Labor Party resolved to " support the equal payment of females with
males when work of a similar character was performed and the hours of
work were the same."
Immediately upon taking office the Whitlam. Government successfully
applied to re-open the 1972 National Wage Case in support of this
principle. Women employed in the Australian Public Service were granted
equal pay without a phasing-in period.
The Prime Minister said today that for their 21 years of office,
after the Convention was adopted, Liberal and Country Party governments
had failed to press for the ratification of this important Convention.
Nowhbre in the latest Liberal/ Country Party policy for women is this
principle supported and at no time have the leaders of those parties
stated their intention to ratify this Convention. Worse still, last
December, Mr. Snedden publicly stated that he did not think that women
would be advantaged by passing legislation guaranteeing them equal pay,
for this would affect their job opportunities.
The Prime Minister today reiterated the reply he then gave to
Mr. Snedden. He said that he wanted to make it quite clear that he did
not accept that women should only get jobs if they do them more cheaply:
if they are doing the same job they should be paid the same money. / 2 
The Equal Pay Convention is the only I. L. O. human rights
convention which the Australian Government has not yet ratified.
The Whitlam Government has ratified all the remaining ones.
Ratification of this Convention will clearly indicate the
significance which Australia attaches to removing all forms of
discrimination against women in our society. The Government's
industrial policy places human rights and values first.
It decrees that a proper share in the nation's productivity
is the right of all persons male and female who are ready,
willing and able to work.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 4.30 p. m.
j6May 1974
: THE CARE AND EDUCATION OF YOUNG CHILDREN
During his speech today in Sydney's marginal Bennelong
electorate, Mr. Whitlam announced the details of the Labor
Government's new child care program.
Mr. Whitlam said that by 1978, half a million Australian
children would have access to both pre school educational
opportunities and child care. Pre school education will
be free for all children. Child care will be subsidised
with parents contributing to the cost according to their
means. Eventually, all children, whether they be at home
or in care, would benefit under the plan.
The goals of this new program are:
to increase the social development and
learning ability of all children, regardless
of income, family or ethnic background;
to provide care for all children who need it,
be it occasional or regular;_
to increase the quality of parents' lives, in
particular, the life of the working mother.
This program would include not only full day care facilities
and educational opportunities. It will also offer emergency
and occasional care, before and after school care, holiday
programs, informal play groups, toddlers' groups and babysitting
pools.
Each community will be involved in the development of facilities
appropriate to their area.
The cost of such a program will be $ 130 m. in a full year.
In contrast, the previous government promised $ 5 million towards
child care in 1972 but neither the Gorton nor the McMahon
Government managed to spend anything. The Whitlam Government
has spent $ 18 million on child care in the last six months.
The Liberal-Country Party says that it really cares for the
children of Australia yet it is prepared to spend in a full
year less than the Whitlam Government has spent in developmental
programs in the last six months.
The Liberal-Country Party agrees that there are over 300,000
children requiring child care and yet it says that it will
reject or reduce this program, not because it isn't adequate
to overcome the needs in a commuunity, but because it would
cost too much. A detailed outline of the child care program
is attached. 
For these facilities to be developed in an imaginative and
decentralised manner, the Australian Government will make grants
through the States to Local Government and community organisations.
The Australian Government will provide assistance to the
communities to enable them to work out their needs and administer
the facilities of their choice. Evidence and commonsense
demonstrate that quality care requires the involvement of parents
and the community in this program. The Australian Government
program will involve families and community organisations in the
control of facilities in their areas. Such a scheme will make
possible the full and imaginative use of the present limited
supply of professionally trained people. It will also use those
skilled mothers in the community who might choose to earn a
living caring for children rather than on an assembly line.
Education for the care of children must involve all those people
who are or could be caring for children: first and foremost the
parent, both mother and father; secondly those called upon by
parents as a substitute to help care for their children;
thirdly, the highly trained professional, the mothercraft nurse,
the pre school and primary school teacher, the social worker,
psychiatrist and other professionals whose work is associated
with children.
A program of this sort will cost about $ 130 million in a full
year.
A program of this sort is needed
15,000 children left unattended during the working day;
365,000 children under the age of six who are children
of working parents. One in every two of these children
is in the care of persons absent from the home for more
than eight hours per working day;
one in every three of these 365,000 children is in the
care of relatives, friends or neighbours. One in every
ten only attend a nursery school, creche or similar
institution.
The Liberal-Country Party says it really cares for the children
of Australia. It says it would reject or reduce a program
designed to overcome the present need both for care and
education of the young. It says it would cost too much. 
DETAILED OUTLINE OF THE PROGRAM FOR THE
CARE AND EDUCATION OF YOUNG CHILDREN
The Labor Government has developed a new and imaginative program
f or the care and education of young children. This program is
now ready for implementation.
The program will offer diverse and interrelated facilities in
the development of which each community will be involved. The
scheme will benefit half a million children by 1978.
Key features:
pre-school education will be free for all children whose
parents choose to send them. All children, whether they
are cared for in their own home or elsewhere will have
access to these educational opportunities;
child care will be subsidised, with parents contributing
to the cost according to their means. The main thrust
of the program in the first few years will be to offer
financial and other assistance to the children of
disadvantaged families.
The Australian Government program breaks down the traditional
distinctions between child care and pre school facilities. It
recognises the need for educational, health and welfare
components in child care; it recognises the need for these
same services for children whether they be at home or in care.
What matters is the total development and happiness of the child
and the family. The programs now being-developed will offer
genuine choices to mothers and families and will ensure that all
children enter school free of the disadvantages which may follow
from inadequate pre school and child care facilities.
The key element in the ' new design' is flexibility. Innovation
and diversity will be stimulated.
This program will not only include full day care programs and
education programs, it will offer emergency and occasional care,
before and after school care, holiday programs, informal play
groups, toddlers' groups and baby sitting pools, to mention but
a few. Similar schools are already in existence in other
countries. Australia lags behind the rest of the world.
The program is sensibly based on a recognition of the value of
much of the care already being provided within communities.
At present one in every three children remains in the care of
relatives, friends or in what has become to be known as family
based child care. This form of care will continue to be
developed and will begin to be supported by a wide range of
services. The thrust of the government's contribution will be
the provision of emergency facilities for sick children or children
in the care of a sick mother, access to education within family day
care facilities, counselling services, training opportunities for
the day mother and provision of welfare and medical services. 2/ 



EMBARGO: 8. OOPM 6 MAY 1974
A. B. C. BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP,
MONDAY 6 MAY 1974
Let me remind you of the basic choice you face in this
election. It's a choice between turning back returning to the
past or moving forward forward on a course of progress and
enlightenment. When you elected this government seventeen months ago
you gave us a clear go-ahead to carry out a vast and creative
program of reform.-You said: " We've had enough of run down schools,
of injustice and unequal opportunity, of overcrowded and inefficient
cities, of miserly pensions and sub-standard health services. We're
sick of seeing our-industries and resources falling into foreign
hands. We want change and improvement, a better life for our people
and our children, a greater say in our own destiny." Those were
your instructions. And from the moment you elected us we set about
to fulfil our promises to carry out those instructions. We have
done a great deal in those seventeen months. What we ask of you
now is a fair go a fair go to complete our task, to get on with
the job you elected us to do.
You hear a great deal of scare talk and hysterical propaganda
from our political opponents and the sectional interests they
represent. Let's just look at the facts. The facts are that
Australia has never been more prosperous and its future has never
looked brighter. The first thing we had to do was restore full
employment. We've done it. We have restored full employment. We
have high wages and we ' re well on the way to equal pay for women.
Farm incomes are at record levels. Company profits are at record
levels so are their plans for investment. Our overseas reserves
are immensely strong. The Australian dollar is one of the strongest
currencies in the world. Our economy is vigorous and buoyant.
Along with that prosperity, like every other major country
in the world, we share this difficult problem of inflation. The
causes of inflation are complex, but there were two major causes of
inflation in Australia: the first was a flood of foreign money which
our opponents allowed into Australia when Mr Snedden was Treasurer;
the second was the gross under-valuation of the Australian dollar in
the last year of the Liberal-Country Party government. You'll remember
that just before Christmas 1971 there was a long and bitter wran-gle
between the Liberals and the Country Party about the value of the dollar.
Mr Anthony threatened to resign from the coalition unless the Country
Party got its way. And the Country Party did get its way. The Liberals
caved in, the dollar was devalued, and the seeds of inflation were
sown. When we came to power, inflation was already the worst for
twenty years. We immediately raised the dollar'ls value and closed off
the flood of foreign money which speculators were using to buy up
Australia's resources on the cheap. In the year that followed we
revalued the currency again, we cut tariffs, we exercised flexible
monetary policies, we pruned back unnecessary spending on subsidies
and tax lurks. The result is now that we are winning the battle ./ 2 
-2-
against inflation. Our policies are working. The latest consumer
price figures have shown~ a dramatic and encouraging drop in the
inflation rate. Let's keep up the good work. Let's not undo those
policies now now that they're working. Because the Country Party
and the Liberals would undo them. They have promised to remove our
restrictions on the inflow of foreign money. They have promised all
sorts of electoral bribes. They have promised to cut taxes. Imagine
it! Cut taxes to fight inflation! I ask you: where would the extra
goods come from to satisfy the increase in purchasing power? It is
economic nonsense and every responsible financial commentator has
said it is nonsense. Mr Snedden's proposals would reverse all our
hard-won gains. They would create further inflation on a catastrophic
scale. The other great issue before us is this: do we want
Australians to remain in control of our resources, our industries,
our raw materials or do we want them to fall increasingly into
foreign hands? Here's a figure to keep in mind: when we came in,
68% of our energy resources our coal, our oil, our uranium, our
natural gas were in foreign hands. Sixty-eight per cent! You all
remember how Sir John McEwen, when he was Leader of the Country Party,
expressed his concern at the way Australia was being sold out to
foreign interests. I'm afraid it's a different story in the Country
Party today. They no longer care much about the farmer; they have
become the spokesmen and defenders of the foreign mining companies
and speculators who are rushing to buy up Australia's resources.
They make no secret of their intention to lavish incentives and tax
concessions on these companies, to reward them for the privilege of
taking Australia over. They have promised mark this to double
the Australian price of crude oil solely for the benefit of foreign
oil companies. The Country Party would make every motorist, every
farmer, every business pay more, much more, for petrol. That is the
most irresponsible and inflationary promise of all. So never forget
the power and influence of the Country Party on their Liberal
partners. We all know who would be running things if Mr Snedden
were Prime minister. It wouldn't be Mr Snedden. It would be the
Country Party the most sectional and reactionary of the major parties
in Australia. My government has acted with vigour and determination to
keep Australian industries and Australian resources in Australian hands.
We won't allow Australians to be tenants in their own land. We will
defend the right of Australians to control their economic inheritance
for themselves and for their children. In a world where mineral
and energy resources are precious and scarce, there will be no sell-out
of Australia by my government.
So that is the choice before you a united and determined
government, pledged to progress and reform, winning the battle against
inflation, pledged to defend Australian ownership; or a weak and
divided opposition, an opposition that bribes you with inflationary
tax cuts, an opposition that forced this election even before it had
patched its policies together, an opposition dominated by the Country
Party, with muddled and contradictory policies on inflation, an
opposition that tamely accepts the sell-out of Australian assets. You
know our record. I am proud of it. We have given a new deal to our
schools, to the children of Australia. We have restored full employment.
./ 3 
-3-
We have launched our great program to make Australian cities decent
places for our people. We have given Australia a new pride and
standing in the eyes of the world. I don't believe the Australian
people are ready to say: " All that was wasted. Let's put all that
aside and turn back." I don't believe we want the rest of the world
to say: " Australia has lost heart. Australia has lost faith in
her vision, in her future, in herself." I say to my fellow Australians:
Don't put the clock back. Let us get on with the job together.
Good night 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT
7 May 1974
Aboriginal Land Rights Commission Second Report
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
the Government had accepted in principle the recommendations
contained in the Second Report of the Aboriginal Land Rights
Commission. The Report had been received by the Government following
its presentation to the Governor-General last Friday, 3 May, and
was now being released in accordance with the undertaking given by
the Prime Minister in his Policy Speech.
Following its re-election, the Government will arrange
discussions with Aboriginal Councils and communities in the Northern
Territory, with a view to early legislation.
Mr Whitlam paid tribute to the Commissioner, Mr Justice
A. E. Woodward, for the way in which he had conducted the Inquiry.
The Commissioner had enabled Aborigines to participate with an
effectiveness wholly new in Australian history. At the same time
widely ranging evidence was received on the issues affecting his
terms of reference. Mr Whitlam said that the Government strongly endorsed the
Judge's view that " tan imposed solution to the problem of recognising
traditional Aboriginal land rights is unlikely to be a good or
lasting solution", and would adopt the suggestion that the proposals
be taken as a basis for negotiation between the Aboriginal Representative
Councils and communities and the Government,
Mr Whitlam said the Government believed that the Report
provided a well balanced consideration of the claims and needs of
Aboriginal Australians in the Northern Territory while ensuring
respect for rights granted under previous Governments. Its
recommendations offer a-framework under which the legitimate claims
of Aborigines can be met'-and their deep affiliation with the
land acknowledged. It would therefore provide a basis for the
development of the Northern Territory which Australians can in
good conscience accept and defend,
The Government welcomed especially the Report's
recommendations relating to mining. They clearly justify the
Government's concern to enable Aborigines to protect their way
of life from the destructive effect of mining development.
In particular it endorses the Government's decision on
Queensland Mines proposals to mine uranium at N~ aalk
The Prime Minister said that the electorate was entitled to
know what attitude the Opposition would take to the recommendations
of the Report. He had made arrangements for copies of the Report
to be passed to Leaders of the Opposition Parties in the Parliament,
tb the Premiers and to Corporations referred to in the recommendations. 



J AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER 8 May 1974
VISIT BY H. R. H. PRINCE CHARLES
His Royal Highness Prince Charles has accepted
an invitation from the Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, to
visit Australia in September and October.
Announcing this today, Mr. Whitlam said Prince
Charles would officially open the new Anglo-Australian
150-inch optical telescope at Siding Springs, New South
Wales. He also planned to visit other States, and the
itinerary for his visit would be arrang ed soon. i
Mr. Whitlam said Prince Charles had told him in
a letter that he looked forward enormously to his visit.
Mr. Whitlam said he was delighted that Prince Charles had
accepted the invitation.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SAUSTI'. ALIA, 9 May 1974
SOIL PRICES
Mr. Anthony has finally come clean on the Liberal
oil price increase. He admitted in Perth yesterday that
Australian crude oil prices should be raised by at least
per cent this would mean a rise with mark ups of at least
3 cents in every gallon bought by the motorist. Quienslanders
use over 350 million gallons every year the proposal Mr.
Anthony has revealed would cost Australians over 1G60 million.
This is no way to beat inflation; it would make it worse.
There would be a direct effect on all motorists and and
indirect effect on all commodities because of increased
production and transport costs.
As the Prices Justification Tribunal report shows
the impact of the world energy crisis caused a rise of only
1 cent per gallon about a quarter less than the Shell
Company asked for and which they would have got under a Liberal
Government. Opposition spokesmen are still talking about
increasing Australian prices to world prices. This would
increase petrol prices to the motorist not by 3 cents per
gallon, which is all that Mr. Anthony can admit so close to an
election, but by over 20 cents per gallon. The Prices Tribunal
Report i-ndicates they would already have gone up 13 cents.
The Opposition is clearly committed to revise the
Australian Government's policy which prevents an increase
in Australian oil prices. The Government has been successful
in this policy. Petrol will go up by only 1 cent per gallon as
a result of the world energy crisis. Since November, it has
gone up, in England, by 35 cents a gallon, in France by 32 cents,
in Italy by 39 cents, in Holland by 27 cents and in the U. S. A.
by 9 cents. 
r -2-
Australians should be warned by the hints of
Liberal policy which could increase oil prices by over
cnts. Mr. Anthony will admit to only 3 cents but neither
he nor Mr. Snedden will deny that it might be more. Even the
3 cents is three times what the Prices Tribunal allowed.
Even the 3 cents per gallon increase would provide
a gift of $ 160 million to the profits of Esso and B. H. P.
The 3 cents which Mr. Anthony himself has now revealed,
would be the greatest stim-ulus to inflation which any
government decision could make. It will increase the price
of petrol directly and it will increase the price of all
manufactured goods. All goods need oil to be produced and
O transported. A rise in the nrice of this basic commodity would
spark off a new inflationary spiral of wage demands and price
O cionmcirnega sedso. w n. We Alhla vet het udrenceids itohnes cwoer nhearv e miandfel atiodne ciiss ionnosw which
are now working would be thrown away by this scandalous
proposal. An increase in the price of oil of this size would
cause the worst inflation in our history.
This proposal is typical of the special pleading
of the Liberal and Country Parties for narrow vested interests.
In order to boost the profits of Esso and B. H. P. they would hit
every consumer, every farmer, every manufacturer with huge cost
Sincreases.
O Combine it with their other inflationary proposals,
an indiscriminate tax cut, irresponsible expenditure promises
to every narrow interest group affected by our decisions, the
flood of foreign money which will come in if they lift our
restrictions. They would probably increase indirect charges.
Taxes on petrol, cigarettes, cars, all consume:: goods would
go up. We should remember that the Liberals promised to cut
income tax by S200 million at the 1969 election and they
did. But they increased ihdirect taxes in the 1970 Budget
by .40 million. This is the way with Liberal promises. They
would do it again.
Now we have their admission that they would increase
the price of petrol. If we combine all these things I predict
that inflation would rise to at least 20 per cent this year.
Our policies have brought the rate down it fell by a third in
the first three months of this year. We can beat inflation and
ve will. The Liberal and Country Party promises to the powerful
vested interests that support them and finance them would send
inflation through the roof. 



J 1AUSTKALA L
PRIME MINISTER May 1974
FREE ISSUE OF TREES AND SHRUBS TO SERVICEMEN IN QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister announced today that the Australian
Government would assist married servicemen occupying Housing
Agreement homes in Queensland to establish and landscape
their gardens by providing trees, shrubs, lawn seed, top
soil and rotary hoeing free of charge.
Mr. Whitlam said that these items were normally provided
for all Service-owned married quarters completed after 1 July
1970 and also in dwellings allocated to servicemen under the
Commonwealth-State Housing Agreements. However, the Queensland
Government had not agreed to accept this provision in the-homes
it~ builds for servicemen.
The new provisions will apply to the original tenants of
houses completed after 1 July 1970, the gardens of which are
presently not established.
The Prime Minister said that the Australian Government's
decision to provide landscaping assistance directly to servicemen
occupying Housing Agreement homes in Queensland followed the
refusal of the Queensland Government to bear the cost of
providing these amenities for Australian servicemen.
Mr. Whitlam recalled that he had raised the matter of
providing trees and shrubs for the occupants of Army married
quarters in Queensland with the then Minister for the Army,
Mr. Peacock, as long ago as September 1971.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



jj 5i A4
PRIME MINISTER 11 May 1974
COUNTRY PARTY DOMINATES THE OPPOSITION
TVie most sinister factor in this campaign is the power
and influence of the Country Party over its Liberal partners.
Liberal voters should remember that a vote for the coalition
is a vote for the domination of the Country Party the most
selfish, sectional and reactionary of the major parties in
Australia. If we look at the record of the coalition we see
repeated evidence of the Country Party's power to browbeat and
manipulate the Liberals.
In the great row over the value of the dollar in
December 1971, the Country Party threatened to smash the
coalition if the value of the dollar was raised. The Liberals
caved in, the dollar was kept under-valued and the seeds of
inflation were sown.
The Country Party has now abandoned any pretence to
be a farmers' party. It has become the party of the foreign
mining corporations and manufacturing interests.
Under Country Party pressure, Mr Snedden has promised
O alalrveiasdh y tawxo rkcionngc esast iofnusl l anpdr odiunccteinotniv easn d foern jionydiunsgt rrieecso rdt haptr ofairtes.
Under Country Party pressure, Mr Snedden has promised
to remove all restraints on the inflow of foreign money and
give foreign interests an open go to buy up Australian resources.
Under Country Party pressure, Mr Snedden and Mr Fairbairn
have committed themselves to push up the price of petrol for
Australian motorists a price now held in check by the decision
of the Prices Justification Tribunal. No wonder the Opposition
parties are scrambling to back away from that commitment.
Mr Anthony makes no secret of his ambition to be
Treasurer and Mr Snedden refuses to say who his Treasurer would
be. Judging by his record, it is highly doubtful if Mr Snedden
would have the guts to resist this latest Country Party demand. 2/ 
2.
Let there be no mistake with the Country Party in
charge of the Treasury, Australia would quickly rever to the
conditions that produced our inflation in 1972 and 1973
an under-valued dollar, a flood of foreign money buying up
our natural resources, a host of costly tax lurks and concessions
to sectional interests. The government's policies have reversed
these conditions, we are beating inflation despite the fact
that every one of our anti-inflationary measures was resisted
by the Opposition. The greatest instrument for helping Australia's primary
industries not the Pitt Street and Collins Street farmer,
but the primary industries that really need help is the new
Industries Assistance Commission. The Country Party opposed
that Commission. They fought it every inch of the way in
Parliament. Whatever name the Country Party uses National Alliance,
National Country Party, National Party its policies are the
same. Those policies mean lavish hand-outs to sectional interests
at the taxpayers' expense.
The Country Party in Queensland maintains the most
flagrant electoral gerrymander to be found anywhere in Australia.
The Queensland Government is dominated by a party that won
of the vote. Do we want that situation in the national parliament
as ell? Do we want a national government dominated by a
sectional minority party linked to the most discredited of all
parties the D. L. P.?
Mr Anthony must be having serious second thoughts about
his half-baked merger with the D. L. P.
The Country Party leader in New South Wales, Sir Charles
Cutler, would not have a bar of the D. L. P. Sir John McEwen
wouldn't have a bar of the D. L. P. Australians won't have a bar
of the D. L. P.
They won't have a bar of a coalition deeply involved
and officially linked with D. L. P. extremism.
A government led by Mr Snedden would by under the thumb
of a Country Party-D. L. P. alliance a combination of the worst
right-wing elements in Australia. It would be a disaster for
the nation. 



EMBARGO: 4. OOPM SUNDAY 12 MARCH 1974
) AUSTRALIA 12 May 1974
PETROL PRICE
The Liberal and Country Parties are now clearly committed to
a massive increase in the price of petrol. It is no comfort to
Australian consumers to be told that the full impact might be delayed
a year. Not only would the price of petrol go up but all goods would
go up as a result of increased production costs and transport costs.
Mr. Anthony let the cat out of the bag let the tiger out of the
* tank. He has destroyed the Opposition's remaining credibility on
the issue of inflation. If this sectional and divided coalition
became a Government, inflation would go through the roof.
Mr. Snedden and Mr. Anthony are united on one thing; they
believe the price of oil should go up next year. They have not yet
said how much they believe it should go up. The truth is that their
policy means an extra 20 cents per gallon on petrol. Fuel oil and
LPG wodld go up by $ 200 a ton. Increases of this size cannot be
Justified. Their impact on inflation would be huge, whether it
happened now or next year.
0 Australian voters will not be fooled by the pre-election attempts
of the opposition to cover up this outrageous proposal. On Wednesday
in Perth Mr. Anthony said that a rise in the crude oil price was " urgent".
He said the same on 11 March of this year. He said then that there would
Sbe a " substantial jump in the price of oil" in September 1975 and added
W that a " gradual rise" would be more easily absorbed. He seems to have
backed away from his idea to increase prices in a series of steps.
But he has now confirmed the Opposition's support for a ' substantial jump
in the price of oil" next year.
Mr. Snedden has known for some time that this was Mr. Anthony's
view. It is only now, just before the elections, that he tried to get
out of it. Why did he refuse to make these statements when Mr. Anthony
said similar things before?. Mr. Snedden was asked at a press conference
on 10 April to " make an unequivocal statement that the agreement would
not be re-negotiated before September 1975". He refused. What he did
say was very revealing:
" There is no reason why the other parties to the agreement
can't ask us for it to be re-negotiated and if they did so
then of course it would have to be discussed with them."
If BHP and ESSO wanted to increase their profits by a minimum
of $ 260 million per yeaV under Liberal/ Country Party government all
they would have to do is ask! ./ 2 



* 0EMBARGO: 4.00PM MONDAY 13 MAY 1974
0 13 May 1974
VISIT BY H. R. H. PRINCE CHARLES
The Prime Minister announced today that advice had
been received from London that The Prince Charles
will inaugurate the Anglo-Australian telescope at
Siding Springs and carry out other engagements in
Australia next October.
A similtaneous release to the same effect is
being released in London.
CANBERRA. A. C . T. IA
Jj AUSTHALIA,, l1
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



ELECTIONS 13 MiAY 1974
THE POLICY SPFCl
THF' PRIM~ E MINISTER OF AUSTRbALIA6
HON. E. G. TV71ITLAM, -P
9 . BIArKTO' TN,,
29 APRIL. 1974
A IT. S t. A"
INDExeo Co~ y.
Jjj. . A U 8 r I I A I I A 6q 
Men and Women of Australia,
Just 17 months ago, I stood here, and from this
place and from this city I asked you to choose for Australia
a new team, a new program, a new drive for equality of
opportunities. You gave us a clear mandate to go ahead with
our program for the next 3 years. For 17 months we have
driven ourselves to carry out you;: mandate, to carry out the
program I placed before you. Now the government you elected
for 3 years has been interrupted in mid-career. Our program
has been brought to a halt in mid-stream.
Everything we promised, everything we have achieved,
everything you expected of us your expressed hopes for
yourselves, your families, your nation all this is suddenly Lt=
threatened. It is threatened by the actions of the men you oco
I rejected a mere 17 months ago.. It is threatened by the actions
of men elected to the Senate not in 1972, but in 1967 and 1970.
It is threatened by men who refused to stand by the umpire's
verdict your verdict to give , s a chance, to give you a
chance, to give Australia a new chance.
These men who have falsified democracy now ask
you to turn back. Turn back to what? Think again how it n
was when you elected us in ! 972. Unemployment was at its " 4 A
worst for 10 years. Our rate of gr: owth was one of the
world's worst a paltry 20. The Australian dollar was
grossly undervalued. Foreign money was. flooding in to buy
up Australian resources and Australian industries on the chieap.
Accelerating numbers of nigrants w/ ere leaving in disillusion.
Australia was still deeply involved in the war in Viet Nam.
Our whole foreign policy was based on hostility to China. We
were running an army on the cheap by conscripting young men.
There were young men in prison foe their conscience.
Australia was a. d2ep3y divided nation. Our young people were
becoming alienated frorr. the mainstream of Australian society.
S The disrespect in which our nation.-al leadership the Liberals
were held at home had spread to cidre~ ect for Australia abroad.
Think again, indeed!
Mark today's contrast. The Australian economy i
one of the most buoyant and vigorous in the world.
Full employTmnt has been restored. Business
activity is at its highest for a decade, company profits are
at record levels and business expectations are at an all time
high. Through our economic policies and our social security
program, Australia's prosperity i3 becoming more fairly shared
than ever before. Abroad, Australia has never stood so tall. We have
buried old animosities. We dare-hold in new respect by old
friends and allies. Never in her history has Australia been
more secure. 
2
We have ended national division, national
disunity by ending our involvement in Viet Nam, and ending
conscription. We have opened up new and expanding markets for As,
our farm products. By placing family reunion for migrants above mere f'e
recruiting, we have stopped the rmigrant drift. t
For the first time Australia has a government
determined to promote Australian ownership and control of
Australian industries and resources. 0 N( 446 ' IR
O-^ N&amp; oub
For the first time fcr a generation Australia has
a government dedicated to equal opportunity for all its
citizens. We have more than doubled spending on schools. d JLu-cJG
We have abolished fees at universities, colIee 3 of zaivanced
education and going one better than oar pledge at technical
schools. For the first time Australia has a government
determined to make the conditions of life more equal for all
Australians, wherever they live in Australia.
For the first time Australia has a government WQ A
seriously concerned to give equality of opportunity to women.
For the first time Australia has a national
government involving itself directly in the affairs of. our
cities. For the first time Australia has a government ready an
to give local government direct access to the national finances.
For the first time Australia has a nrational
government prepared to co-operate in renewing our decaying
urban transport systems. 27
For the first time Australia has a national
government determined to fulfil its con: stitutional obligationAa1
towards the aboriginals L
For the first time Australia has a government
determined to preserve, protect and enhance Australia's
national estate our natural and historical inheritance,
what we keep from our past, what we transmit to the future.
For the first time Australia Las a national
government which recognises the significance of the arts and
artists in our society. Our support for the arts has
released an unparallelled burst-of creativity in this nation. N. ox 
These achievements are just some of the fruits of
programs based on expert advice. . Je sought and obtained the Ow AMA
co-operation of the most highly qualified Australian men and
women to enquire into and to report upon basic requirements
in Australia's social and economic structures. Tnese reports 5a4
are public. The work of these enquiries and commissions is
the basis of a continuing, coherent. comprehensive program.
The new initiatives 1 announce tonight are the new dimensions
and expanded fruits of this work.
This premature election means that these fruits
are being denied the Australian people. It has meant deferring
our entire legislative program. ' Oe have this legislation
ready to go; it is crucial legislation, and we have it ready.
We ask you to send us back to get on with the business your
business. In the Parliament that has been dissolved four
referendum bills had been twice rejected by the Senate. Under
the Constitution the Governor-General is submitting each of
them to the electors. Six other bills had been twice rejected
by the Senate. That is why under the Constitution the
Governor-General has dissolved both Houses of Parliament.
The Senate had also rejected nine other bills.
Some of them had been introdiuced a" second time. When the
Parliament was dissolved 24 bills were waiting to be passed.
The government will reintroduce all these rejected and
pending bills in the new Parliament. Also,* 107 new bills
have been already drafted and are awaiting introduction in
the new Parliament; a further 104 bills are being drafted on
the government's instructions.
I Our programs the programs you endorsed in 1972
had been developed over the previous si; x , ears. They were
published policies; they were debated in public; they were
scrutinized in Parliament. Time and time again as an
Opposition, we put positive proposals up for debate in
Parliament. By contrast our opponents have never since put
up a single proposal for examination by eitier Parliament or
the public. When they forced tnis election, none of us knew
anything of what they proposed. All we knew was what they
opposed. And that's really all we know now.
In defence of their wealthy friends and vested t
interests, they rejected the democratic principle of equal
electorates; they blocked attempts to democratise and modernise
the trade union movement; they denied representation in the
Senate to the people of the inorthern Territory and the
Australian Capital Territory; they sought ' L deny to local
government direct access to national revenues and borrowings;
they preserved for foreign mining iaterests the right to
exploit our of f-shore resources. -They preserved the inequity,
inefficiency and injustice of an anti{ uated healtA scheme.
They have prevented one million of our fellow-citizens from
having any protection against hospital and medical charges. 
4
By shelving the Trade Practices Bill they left
the door open to monopolies and big corporations to fix
prices, organise cartels and exploit the Australian customer.
By shelving the Ausralian ndustry Development Corporation
Bill they blocked the most effective instrument for ensuring
Australian control of our industries and developing new
industries. They left the door open to foreign takeovers and
foreign exploitation of the Australian economy. Yet you had
given us a clear mandate for every one of these proposals they
have opposed and obstructed.
These are the men who forced a premature election.
Now they are asking you to make a judgement affecting your
lives, your families and their welfare, your nation's future
for the next three years on the basis of policies cooked up in
the last three weeks. When they destroyed my government's
power to govern they had no more idea of what their policies
would be than you did. All they knew is that they were out AW
S to destroy the Whitlam Government. The Leader of the g
Opposition in the Senate admitted on the night of the
dissolution of Parliament " T'e embarked on a course some
12 months ago to bring about a House of Representatives
election". In the five weeks that the Senate sat this year
votes were taken on 43 occasions. The three opposition
parties combined to defeat the government on 42 of those
occasions. They had made the parliament unworkable.
What a spectacle This must present to the world
a world where everywhere democracy is under challenge. In
no other country in the world could an Upper louse, elected
3 years ago ' and 6 years ago, use an outdated majority, a
chance majority, to bring down the government elected by the
people only one and one-third years ag.
SAnd in Australia this had never been before
attempted by the Senate. Until our opponents lost office,
after 23 years, it had never even been threatened in the
Australian Parliament. One result of their actions is that for only the
third time in Australia's history, we are to have an election
for the whole Senate as well as the House of Representatives.
In addition, you will be asked to support referen. um proposals
to make the Australian democracy more equitable and more
efficient. REFERENDUMS The last occasion on which you voted for the whole F&amp; W
of the Senate and the House of Representatives was 1951. The
first referendum proposal is desicn-i: to avoid the situation
after 1951. Barely two years aftr the 1951 double dissolution
there had to be an election for h&amp; af the Senate ' and then a year
later a separate House of Representatives election. It is
quite wrong to suggest that the present dissolution of both
Houses of itself synchronises future elections for them. 4 
It does nothing-. of the sr. The-ehiections for the two Houses
will remain out of kilter' unless you accept our referendum
proposal. Australia has too -many elections. Since 1963 we
have had a national election every, 1j years. That is not
good for Australia. It does not make for good government or
for a healthy Parliament.
* Australia needs a period of stable government.
Australia needs a period of stable lecadership. we enter upon
a timne of difficult deci; sions. Such-decisions can * be taken'
* only by a united governme-at1 a united ' leadership, a united -Party,*
a united nation. Anid ou-r government alone offers such unity,
-Such leadership. We need a Parliament which re'fects the will of the
W people as fully and accurately as pom3ible. Our referen'dum
proposals are designed to achieve this.
-Our proposal to synchro-iise elections fo h-Senate
and House of Representatives was reccmmended as far back as-
1958t ye. a1part Contitution Review Committee establishd
under Sir Robert 21enzies in 195G. The second proposa. is to--
allow the Constitucion to be c-Ilt_ red if a m~ ijority of all the
electors in Australia approve anC ilsd a majority of the
electors in not less than one-half of th,! States; this
proposal was also recomaended by the Ct-onstitution Review
Comiteein 1958. The third proposal is that after July 1976
there should be equal electorates in the Uois!_: of Representatives
and in every State Douse of Parliament; thle inethod has been
perfected for the. U. S. Congress and State legislatures by the
U. S. Supreme Corurt over the lz. t 10( years; in Australia'it will
be applied by the High Court. The Sen~ ate o-pposed your having
a vote on any of these issues, eve, th-ose recommended as far back
as 1958. But where tha Senate tcerejects referendum proposals,
the Constitution gives you, peopl. e, the right to vote on
them regardless of the Scnates re-Jection-.---
* It is not i thoui-s. gpifi canc3 that our opponents
-used their -nui-ibe-Ls in the Senate' ock your chance of
having your say as -electo,-s on pronoSals to make Australia
a more stable deniocracY anid a more. iaqial democracy. Despite
their obstruction, you will1, at referendumns on the same day
as the elections, be able to. hav -_, our say.
Iknow that thesc matters require your thought and:
your time if you are to make a reasonable judgement. I ask you
again as I asked you two weeks ago, give close thought to
them and five minutes of your-time for the future of Australia
on the 18 N. ay. 
THE ECONOMY Ue Australians all now face together one of the
great historic challenges of our time; to make democracy
work; to make the parliamentary system work; and make it
work better. We share this challenge with most other
parliamentary democracies. Equally, with them, with all
major trading nations, with all mixed economies, we share the
problem of inflation. We are all seeking ways by which the
expectations, the wishes, the aspirations, the hopes of every
member of the community can be reconciled with freedom, good
order, security, stability. There is no simple answer, no
one answer, no easy cure. But if a solution is to be found
or even attempted, we need a strong, courageous, united
Sleadership. We need at the same time, a national leadership
passionately concerned about the preservation of the democratic
system and a leadership compassionately concerned to protect
the weaker members of the community. I suggest to you that
our government, since you elected it only 17 months ago, has
Sshown such dedication and has shown its capacity for firm and
courageous decisions decisions which were sometimes
initially unpopular, opposed by powerful interests, but which
have proved their correctness and which have proved the
doomsayers wrong. World events and the policies of -our predecessors
inevitably meant a higher rate of inflation in 1973 than in
1972. We have acted firmly to moderate these pressures.
s And these policies are beginning to work inflation
has slowed. All our efforts to curb inflation have been opposed
or obstructed by our opponents. Where we took administrative
action, they criticised. Where we took legislative action,
they obstructed. Where we sought more powers from you by
way of referendum, they opposed. Uhere we have sought
co-operation with the States, governments of the same political
persuasion as our opponents have failed to pass the necessary
legislation. SA1dministratively, we cut tariffs by 25% to. reduce
the price of imports without damaging Australian industries.
We have twice revalued the Australian dollar reflecting its
true status as one of the world's strongest currencies.
By legislation, we have tried to promote competition.
As long ago as 1963 the present Chief Justice Sir Garfield
Barwick pointed to the need to outlaw collusion between
corporations in fixing prices above their genuinely competitive
level. Last September we introduced legislation to do just that.
Our opponents in the Senate combined-' three times, not just to
oppose this legislation, but to prevent it from even being
debated. 6 
7
Only the Labor State of South Australia has
cod-operated in setting up land commissions to stop the spiral
in residential land prices. The average price for a home
site in Adelaide is $ 5,000 and has begun to stabilise. The
average price in Sydney is $ 18,500 and is still rising.
Not content with obstructing our efforts, our
opponents in their election promises now propose economic.
vandalism. Their policies mean soaking the average
Australian wage and salary earner. They mean cutting back
on opportunities for creative employment. They mean the same
sort of unemployment Mr Snedden as Treasurer created two years
ago. They mean the same rise in indirect taxes which they
imposed when in government they pretended to reduce income tax
in 1970. They mean disrupting our program for help to all
Australian schools. Their policies mean that once again, as
happened so often in the long life of the previous government,
O Australian children year after year will be set back in
their opportunities. When ' ir Snedden speaks of cutting back
on government spending he means cutting back on schools, on
health, on social security. They are the only fields where
meaningful cutbacks can be made. lhy should the children of
Australia, the migrants, the old, the handicapped, the sick,
the retarded, the aborigines, the disadvantaged groups pay
the price for r Snedden's economic fantasies? Let our
opponents say clearly, honestly, unequivocally, that their
weapons in the fight against inflation in Australia are. to be
the children of Australia, the aged of Australia, the
handicapped of Australia, the aborigines of Australia, the
disadvantaged people in our Australian community. For that
is what their policies mean. These are the consequences, the
undoubted consequences of their rag bag of proposals.
Forget their half--bahed proposals and look at the
performance their performance of obstruction in Opposition,
Stheir performance of mismanagement in government.
You will recall how for a disestrous week before
Christmas 1971 the then coalitioc* 9-g-.'-rnment nearly fell
a'part about the internatioual v. 1iue of the Australian dollar.
The Leader of the Country Party the man who wants to be
Treasurer, the man whose remedy fcr inflation is to double the
price of oil threatened to ., ilk out of the government
unless he got his way. And get his disastrous way he did.
Their division as much as their actual decision to devalue did
great harm to Australia in those days. Australia cannot afford
a repetition yet nri. thiig is m'ore certain, than that the
return of our opponents to government would mean deep,
unbridgeable and continuing division and damage on the matter
of the value of the Australian dollar. Division on such a
matter means undermining the strength of the Australian dollar
u 
8
Following the decision in 1971, this nation was flooded with
millions of dollars of unwanted foreign capital, capital which
sought to buy Australia up on the cheap. You must not allow
it to happen again.
This vast infusion of foreign money was one of the
root cauces of the inflationary problem which we have faced
ever since we came into government. The men who created
that problem now ask you to give them back the government.
The same men created the major economic prohierm much more
than an economic problem a social and huxian problem which
we first had to face when we came into government. It was
the problem of unemployment. The Budget of 1971 created
Australia's worst unemployment for 10 years. The man who
made that Budget, the Treasurer who presided over that
unemployment, is the present Leader of the Opposition. We
promised to restore full employment. We have restored it.
Every comparable country in the world shares the problem of
inflation. Ile are distinct from all those countries in this:
that in Australia alone, there is._ no unemployment; in
Australia alone, unemployment and inflation do not march side
by side. Our opponents by their divisions,, by their decisions,
started the new round of inflation in Australia. Yet
simultaneously, they created unemployment. And these are the
men who ask you to give them control over your economic-affairs.
V.. 
9
TAXATION The new prosperity our policies have created, the
restoration of full employment we have achieved, the rise in
wages and salaries has brought new problems, in particular for
the lower and middle wage and salary earners. It has created
a whole new range of problems and new inequities in the field of
personal taxdtion. In Septenber 1972 our predecessors appointed members
of a Committee under the chairmanship of Ir. Justice Asprey to
inquire into the structure and operation of the present
Commonwealth taxation system and to formulate proposals for
improving the system by making changes in it, abolishing any
existing form of taxation or introducing new forms of taxation.
The Committee was to have regard to the effects of the present
system upon the social, economic and business organisation of
the community and upon the economic and business organisation
Sof the community and upon the economic and efficient use of the
resources of Australia and to the desirability of a fair
distribution of the burden of taxation and of a system of
collection which not unduly complex and did not involve the
public or the administration in undue difficulty, inconvenience
or expense. The Treasurer, Crean, an:-I have had discussions
with the Asprey Committee, which will make a report to us by
I June. Its recommendations will therefore be taken into account
in this year's Budg et, when we shall be giving urgent consieeration
to the restructuring of the taxation system.'
In my Policy Speech in I! ovember 1972 I promised that
we would expand the terms of reference of the Asprey Committee
to include State and Local Government taxation systems and
Scollection methods. The Premiers of South Australia, Western
Australia and Tasmania agreed to coopel. te but the responses of
the other Premiers made it impossible for the Committee to carry
out the expanded inquiry.
Last month, however,. at a Constitutional Convention
standing committee which I chaired, it was decided that Commonwealth
and State officers should confer and report on the
respective occupancy by the Commonwealth, State and Local
Governments of the fields of income taxation, excise dutie2 And
sales tax, vehicle and fuel taxes, death duties and land and
property taxes. ' e shall be consulting fully with the States
on those items of shared taxation, such as death duties, on
which our officers are to report.
The Treasurer has already announced in Parliament that
the estate duty law is to be amended to e-tablish a Board of Relief
to hear applications for release from liability for duty in cases
of serious hardship. Such a Board has proved its worth in the
case of income tax. The estate duty board will be empowered to
release an estate from all or part of the duty payable where
ayment would impose serious hardsh; ip on a beneficiary or
beneficiaries and where relief granted would be for the benefit
of beneficiaries so affected. 
10
One aspect of estate duty is particularly unjust
the taxation of the matrimonial home. This practice constitutep
a failure to recognise the role wo; ien play in our society. The
person who looks after the home and the family contributes as
much to the economic value of the family home as the person who
goes to work. In estates in which the matrimonial home or an
interest therein passes to the widow or widower of the deceased
the value of the deceased's interest, up to a limit of $ 35,000,
shall be excluded from the dutiable value of the estate; the
prooortion of the value exempted from duty will be reduced by
2% for every $ 1,000 above this limit.
This is one of the very few completely new undertakings
in this policy speech. It will cost only about $ 10 million
per year but will ensure that no widow or widower will have
to sell the family home in order to meet federal estate duty.
The present income tax law allows concessional
deductions for dependants to Australian resident taxpayers only
where the dependants are themselves resident in Australia. In
Sthe case of a migrant who comes to Australia intending to bring
his wife and children out to this country as soon as he has made
Sa home for them, a period of 5 years is regarded as a reasonable
time for the wife and children to join the migrant in Australia.
If he maintains the family during this period income tax
Sdeductions for the dependants are allowable to him.
However, migrants who . are maintaining dependent
relatives overseas with no view to bringing them to Australia,
or who may be prevented from bringing them to Australia by
restrictive emigration policies in force in some countries, are
unable to qualify for a tax deduction for dependants. It is my
Government's intention to extend the provisions of the income
tax laws governing dependants' deductions so as to entitle people
in these situations to the taxation advantages availale already
to all of us maintaining dependent relatives who reside in
Australia.
SCUSTOMER PROTECTION The Australian Government has already taken
important measures to protect the -safety and economic interests
of customers. They include the 25% tariff cut and decisions
to. ensure cheaper colour television sets and radios. 7iTen
passed, the Trade Practices Bill will make safety stanrlrds
mandatory, and will require specified information to be disclosed
when specified goods an1 services are offered for sale.
Collusive price-fixing by corporations , ill he prohibited and
the protection of customers will be promoted through the
encouragement of a competitive climate in industry. Last year
we established the Interim Commission on Consumer Standards,
which has recommended that a permanent body.. succeed it.
We will establish a Bureau of Customer Protection.
The Bureau will ensure that consumer interests are properly
consulted and represented in all aspects of governmental
activity on consumer protection. 
.11
The PILu~ trali-in Coveri::. ent la~ hor9 tories twi 1 he
or inntJ~ LeLoward:: pro-luct T0i1 : tfwr esults Of suoch tests
b ie. e t u1 l. c.
MlEW STRUCTURES The greatest burden on the Australian economy,
the b~ iggest drag on our nr~ timnl prwosperity is the inefficient,
costly structures iLnheritted frcii L1.0 p&amp; SL. The great thieme of
our legislative program th~ e program now disrupted and deferred
by this premature electir) has ber; en one oi: refLorm and
renovation. Wie rccognise-d from i-he heginninq that thf.! ref'orms
vie wiere sceeking for Austra] izon socie ty -for a more -ju! st and
humane Australian society would be possible only through
reforms in the structure of tha government itself.
9 The accumulated dcadwocd of inefficiency of our
urban sprawl, uncoordinated local government bodies, too many
trade unions, obsolete communic at ions, archaic public transport
systems, lack of hospitals; where most people now live, our land
* use and abuse, the duplication of es. sentiail scervices because of
a misinterpretation of the true mcnaningy of fedUeralism, an
education system which until latyear never took adequate
* account of needs it is all these archaisms, anachronisms, and
inefficiencies which generation after generation, have built
into the Australian economy such-. high costs for such poor returns.
And this is precisely what we. hacvb attempted to reform and
restructure institutions and system,. s whose ine ffici~ erncy or
antiquity impose a tremendous buirden on th'c Australian economy
and the Australian Society.
The onsitution~ i~ a~ s~ " There shall bie ah
Inter-State Ccmrission". One2 of the first acts of the Menzies
Government in 1950 -was to repeal the act establishing the
Conssion pqc . oenmn n9-1: 21. o The
Government will re-estabis omsso h _ yhea r.
Vle hav'e completely * ccmoulelJle thoe epartmental
* structure of the Australian Governmcm! t. To qive2 organisational
thrust to our new priorities we -hfivo created new; depa--rtmncnts
Mlinerals and Energy, Urban and Regional Davelopnient, Ahoriginal
Affairs, Environment and Con serva tici and Horthern Devalopi nent.
We have remodelled and reinviqrritc'd othw-r departments and! ltave
amalgamated and are amalgamcat~ ln; st'L! 3. others. Vie Ihave, a rnoct,
efficient administration. Even r,. or e: important, the national
government is now equippe( 3 involve itsel-i-in new important
and urgent fields. In 1972 1 said:
'" We shall need the help and seek the helrh of the
best Australians. W'e shiall rely of course on
Australia's gireat Publ) Iic Service. tic shiall seek
and wielcome. ad ice arid co,--operatormbyn
the confines Canb , Xra':. 
12
To promote further the efficiency of the Australian Puh-Ii qervice
w; e shall establish a R~ oyal Cornnision. It will b; e headed by one
of PAustralia's most dTstin uished and experienced former public
servants a great servant of the Australian people Dr. H-. C.
Coombs. I have already announced, our acceptance of the
recommenda tions of Sir James \ lernon's I1: oyid Coi-miission on the
Post Office -that tl'ut Post Office __ snould-be I-: ndeyeuident of the
control of the Publ--i; cService Board. an. that a separate
Australian Postal Coiymiru~ iov' nd Au: tralianTeleco nunications
C ORnissron ( incor--Lc-rat iriq the 07ex seas icmuriain
Commtission) should be established. 1e( shill follow the same
principle in the transpurt fielld for the Australian
National RaiJlwa s, our: airportKri &amp; tcve' q oprations and,
~~ Lti wththe respective Statas, the Mewcastle dockY ardl andI.
We have armred the admi nistrative machine with new
capabiliti's -and new organs to c-a1 with the increasingly
complex and difficult problem's ofL planning tor the needs of -a
growing iridustrizl soci ety. Srme ofL -% he new~ bodies were given
permanent statutory form, slich as th-&amp; schools Commission, the
Social welfare Commission, T. he Isat and flea3. th Services
Commission, the Prices Jus t. fijat. ion Tribunal and the Pipeline
Authority; others ha-d tileir statutory charter utterly
transformed such as tho Grants Ccmn; si: on, the Cities CoMlission
and the Industries Ass; istance C ommission.-
Obviously, our newC Ldeirart-mc-n* Cs, statutory authorities,
the comnssions and enr~ uirij. es aL'Aisj. nci the Government and the
Pavlii-nenrt cannot oper: ate wvjti-iout staff, without advice, vlithout
qualified men and wvomen. Of crsthat costs money not a
cent too much, not a cent too soon. Yet for the sake of paltry
* short-teinA saving~ s, at th,-e pri. ce nf ). osing the timne and talents
of men and women who hav cr' te1rqcuctdy--
judges, academics, sta te pulcservants and businessm-ten, our
opponents propose -to thaiottlei These nmew activitieS; they . itend
to cut off the source of : 2xper t an(! pulic advice so essential to
any planningj for tLhr-. effoctivO,-ef , ficidm-t, mo! 3t humane andi least
exp:) nsive ways of decaling wit', A ustralia' s accumulated soCial an~ d
ecoinomic problems for the re-st of this centCury. . The fact is that
wie have to spend a little plan a lot now, in 1974 ife
are to build a decent, humane, efficient society for the
generations to come.
so we have begun 1Lasic andA quite massive reorganisation
of the s~ tructuLre-S wii-ch oerensUse. in
hustralia to carr:' out tic pol's ule This w. e propose
to continue to do. -In some 2: e/ Jrota YIy eCf'ucatioin, ' i&gt;
able to act immciatelyvf o-her fields, , e nad to ; q-ait for
moreD information and moze e; perL so weimmediiately sr-t
_ L~ ut getti-. g th-at advice ai-d, *. r. cru? ti-nc the ex). rts. I'II othc,:
fields, like health I , ot conrt btuL.~
Dat in all f ields and all levelIs, t. he wor'k goes on. It mnust ixit
Ibe interru. pted. It must not be disrupted. I utnth
dlestroyed. 
F. UCATI O1.1 The vdluc of the work of our new Comnmissi~ ons ancl
Committees of Enquiry have been great and continuingi. e
arnel. Cormmtltee on * Schools, now instituted as the ' Schools
Cormais Aon, has transformed the outlook for Australian
education. We have* almost doubled Au-stralian G over nmnt fqlr'.
on education. That money has beens distributed Z1CCo1! din-. J to
needs of all schools. Ile have assum&amp; ed full financial reop-: n0--
bility for tertiary education. Vle have. abolished fees for
tertiary and technical education. For the first-time qeare
giving assistance to teachers' colleges and pre-schcol teachers'
colleqecs on the saine basis as univer. si ties andl colle-,; es of
* advanced education. We are giving much more generous allowancens
to studE-nts and have more than trebled the nu.: iber of teaching
scholarships. The parents of Australia well know -and history
* will record that the greatest single achievement of our
* W Government in its first year was to change the face of education
in Australia, and to change the basic attitudles, of the Australian
people towards education. If we had achieved nothing else, iwe
would be remembered for this-that we buried once and for all
the futile and divisive debrate over so-called " State rights" and
" State aid" for s; chools. T. e not only freed vast amounts of money
f or schools; we freed the whole deboate on'education so that froill
now on, parents, teachers, and educcational authorities can engage
rationally in discussion about what is really best for our schools
what is truly best for our chilcdr. n.
Of course, many reforms st.' 1 remain to be made
within the Australian education system. The Schools Commission
is already conducting a study of those -_ rours not receiving full
Wbenefits their schooling.-the culturally dis~ advantaged
* child, the linguistically disadvantaged, the emotionally or
intellectually aisadvantaged. The greatest inequiity in the
* systcem ' how: ever, as the Karmel Cormm-ittee itself remarked, is its
bias ajainst girls: the fact that so few girls as compared to
boys sit for their final sc'-iooP &amp;; rWAS or continue into the
technical trades or enter the brofes:; ions. This is one. th~ e
major reasons w~ hy women are concentyr-ted in the less wjell paid
Jobs in our society. I have as3-ed the Commission to study the
causes of this situation and recomn. nd remedies.
1have drafted a bill to establish a C-urriculum
Deve) opment Centre. 
CHILD CARE The advice of the qualified and the concerned m~ en
and women now being made available through our commissions and
enquiries enables the Government to imlpleMent its broad vision
of the nature and purpose of education in a modern society.
Tile want not only to provide wider opportunities for education.
for a lifetime, we want to provide opportunities for a life-ti!. i-e
of education. Such opportunicties must be made available if
Australians are to be able to lead full and happy lives
rewarding to themselves and to the cOmmunity. In a society
undergoing such rapid change a~ s ours, the plain fact is that a
majority of people will changeterocptonmr hnoc
in their lives. Rcdundancy Is no longer the lot of manually
skilled workers alone. Few occupations are going to be left
untouched by the technological revolution.
In the next Parliament our big initiatives in
education will concern the care and education of pre-school
children, technical training, and adult retraining. The
foundations of our initiatives rest on work done by the
Social 11elfare Commission, the Pre-Schools Committee, * the
J'angan Committee on Techni cal and Farther Education arid the
Cochrane Committee on Adult Training and Re-Training.
There are at Dresent about 1.3 million children
of pre-school age. For more than one in four of these children,
there is no parent at hoi-me during wvorking hours. of these only
one in every 10 attends a chill care centre. A child in
Canberra has twice as gjood a chance Lf attending a pre-school
as a child in Victoria and four times as good a chance as a
child in Nlew -South OaJes. least 15,000 children aire left
totally unattendedi] durincj the day. Thousands more are left to
the care of brothers or sisters. Furthermiore, for too many of
our primary school childran there is , here to go outside of
school hours or during vacations. Too rf; any children begin
school with educational, cul tural. or psychological disadvantages.
The Government's Droqran for these children ) reflepcts
the recommenEtiers of the PeSho mitewhosceorot
was tabled last December, the Social 7elfarc conmmssion,_ Lpi; h
was established by ain act atVoHvaesidn iber, ar) d thr
Priorities Reviewz Staff. The. roiq ran will aa e"" elop
of services__ includingi the development of famnily dIay cr
diay centres, preschools, T~ tyL. O uis, outside of school care,
Li,, irqenc ard occasional care, todi-iers qrourns and _ y-tin
po4-ols. Pro-. ision will. he imi-Ade fo tof: care by relativl-S,
or hhors TheH scen! ill be diese and f lexib-le
troe cogn Ise d if fe r ent nie cd s o f dI f ' k: c-rent communities.
To encouragje the creatiiion of child care csnntres in
indrustry, ". 1es~ ai remove t1' e' Innr wt ip. Lrrcomc-Tax Act
w; hich' 1inipEdes the( tax dieduct-ibITity ofsedn--_ cm~ ne
on child care. 
15
Ve envisage that 50-0,000) children will benefit by
1.977 and that by 1930 all Australian children will have access to
local centres designed to take care of their educational, health,
psychological and other needs. All children, not just the
4 year-olds, whether cared for in their own home or in full,
part-time or occasional care, will have access to free pre-school
education. Child care servi. ces wil~ l be subs idi sned ith parents
contributinq to the cost aeoc~ oto their me~ ns, the inain
thrust of th~ e prograt in tFhefirst yer being to assist
disadvantaged children, it is esLimatedI that the cost of thi~ s
program in the first year a program of vision and imagination
based on a compassionate understandi -ng of the needs of the child,
the parent and the community will $ 130 milli-on.
We are determined that technical education shall
cease to be the Cinderella of Australian educationl. The reports
* of the Kangan and Cochrane Commiittees will provide an effective
and expert basis for hold new initiatives to allow technical
skills to find their proper and honoured place in a changing
society. These proposals represcnt a major attack on social
inequality. We have drafted a bil~ l for a Technical and Further
Education Comm37ssion. In March last yea r my Government appointed a special
manpowaer commission to study manpower policies abroad. Ne now.
Ppos1 e to am-lalciamatce all existincj5 -r iining chemnes into one new
National Emplo~~. 1ymernt arid Training ]? rocramu . wl oki
W s -6o-aoain-vi-t no movement and employer
organisations to identcify immaediate needs and to make long-term
projectioris of labour needs to meet the future demands of industry.
Ve will offer relocation assistance to those who find themselves
in regions or industries affected bjy economic, structural or
technological change. In the provi-sion of its training
facilit-ies, will give priority to persons affected by
changes in tariff policiesz anid th-ose m-ade ri-dundant by technological
change. N. E. A. T. will trinn ooron5p~ o rtunities for
all persons without discrimination on grounds of race or sex. 
16
Our retraining program will help ensure that our
present unprecedented growth in enployincrit opportunities cal).
be met and maintained. Increased productivity and our groving prosperity
depend upon our ability to make full use of the whole of our
available manpower.
STIdJCTUILAL CIX\. CFE
The Government realises that, in times of rapid
tectinological change a mechaninm is nceded to promote and
make easier the movoment of employees from one occupation to
another, from one industry to another, from one region to
W another. Accrdinqlv, the Governnent has decided to
introduce structural adlIustArnent assistarice to inci'viduals
WattY* ! fLVoyers. Indlivi~ duals, including~ sma~ l owners ant
rur i pro" W -C-3, s advecrselyrnj~~~ i~ l, structural ch? n r~ qo
3 1. C 0 1 f J, 1) 1e f q(-Ji(' ICC U MC) Mi 1,17.1i ' t-enance paRyment s,
raininq assistance and rc ocati7onq f rms
will be eliqi. ble f o r consultancy/ qua.-! antees
This scheme will improve the Xusitralian economy
in the interests of the consumer and will provide industry
with a better resource base and pattern of skills.
L 
.17
1iAIGTANTS We recognise the outstanding contribution migra-, nts
have made to our productk-ive capacity. Our primary conc(! rn,
8h ow'tvleever.-s, ai. ns d rocti titzheenisr. ecotlneo mhaicv e vhaleueq ibunta vthgeoiro hsadpip-n s ohsl
migrants ovrercclflie the disadvantage inseparable fromn life in a
new country. The number of social workers and welfare officers
x. orkf.': ng amongst migrants has been more than doubled. Sonic 1,500
special teachers 1vv'been employed in schools at 3atnrr
Government cost to give special tuition in ~ ni. hto 60,000
miqra-i1t ebldien, twice the number receiving it under our
predecessors. Provision has also be: en made f.-r emergency
classroom acc.. mmodation, For a. ilts-the numnber of specialised
courses intensive or accelerated courses, courses in industry,
3courses for women arid arrangemwents for onie-two-one tuition in
migrants' own homes has been developed or expanded,
Mligrants have responded and have demnonstrated a
new111 interest in ident.' fyling wit'. Austr:* lia. The number who
Whave beco-ye 72xUStrali. ay--iti011inS 1973 has increased by 48%
over-1972, ind the nun. bter returiining to their countries of
okigin has declined for the first timie in 9 vears.
* SOICIAL SECURlITY For too long Australia has demeaned herself and
mlli. ons ol. our followi-citize.. ns by the idea that those unable
to work, or to engage with full vigor in the xw. ork and leisure
Sof a vig.:-rous community deserved charity but lost their right
Wto self-respect and dignity.
' 1e inherited a system of social welfare based almost
entirely on the% concert of cash payments. We inherited a system
* whereby society accepted that it had fulflilled it~ r. oh~ ligat. ions
Wto the disa-dvantacjcd sections of the comnmunity onece it h
settled upon the leval of cash payments JFor tho! se dotoeid to be
in need. It was an easy way to fob off our coillectiv conscience.
It was a systefa which took litt-le ' real account oif true : ei
It was a systeia which did nothing at all. to provide its
beneficiaries o; victims -with a chance for dignity, a chance
for rehabilitation, a chance for taking a real place in the
living community. The Social W4elfare Commission has been established to
help the Government set goals for social welfare and to allow
the community to help determine these goals. The public reports
of the Corai: is ion serve as a standlard by which the comt:, unity
can judge the Government's decisions and performance.
Certainly cash payments for all classes of pensions
and welfare benefits have been sign-ificantly increased. 
Since taking office, we have increasedi age and invalid
pensions by 30% a significantly greater increase than the rise
in average weekly earnings or prices.
We have introduced a number of new benefits and
improved a number of exci.-ting oiien. Ne introduced the Supporting
:', others Benefit and the Or-phans Pension. We abolished the
discrimination of classes of widowys all widowis nowr receive the
same amnount. We, have increased the grants arid liberalised the
conditions for Aged Personr' Homes, th! 2 Home Care program and
Rehabilitation allowances.
Ile have proceeded to abolish the means test according
to our promised scheO~ ula.
My G~ overnment's ovar-riding concern, however, has
been to overhaul th: entire system so that Australia s-hall be,
as once she was, as she ceased to be in the coalition years, a
pioneer and a l. eader.
The TAustrAlian Assistance Plan has been established
to expand and enh,, ance, co-ordiix atte yet diversi f-y the activities
of welfare agencies, official anu' ; clunt~. ry alike. The Plan
places emphasis on th? neec'. for huirnr contact, counsel and
compassion as an adlition to cash payments. Funds on a costsharing
basis with ilocaJ. gover-. n-Rent; and voluntary agencies havre
beeni made availabla In 3.5 regions ohbt. A trl.
In 3.9' 5 the A'ustrcalian Gcvormmnt % ill-make funds
available und( J the Plan tovcy ejo. n u
NATIONAL COMPENSATIOM lie are ( ieter-. nin, 2d to place the security, the welfare
of those who suffer incapacity th; rough z:. cciden;-or sickness on
a sure and certair, ba:-is on t-he basis of confidence and freedom
from f inanc ial. a:' ix ety for tlhenms2 vc-s zand their famil ies.
Australians should not havie ton l. vc ini d1oubt or anricty lest
irnjury or sic] WC5Ss reduce oet! ~ eW hmw~ i ant to reduce
hardships imrpose_; by on(-of the great fi. ctors -for i~ nc. aliy -in
society irnequality of 2uck. Accor0. inaly, in arhl: 7
we established the National Rehabil itat ion and Compnr: satio2
Committee under the chairmanshi of-rl justice 7, ooahouse of th e
N~ ew Zealand Court of Apa. In rubi: uary its teram of reference
were extended to cov, the sick as wcll as the iLnjuired. It is
excpected to report zL the end of June.
N-y Government has dec . Ae-! d to irntroduvo a procjral to
help meet the im. aterial neeas anrl. vdtise the dignity o-1 homcL! Es
men -and wometi. 
Ca ita). r rants will be made available . q-or a
three-ear period to vo untary agecies, local anr~. a-i2r
authlor . tief; for cts such a~ s ngtsetrhses
daycetre a sapncYdTe ~ TTis c-and centres.
This is a program devised in response to a ic.
neglected need; it will be of benefit to the young as well as
the old. It will be of benefit to any person in inediat e , Cdt:;
to the permanently homeless, to the desierted or disturbed womThAiL
and her children, to the aboriginal or teenager in want or distr(-: s
to the battered woman or the battered child, to the singjlepan
in short, to anyone without support or an income.
NUHRSfING HOMES In keeping with the governmenit's commitment to proteuti! ng
arnd improving the position of tho sick arid the aged, the qoveriient
will suzattlyincrease benefAits paid to nursi. nq Fm din
to taKe iento account the increased COScs incurred. by nursi ncy huces.
In addition, an altcrinativc form of financial
assistance wl'YFFe of fered * to rTTeii cht. errriI~ ri~
I) T2I ne thje&amp; I* eIciIIpc) eot rUatxnqr
of these homes reclarding this arrangcment which will enale these
homes to improve still furtCher their stanidardis and facilities.
The ! Ainister for Social Security, Hr. Hfayden, wi) ll
announce the details of the proposals and other welfare mfuasure.:
in the goverpment's welfare pol icy speech in Djoeibourne C~ n
W~ ednesday.
HIEAVY i The government is determin, -d to fulfil its
constitutional responsibility ' for providin~ g ho!: pitcil b : rierfit anid
medical and dental services anid to give all Aistralians. access
to high quality health care at reasonclble ccest.
Our proposal for universal health iirisurance pat
you and strongly supported by you in the elections of 1969 and
1970 as well as 1972, was twice rejected 1, y the Sei*, ate. It wz:. S
among the measures on which the Gove rno.~ Generzal grantced t he--
double dissolution. it will therefore he one of the first
measures brouoht before eho alam~ t. i r tiLU
one mlfon_ Austraflans -are st1 l , otctaeqda iast hosoital
and medi. cal c-harges.
We will extend iuedial eefits Lo ; ovei: 1, hwJtat ions
with op tome t F~ sts. 
We propose to restore free hospital treatment established
by the last Labor Government in 1947 and abandoned by the 1ienzies
Government in 1952. ! tJe shall offer to share . with the States half
the cost of making_ hospital treatim: ent free in sitandard wards.
Furthcr, the national. qov'ernment is ite r epred
to build, staf f and operateflhospita õ li areas and regions now
inadequateLy served. ' ie havc alreadly approached the States.
We have offered to provide half the cost of building
and operating a new General Hospital in Launceston and wholly
build and operate a new womien'I s hos-pital in Hobart.
Ile have offered to construct and operate teaching
Wextensions at the Rloyal Newcastle Hospital without cos-t to
the U. S. W. Gov'ernment. In the last Budget we set aside $ 4 million to proceed
Swith the building of a teaching hospital at 1W. estmead,
WThough this project has bee(-n planned by th State governr1, c-nt
for silz years, that government has i. nformoed us that they are un1able
to spend the mnoney' we have provided. our offer still stands.'
The money is there. It is up to the State government to
use it. Ile shall press on withm the establishment of commuunity
health centre~ s, Te ihate and
loaloverninents. The Australian school Dental Scheme will be expanded
to cover all rilnary scoo lddrnb
We shall institute a dornici liary dental servefo
thed tosev 7 OO Ooplhe~
a cost of 600,0OO anmmual. y
Ile shall reconstitute thie Commonwealth Seerm
Laboratories and estc hTFa Phaxin, it~ a3d. C, iii ion to -es arch
.( and w holeo; ale di-1gs th u~. feslnsrcmkJ) 0_ a
bythe Vernon floyal Com! wissio F~ or the Ps fie
CITIES In all. these matters in education, social security,
health we have had these great objective.;: to reduce inequality,
to promote equality of opportunity, to make the system itself
rmo re efficient and equitable. 7, J1 ther~ ain 3 aire comnbined in
the biggest new effort my cjo'i-evnt has mido_-in our qreat cities,
in our growing centres all around AUStralicz. At last Australia
has a national governmclnt reparc-d to i nvolv e it-, sel f i~ n the
* affairs of the places where m~ ost. Au ~ txraliant liVe: our citieS
and our centres. 
21
We have recognised, as I said in 1972, that " a
national government which cuts itself off from responsibility
for the nation's cities is cutting itself off from the nation's
real. life". In its direct involvement in cities the Australian
Government has entered the mainstream of Australian life. That
new involvement has been central not onl. y to the affairs of
the great majority of Australian people; it is central to our
relations with State government and local government, Pie not
only want to remould, modernise, revitalise our cities; we want
to remould, revitalise, rnodernise the relations between the
three levels of government national, state, local. tl. have
involved the national governmen~ t in matters w . hich previously
were left to the States or not done at all. If they were left
to the States,* they were too often done inadequately, or not
done at all. If left to local government,. they were too often
done inadequately, finaaced unfairly or not done at all.
0 In this field we have had some examples of splendid
co-operation with the States yet equally we have met some of the
worst obstruction f rom the States.
The Albury/ Uodoiga agreemennt. to create Australia's
first large centre away from the seaboard since the found.' ing of
Canberra has been a splendid example * of co-operation. . Je have
also made agreements with the States for new growth cent)-es,
finarice for sewerage and grants for urban transport. It would
have been unheard of until 1972 that an Australian national
governinent should involve itself di rectly ip regional development,
s-ei\: eracge, urban.-trcunsport. Because previous national governments
even with all their atonopo ly over the really big and gro..,; ing
sources of revenue, w-, ould not involve themselves, nothing effective
* was ever done about c~ ecentralisation; our great cities had the
largest unsewered areas of any comparable cities in the world;
and our urban transport systems were app&gt;-:, a ching breakdown. Of
c~.~: cit hats been impossible in so short a time to reverse
the trendis rc-. salting from decades of neglect. But we have made
a J nnn; a rtbainic
LOCAL GOVERNIMENT Yet crucial to making a good continuationi andl a gcod
culmination of these efforts i~ s the role of local goveroi. cnt'.
And it must 1be sai. 1 tChat our efforts to raise the status of
local govern~ ment and to give local government direct access to
th1 nation's finances have met with scant co-operation from
state governments. Ie huave sought to wake local government a genuine
vlrtrtner in f~ ha ; stc T liñ. rvi c. '~ ll1: the
Gtants Cou.~~, a~ llot; 1.-. Cal j0-v'-L'r1JTIent bodies to make
submissions and t allow the Cormission to ma ke recommrendations
on the amounts of ri,. nay needed to rek-1tce inequalitjes between
regions and within States.-as traditionally it used. to do as
between the States,. 
-22-
The role we assign to local governmenit is the real
answer to charges of centralismn. Under a variety of programs
we'have provided local governm-ient with the funds to undertake a
range o activiti-es previously inadequately carried out or
totally neglected. The Auistralian Assistance Plan, the programs
for community health, area imp--rovemnent-, the national estate,
the arts, tourism and recreation a d aborigines all these
provide funds for commrnunity activities to be orqanised by local
government. We deliberately have made and shall make local
government a vehicle for our lcgislation on aged persons' homes
and hostels, sheltered employment, han-dicapped children, mea ls
on wheels, home care and nursing, nursing homies and homeless men
and woi-men. These are all activities which cannot be close],,. y
regulated from the centre and are best planned and implemented
by local government workingq with local communities. They justify
assistance fromn the nation'Is finances but not increases in rates.
W~ e insisted on local, gover-nment representation' at
the Convention on the Constitution in September last year~. We
made local government representation a condition of part iciJ-pation
by the national government.
0At that Convention I put the case for local govevnment
representation on the Loan Council.. The States' Premiers then,
and at a special Premiers' Conference in Octolber, turned down
our proposal that local governiment should have a voice vid a vote
in the Loan Counzcil. Tie forhreferendum now boc": ore you will take the
next crucial step in raising the status of local governriepnt. It
wil. l enable the national government to make grants direct: to
local yoenetbodies, if they wish, zand to borrow m,-oney on
* their behalf, if they wish. Only if this is done can local
governmtent acquire reasonable access to '' le nation's finances.
Only if this is done can local governmenz carry out, the increasing
responsibilities and bear the increasing . h-urdcer-s vyhich federal
and state governments alike iimrpose upocn it and which the p.-eople
* need. Only if this is done can inequality between regions be
reduced. It remains true, as I said in 1972, that more anid more
the standard of life of the Australian citizen depends not
so much on how much hie earns but % Z1tre he lives.
URB3AN TRANSPORT We are providing $ 31 million this year to the state
governments for urban public transporL.-improvement. We are
proosinqt2p1ovide another 141 mil lion to coi : pet FrIc~ ts
CUoimn 1N. 9ths Y. Half the morie y haF, been allocate-d for the
tion of new railway rolling st~ ock, buses andtr: s
Other mcjor proje( cts loeing assistecd include
quadruplicatioii of the railway line lhcatween Granville and Penrith,
construction of a number of acdditioi... 1 tracks in N'elbourne to 
-23
relieve congestion and increase the capacity for express services
operating to outer suburban area!-, and electrification of urban
rail links in Brishane andl Adelaide.
From as far back as 1907 each mainland taegove~ rnment
has from time to time-consented to Che Commonw,. ealth Government
constructing or extending railways in its state; these railway's
have always been country lines and have usually involvedC State
expenditure. Last February my g-overnime,' int sought. the M. S. 14.
government ' s consent to construct a railway in the metropdolitan
area, to be constructed and operated without cost to the N. S. U1.
govern-iient. The railway system we scek to construct will radiate
from )? arramatt1-a to Hoxton Park, Castle Hill andf through Carlingford
to Epping. It will allow the i~ ntr. oduction of the best contempnorary
* Signalling practices and carriage sets.
I have told the Premier -that we wish to Provide funds
in the ne." zt uqe heeimc: Lntof-E; ntrC tioi and -the
0ECo rol I~' stoCK
1131 S 1.1G Wrec ogise too that wher-n Australians live is le: s
and* leS a Matter Of truly f ree choicee, but a matter of the
availability and price of resideiAial land. I regret to say that
here agaitn, in our Ce2forts~ to hoJ. d down the pi-ic-e of lizntd, we havke
mnet State goverrnm'ent obstruction. Frum-, the -timue we tooK office
1; e hAve been negotiating with the States to es. tablich land
. friCnogretmsi ssi ons to clear and develop lanei at new centres or On the
of existingl cities. The Commrvissions, by selling
buildingj blocks at'a fair pri~ ce, twov! ld help dampen spiralling
land costs. They would alslo be a key to better town planning. In
the larst B~ udget we allocated $~ 60 million to be spent over two
years by the land coaaissions. Only one State the Labor State
* of South AustL-ralia has so far pa-ssed. the necessary lecjisl&amp; a'ion.
The foL-mer Labor Administration in !( estern Aii7tralia pass!, ed the
legislation in the Legislative Asseinbly, only to have it rejected
in the Upper House.
lie have found the housing problem one of the most
difficult of all our inheritances fromn the previous government.
During the two year: s prior to Deceniber 1972, there was a miassive
growth in money supply within Aust-ralia and vast sums were
channelled to the housing industry for private dwellig
con struct ion. The result of this was that the housinrl industry
became grossly over-extended, long delays occurred in the supply
of materials and labour to building sites, construction times
were greatly extended and excessive cost risQs became the order
of the day. Public housing-proqrairs-for which thle government
provided a record assistance of $ 21l8.65 million in .1973/ 74 were
not being fulfilled because of the demand for resources in private
housing and other building construction. 
-24
While maintainInc all our efforts to-rc. over from the
position we inherited, We pro, ) oso fur~ ther nieasures; to reduce
housing costs and the burden of ;' igfor a house.
A major proc id al-uadcy, r am3; en Launched to produce
a uniform housinq code and '. cmmwdp.-cacticcs for dwellinig units
of various types ranging. from hiJh' te med11WL andi low density
housing. This is aime at_ sip aynnd rational ising inany
of the unnecessarily complex and non--st. Drila~ rj ic, ms; whiich ad~ d
unduly to housing costs, and x-Aich do not conL) ibutc! to thle
quality of living.
HOUSE INTSURANCE The government Jis determine6 to civc home--owners the
opporuun3. ty to insure their propcrties, for lower prcinium,-s and
against natural s T ~. 1Jh JVq( 1C
introduced on I f[ chr)) uiary u s ' VIi' iA r21-osr, L
favourable than those se t hOy i SUJ1: c2]: t t111: h1 t: 1k DI.,, XG:
Service HIomejs i u~~ eshiv . r : evrIg~* A
wider ccover than oi-. hcr inuiors ~ c
have come to realisc.
AccordIn-nly Lhc tjvny. n: I isn Au'. itral IJ trz
Gove-rnmient InsuranL: j~ 2 f. e
forms of insV raflc(* hIlcA'm 2, ii~ i'
UI.;-diJS tjcs; e1 oCe) r fo:-no,:~ t~ IIe:
TiFn1RS i I : J Tofc
P~ e will heltp new-,. hiome bye to rearrane their
mortaq( e repmon-._ 1111Tcsrcr andI the( IinisLer fo): Housing
willrhave early dicussicons \/ il: h the mrajor ) c: n3. ing institutions
* mono rttghaigse mpaatltmerc. n t3 Osuor itnhha-te nyt-o'uonnri c is tom hc.; I~ rn. easw lr , arrangcpmayc erliet sso fat
a time when the cderiands5 on their . iJncoPme arc-1igche-t. nI hrc. 1in
to pay more later i~ n life whea .' h) iy are-be. ter able tc) ov
higjher repayments. We are thoroughly aware of the burden interest rates
impose on those buying their cown home, particularly-young married
couples. Ife are determineC. to cEac t-hat burden for those in
in my _ 972 policy spehT unoertook that until
i~ anteer et cn h~ edued a ~ hor would introdue
a scherie of tax deduc-:_. bility for hom-. e i; Itc-' c! i-. s payments. All
ta) payers -wh! ose act~ oal incon or belo-7 wilil be entitled
to dedu~ ct 10 0 of thi r intclsc i e AVMinctS. r'iwi vercentaqle
JJEtoti interest nam2t 7V74hiutYS will e reduced
Py 1% for evei5 100 of ic;: in e o of , Gco. r1hat c-~
as I announced 4i. n rebruacry 19.74 is 6ue to no into &amp; f: t . i. n*
of T fh. The legiTs4a Lion hasJ T The~ d schemed 
II
will provide direct tax relief inot&amp;-only for now hiome buyers, but
also for nearly all those %-whc arc: at present paying~ off their
homes. ENVIRONJIIENT Increasing. 1 lh.' z rntoisWvce come to see the relation
between thleir oti'ri hornres h i thr: i.* i ', 70MniLi. ens an
the Whtol;. AuStrillian retn . tt h. 7 j r! q(.' nei:! tion of
Australian.; to tt ( eoest" h:. e 3:. 1c n Yrwls
bex-, weefl oro. wth aidpe3v: i nof tL-he-fliu:~ rmc~ t
govextr-~ 1~ 1~~ ri~~ r~ nt.~ 1A C! I--st CAI, 1) d2d.
to cnsiirL iiha t. crov. th andr jr iC?] Yr: ce nut boiiqhl a t the price
of the dl(,.; ruct. or of thuntio'~ n~ tur-al. and hi!; to'zical
inhe): i4-ZnCc . ICW-h( e, jCv thlat. The polluter must riot future
generations of Aus-k-raJlians.
One of my fir3st-actionsE vat-to* confer with the P r crm i es
of N. S2-7. Vi". ctoria and S: outh st;&gt; ialja on thu fEunctions of the
River Iurray Conw. is-, ion, which have been virtuially un: hanqjed for
years an~ d which are now LuAeJnd2ua to sa feguard the
urban and rural. u~ ers of aqlcreaiate' st1 waterway/.
!, le have Cbt r nictf1Protection Pill
yprovidinqc fon vilo. m1;" I1-~ i il
on them."' I have r po:. e. 1t t1' c yli oH enLr 1 I
impact statents ce. -ilr ;; r
Tr i a,, Z 770. e e5 r ch; t Eli-I
-r 31 o 1~ uI Ti7r'o~
T 1: r to hePm3r5that joint
invo. lvinq X003 -1-s Iit6o 77 õ QJ CA: G~ 0
Corrmittee. on Inciuir-" The Con-. titu'Lton c ivos the Australizin
Government power 4to corit:-ol th-. ey~ port of goods and, in particular,
the export of innerals and t:': imicr. It cai, requi-re that ith
satisfied that the exp) oitcitio of mincra or t.~ c eor~ S
or the manner or -zxterit of tliat e-. ploi1: ation, w! ill. not adversely
affect the environment hcfor-. QV1. iriq(. a toeseeLc port." Otr
. gp\ ernmcflnt will. excrci~ . bs j'mo roqjulaYrly arnd effectively
on the basi. s ot ski:. ilrd and . in~ herc., dnt ilvice.
' Je have drafteOd a National Parks andl 1 Jilcdlife-
Conservation Billi. It wi). l eea. ih~ ilationil Park: s and
Wildlife Commission " 71 Y'iTQhC: JCT e, on a 1
parks, includin such arts a ffuhe ret rr r ( 6
tieJntral, Austral. an71Tre -thcxut' La AA ps an( e
vacatd dncfenc in s ie y i ian Po P1% i-T i
The Governmrnnt ':. rethexotof i tiruts of
kangaroos and relat-d ,;. ecjps. It hi 6ti-' I~ l ii I~ 1th
internM-. i-, il . X4TL7omil1Aty as: Ote t; e irport-ance
of wildlifie cozii.: rvat. 6on. aro . o inccatc : othe i~~: es thlat . it iS.
not siit i., fied with t. 1 l of itni -armniiy in their. approacb. t
conservation pro: 7ram3 for krA:~ s 
26-
FORE~ IGN CONTROL OF RESOU31CES
The national estate belongs to all Australians.
We have accepted the responsibility of the national government
to help protect it arid preserve i~ t for the benefit of all
Australians. Equally, we have accepted our responsibility
to protect Australia's resources ' S thtIecfrh utain
will have a greater share in the control and ownership of
their own resources. We have tried to stop the gre at Australian
sell-out. We have tried to help Australians buy Australia
back. In these aims we have met unrelenting obstruction from
our opponents. For years the Australian Labor Party advanced
the idea of the Australian Industr,-y Dc velopment Corp~ oration
Sand in 1972 undertook to expaiid iLs activi-ties: to enable it to
3join aith Aun'L-ralian arnd foreilgr companie-s in the discovery,
development and proces sinq of Austral ian resources. Eight mon ths
ago we introc2uced the legislation; the Senate stalled it.
Con. 1 anion legislation for the National Investment Fund had tlhe
* Same fate. Through this fund wo intend to holp ord~ inary
Australians invest in the devc,.' pwm nt of thei~ r own re,-_ source~ s
and industries instead of subuidising to the tune of millions,
foreign investors and nmulti-n~ itional corporations. T' e F.
will raise f unds by oprtn
for the g&amp; Yc_, q-( iCp ublic andl by LferiiL3-v erjtC: n investi~ ent
bonds to both~ irivate and i~ Lt* inl: n~ ios
Further, the Senate twice re-jected the Pe-trol and
.1inrals Authority Iill. Th1is is designed-as our basic
instrument for ensurinig dcveloprrent of our energy and mineral
Sresources and to maximise thec ownership and control. of th. CEse
W resources by 1' Australians. It was another of th~ e me,_ aSures'-on
which the Governor-General yranted the double dissolution
and it also will be Yrmtbyebfoocrhet the new Parliament.
Our opponents pattern. of resistance to measures
Wdesigned to promote Australian ownership forms part of a
pattern of encouragement of foreign ownership they set when
in Government. The great sell-out occurred when they formed the
Government. They are still the apologiists for forcei-. n ownorship.
Their return to office w~ ould agJain olpen iw. ide the door. As a'
result of thieir policies, 68 of our cnerm' resources are
controlled overseas. just how wide our opPonients opened t ' he door
is now being revealed. T * he Departrent of H'inerali; and Energy
set up by this Government has now received a thoroughly
documented and impartial report on the mining industry
the Fitzgerald Report. 
-27
Ausralansnow know for the first time the exteat to wich they
have been suL-sidisirig mining invustors.. riainly foreic ncorporations.
The profit on their operations for the las.-t 6 years
was $ 2,000,000,000. Our prodoccs-lori3 developed a syste m of
taxation concess~ ions so generous to these struggling corporations
that the Australian taxpayer gave*' 3100,0 in subsidi-es and
concessions. But the comcpanies paid only $ 28361-in tax. es an-d
royalties, $ 55 m~ illion less.
We have been paying to be TThie~ oti
Fitzgrald orwc lJ tfe sti tr tiriq poAit fcnr L. formutlation
C~ fpoicusai med at m: 1Li; qtn-e" r tAur~ i to ziu~ trali a of her
natural en.] o,; 1xlat or-mineral and ec-kerj wealth.
__ We will. conitinue to pursue v wih vrigour the surveillance
Vof all foreign takce-over pro~ posals for shares or: assets of
exitin Zutralian compaies. kWe have. estcablisheC[: u' e ine
of new foreign invostmervt proposal1s for wn c"" h e eiiceC1lLC
approval i~ s reci~ red. We haveq n~ It' I a c~ t* f1O LO
certain industries Austr3 3 i iiIiL: U. i
institution. s s; o -"-ere is 1itt 1c! advad. ' t;': 3Ce J1in CJ Jowiflcy C3itoDCJ
institutions to Lbe cstablisicd inte. rcists. This is
parti. cula:': ly thie case in the 2je). d of int-urarnce. In the iareza
of m~ neals we have, indicatedC clearly that it . is our ob-i cctive
to reduce the extent of foreign owner-ship a~ nd con trol and
to rnaxiu. se Ausit-ra~ lian contCrol), parjjticujjnr. y of onerq'~' resources9p
FurthurmoreC we haestpp d thec I-u of Autr~ l~ nland,
andexhage onro. ppro~ ial for foreig inCaIl~ v~~ ni
estate. hzas been Iimrited.
T he G vrieie tn t' ii 1 wa . I
ii.( 1 3 il -e 1)*-Th-' afli.-
p. 1ocgsS of fo),-e ion andne'c: v
CC8: fl ng proC: 5~ i un Cñ e o-oi.~ r ci. o, L OF tftlh 1:
will e c 1 to dCVeP Io' p0 r f'hI'f " k 0l1~ kii i. iiflI:
areas oft c;: port fxrc~~ I J~ w
i L. 11C-f 0 ( yJ d) utLTlhe
world ehcccjv rit.~ td4CA:! hd
* thie resources policies of the t iw G: Lln.. h'
met that test triunphant). y. We have no int,-nti on % fia1.:: ocver
to use our possession of vast res: Luarces to 9g:. ng up against
* the resource users. I e stand ready to join with oth-, r nations
in search of solutions. ue recog-nise the interdcpeiidcnce of
our economy and our prosperity withi our great trading partners,
particularly Japan, Northern Amrica anc! Surope, We are,
however, determined that our resources command a fair price
in world markets, This we arei achieving. Througn export controls
and . discussions with exo~:;. h'Oirrei: h--. obtained higher
returns for exporters. 
For the first time an Australiai cjovernuiont has U'sed its authority
to reinforce the bargaining power of Australian exporters. We
shall not sell our re.-Dources on; thec clieap.
Australi~ a has emerged az: s one of the world's ene7rgy
rich countries. . chave,; mn~ murm dc4; pen] Ence on imports of
heavy crude oil and we have been amo. ingj the countries least
affected by escalating crude oil prices overseas.
To obtain advice on hoe this situation can lbest be
used for the continuing bc,-nefit of aill !' ustralians the
governmtent has set up a Royal. Corcimssion under r~ r. Justice Collin.-s
to enq. uire into all a-spects of petroleum products, refining arnd
pricing. Further, we ap-proved lastC year the creation of a
Pipeline Authoarity to provide for the transmission of natural
gas by an interstate pipeline ' stein. Thce f irstsag h
National Pipeli-nc Sys tem -Jill link Sydlnuy to the Gidgealpa fields.
It lst iatlyproposed th-at the pipe) line will continue to
Palm Valley. Inv~ w of t'lce cj-i. ical onerrm-s) horta( je in
Weten st~ ia aTZjo int ormw~ ithS! aL study is uinder way~
tov al~ Letho feas ibil1it,' nf pipel-3ine l ink hn-_ twecri Palo, Valley,
R z 1 c r-* i Pert. 1-and3 the 11Ftura1_ q3U-c~ ds on the ortl--cst
The Australian ( Jovternman t is working closely with
the Wecstern Piustralian Governmant on a studly of a ma. jor industrial
complex in the Pilbara baseC. on the utiliza-tion of the ' abundant
suppli -s of natural gas, iron ore and salt in the reolon.
The rellort wiJlprovde the aS: fi or decision on our f-uture
r1o. e dveo~ : iLol. tij-e iIt will. bo reLaay in June.
P RrIiA RY INDUSTRIES
SAustralia' s future as an ex-porte-r rests increasingly
upon o-ur newly discovered imincrcii. re! zourccs. The farm sector,
however, rem-iains and will. long remiain fundamentally important
to our trade, fundamentially impurtant to Australia's pr-osperity.
My colleague, Senator 17riedt, the Mlinister for
Primary Industry, will c. lelivcr the governlment's rural policy
speech in Coulburn on .' ed: nesdl-y. 1l.-t me, however, outline the
Government's general. approach and record.
Eost Australian farmers this year have enjoyed
unexampled prosperity. The avrac jrit income of Australia' s
190,000 rural holdings this year is about 000. Tne average
for the previou5 6 years was less than $ 6,000. Our policies
have contributed in no small measure. In particular, we have
sought aid! to farmers to take the hetadvantage of present
favourable conditions to obtain new mnarkets. We want to encourage
industries whicha have solid, l-png Lerm prosi: ects of selling their
products at a good return to the farimer. 
-29
To this end, we have viqoroiirlv expanded existing
mnarkets and opcncd newi one(-s.
The Tr-ad'e agreemenmt withA Pe~ cISh IO~ Cof China
is onl~ y th-e most and novel. exoam'. 1e. lk. tlhii li term'Is Of
this Aqireement iih-i:. a ocrter coitract kavec . n 1.1nre
f or the supply of Aust; ra-lian vheat and sugar to Ch in a. Tt -is Ibeyond
question thiat the q'efrnl-inent Co,* China '. 111 honou-ar a~ ou~ Jya
agreement, noe-c-s . oliiica. a: oscmltL~. e ~ d
re). ajons Our prko: N.. ot: ecrcg I., f. n o' the Pjo ~~~ ulc~ asww
iadis-putably a signific nt -7ator: in th2 wrt) v Vd 3, U
ri~ rt with whic,' .) oth f; Ades negotl. aze h f&amp; e2c~'~~
In addi-tion, t're P . us':, alianG overnment has roached a
new levl1 of 111&amp; rstr. dJrcj : n trz'.&amp; o w%.. th Japc'-7n, thv Pacif~ ic region,
eastern Europe andI the S;; vict-Union.
We have Is2i30 Acts fo,-r the rtcco and
Sreconstruction of prixi-iry industry i~ n genera.. aind for S; nCh S)) ciU
industries as wool; Wfl(: at meatr eggs in-m-, honey ap õ ' les andper
ile have drafted 16 bfiil~ ls~ nitrogeioow; fci-ti.. z
subsidiEs and v.]; e( at stabi lizatiion and~ For thc! sugar.,~. yx~
* pig-' farming, wool, canned fiiP.&amp;. ts and a'canc! pear i. nustries.
Although our vineat; tiJ.~&amp; n. plajn was edre ru:.
by the itsr3~ lhaa. h;* nwbripJlacod
in jeopardzy by the new llo-tarn. Am; tC-ra. ian ocrme.
pro~ uer Miy coverninent-ocd~ ie or~ tns of priimiary
cmpajnlvs -1) bout h-' cji-i tcIDf.~ y re. ducing tariffs
by 25% across the Bouard weshall. savu prirr. a-y produicers att least
$ 100 million this fina: nriaj. yors:.
The Tarii~ f Poare, oas i~ e succ-eeded h't~ he X( nelstrj-cr
A~ ssistancecormsox on i ash J re
Si~ r John Craw-S'ord. A'thouiq! i thi e L3Ax ta0 t. ric ULrst
tailoe enale1. s ( gToJvun nat to) 5. ud m: ia v~:
on assistance fo0--i~ x tto oni a bq. r1asis, the
COuntry Party in Doouhs es~ ilgei s: S the * ijiil es--ta. blishing
it. I havo ale a s! C&amp; ithz-. OQ co. x rc,. or-t
prom~ oti On and rae hand riuct r on cbl23 ~ c; x
OaL : y and qoi d-' uKiningj2PU and toi~ d~ r~&gt; i~~. a
;&gt;, lanxis f -: rm rs.
The(,, governiment is awaj. ti nrj rc:; ort Afrom a o ite
o ~ hchE~~ h7 Ca; fod saISo nb) or. tep~ . p
Tlmrdc. kiri andl Doci-, D'; I'Arml~ s 
FLOOD__ ITiIC." TIOW
Tha recent d-isastrous floods in. Queens land have! amply
deoions t rated the nec~ d for a positive, co--ordinated nationali
approachi to f lood mitigation. jer. onally invited the Premr
of ) ue-: n. s land X suDi-. tit__ a S Ltie-wide panoji floo-d Iiticration
as tlie basis cii Con-3: lcerat ion for Austra'li'an G~'-: r. tassistance.
We rooethat anve.-A fl. c-itiqaion schemofi fov
1Livsoir : ' s shoul. d b! e__ d ta co-or. crc&amp; i'v&amp; ly'b_~ e the
Aiir. a-ralian, Sta La ar local coverwY : nS as jv.' 1
in.-the case of Nov. () Lltll WaJ'tles.
I contr.;-: 2t tl-ii. cc)--operativc appro:, thnis national
ap) tocCh wqit. the attitude of the present Leader of thc Country
Party jhc n 1) told tL--he_ 11ou sro of eprezc~ n tz. tives on 1,16 May 19), 6 3
' Th-problem of flood miticiat-_ oni rcst-~ s.-paarely on State
( Govc:: rments The. pres Co*., monvealt~ h R~ id 7. ads Act expi-res at
the end of Junec. TeBureau of Poads-impa-e a report to assist
the goverrnmunt in consi4dering final-1 * ci-al ass-Istance to the States
for the ensuing pc~ r-: Lod. TjiC Pliniste-r for Trai-spozt tznled 1te
reot last DocevIber. Discussions have since enhedwt
the State-s and also0, -for ' Che firct tLi-c, Lut ina accordance with
the* t, Bureau' s recommecndation, vy., Ath Local -o'. rwn autNioriti-s.
These diacussmons will be r'? sumed af~ tcli the e:~ ections.
ivleanwhile t!) e qovernment has ~ eiddthat it will
itself Pre.!. ' n the con ~ tru. ctio ofLa a na Li. onaLI roal
systa in t: Iiose areas \ wichi iiwth7 ow Cnt. J. i t.. i fn
repniiiies., ti 1Vr12ft'~ ~ Qrrpni)~
the whole Cost of Ol trOitjigl anl d ii tainlncf the i. ncxa.
road -hne. L ~ eaia~ 7r
-inter ests ofl S~"
SccC nriuy a ncw; 4 -1cuic diviLdedhqwc needls t te Y' vc
t nc GItJ'~ L( oal) bn ai. d irok pTsis inc : 1OU'
j'. mu t a': dBatlo and-~ comng cl.. ose t1o Ccanburra it will recuce
L:.. roa.-d () istanc. e bctwcen Sycin-y and i ~ 1o, u r ie by 70 miles.
The~~ m ~ twii Ico lq inL h ic ,. tzte and local govurnment
authoritio. s on the prcise-, routo. 
S&gt; eccnc'lv, the ooverroentc aill1 take epos. iit
for the whole cost-ofotot 4&amp; i1 ilrsqui~ c
These__~~~ ucflihe-nrte rcroads ( ovecrthenext three \' ears
_ poo-m~ ioli yc'lln and 23 ilo
on the, FIItzroy r s iq-! rdia ro . tj in Ues toW71Z ra ri d
oteu a oianng mines to i; naodr. u ~ ca roc i~ s
. to mjocr sea and air termi).-als.
Thirdljy, we shall make special povA. son fur roads
between Canberra and nej. crhhcur incJto in 1lew r-; OuItlh W-ales
and betwccn. thez-Northiern Tr. tr&gt; cIthe~ tl-re surrouing
SEA TRAIISPORT We have appointed Mr. M' 1lCOlr SuM2! ie r the former
secretary of the Department of Tran.,: port, cas a Royal Coi-, if'iisioer
to inq1uire into the M1arit.-Ie TIndustry. Ei~ s wilcl~ t e h
foundation of a coiqlete x-oderni:.; ation of the laws cover. ig our:
ports and our coastal and overseas trade.
Vie are particul~ arly awarc-. of the burden placed on
the Tasm,, aniai ecorio! my and on Tasnaiinm by their r-elijance on sea
transpurt. Wle have aryoiritLcd Nimio a membe10r ofJ--the
Grants Co zua5sion as a N~ o al Con,,: i ri o inc-uir into the
impact of freijht ILL-cS, oCAI~ a~ arinecn
THlE i-10! 1.-FORCE' Here then is a picture of tlre nat ion -rich in
resources, and through our policies, ( lett. in,-j ricber; rich in its
ability to develop those re,!( Jnrc('!: i. AnL Hirow( our lO . i c:
getting richer, a n-I t iou. i i r in iaJ'i: ri*. UjJ-t-JIIj h. Iomj
resou,. rces at home anhd abroa, v jAii uo OA Cik œ fcj t1 i'il
to th; tre tnm n io~ n 1, c c o1 . cie s,
oettintj rircher Yet we rcco i-ec [ H At IL-1ebasic AnIst) v'Ilian
resource, the to ( Il r 1jFj jov.. a m ii; j~ arj 1 o : i
the Austral~ ian % workof rce, aS Skillcd EIS ally in theC liO. Cld, a
hardiwo,, rki. nq as any in the world. TIhis workforce is overwhelingly
and increasingly coimposed o~ f employuees. 1'] o0re than ever before
and tLhe trend wX. continiuc the more skilled a pers. on is,
the more likcly it is thlat hie will be an eirployee.
For the first time the submnissions before e
Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Coriu-ission hiavero been
positive and corist. ructive. As soon as we ' were. elected we
reoperied the eq. ual pay. case and our submiasion was suCCCS. Sful.
31 
32
In tha 1974 National " laye Case, we argued that the
miniimum wage sli,) ulj 11j e-: tenoed worlen anCm the automatic Viage
adjustmcnts to compensate for risina, prices snould be reintrodiuced.
There are complli-ng . in,,, iu::; t-L-rial, social2 and rworal arguments for
the eoual treatment xwo . er. n thc aorkforce. Further all women
whether in the w" orkfoicc or not, will knowa the need arnd the just"-ice
of automatic adjustim. ent..; to wages a-very t. 1hree mtonths. If accep~ ted
by trio Comdsslon these aUtonwti. C Z. Cj LIEt:,' ntS woxuld remove the
cause of miany inOU2; trial dlispu te: r' and would protect the fam., ily
budget against the effects of infJ.-tion.
The vast itajo::-ity of A'u-sL': liz-n oi-iJpoyees are membcrs
of unions employee a-ociationF*.. Th,:',. fey to industrial
efficiency is efficient cmlw) loyee organisattiecn. Our opponents
have obstructed our efforts to ; o. rieand denocrat.-Lse
Australian trade unions. There are too m~ lany. unions in Australia,
We have souiht to recluce the number--of uyilon: 7. There are too miany
needlo~ ss strik es in Austrcilaa w-, e have sought to reraova the
causes nueelss striik" cs. In tocefforts we have been opposed
by our opponent: s in the her PZrliamnnt and have met with no
co-oper. atioll fror~ thjei Cc ujde~. ate 41-n Ch tts
RestlJonsaibie leadeorship of both unions and iindustry
strongly supporLts a reductiLon in t-he, nuntber of unions and of
demarcaion disputes et.: nrivalj un1, ionS. Our lcg Kt" ation to
help union amalgamation has beeni tiwice reject'ed by the Senate.
In February J., 7,690 the Inri'utrial. Court pointed to the
u r gent need for tae Austr-. Iian.. ' ew South t~~, Queen~ sla. nd,
South Austr-aliari aid Weten Wstralian Parliarrents to remedy
the problewms creatcd by corflictiing atnd unrx:--ordinat~ ed federal
and Srtt c Ir partic-alar this situation has
caused. Jndustr-iai trf throac1-co~ metition fo union membership
within the saina 4indu : rv. Ul have. ;: cted u*,: q. cnt-lv on this riatter
whjlich the Industrial Cutsaicl war~ gent years ago'.
Ile have repeat,, dOly as-ke thle Stat-2s to ce-p aewith us in
co-ordiniatincjgisai Only SQcutli Austr'aJJid has cd-
We have iwet with 20o rosponse in pa.: tizular f rein Nlew South Wales,
the StLate whe.!: e: the pro) Je~ is : 1' cxst acute, most urgenit.
It is not my : ov. rhoweverl, to dwell or) matters
where we have b-eern fairustra&amp; Led, ciAtlir by thei-Seniate ox the States.
For the real story of the . a: t . seventcan inonthr, has-been one of
Coninunq Q ~ izie chievemenL. It has been a story of nc-O)
initiatives carried throughl, of ncov.? baginningso, of new co-operattion
at all levels: tc the gr~ tand enduring1; W ac1.' antagc of tha people
of raiion Outitnhhiss be o see that' n~ o Australian,
nobody % who ]. ivos in Austr-alia and cjs to caZ st his J-oL with
us, shoulci be eXc]. uded frmn the famiily of thc! nation. ive have
s ought to unite the nation and all wiio live in it. 
33
4ce have soucjht to 3( d Pp; Ortufli. tJes mforeC &amp;%; u21L.
to . O '~ UIt2o 10r&amp;; I ' ve SuC." ai i' ., Zae Ca 1-Iien rt C~ f
3.. e or all Our ouo,) 0C. -Je iiL.\' Q sougit. o ; pV. r n i. 2
for all citJ!. zoos th : L thrw fatiun nicgj) iL no ]. o,-Vcj 6Jqjin u
the i.: xistenfcc am. us 0o: tac g. rosse-: ine~ mualij, the
grouser diszadvantages, the ~ osrdiscriination.
In my p.. olicy specch in 1972 T said tha! L "~ All of us
as Australians are diminiihod whilIe the Abor iginec; a: dcrnio
tbjei r rightful. i1: lace in this nation" Doccmbiibr ). 972 h uh
d. a ill t} V: l.; J g~ u of Abor. iginal ut. 1an
ma Ku: by Sh. eful b'rutality, pi . tt. on egl:, ct. andCL contcernot.
We i. o not claK h: t ou,, r C LL h.) e e whoi. Y SCC. ' otul.*
33uL we m.~ n. w c. ourfc We vei atb ver*' le; t OlYC
a d o) to0 1.) Deupi. ~ ta d~' Aa i-a iuich h.! is ' 0een achi evA: and theroad
f~ or t: 1e, kut. Ire daily clc. arer. For the -first timo
S aborioiria x'oLces h" avoe 1-een hoard and iheedcd. From now on the. 1re
will t1nxvT! local comvmunity councils cnd at tho national level
througa the U i o:.( inal boisin close touch w-. ith
Aborig * inal orJn,, on zand int--rcs ts width authority to s,* peak for thcr-;'
and to work in tchei~ r Myn ~ eg~ cs-) vornmae{ t, o,, e of its f-I-St.
acts, decidocd thiat I rgnsin. t Northern Terri. ry sh ) uli
gratedrigh,_ s-to thcui r traditiun3i* lands&gt; wmrL oc tIc-~ A
esltablished. and ap-poinced Mr. Justice EI. A. kloodlward to advise us
on ho-v logi E-, I t ive uthnrity could best bct given to -that
) Lt. T. I[ oei ~ th; , a not Yeth~
cC: h'eI r2 Sns:. -7o t c) o vir 1I2I? Ii : ii c, nw ~ J; 3 3 to
oftiiciolehve fully acce:: tcd the ovtcrW-, ciI! 1.-p i i-structi4on
of t -Li. gi~ vonY in the reir~ Ou~ fl~ ito
&amp;. cc~. pt rnct.. ona. I i~ feopnr ~ Abc( A. iln.. 4 V. 51110h
zroAu'c.. 1i. n 3az -liamcnzt I , as oasscud, 1 the ncoudr
complecmonta . eil. to to giv6d 0Tiffct to pOPl
q:(-WttY. nI2V$ a ; bn rr ., ched in ~ in: e
a, States:_ cl e 1' id1 0 a
: oreached-c on~ -the trcansfe~ r of rc!-; poa-. sibii. ity for Ao~ iia
is fx-o~,' he Queens . Slid Governm&amp; . t to the Australiean-
Goverrnent., . wtheo pes cii : L deimnded 7 ya. na-o.
I e int4-. cend( to c: 1. iminate the remniantf3 Of discriminatory Queens. le. nd
l~~ a. cs1li jainst Aborigines and : TJlanders, a hope declared
y) r4. m MnCiister Gort-on.
Au~ t. c r looiwiii s neri-itled to free legal aidl
from the Aboriginal Legal Servicos % we establisheOd.. 
.34,
THE,~ L-AIJI tie have soucT lt, however, to riqlecm 0, jd
within the reach of all .' wu: traliaiis. arc concerned to
protect arnd enhan: e tlhie: ricjhts of z2. l AuStralians. r-Je
are determined to give realj moaning -, to the concept of
equality before thle Law.
The Australian 1. egal AieJ Sarvice has been
established to ensurce ready and equnal access to the Com:' tCs
to give every Ausc'Lralian ezrnual protection bofore thz! Law.
The service is already funct--onincj in all State capitals and
in Canberra and ] aii. Ofii. ces will Joe ened in rec~ i-inai
centres throughout Australi iL n the nex~-t 3
The refusal of Suppl~ y the Senate has delayed
* our legislation to estcah1ish an I'ustralian ombudsman and
Adninistx-ative AFpeals Tiribiiunal.
Pe wanrt to simrplify the law and it~ lecss
expensive, Wea'e-atbis~' d: I., aw ~ for Cct: Lmssion an~ d
* have set-up a Le, isLa1i-ve Drafting~ 2: ns! 7t-itU. L Co ran
in the d3rafting~ of' -, implcr an( larr-and therefo0re(
better law IW e . sI a I Ie cj' is 1at e I.-o 0, en-1 t 1io ': uhl ic
F, r v ant the ma) x3muzn sib-' fredmto ercisce the civil
and p-olica riq'hts e~ oe yOE~~ 1L~ S
VWe wjill proc,, edl with ou r iPre cidoti 6f In form~ at ion
A~ ct. The rcefCrCIOdUMnpooa be fore you are e i-jneci
to protect and enhance 1-ttuos r eassa ~. iocaIy. F, 1
* true eqiiality ofj r-epr esent: a. i-oA in ow: r'laetaypoess
As a further prote: cticrn arjainrst pervers'-wn of
these processes, we -noose for th-e riisclosure of
the sour1ce's of full"!-n asF; ino to
The Cokrcrnftion: wAJ rpin:. Iudc i r
flto-.) m! l-thorls 7cJeindcisimZ) Orn ad'-; e,-Se) yi cLJ3
. ti~ zenrs or lie w-. ill re-introdunce our Qci 21, tt on fe the
Sn oc'r ior Cour~ j-c-iustro ljia, a pr~ pco2Q., laulicheK. hI,
; ir Garfield 1. r in lIW-: i96, clev 2 oj by the present
Tea( der of the O~ o.~ r~ as 1\ trc-~ e~ a d introducerd
i,. ontli ago. 
The '\ ur-tral. i. an Coverninent is con\ vjnc-d tha t the
High Court of Australia mnust: hc-comcl th-e final court in all
ma tters pertaininig to Australiai andi to the legal. riqhts afld
obligations of its citizens. Inrocec-. : A4--h our
legslaion to abolish otePiv orc~
SIle have pa., sed three jAfllS concern: fyq onqera 2 arld
life insurance. Pe have 71rafted leg islat ion on novi intawaricc
companPi. s and on the upervision of ins-urancre bro! kers.
have twice introduce6 but not yet M.. 3se( 1 tho Finzancial
Corporations Bill. Ile would nave alre~ ady introduce.( 1
legislation for the controi of the securiie_ industry 1. ut
for the constant dlefeorment of a report front thel 1elect,
Comnmittee on Securities and ). xchanqe whiich the ~* ntesot
up over 4 years ago. Ne shall. introduce a. lat iona 1. Con. n) nie S
Act iwhich vyill ecj h . oriy-rr . cpePS' 0El 11uht by
Lierñ owerr;, Yt~ since thhe late 1950' s hut aelnow. ler190ed
to be un " tta -hkable through sep'Arate. acLs of the S'tate-s
Vle have dJrafted 1).. jEc; slaton to ta! l.' Ian e : thikand
J'und,. merntal to our whole hc OS1) andI fundamcnt. cal
to our programs is the idea of a . xouzAw. tralian national
sp. nt a heal thy prido ancl corifidI~ e c ow~: vs,
our country's promisc in our capacity to 1. i 1t the-stan-' ords
of our people andl help our less foj.-tur. 1: Le I. 0curi t
fuler andl hetter-life.
Sp ri. dec, arid toT o ehnel~ alrpg ec ult hteiv arOteco pla. e richol :) i~. 2i i~ cn-ur if( j forn fl1ic: i~ ounai; il
fulfilmenL e have qiYn higl\, pr4-im)-ty to tliaecc11qIe
of the: 7 arts, hiaa v rcC r t5 Lu1 14et r. l~ ( ounci. for
the Arts, andI prcvirle2 5Q1 ( foi[ lintr art s iri our firl; t.
Judcjet more ttntwi cce ou iven) hby our prdc.-ccs sors.
W CdLe. hut-. no L y(' et. r s cJi. I fo:-
)? otes*;__ are1the Chairman of the Aus-_ tralJian S. chools
ccirriission. It is not jus t the artists themsefl5IVOFS who will
benef it. Our purpose is I* o mal~ e the arts more accessible
to e-ve---y Auctralian, -to let ever,. y mian and ' woman share in
their challenge and enchantment and in the richer and fuller
life they can 1bring. 
36.
In the past 17 m,, onths we have encouraged a
greater participation of Australian creative and performing
tal. ent in radio, television and! cinema production.
Nlever before have there been s~ uch opportunities
for Austral~ ian artists. T7e are firmly cornu ritted to
miaininqa hos oportunities and increasing thewt still
f urther. Xn our niext three vears tin we il
prov~ ie at v-J. cost, aa daitionaEDo network
w: rraihavowrcev
a-n g3. C AYs~ eL e will introduoce V11 radio for high quad. ñ ty
U'UPbac at~~ than Oni the iv ento~ lvacepted heawnd
The pub!. ic iiw~ iuiry whAich we estabis41hc2 cajlcuiated that this
wouw. d cost an extra $ 2250 It would have been ; anoth--r
Fill. The pr.-evious coverninrii-Elso turncA a lideye to tChe
tecnial o~ sib2 ~: esOf new AMY ra~ dio stations. Additional
radio œ Jxequcncies w-. ill enable us to exp-And the comciuJa1
oerv' 3ccr;, cr-twbl; ish educational. and fora'i'n language
statio,-ts and uiall-e spf-cialpro' i o ~ 1rt mnoritJy cgroupf;.
W'e slijA. l introdiuCe colour tColevL5Lon in A'utrali~ a
on 1 llm. rch epr ev: tLOU' goC rmub~ ie
~ FsEiW~' ThY:~ ato inquje Ii the Cost Of colour
* tel. evision receivers. On-. of the first. steos I ' Cook after
Ibeco: minc Prilme ilirisr; Ll was to refer the10 ill-uP" ter to the
Tariff ) 2adfol inq~ uiry. E'ecauee~ of action talre. 1 by my
goeri~ ntto datc, colour television rc. ceives in Australia
will1 be availaWle to thce public-at a xmuchi ciicaocr price than
~ ould have been the had. Jh inquiry not brZ! en held.
We hal; e etl. hdthe Filmn and T ol r i S o 1
School anJ we ILicrodhice Tcq-.( JSiL. Y u~ rteA~ rl
ara nlv s the Austi~ xalian I; oniC. L'rthe Au,,-traliari
Na t: 01n1 a-~ CU andJ Col ct) i. onr3 th AutT 1' ii an i111.
CO'MS iCon, -L o 11. i: s ru : onht Aieic inCT
a ndTT-t-1l--Fc-ou) 1-nty.
In short, as far a qovernmnts can act in
terms of money and iiiachiner, , e v re creal~ inq the conditions
for a renascence of Australian creativity. 
-37.
-f V3T:' RNA'T TniJ7t%, ITT O MS
: lore than ever before Austral. ians ar1c en-tit * lCe
to feel Lorit'l in theiAr nation. T~ oe have never beec( n liel-0 in
higcher respect abroad. ore than ever beforc Austk-ralians
arc, eititCledl to feel confid6enit. I have said much ahout: our
resources. In the final analysis our r: icbest resource, an
irreplaceablie one, is our naitionial rei,-u t* at. ion). Tha t
reputation has never been higher. Ir have saiA muc-h about
providing security for all. our citizens. In its wiclest
sense this country has ne-ver 1-) en more secure. A u s tr a'( iL now
has bas.-ica).]. y a bi. partisax forei. gn Policy, not b~ ecause of
any change o-f heart or miric1 on the partk-of our opponerits, b ut
bracause we; as a' governmont recoyrnisc~ d and acted ur) ofl the"
rea.-lities of worl affairs and above all t he realities of our
regi~ on. Our op ' poneni11-s hav\, e just cuh: up witk-h reality.
* The feairc, the shih-b) oleths on which they trziae for a
generat:;. on have. been sw-erpt aw! ay. Try as they ight wish as
they magih. our o-f;-onents cannot return to the Dast'.
It is beccause iw. e rcgic1the realities of
* our tines t'hat orforeign policy has )-een so succes! sfl
Wand our defence policy so relevant. e approa--ch the
managementl-of def-ence matter-cs on the basis thi. tL the
interna:: tional situt~ tion and the-atfairs of the region Ere in
the process of rapidt clh ; nqe. Tie saw that defe', nce policy and
foreiLgn policy hdto b~ e b-rought into line wi'jth these changjes,
into lina with tliese reatlities. Ile saw-v how. fax-both deifcrnce
and foreign po: licy had beco-me basedl on p-ast concept~ s iand~ eeep
rtisconcc -tions of thec proesent.
In 1.972 -1 undertook to loadt( this country to her
rightful proud ancd securce pl. ace in th-e w-. orld. IA--can be
w proud of our repu kation can ccoi. n* :. dciint of our sccur'it.
V-e have set a nevy course fo. x-Australia v'ay from
interventionism, towards tr--* uc interlnationali sin. This i s the
most genu;. neiy interinational govern-ment lustra J. ia has ever
O had. VTh have placedl our relations-hips with the United
S tates and the United Ringdom on tho basis of mature
partne rr; h) ip1. ' ec have reneg9ot-iated the aqr-ceint for -the
L-te States flaval Communication St~ ation ilto rth v-est Cape.
The agreement sjigned by our opponent. s: vas a denial of
Austral. ia's rights. The new agreevient asserts and establishesF
them. ha;: ve-wid'. ened our ho-rizons, sought anti, achieved
growing co-operation with t~ te count: ries of the Cornmnwe,( alth
and with the nations round. the In ian and south Pacifi. c
Oceans. 
17e have: Irouciht co-operation and frin:. 1ship with
Japan, our greatest trading partner, to a new~ l-vel.
Followinq an agreem.--ent in principle between Prime ' Iinister
Toy last Octobe.-r, We'i c1e into a treal-y of ricileWShi
theTra of Fjs~ er
Ue have sought to 1. realh Oown ideological constraints
which had for so long; oLbstructeO! meaningful relationships with
countries such as China, Past Germiany aylo Uar1 Viet!~~ L
Wc have sought to remove any taint of racism from
our national and ite: rnatioja. nolicies.
Pe havo co--opera'tel c. Lo. sely with the Government and
H~ ouse of Assemibly of Papua P ew Gluinea as our neighbour moves
* towards independlence bDy Dccemher this year.
TlJe hwave forgued and intiriate links with the
countries of'. A. S. V". A. rlI. TnrI. 0neSIa-, the Philippines, ~ a~ a
Thai lan!. e-n6 1i-lrrh ave acce-pt-ed their inv ita tio. n
to co-operatec with A. S i Qfl devt-lorv ' ot ts.
With the agreceme: nt of all1 it-s nieibers, we have
secured the remodellinrg o; . E A PC
Ue haove-, taken f irm moarures for disarmlaltent and
against the develo; rf cnt and pr: ol zf-ra ticr of nuc lear waos
Pe have ratif-ied the nuclear non-prolifera. tion treaLy and
the Sea.-led Arms Cont--: ol Treaty. Ile have protosted ar1a jis t
C h i ne se t es ts IWe niali used every availab?. o, leqal. an.-.
* politica). channel to persuade F-rance to desist from its
atmospheric polluinlon ixn our h em) ni S I crr
VWe have actively suipported the obrjectives of the
zoofpne ae ad nutrality in South Fna; t Asia and the
Indian Ocean z~ ne of peaco. Pe haye madle pol-.' rrful
W reprOsentat4io3ns in T,*' ashi~ nq1: c-n an. ocwto p! r suacle the-m
to exorcis8' restrai~ nt annI not to ma]:. ehe Indian Ocecmi yet
another scene for great, pownr rivalry.
Wehave introlue3 1, ul: vetpa~. lciQtn
to eaals nAsi] inPvio'n: L; It:~ c] nY' in
order to . lii-v h! a ruaii-. our a ir) ) Yoq rain, arvO -move.
tctdh0{~-I Zton a 1 ta3-cq ei, wih C, we~ hav, aci; eptc d, o( 7 
39.
Dr, T-PNCE W'. e have encouraged and supotd the-, ' Jetente
betwoen the great po',, Yers-. 1,, e have tal-en aclvantag of the more
hopeful ou-L. ook in our region to _ reorjanisc: Australia's
defence forces. To giv,, e a tarigible and pcactical basis to
our defence relations wi1.. th ot-hcr countri. es we have ebredon
an expanded progia of exercises w, it h our neighbours and.
traitional allies. In June, the l? rqest peacc-timei exerCise
ever held in Australi-a will be helrd in Queenslanrd involving
over 8,000 servicemeri fromn Australia, P1ew Zealanrl, the U~ nited
States and Gj: eat Britain.
The Deputy Prime ! JnistCer, iny . closest colleague
downn the yca:,_ s, T1r Lance Parn;; rd, has provocd the most
const.-ructivc. and effective, ministerial, hea( 2 of the, dlefence
forces in Aut: la'ahistory. T-je has ayialgaal-. cd the IDcfa~ ncce
JDeparytvtent and the 3 Service tert ( is reo;~ n~ din the
report, of the-iqorsho-ad Coitmit-Cee wshi. ch our predE. cc,. ssors
sup-pressr-2 -oz 15 yeaors. HeI has-underta):,' n to es1to;*&amp; jish the.
co:,-bined Au.-tralian Defence Frce Academ~;-y. The scvices are
being~ equipped to pleay a gjreater role in case of c1neracricies
and natural disasters. He has presenter'. to the Parliame-nnt a chiarter
for the Citizen Military Force s, -a newv cdisciplinary code o
the forces a nenw p2: ocurcenert p~~~ mfor taW,' s : cna ie
aOrcraft and destrors. ( Our p) Xo5cft. ta-nkzs %,, ere orclerci y h
last Lab-or Governmient a quartern of a century ago.)
fie has ap.-po~ nted. a military ombudsman.
F~ e has instiituted. the-regul ar ; rceviev, of: sn. vitce Pay and
allowances and a comprell-ronsive andl coiworoeni, ibl a Defence
Forces Retirement ar(! Docath 11( new~ itc schcme. Pie has co-o-: 1: inated
the passaae of 17 measures 31-alin( T With 3-0_ repatriOat: io31, taxa-Ftion,
eduication and acco-mmodati'on bene fits for sorviceiztfn and the
draftIing of 9 more such measures.
In short, we have.-ila) ycd steidily and firmly
towards our aimi that Auta:.* salhave theC cfence-. forces
she needs -finely e-quipperl, higjhly professi. onal, high mobile
and highly respected. 
rV
Here then i. s a record of achieve-ment, of purpose,
yet it-is a record of a governrnent w.. hich has heen in office
a mere 17 months. It is a record -6f a government which came
into oiflfice after 23 unhrol! en Years of Dower hecld by our
~ o~ o~ ns~ 23 years or decay and neglect. It i~ s a record of
a govcrrni.. ent whicl-had hva, -o overcoiie unparaliclled
o b st *-, ti: ion i n . a S c n a 4-Q i n i) ic h I JLt wa s in a i,, noc) r it Y. ThiS
was our legacy inl 1972 23 yearis of* our opoets'iStZ1, e~ s
and a hostiAle Sen,-ate. rl-e havre lived with the part and wer have
ovc _ rcc-. nea thec-past, the record shiow-s it.
11ow our opponernt,,: propose._ a return to the past,
* the attitucles aneA policies of . the past whiich you so firmly
rejecteO only 17 imonths agjo. tlhere hoe no ~ mistake abrout
the truLe na-'. ture o: E thes tii-. n-s and olicies. In the, oast
17 months our oppo. nents ha-ve siiown no repentancc,, they h'ave.
done ) o On ev r mAjor issue ilow a) s always, they
* come cOown on the side of prvl~. Th-e who7Lle thrust their
policies . ceiflis theC retenL-ion o-c priviloge an: d exteflsiofl of
priv-41l':. io. ThiLs has been tl-e t x runningJ through the~ ir
pattern o-C'f obStruction and o-Pporsition. They resistO. to the
ele-enth hour our proposals ~ oqivo 1mosti mone'.,, to the -oSt
nee-dy sc] ools. The \ 7 havo ohbst--_ ct-ed "-at every tu" rn our la r
to give health covor tCo th-: milliii unlprotectec! Australians..
OQl : every cccas:! on tILhey have s~ prung to the dlefence of we'illthy
interest-. who fear-that ouir ofo~ sto retain the greater
haeof Iuiztralia; n control ov'er our resources may inconvenience
tbc-m1. They hay--opposedt our every effort to have qreate-r
c'ualil-in parli~. lcentary re~~ eiaini uta.
The last elect~ ion was oezscritiaJ. ly about the
pro-motk-ion of op,? tuin itict-: of ;: urr c, i -* XorJt-un itie 3 ane-d morla
eC'ual opportunities, all~ i Austra1.1* 0r1S. n the past .17
onths that effort has been carrica on with zcst, deter-ii,, iation
and Ispucciceecs s sccs of course the tiimeF hasbe
short, the back~ log of 23 years so groat The question now
is % whether that work1-shall go on.-.--The quostion iS whether the
great opporitunItie. s this nation* offero -shall ba more and m.. ore
equally sha-red, whether prfvilege halbe deeper and ezeeper
entrenched. This lawhat you have to1c lecide.
W~ hen they makeo thieir jue~ geii,: ent I to the basic
intelligence and idealism of t! 7 Australian people. I rely on
it, and I -rely upon it with confidenno-a. in all my fafforts to
reform and revital. ise Australia, in my efforts to reform
and revitaliSe the Australian Lalo. P. artv, 1 have relied upon
that: inteolligencia and t,-ha't Lresñ Andi voru havje never Let
me down. T look to the imen cJ. 7, ustrali-' who bel,-ieve in a fair
go not. just a fair go for an elected' g overnmnent, hut a fair
go for all those of their fel. low citizens to whi . Cur policies
have brought a new hope, a ne' chan ce for a Odecent life. I
look to the women of Australia, who .'-ell ifnow what our program, 
has-alre-ady meant for the future, welfare of our children, of
our aged, our sick, oxr f~ look,.-to the idealism
of that vast new constitucency of irura anl women over the acjTe
of 18 now voting for thc first tiri~ e. It ip, al-ove all their
f; uture at stake. 1' or the outco.-me o this clectio must go
t ar to de!: ocrmine the sort of Austcal ia they will be living in
for the rest of their lives.
Bere is the recordl. !! ere is the:. promise of the
fulfilment of the pi-ogram!; w have begun with such vigor and
determiation with dcaicaticn. que, tion is whetCher
the action of our opponents last month was only a temporary
interruption to thosre progrc~ ms or the-i-r dlestri. ction. It is
nonsenfse to believe that oppunlants w'oul. d accept and apply
our prcjms and policies w, h ich they resisf. ed and. deriJded for
* 23 yas rel. ory--Austrahians?-it is a tima for decision,
and I put thc. e quetionsj to ' iou.
Are you for e. fcU. i go, not just a fair go ' or
an elected Govornwm: nt, but a fargo for our program to w-ork?
Are you for giving us a chaince to make them work?
Are youi for Pixst--aliris haiga fair opplortunilty
to have a fai-r share in conti. L. and1 ownership of theirJ. 3 own
resources? Are you In favour of giving every Austral1-ian chlildi,
whatever his parents i~ iani ocj ~ cd a ifair start, an equal
start in life? Av~ e yo. u : E-01. h du. wa have given to our
children, to the O-pcndLrt, tho cli. ,; z! dvantaqge-d in our community?
S Aro y'ou foi: thic :, iore docent the more humane,
the more toie: caP:, thc :~ int : ooe'coi ety wic have been
trying to build1 in thie last J. 7 im. onths?
A ro: t 1, e A u str, 1i a n p-cofIe-to allowed to rear)
the full harvest, 11 of ouor pro'jrams?
I don't1 be). imive the. Autralian people areL(-going
to turn h-ac. 1 don't belie4. ve they'r going to turn their backs
on the promis-. of the future.
I d. on' t bohl ove thg ecoing to throw wimy the
new opjortuwA.' S -11C newJ hiopes, -! ic new iitiozial fpirit ar-A
national self-r. se. 
r 42.
I ( Ion't -elie7e they wjia :. 1 a &gt;-ar Of the
tactics, the bl;: tart opportmn. i sm of ouw opponents.
I don't believe for a :-icren t th. Cy arr-AhCit
do wlh! at they , ave refused to do in all our histcry
a strncg, united cqover: frent, i tqovnrnmnent wilJ. l a clear program,
a proven record, a great record, and hand this country over to
a Odiscreitied, di. sunited, ( iiscarded coalition of fru-ltration
and futility, without policies, without unity, without
leader,. jhip. And t1at is the real choice on the 18 tva,,,.
Therofore I looj: lith ronfidence to a great vrote
of affirmation on the R 1ay a migyhty votc of ye yes I-o
our xeferenCitui prop -sals yes to tu return of o-r gjovernment
t" e fut!. Iv,, a bright confidant, prCoud, secure future 



A-IWtA I I 13 May 1974
S'AVEMNT BY THE! PRIME~ MINISTER, ' H110 IN. E. G. WIIITLAM, Q. C. M. P.
HANDBOOK ON AUSTRALIAN GOVER14MENT ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERN4MENT
PROJECTS 13 MAY 1974
The Australian Government is determined to ensure that
local government plays a full role in our three-tier,
federal system of government, and as part of this we will
see that it is given adequate access to the nation's
finances.
As a major step in enabling local government to obtain the
financial help to which it is entitled, the Department
of Urban and Regional Development has prepared a handbook
for local government and community groups. Entitled
Australian Government Assistance to Local Government Projects
the booklet is a guide to sources of funds and explains,-how
to apply for them..
Local Government in the past has had to battle with a
Cinderella-like existence, starved of funds and with its
significance largely ignored. As if this were not difficult
enough, it has also found itself cut off from assistance,
simply through lack of information about its entitlements.
It is not good enough just to institute programs to assist
the community. Information on these programs must be
easily accessible.
My Government recognises the importance of communication,
and we see the publication of this handbook as a positive
contribution to the kind of open government and citizen
participation to which we are committed.
The handbook, which is being circulated to councillors, local
government officials and to community groups throughout
Australia, describes the wide range of activities which are
eligible for finance and the forms of assistance available
for each one. A brief description is also incorporated of
the existing financial arrangements between the Australian,
State and Local Government.
It is just one of a series of actions and programs through
which my Government has shown its determination to upgrade
the role of local government. Other initiatives include
ensuring that local government was represented at the 
' br-' Constitutional Convention, restructuring the Grants Commission
to allow local government to apply for assistance and holding
a referendum to give voters the opportunity to allow the
Commonwealth to grant financial assistance directly to
local government bodies which request it.
I asked the Minister for Urban and Regional Development,
Mr. Uren, to prepare the booklet following a meeting with
the Lord Mayors of the capital cities last December.
During our discussions it emerged that there was considerable
misunderstanding outside Canberra about just what kinds of
Australian Government assistance were available to local
government and local projects.
We have aimed to gather together all the major sources of
this assistance in one easy reference document. Councils or
local groups wanting help will now be able to refer to the
booklet when they want to discover what funds are available
and from whom and how to set about applying for them.
Such a booklet may appear to some a rather dry listing of
Government programs. But its very existence will help to
bring into being many of these programs, in areas like health,
Aboriginal welfare, housing and employment. And these
projects when implemented make a vital difference to the
lives of the people they affect.
Some examples of projects for which assistance is available
include housing of Aboriginal employees, bridging
finance for the development of essential amenities in new
estates, assistance to local governing bodies in providing
a variety of welfare services and grants for new education
projects. With reliable data on just what assistance is available
from the Australian Government for particular projects,
local government and community groups will be able to make
more informed decisions on%. ways to improve the lives of
their communities.
To a certain extent, many of the programs described rely
for their success on active community involvement. We hope
the existence of booklets like this will stimulate community
and local government groups to take new initiatives.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, IMR E, G. WHITLAM
AT THE SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE
MONDAY 13 MAY 1974
ON 2 DECEMBER 1972 THERE WAS A NEW SPIRIT OF
HOPE KINDLED IN THIS'COONTRY. THAT HOPE, FOR A BETTER
AUSTRALIA, A MORE EQUAL AUSTRALIA, A MORE INDEPENDENT
AUSTRALIA, A MORE TOLERANT AUSTRALIA, A MORE COMPASSIONATE
AUSTRALIA, BURNS BRIGHTER THAW EVER. AND IT WILL BURN
BRIGHTER STILL,' AFTER 18 MAY.
EVERYTHING I KNOW ABOUT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
EVERY RESPONSE OF THE PAST TWO WEEKS AN ENTHUSIASM
AND EXHILERATION, A DETERMINATION BEYOND ALL MY EXPERIENCE
IN PUBLIC LIFE CONFIRMS MY BELIEF THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE ARE NOT GOING TO TURN BACK, THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO TURN THEIR. BACKS ON THE MILLIONS OF THEIR FELLOW
CITIZENS TO WHOM OUR GOVERNMENT HAS BROUGHT A NEW DEAL,
A NEW SENSE OF PURPOSE AND A NEW SENSE OF PRIDE AND
PARTICIPATION IN THEIR COUNTRY, 
AFTER NEXT SATURDAY, WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A NEW
PARLIAMENT, A CONTEMPORARY PARLIAMENT, A PARLIAMENT FOR
OUR TIMES, WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A CONSTITUTION THAT
REFLECTS THE NEEDS OF OUR TIMES IN CRUCIAL MATTERS OF
EQUAL DEMOCRATIC REPRESENTATION OF WORKABLE PARLIAMENTS
OF FULL LOCAL GOVERNMENT PARTNERSHIP IN OUR NATIONAL AFFAIRS,
WE ARE GOING TO HAVE AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CONTINUING
TO CARRY OUT ITS MANDATE, BUT THIS TIME, A GOVERNMENT
WITH THE AUTHORITY IT NEEDS TO GO AHEAD, AGAINST THE
OBSTRUCTION OF THE MEN OF YESTERDAY,
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN AN ELECTION IN LIVING MEMORY
WHERE THE ISSUE AT STAKE WAS SO CLEAR AND SO C-LEAR-CUTI
IT IS NOTHING LESS THAN WHETHER PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY
SHALL PREVAIL, WHETHER ELECTED GOVERNMENTS SHALL. HAVE
THE RIGHT TO CARRY ON THEIR FULL ELECTED TERM AND TO
CARRY OUT THE FULL PROGRAM FOR WHICH THEY WERE ELECTED, 
-3-
THE HOPES RELEASED BY OUR VICTORY IN 1972
WERE NOT CONFINED TO AUSTRALIA. AROUND THE WORLD,
PARTICULARLY IN OUR REGION, PEOPLE WERE MADE TO BELIEVE
THAT PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY COU_ L WORK, THAT THERE
COULD BE ORDERLY CHANGE, PEACEFUL CHANGE TO BELIEVE
THAT A GOVERNMENT ENTRENCHED FOR 23 YEARS OF ALMOST
UNCHALLENGED POWER COULD BE REMOVED BY THE WILL OF THE
PEOPLE, EXPRESSED FREELY, PEACEFULLY AND EMPHATICALLYV
NOW THEY SEE ALL THAT PUT IN JEOPARDY, AFTER ONLY
17 MONTHS. THE ELECTION OF OUR GOVERNMENT NOT ONLY
CREATED A NEW INTEREST IN AUSTRALIA, AROUND OUR REGION,
AROUND THE WORLD: IT REPRESENTED A NEW HOPE FOR
DEMOCRACY EVERYWHERE, FOR THE PRINCIPLE OF PEACEFUL CHANGE
THROUGH PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS. 
-4-
WHAT OUR OPPONENTS SAY TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
AND WHAT THEY WANT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE TO SAY TO THE
REST OF THE WORLD IS THAT IT WAS ALL A MISTAKE.
THEY SAY: TURN BACK THEY SAY: COME BACK
COME BACK TO THE SAME OLD DESPAIR, THE SAME OLD DIVISIONS,
THE SAME OLD PREJUDICES, THE SAME OLD MANIPULATED FEARS,
THE SAME OLD DRIFT, THE SAME OLD STOP-GO, THE SAME
OLD SPECIAL PLEADING, THE SAME OLD DOMINATION BY SPECIAL
INTERESTS, THE SAME OLD CREW THAT YOU REJECTED ONLY
17 MONTHS AGO AND REPLACED IN A PEACEFUL, ORDERLY,
DEMOCRATIC WAY ONLY 17 MONTHS AGO. 
WHAT IS IT THEY ASK YOU TO REJECT? WHAT IS IT
THAT HAS STIRRED UP SO MUCH VOCAL AND VISIBILE HOSTILITY
AMONG POWERFUL INTERESTS AGAINST MY GOVERNMENT?
IT IS BECAUSE WE HAVE PLACED THE PEOPLE BEFORE SPECIAL
PRIVILEGE. IN ORDER TO FIGHT INFLATION, TO PROVIDE
MONEY FOR SCHOOLS, FOR HOSPITALS, FOR THE AGED, THE
HANDICAPPED, FOR OUR. CITIES, WE HAVE WITHDRAWN HAD. TO
WITHDRAW SOME SPECIAL PRIVILEGES CONFERRED BY OUR
OPPONENTS AN AMOUNT IN ALL OF NEARLY $ 500 MILLION
OF YOUR MONEY. OUR OPPONENTS ARE COMMITTED TO RESTORING
THESE PRIVILEGES. -THEY PROPOSE TO DO IT WITH YOUR MONEY,
AND WITH THE MONEY THAT WE HAVE DIVERTED TO AREAS OF
GREATEST NEED, TO SCHOOLS, TO HEALTH, TO WELFARE,
TO CITIES, TO THE MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE, TO THE PLACES
WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS LIVE AND HAVE TO LIVE, AND TO
THE NEEDS OF MOST AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.
FOR LET IT BE UNDERSTOOD:. EVERY CONCESSION AND SUBSIDY
TO A SPECIAL MINORITY INTEREST IS A TAX UPON THE MAJORITY,
A TAX UPON YOU AND YOUR FELLOW CITIZENS OUTSIDE.
SO BE CLEAR ABOUT OUR OPPONENTS' INTENTIONS.
THEY TALK ABOUT A PACKAGE TO FIGHT INFLATION. NOW WE KNOW
WHAT'S IN THE PACKAGE. 
FIRST, RESTORE ALMOST $ 500 MILLION WORTH OF
SPECIAL INTEREST PAYMENTS, BOUNTIES AND CONCESSIONS AND
. SUBSIDIES, How WOULD THIS BE DONE? WITH YOUR TAXES.
SECONDLY, FREEZE WAGES. HOW WOULD THIS BE DONE?
BY SUSPENDING THE ARBITRATION COMMISSION, UNDERMINING
ITS AUTHORITY, SETTING ASIDE FEDERAL AWARDS AND LETTING
STATE POLITICIANS SET YOUR WAGES AND SALARIES. FOR
THAT IS WHAT MR SNEDDEN'S PROPOSAL FOR A WAGE FREEZE MEANS.
WOULD YOU LET SIR ROBERT'ASKIN FIX YOUR INCOMES?
THIRDLY, MR SNEDDEN HAS A MARVELLOUS. PROPOSAL:-
TO BRING DOWN THE PRICE OF MEAT BY WITH-HOLDING LOCAL
SUPPLIES AND THEN IMPORTING MEAT. AT THE RISK OF
BEING CORRECTED BY PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK, WE HAVEN'T
IMPORTED MEAT SINCE BENNELONG WAS A BOY, OR AT LEAST
SINCE GOVERNOR PHILLIP PLANTED THE UNION JACK DOWN THERE
ACROSS THE QUAY. 
FOURTHLY, OUR OPPONENTS SAY, DOUBLE THE PRICE
OF PETROL. FOR MAKE NO MISTAKE, WHAT ANTHONY SAYS,
CLEOPATRA MUST DO.
THAT IS THE-PACKAGE. SOME PLAN AGAINST INFLATION:
SOME PACKAGE: AND FOR THE REST OF THEIR POLICIES WE ' LL READ
ABOUT THEM IN THE HERALD OVER THE 3 DAYS 3 DAYS
BEFORE THE ELECTION THEY'LL TELL US WHAT THEY PROPOSE
FOR THE NEXT 3 YEARS.
.7-
WE ARE FIGHTING INFLATION. WE ARE BEATING
INFLATION, WE SHARE THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION WITH
EVERY COMPARABLE COUNTRY; AND WE ARE DOING BETTER THAN
ANY COMPARABLE COUNTRY, ALONE AMONG COMPARABLE COUNTRIES,
OUR INFLATION RATE FELLLAST QUARTER. IT WILL CONTINUE
TO FALL. BUT ALMOST ALONE AMONGST THOSE COMPARABLE
COUNTRIES, WE. ARE-NOT FIGHTING INFLATION BY PUTTING
MEN AND WOMEN OUT OF WORK. WE HAVE-RESTORED THE
FULL EMPLOYMENT. DESTROYED BY MR SNEDDEN WHEN HE WAS
TREASURER. WE WILL MAINTAIN FULL EMPLOYMENT.
ALONE AMONGST THESE COMPARABLE COUNTRIES WE ARE CONTINUING
TO FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION WHILE CONTINUING TO PROVIDE
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR OUR CHILDREN, THE DISADVANTAGED,
FOR HOME SEEKERS, FOR HOME BUYERS, FOR THE CITIES.
i 
THE FIGHT AGAINST ' INFLATION WILL CONTINUE.
IT WILL BE WON. BUT WE DO NOT CHOOSE TO FIGHT IT
AT OUR CHILDREN S EXPENSE, OR AT THE EXPENSE OF THE
DISADVANTAGED OF THIS NATION. IT WON'T . BE WON BY
LETTING OUR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN OUR CITIES BECOME
EVEN MORE RAMSHACKLE, MORE AND MORE INEFFICIENT,
MORE COSTLY, IT WILL BE WON ON THE BASIS OF MORE EQUAL
SHARING OF OUR OPPORTUNITIES, OF OUR WEALTH, AND
IF EVER NECESSARY, MORE EQUAL'SPREADING OF SACRIFICES.
I CANNOT PROMISE THE GRAZIERS EARNING. OVER
A HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS, WHO HAVE LOST $ 4 MILLION
IN SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTIES, THAT THEY MIGHT NOT HAVE
TO FOREGO A NEW YACHT FOR A YEAR. BUT I WILL PROMISE YOU
THAT NO AUSTRALIAN CHILD WILL HAVE TO FOREGO A YEAR'S
EXPANDED EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES AND IN EFFECT,
AS IT WOULD BE-UNDER OUR OPPONENTS, LOSE THOSE NEW
OPPORTUNITIES FOR A LIFETIME. 
WHAT HAS OUR GOVERNMENT BEEN ABOUT?
THIS VERY MEETING, THE GREAT PLACE IN WHICH IT IS HELD,
THE AUSPICES UNDER WHICH IT IS HELD, THE COMING TOGETHER
OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS CITY WHO WORK IN THIS CITY,
WHO GIVE THIS CITY ITS LIFE, SYMBOLISE WHAT THIS
GOVERNMENT IS ALL ABOUT.
WE ARE FOR THE PEOPLE, AGAINST SPECIAL INTERESTS.
WE ARE FOR EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY, AGAINST PRIVILEGE.
WE ARE FOR A MODERN, PROGRESSIVE, HUMANE AUSTRALIA.
WE ARE FOR AN AUSTRALIA IN WHICHEVERY CITIZEN
EVERYONE BORN HERE) EVERYONE WHO SETTLES AMONGST US, HAS
A FAIR AND EQUAL CHANCE TO ENJOY THE OPPORTUNITIES
OUR GREAT WEALTH OFFERS, WHERE EVERY MAN AND WOMAN
CAN PARTICIPATE AS A FULL MEMBER OF SOCIETY, FULLY
INVOLVED IN THE WORK OF MOVING THIS COUNTRY AHEAD.
AND THAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PRESENCE OF
SO MANY DISTINGUISHED AUTHORS AND ARTISTS AND ACADEMICS
HERE TODAY. 
THIS COUNTRY HAS SEEN IN THE LAST 17 MONTHS
AN UNPARALLELLED BURST IN CREATIVE ACTIVITY.
SURE, WE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE FOR THE ARTS A GREAT AMOUNT
OF MONEY, FOR INSTANCE, TODAY I WILL BE ANNOUNCING
THE FULFILMENT, AFTER MANY MONTHS OF INQUIRY, OF A
PROMISE I MADE IN 1972 FOR A PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT,
BY WHICH AUSTRALIA'S AUTHORS CAN RECEIVE PAYMENT FOR
THEIR BOOKS IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
BUT AS FAR AS THE ARTS ARE CONCERNED,. IT'S NOT
JUST A MATTER OF MONEY; IT IS A MATTER OF INVOLVEMENTL
INVOLVEMENT IN THE MAINSTREAM OF THE LIFE OF THE REAL
AND LIVING COMMUNITY. FOR IT IS OUR ARTS, OUR
GREAT BUILDINGS, LIKE THIS, WHICH EXPRESS TO GENERATIONS
YET UNBORN WHAT WE WERE LIKE IN OUR TIME, WHAT WE
ACHIEVED, WHAT WE DARED TO TRY TO ACHIEVE, IN OUR TIME.
i. 
IN 17 MONTHS WE HAVE ACHIEVED MUCH AND WE HAVE
DARED TO ACHIEVE MUCH TOGETHER. BUT THERE IS SO MUCH
MORE TO BE DONE TOGETHER. IT HASN'T BEEN ALL
PLAIN-SAILING, AND I'M NOT SAYING THERE AREN'T THINGS
WE WOULDN'T HAVE DONE DIFFERENTLY, GIVEN MORE TIME,
GIVEN THE EXPERIENCE WE NOW HAVE. WE ARE TRYING
TO ACHIEVE AN AUSTRALIA WHERE THE ABLE AND THE ABLE-BODIED,
THE TALENTED, THE SKILLED, CAN ENJOY THE FULLEST FRUITS
OF THEIR GIFTS, AND OPPORTUNITIES; BUT, AT THE SAME
TIME AND ABOVE ALL, AN AUSTRALIA WHERE NO GROUP OF
AUSTRALIANS MUST TAKE SECOND AFLACE OR GO TO'THE WALL
JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE WOMEN, JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE NEWCOMERS,
OR BECAUSE THEY ARE YOUNG, OR BECAUSE THEY HAVE TO. LIVE
IN NEW AND DISTANT SUBURBS, OR BECAUSE THEIR PARENTS ARE
POOR, OR BECAUSE THEY ARE HANDICAPPED, OR BECAUSE THEY
ARE OLD, OR BECAUSE THEY ARE ABORIGINES, OR BECAUSE
THEY HAVE SUFFERED INJURY OR SICKNESS.
WE ARE TRYING TO BUILD AN AUSTRALIA WHERE ALL CAN
FEEL INVOLVED, AN AUSTRALIA IN WHICH ALL FEEL A SENSE OF
DIRECTION, OF PURPOSE, AN AUSTRALIA WHICH BELONGS, NOT. TO
SPECIAL INTERESTS, NOT TO THE PRIVILEGED MEN BORN TO RULE,
RQI TO OVERSEAS. CORPORATIONS, BUT AN AUSTRALIA WHICH
BELONGS TO AUL AUSTRALIANS,
AND IT CAN BE DONE, WE ARE GOING TO DO IT. 
IT CAN BE DONE THROUGH OUR PROGRAM.
WE ARE GOING TO CARRY THAT PROGRAM THROUGH.
IT CAN BE DONE THROUGH THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM.
WE ARE GOING TO DO IT. WILL YOU JOIN US IN DOING IT?
IT CAN BE DONE THROUGH THE PROGRAMS WE HAVE STARTED,
THROUGH THE PROGRAMS THAT ARE NOW BEARING THEIR FRUIT
FOR THE BENEFIT OF ALL AUSTRALIANS.
WILL YOU LET US GET ON WITH THAT JOB?
IN THIS GREAT CITY; THE LIVING SYMBOL OF SO
MUCH THAT WE AUSTRALIANS HAVE ACHIEVED TOGETHER IN
THE PAST: IN THIS BUILDING, SO MUCH A LIVING . SYMBOL OF
OUR PRESENT VIGOR, PROSPERITY, PRIDE AND STRENGTH)
AT THIS MEETING, SO MUCH THE SYMBOL OF THE NEW HOPES
BORN AND THE TALENTS AND ENERGIES UNLEASHED BY OUR
EMPHATIC BUT NONETHELESS INCOMPLETE VICTORY 17 MONTHS AGO:
I ASK YOUR SUPPORT FOR THE FUTURE, FOR YOUR FUTURE,
YOUR CHILDREN'S FUTURE, FOR THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIANS
YET UNBORN. 
AUSTRALIANS CAN TURN BACK, TURN THE CLOCK BACK,
GO BACK TO ALL THAT OLD HOPELESS NESS, FLATNESS AND
STALE FUTILITY, OR THEY CAN GO ON AND GO AHEAD
WITH OUR PROGRAM OUR CLEAR AND POSITIVE PROGRAM
FOR A STRONG, UNITED, MORE EQUAL AUSTRALIA.
LET SATURDAY BE THE DAY WHEN AUSTRALIA SAID
OVERWHELMINGLY YES TO THE FUTURE. 
404 .10,101 A1
( A jai.) V
6TK .0 An[ nOa os c. flai'* Kom
IA o ia Y A no. t i 1001a13' v
" r pins' I. n . m 



PLAIARM E 10 0
PARLIAMENTAR--
Press Statement
/ 3 May 1974
PROPOSED PRICE INCREASES BY
PRESERVENE PTY. LTD.
I have received the attached report of the
Prices Justification Tribunal on certain price
increases proposed by Preservene Pty. Ltd. The report
is available to the public and may be inspected at the
offices of the Prices Justification Tribunal 10 Queens
Road, Melbourne or 100 William Street, Sydney.
Canberra, A. C. T. 



PARLIAMENTARt1 O
4&gt; usTAA
PRIME MINISTER 13 May 1974
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
The Prime Minister announced today that the Chairman of the
I SCccooomntcmtil, tu steiheoa nd so fw rainIdtn tqeurnie rcytoo m mienantddov aitsGieoo vnehsri. nm m eofnT th et hPePr roicCmuoerm emmMieitnnttie, se t'esSr i rm arjeWocaralltleer d
that in announcing the establishment of the Committee in
November 1973, it was foreshadowed that the Committee's
report would form the basis of a review, by Ministers, of
procurement policy. This review, he said, would be carried
out as soon as possible after receipt of the Committee's
full report which was expected shortly.
The Prime Minister said that Sir Walter had advised him that
the Committee's major conclusion was that the procurement
function as a whole had been seriously neglected, and was not
serving the Australian Government or its suppliers, as'
effectively as it should. Sir Walter said the Committee
recommended that, in order to upgrade the procurement function
to a degree commensurate with its importance to both government
I baen d esitnadbusltirsyh, e d aans Auas tcreantlriaaln Gpourvcehranmseinngt aPuutrhcohraistiyn g toC obmmeission
responsible for the co-ordination of policy, and in the course
of time, for the purchase of goods and services for all
departments with the possible exception of certain specialised
functions.
The Committee sees two major advantages from the creation of
an Australian Government Purchasing Commission. First, it
considers that such a Commission should make possible greater
efficiency and streamlining in the whole process of Government
procurement, as it saw obvious gains to be achieved in terms
of economy and efficiency of operations. Secondly, the
Committee considers the Commission could be expected to develop
an expertise and experience which would allow it to purchase
more effectively for the various Government departments for
which it would act as agent. It was thought that the Commission
should achieve the traditional objective of Government
purchasing, the " best value for money", more effectively than
the present system.
The Committee also recommended that, as soon as possible, the
proposed Commission should initiate a thorough overhaul of the
principles, rules and regulations governing the procurement
function. In the meantime, the Committee would make a number
of detailed recommbndations designed to improve the situation
immediately. In particular it would recommend that the 
SGovernment overhaul its forward planning for procurement, so
that suppliers will have a better knowledge of what is required.
The Prime Minister said he had also been advised that the
Committee would be suggesting ways in which Government purchasing
may be used to further other policy aims considered desirable
by the Government. The Committee has concluded that in various
ways and in varying degrees Government purchasing can be used to
help to achieve some policy objectives; in the field of product
standards and testing; in the following of a labour employment
code; the employment of women; the employment of aborigines;
promoting regional development; furthering technological progress;
requiring pollution control; encouraging industrial efficiency;
setting standards in the field of motor vehicle safety; and
in influencing a desirable structure of industrial development
in line with Government policy and community needs.
The Committee's report will also suggest means by which
Government purchasing can be used to further the policy of
encouraging a higher level of Australian ownership and control
of industry. Q
The Prime Minister said he wished to place on record the
Government's appreciation of the valuable work done by the
Committee. 


PRIME MINISTER&nbsp;13 May 1974&nbsp;PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT TO AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS&nbsp;The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today that he had approved in principle a Public Lending Right scheme to benefit Australian authors. Under the scheme, whose cost would be borne entirely by the Australian Government, Australian authors would be paid a specified sum, probably fifty cents, for each copy of their books available for loan from Australian public libraries. Mr. Whitlam said that the undertaking to introduce such a scheme was given in his policy speech in 1972. A report has been prepared by a committee made up of representatives of the Literature Board of the Australian Council for the Arts, the library profession, the Australian Society of Authors and the Australian Book Publishers Association. Mr. Whitlam said the plan did not require legislation and would apply as from 1 April 1974. Amounts equivalent to 25% of the sums due for a full year would be paid to writers before the end of the financial year. The cost of the scheme in its first full year would be approximately $ 530,000. Mr. Whitlam said that the scheme offered justice to Australian authors which was long overdue. Seven European countries already had such schemes, and New Zealand introduced one early this year. Payments based on a stocktaking survey of Australian libraries would be available to Australian authors, wherever they resided, and to authors normally resident in Australia. Payments would not be restricted to books published in Australia.
Publishers would also receive the benefits of the scheme:In addition to the amounts paid to authors, an extra 25% would be paid to eligible publishers - i.e. Australian-registered publishing companies paying Australian tax, or non-profit publishers such as the University Presses. Mr. Whitlam said, that since libraries would not be expected to bear any of the cost involved, there would be no burden on local government resources or State Government funds. The Prime Minister expressed the Government's thanks to those who had helped develop the scheme, especially to the libraries of Australia whose co-operation had made possible the early completion of the report.
CANBERRA. A.C.T.



13 May 1974
ASSISTANCE TO QUEENSLAND FOR HOUSING
RESTORATION WORK
The Prime Minister announced today that the Premier of
Queensland had accepted the Australian Government's offer of
assistance to Queensland for housing restoration work.
Mr Whitlam said that his offer, announced on 5 May,
involved 70 volunteer tradesmen employed by the Australian
Department of Housing and Construction going to Brisbane to
assist in the reconstruction of flood damaged homes.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



13 May 1974
CHRISTMAS ISLAND
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam said tonight:
" Christmas Island was, in the past, administered by Britain
for convenience as part of the Colony of Singapore. In 1958 it
was transferred to Australian sovereignty by Britain.
" Australian sovereignty over the island is not in question.
Nor are we handing over control of the rock phosphate deposits.
" When I was in Singapore in February the question of
Christmas Island was mentioned to me by Lee Kuan Yew. There was no
discussion in any detail. No agreement in principle about the future
of the island has been reached and there has certainly been no secret
" deal". as has been alleged.
" Any change in the future status of Christmas Island would
involve the interests of a number of departments and instrumentalities
in Australia and a number of countries such as New Zealand and
Indonesia ( which is closer to Christmas Island than is Singapore).
No negotiations on this subject have taken place.
" Those who are making the most noise about what they-allege
to be a sell out of Australia's interests are those who have been
most active in selling up Australia's resources over the last decade.
" If their allegations were true, their concern would be
grossly hypocritical. As their allegations are untrue, they can
only be seen as a malicious fabrication propagated by desparate men facing
electoral defeat."
CANBERRA. 



PRIME MINISTER'S
PRESS CONFERENCE, CASTLEMAINE 14 May 1974
PRIME MINISTER: at 11.00 o'clock and I wanted to see this
century old market at Castlemaine, following on Mr Justice Oakes.
Commitee on the National Estate report who we are going to
restore thexEmsk to the cost of 46,000. xTxhavxalso I also have
of course a a dutiable because my gxxahex grandfather Henry Hugh Gough
Whitlam was born here, in 1856. I am'the most Victorian of all
pi political leaders-in our nation. Are there any questions you'
would like to ask me gentlemen.
QUESTION: Mr Anthony has now said that it wouldn't be possible to.
^ n freeze food prices, Mr Snedden says he is going to. Do you have.-
any opinion on whether or not that it is possible
PRIME MINISTER: I'm ti d of trying to reconcile Mr Snedden and
Mr Anthony. My own view is that one cannot realistically freeze the
price of foods stuffs such as meat because as Mr Snedden himself
confessed if one tries to do that, then graziers and sheep men
will keep their cattle and sheep from the abitors. I don't regard
it as any solution to follow Mr Snedden's idea that in-that case
one could import meat. Meat hasn't been imported into Australia
as I said at the Sydney Opera House yesterday, since Bennelong was. a
lady boy, since Governor Philipp planted the Union Jack at Circular
Quay. My govt took this attitude when the Parliamentary Committde
on Prices made a recommendation about meat, the govt rejected the
recommendation, believed it wasn't a realistic one. I agree with
' Mr Anthony on this, I think Mr Snedden was just thrashing about on
this one matter an as he has on all his last minute proposals for
income and prices freezes. . J
QUESTION: I noticed that the Mr. Snedden said that the Liberal Govt
would spendx$ Af $ 200 Ezs million less on education..... 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: I though t he said $ 300 million less....
QUESTION: You may be right....
PRIME MINISTER: I was going on the Sun-Pic which said $ 300 million
less.
-QUESTION: Would that amount be important, would there be many
S schools suffer.
PRIME MINISTER: He doesn't specify. in wki rx ia what field of
education he would reduce the prospective... what field or fields
Sof education he would reduce the prospective expenditure. It may
h be at the tetiary level, the universities, colleges of advanced
education and both Government and non-Government teachers colleges
for which my Government has made commitments. Presumbaly however,
: the reduction in expenditure would mainly be at the expense of the'
S secondary and primary schools. I suppose technical colleges are
partly secondary and partly tertiary. He doesn't specify where
Sthe reduction will be. It will be appreciated that the expa
expenditure that my Government has undertaken in education has in'
every case been on the advice of expert committees. For primary
Sandsecondary schools it was. on the recommendation of the Karmel
:~ Committee; the interim committee for the Schools Commission. On
S. behalf of universities, it's been on the recommendation of the
Universities Commission under Professor Karmel. In the colleges
of advanced education it's been on the recommendation of the
commission on advanced education under Swanson. Now so... And then
the prospective expenditure that we will make on technical and further
education will be on the basis of the recommendations of the tfn X
Committee which was tabled just -before the Parliament was dissoljed,.
It may be that there will be some expenditures which would relate to
education on the recommendation of the Cochran ; Committee on training
adult training and re-training and also of this inter-departmental A_
committee which has reported on its findings concerning re-training
1 ~-i 
schemes in comparable countries. We haven't yet undertaken,
we haven't yet as a government yet collectively endorsed the
recommendations or haven't Sxax received the recommendations
of the x Cohrane Committee and we haven't considered the
recommendations of the Inter-departmental committee. The Kanla
Committees report we have accepted in principle. David Kennedy,
whose interest in education matters you'll all remember from
his 3 years in the House of Representatives reminds me that
there are on top of this, commitments concerning fees being
S abolished and also living allowances being increased in number
and amount. I mention all these matters they are all subjects
of reports which we have received and we have also au accepted
the recommendations of reports in the educational field and I
have no doubt that we will acceptxtk for the coming budget
that means for the scholarsatic and admñ cxaE academic year
1975 and subsequenti years the recomendations of these
. expert. After all they have been' uamxzxs unaminous recommendation.
from widely representative committees and nobody fxom has
. criticised them. Now I don't know which of these expenditures
Mr Snedden is threatening to cut I d never heard him speci. fy
what recommendations of these committees he rejects, in fact
I don't remember him speaking on education matters at all in the
S ' Parliament. QUESTION: Prime Minister, yesterday Mr Fairbairn challenged
you to give a undertaking that your govt wouldn't increase the
price of petrol, ( uncleac) he said that because of the ( unclear)
increases on petrol ( unclear) petrol prices?
PRIME MINISTER: Well about the prices o for Australian
crude oil. We will not allow that price to be increased before
the agreement expires in Sept next year. I would think it most
unlikely that thereafter we would agree to any increase in the
prices crude oil coming from deposits already discovered and 
4.
operating. I believe that Mr Fairbairn has been too naive
in accepting the propaganda of the oil$ companies in the Bassy..
Strait case its an overseas oil company ESSO, there is not a
shred of. evidence to show that oil exploration in Australia is*
S more expensive or that discoveries are less profitable than is
S the case in any other country, its true that the price of crude.
oil since the September War last year has increased in most oil
producing countries it has increased not because of.* any increase
in the cost of exploration or extractionxfor transport, its
not been caused by any increase in the rake-off which the
oil companies exact, its because. of the increase in the taxes
and royalities imposed by the countries where the oil is found.
Andx There is nothing to sxwh show that oil-exploration in
Australia is more expensive or less profitable than in other
S country. Our attitude to oil exploration is shown very clearly
from our proposed legislation of the Petroleum and Minierals
Authority, we believe that the proper way for a country to
discover oil, one of the proven methods, of discovering oil in
Sany country is for some gaokx governmental instrumentality in
that country to take part in the search and the development and
. that means that the govt of the country becomes k party to the
information the the geoglogical formations and prospects, it
Salso is able to share in the ownership of any deposits that
are found as well as share, as well as share in the m knowledge
which is gained. This is the method ta-t the French use its
S the method : th4at the Italians its the method which the Canadians
are now adopting and Brazil and there are a great number p of these
countries have set up corporations of this character. Australia
would
S would I think,/ be the only country whexexthe the only industrialise
country, or the only country where it is som sought where their
are any indications of oil andxgHsx or natural gas that there
is not a governmental instrumentality taking part in the search
and the development of the oil and natural gas dsopx deposits. 
The one that we have. been basing ourselves on for the last ten
years in our thoughts has been any. In Italy the na inte
nationale edro cabori and as in Italy and France, Canada to take
the cases where we are. most familiar with the operations, it's
not a Government monopoly.. The instrumentality as you know the
he's
bill sets out/ is authorised enter into consortia or arrangements
of any kind for discovery and development and processing and
. marketing with individuals or with companies and these companies
can be overseas companies or Australian companies or with State
Governments or with a combination of all of them. It's no secret
about this because the bill has been twice passed by the House
Sof Representatives and twice rejected by the Senate and it's one
of the a six bills upon which the Governmr-General granted us
a dissolution of both houses.
QUESTION: Is there a possibility of a two-teered policy for
prices and incomes?
PRIME MINISTER: That is a system which has been used in many other
S countries. The price remains constant for the existing discoveries.
The price is negotiable to new discoveries. That. is obviously.
a method which one could consider in Australia. If you have an
' instrumentality in the field such as petroleum and minerals
authority, you have the n knowledge of what the costs are and
S this is one of the reasons of oi^ d course why we want to get
S into the tanker trade as well so that one's able to discover the
cost of transporting. If Menzies hadn't sold out the Commonwealth
0
Oil Refineries, we would have been in a very much better position
. in all these respects as to regards search, transport and
refining and distribution.
QUESTION: Sir, could I ask you your reaction to Mr Snedden's
( unclear) indirect.. tax ( unclear)
c I-
,6.
PRIME MINISTER: I've been asked the questions before on thit,-
and I think I need only repeat the answers I've given previous l y.
I see no reason why taxes direct,. or indirect, need to be
increased in order to pay for any of our continuing commitments,
the continuation of programs we've already introduced or for the
introduction of programs for which we've already introduced
legislation but which the Senate has rejected or for programs
which I have undertaken in greater detail in my policy speech
for this election. In particular I undertook two new commitments.
One is to have a complete... to introduce a complete availability
of care and education for children under 5 everywhere in Australia,
city and country, new suburbs, old suburbs. That will cost an
additional 130 million dollars in the coming financial year.
It's mainly current expenditure. I'd emphasise it's not a
capital intensive program at all. It's not like a program for
schools or tertiary institutions. It's'a program based on people
operating xx in existing community. facilities or in fact in their
own homes or their own streets. The other proposal is to exempt
the matrimonial home during the lifetime of the survivor of a
marriage and the Treasury has worked that out as involving
million a year. There was another proposal I made to exempt
well to allow people to deduct from their for taxation purposes
the amount when they paid for the support of dependants even if
thos e dependants are not in Austalia. Treasury said there would
be no cost to the revenue involved. Now I read Mr Snedden's
statement yesterday and he makes no specific costings at all.
The new programs that I've pronounced, I have just gone over now
* and I have told you what the estimates of costs are. I put them
in the policy speech. It's not necessary to increase direct or
indirect taxes to pay for any of them. I issued costingcf those
items which wel'cut and which Mr Snedden says that he would restore. 
I didn't purport to go through the whole of his policy speech
because it seemed to me it was deliberately... it was vague. Now
. that was either because of her was deliberately vague or because
She is constitutionally vague. But I did specify the cost of.
those subsidies 9-concessions, loopholes and lurks which we
had ended and which he said he'd restore.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Mr Fraser says that all the
Treasury predictions has to make, Government would have to
Vc . K Government expenditure would have to rise by 5,000 million in
74/ 75 to make way for its programs. . He goes on to say that.
Mr Hayden told him that the Treasury estimates had been
. publisheadn d believed that they had gone to Cabinet or a..
Cabinet Committee. Is this true?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no submission to Cabinet
there has been no document prepared by Treasury. Mr Fraser
baseds his allegations on a newsletter hyxsoma produced by
' some body called Syntec. Mr Fraser has made several statements.
I believe he is x the most prolific author of all the members of
Sthe Opposition and most of them are based on Syntec. I think
I heard him... Yes I did. I heard this and I saw this debate
between Mr Fraser and Sir Charles Court and Mr Hayden and Mr.-
Dunstan on Mike Willesee's show on Sunday and Mr Fraser mentioned
Syntec as the basis of this allegation. Mr Hayden said that
there have been no collation of departmental claims. That most
of the claims are not in. I can verify that in my own Department
claims, for instance in the Arts and so on are not in. It's
the practice for departments to make all their claims b' the end
of April. That's because a budget usually comes in in the middle
of August. The claims have been deferred this year because as
happened in 1951 k last time there was a double dissolution, the
budget will not come in until B~ Ezam September. And accordingly,
the claims will not even come in till the end of this month or even 
into June and then the Cabinet will not be considering the
various claims until late in July or even August. It depends
when the first session of the Parliament take s place.
. QUESTION: On behalf of Patrick Whiteman and myself, it's
r got to do with your statement on public lending rights whether
Sit's 50 cents a year or it's 50 cents per volume'. Is it an
S. I annual or a lump sum?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll have to find out.
QUESTION: k( unclear)
S PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I think your volumes are selling
very well. I do what I can to advertise them. I forget it
S may be it's only for each volume that goes into a library
and I would think that the run there is on your works that they
wwo. u ld have to be replaced in more fequently than yearly.
QUESTION: ( unclear)
SPRIME MINISTER: Well that's becasuse they're bound in HongKong.
I'm not aire if I'm right there but the authors get it but the
only b publishers that get it are those who are Australians.
Authors will get them even if they're even if they're overseas
but Australian. Publishers that is the printer -' the publishers
won't unless he's Australian. I think there's one other one isn't
' there QUESTION: But it would have to be annually?
:. PRIME MINISTER: I suppose so but that's only slow moving line.
Laurie would be wise to ask it for each volume.
': QUESTION: Mine will only be slow moving and I need it.
'' PRIME MINISTER: Look give you a copy we can give you a
copy of the report. I don't think there's enought copies to give
S. all round. but there's no secret about it. You'll be in
'. Canberra tomorrow and I'll show it to you.
QUESTION: The other question you were quoted in the Sydney
Telegraph on Monday I don't know where they got it from
it was some interview but government expenditure is going to 
increase by 20% next year rather than 50% by suggested by
Mr Snedden. Can you give us details of that or verify it?
RIME MINISTER: I stated this on Frost so it will come out
I 4i.' tomorrow night and it would therefore be embargoed. until
9 tomorrow night. I know you wouldn't have broken the embargo.
J ., You were in the studio at the time but you must have seen it
Si-in writing somewhere. I'm not suggesting that you/ ask a
Squestion which hadn't been in print already which somebody
S' .: else hadn't broken the embargo on but I was asked on the basis
of Malcolm Fraser's quotation from Syntec. I think it was that
things would go up 40% and I said that that had never been
S suggested. There were no documents to that effect. And he said
* where would it be. I said I think it would be somewhere midway.
And that is purely a hunch. I point out that expenditure in
S. the Government's sector in fact is rising more slowly than in
the private sector. This is rot only in current expenditure
'. but still more in capital expenditure. The latest statistics
the statisticians latest bulletin shows I think -d I suppose.
'.' you can look it up I'm going from memory that the increased
capital expenditure by industries is respectively 40% whereas
we have quite deliberately kept down capital expenditure except
S. . where it would be cheaper than hiring private premises. But
I did say on Frost that * k I thought it would be about 20 which
is rather less than the estimates theprivate enterprise'is
giving. QUESTION: Would that b 20% across the border, Prime Minister?
PRIME'MINISTER: The average of the lot. It's obviously I would
think expenditue on public housing this coming year wouldn't
go up as much as the coming year wouldn't go up as much as the
year just ending because it's been shown that the money can't
be spent and there are many items which are continuing ones where 
the expenditure would be less but I would expect that there
would be some items in the cities field, urban and regional
developmet which would be greater in the coming year than in
the year just expired because the expenditure we allocated in
last budget hasn't been all taken up by, the States. As you
know in transport and land development alone there must be
I'll have the figures precisely for tomorrow night at Bankstown
but there must be over 40 million available for the New South
4 ' Wales Government in Mr Crean's last budget which wasn't taken
S up. Well we would be making it available in the next budget.
Clearly the increase in expenditure would show up as a . considerable
expenditure in the next budget but it wouldn't be such a large
increase over the expenditure allowed for k in the last budget.
QUESTION: I think Mr Fraser is basing his...
PRIME MINISTER: On Syntec forward
QUESTION: yest on what has been said about/ anHx estimates...
' PRIME MIISTER: Well there aren't.... Forward estimates are not
S yet in. They may be for some departments but Mr Fraser's been
S a Minister. He knows that every departments puts in much more
than it expects to get. The estimates. which we got from
S departments last July were at least halved. And if we hadn't
a lot
been able to cut of these inherited lurks exposed by the Cooms
TAsk Force, they would have t had to be cut further still.' Some
of the Coombs Task Force recommendations will have their full
, x impact in the new year. The superphosphate for instance will only'
ibe half effective. It's meant no saving at all in 73/ 74. It will
only make a half saving in 74/ 75 because the Act doesn't expire
until;. the end of. December. 75/ 76 will be a complete saving.
S I rftrSI\ Q~ i0 9Q 



4AUSTRLIALñ
PRIME MINISTER
I 14 May 1974
MARITIME INDUSTRY COMMISSION OF INQUIRY
The Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today . that the Government had received the f irst
report of the Maritime Industry Commission of Inquiry which was
presented to the Governor-General on 6 May 1974.
The first report prepared by the Commissioner, Mr M. M. Summers,
covers training requirements for sea-going personnel. It consists
of two parts. Part I covers principles, broad proposals and
conclusions. Part II is an analysis in some detail of the issues
traversed in Part I.
The report highlights the shortcomings of the present
curricula and the inadequate training facilities now available
for sea faring personnel, especially on trading vessels.
To meet the future needs for highly skilled deck, engineering
and radio officers, Mr Summers has proposed the setting up of a
Central Marine College. This would form part of a College of
Advanced Education. Courses would be financed under the
Australian Government's policy of free tertiary education.
In view of the difficulties and complexities encountered on
different types of vessels, the report recommends that different
levels of qualifications should be necessary. To this end, the
report recommends the establishment of two levels of courses for
both deck and engineering officers. The duration of the courses
offered ( two or three years) and their intensity would vary according
to the qualifications sought. Completion of a full secondary
school course would be a prerequisite for entry to the three-year
college course.
Academic courses would be reinforced by periods of training
at sea. One two-year course is recommended for the training of radio
officers. Mr Summers has recommended that existing facilities for
the training of other maritime personnel ( deck and engineering ratings
and catering) should be improved and enlarged. Training for these
ratings should be co-ordinated by the proposed Maritime College.
These facilities should be available to masters of small fishing
craft and small boat and pleasure craft owners. 
-2-
The Prime Minister said that the Government accepted in
principle the conclusions of the first report and would begin
an immediate examination of the report in order to take
decisions on the recommendations as soon as possible after
18 May. Mr Whitlam said that arrangements had been made for the
report, to be printed and published as soon as possible.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



PARLIAMENTARY 18
May 1974
PRICES NOTIFICATION BY
SHELL AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES LIMITED
I have received a notification dated 10 May
from Shell Australian Securities Limited in the
following terms:
" In accordance with Section 18( 6) of the Prices
Justification Act 1973, we hereby give notice of
our intention to increase prices, from 13 May 1974,
or as soon thereafter as is practicable, by the
amounts recommended by the Prices Justification
Tribunal in its report dated 3 May 1974."
The company has also advised that its new
price lists are in the course of preparation. When
received they will be available for inspection at the
offices of the Prices Justification Tribunal 10 Queens
Road, Melbourne or 100 William Street, Sydney.
Canberra, A. C. T. 



CVA STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
CA CHELSEA MEETING, MELBOURNE, 14 MAY 1974
The Opposition have made it brutally clear that they
would do nothing of value for the care and education of young
children. C-hild care, would suffer under a Country Party-Liberal
Government fo-r thKe-same reason that education would suffer.
Mr Snedden would prefer to spend the money on wealthy sectional
interests. The Liberal record on child care demonstrates their
neglect and indifference. In their last three years in office
they spent $ 5 million a year on pre-school education and child
care. They promised to spend an additional $ 5 million in 1972
but did not do so. ~ w.~=~ tsixmonths teWhit lam Governi..::
ment has spent $ 18 million. It has done this -and much more
by cutting back $ 480 million in unnecessary spending on tax
lurks, concessions and subsidies for wealthy mining corporations,
business interests, Collins Street farmers and category-A
schools. Mr Snedden, under Country Party pressure, would restore
these payments. That is why he has no real interest in child
care. That is why his proposals are hollow and irrelevant.
Australians all Australian governments currently
spend $ 2,000 million a year in educating, sheltering and caring
for children under 12. In this context, the Snedden offer of
million for children under six looks pretty shabby.
That is the reality behind the official Liberal
policy statement that there would be " no new expenditure until
economic circumstances permit", that " current pre-school programs"
would continue. They promise merely to continue something that
everyone regards as inadequate.
There can be no argument about the size and reality
of the challenge. The best official estimates at the government's
disposal indicate a program costing $ 130 million in a full year.
We are committed to such a program. 



PRIME MINISTER May 1974
AUSTRALIA'S BLACK CULTURE FOR NIGERIA
Australia is to send up to 100 Aboriginals to Lagos next
year to take part in the Second World Black and African Festival
of Arts and Culture, the Prime Minister announced today.
The Festival will be held in and around Lagos in
November/ December, 1975.
Australian participation was invited after a meeting of
the planning committee in Lagos earlier this year.
A committee drawn from the Department of Aboriginal and
Foreign Affairs, the Australian Council for the Arts and the
National Aboriginal Consultative Committee chose four Aboriginals
to attend a planning meeting in Lagos. The four will leave
Australia on 17 May. They are Aboriginal Liaison officers,
Vincent Copley, Gordon Briscoe and Charles Dixon together with
Wandjuk Marika of Yirrkala.
The Festival aims at bringing together Black culture and
the cultures of other nations which affect it throughout the
world. Over 20,000 people from all parts of Africa, North and
South America, the Carribean, Europe, India, Papua New Guinea
and Australasia are expected to take part in the month-long visit.
Australia will be represented by Aboriginal art ranging from
music and dancing to painting, sculpture, drama, writing and
film making. Traditional crafts such as weaving, carving, basket
making and body painting will also be demonstrated at the Festival.
The Nigerian Government will build a theatre and cultural
complex costing $ US36 million, together with a festival village
designed to house 100,000 participants and visitors.
Visitors to the Festival will attend exhibitions of all
aspects of Black culture throughout the world. Seminars will
also be held on the preservation and development of Black
civilisation.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON : PRIME MINISTER'S OPENING ADDRESS
MAY 1974
Mr. President, your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Please forgive me if I'm not too formal. I have no text to
declaim to you. I will make some preliminary observations
and then whether I like it or not I'll have to answer your
questions. I gather that on previous speeches in this particular round
there have been a great number of references to economic
affairs. I shall quote from a part of your newspapers
tomorrow morning which you won't be writing yourselves.
It's a letter from economists a majority of the professors
and staff in economic faculties right round Australia. It
states, since the present government won office, Australia
has witnessed several significant changes in economic policy.
The government has, for instance, revalued the currency, cut
tariffs across the hoard, increased interest rates and
substantially reduced the alarming growth in the money supply.
Inflation has, of course, been the major concern of economic
management for the government. The rapid increase in prices
has been an international phenomenon as well as a national
one and we doubt that any Australian government could have
managed to isolate our economy from these international
price movements. We believe that the general thrust of the
government's policy responses has been in the best interests
of the nation as a whole. More importantly, we seriously
doubt that the previous government would have had the wisdom
or the courage to undertake it. It had certainly given no
indication of moving in that direction while it was in power,
even though the need for such policies had become obvious.
There can be no doubt that inflation would have been even
more severe had the government not taken the steps outlined
above. .2/ 
We urge the public to carefully weigh these matters before
making their decision on the 18th May. The letter which is
being delivered to all the metropolitan morning papers today
is signed by 130 professors and staff members, the first
signature being Professor Trevor Swan, the Doyen of
Economics at the Australian National University in this
c ity where we are meeting and the it goes right through
and the last signaturies are from Drs. Ironmonger and Sheehan
of the Institute of Applied Economic Research, Melbourne, the
Editor and the Assistant Editor of the Australian Economic
Review. I noticed that in his address to you yesterday, Mr. Snedden
had doubted that on the 2nd of December the people of
Australia had voted for a change and~ doubted that they knew
what they were doing when they voted the way they did. I
would merely point out that the program which I put on behalf
of the Australian Labor Party in the elections before the 2nd
December 1972 had been developed openly over many years. It
hadn't emerged from a war council the previous weekend. It
hadn't been evolved behind closed doors three weeks befQre.
It in fact had been in print in party documents for months
and years before. It had been debated in public. It had been
put up in the form of motions and amendments in both Houses
of the national Parliament. It was well known, and there
could have been no greater, longer opportunity for the
Australian people to know what any political party would do
if it received their support than was the case before we were
elec -ted by the people with a comfortable majority in the
House of Representatives on the 2nd December 1972. Now how
have we tried to carry out our programs, the ones which we
enunciated then? We have put through the Parliament a record
number of bills. There has never been so active a Parliament
as that which was dissolved three weeks ago. None of the
legislation we introduced diverged from programs which we had
published and debated before the people elected us to a majority
in the House of Representatives. I'm told that in another
speech last night on David Frost, Mr. Snedden said that he .3/ 
would now accept all the legislation that went through
except those bills which had been rejected in the Senate.
Perhaps then, I can refer to some of those bills which
had been rejected in the Senate so that one can see the
difference in approach between the Government and the
conservative coalition opposing it.
One of the bills rejected by the Senate was the Trade
Practices Bill. It followed up on suggestions which had
been made by Liberal attorneys-general including Mr. Snedden
himself. In particular, it wanted to ensure that companies
could not by collusion fix prices between them. It also
had an extensive code for customer protection. We have said
we would introduce such legislation. We introduced it 9
months ago. It came up for debate oh three occasions in
the subsequent months in the Senate where it had been
introduced first. On each of those three occasions, the
Senate voted not even to debate the bill. Then there was
the Australian Industry Development Corporation Bill. It
was an expansion of a bill which Sir John McEwen had been
able to get through our predecessors over the oppositioh
of many Liberal Ministers, including Mr. McMahon was was at
that time the Treasurer. It was designed to give Australians
the opportunity to stake out a claim for a share in basic
industries. It was to prevent the takeover of those industries.
It was to give the national government the resources to
prevent a further erosion of Australian ownership and control
in basic industries. That was rejected by the Senate. Then
there was the Health Insurance legislation. There surely
could have been no program which had been so widely discussed.
It was discussed not only in the 1972 House of Representatives
elections, but in the 1969 House of Representatives elections.
It was discussed in the Senate elections in 1967 and 1970.
Our legislation completely accords with the program which we
outlined on so many occasions for the people. Then there is .4/ 
the Petroleum and Minerals Authority legislation. That has
been twice rejected by the Senate. It is designed to
enable the taxpayers through a government instrumentality
to take a share in the discovery of Australian natural
resources and the development of them. It would give the
opportunity for Australians through their own instrumentality
to learn the scientific and economic basis of these basic
industries, based on our natural resources. It follows
legislation which was the means by which France and Italy
and now Canada are taking a share in the discovery and the
development of-their resources. It would avoid the situation
which arose under our predecessors whereby 68.3% of our
energy resources our oil, our natural gas, our uranium and
our coal -are controlled from overseas. Add the metallic
resources -the iron ore, the bauxite, copper, lead, the
zinc, titanium, magnesium and so on and you still have
controlled from overseas. It was a means of avoiding
that overseas control becoming still more dominant. Twice
rejected by the Senate.
Then there are the electoral bills. In particular the
bills which would have given votes for the Senate for the
people enrolled in the two territories. We put the
proposition at the last two House of Representatives
elections I believe it's a proposition overwhelmingly
supported in the two territories but the Liberals,
Country Party take the attitude the Senate is a States
House. And then there was the legislation unanimously
recommended over 15 years ago that thca variation from the
average en rolment from electorates in any State should not
be more than 10%. You shouldn't have the present
The 10% maximum variation was endorsed by Country Party as
well as Liberal and Australian-Labor Party members of the
Constitutional Review Committee set up by Sir Robert Menzies
in 1956 reporting to the Parliament unanimously in 1958.
The legislation was twice rejected by the Senate. Now there
were other bills too, but I give those basic ones because
many of them are bills upon which the Governor-General said
the Parliament had become unworkable and therefore we were
entitled to have an election for the whole of both Houses
at the same time. 
Now, that's what we've done by way of legislation, in
carrying out oiir programs. Then, the rest of our programs-
I pointed out to you when I last spoke to you would be
based on expert advice. It was well known before we came
in that there was not in the state public services or in
the federal public service enough men and women who had been
given the responsibility of investigating and recommending
courses of action dealing with what were seen to be problems
for the Australian people, but problems which could not be
solved unless governments took some action about them. And
I'm reminded that I said at the gathering like this before
the elections in December 1972 the key channel for communication
between the Parliament and the people will be a
number of expert commissions making regular reports and
recommendations on new spending. These bodies will not
merely be exercises in more efficient, more expert
administration of public affairs they will be an expression
of our determination to keep the public informed and to keep
the public involved in the public debate on the great
national affairs and the great national decisions. We have
been as good as our word. We have where we've been able
to get the legislation through set up standing commissions.
The chairman, sometimes also the deputy chairman, have been
full time. But the rest of the men and women appointed to
those commissions have been experts in state public services,
universities and various professions and organisations. They
have been happy to serve on these bodies knowing that whether
the government accepted their recommendations or not the
Parliament and thus the people would be told what the
recommendations were. We've sought to end the situation
where the government was regarded as the only body which was
entitled to know what the experts recommended. And there
was before we came in a very great disillusion among
academics and heads of commerce and other organisations about
the use that they could be to the public, particularly in
advice given to governments. We have ended that suspicion,
we have involved them, there have been scores as you know
of professors and captains of industry and managing directors
and directors who have and state public servants as well 6/ 
as federal public servants who've been willing to be named
and identified among those who were advising the national
government. And in every case the report has been made
promptly available. It's been made available usually
before even the government has made up its mind upon them.
And the consequence has been that if the government has
differed or delayed on these reports, then the public was
able to make a judgement and assessment itself. It's
remarkable the extent to which there has been support for
and acceptance of these reports. And the big initiatives
we've taken in development of programs have been along
these lines, that is the increases in government
expenditure which we've undertaken have been on the basis
of public reports by experts which the public have themselves
received, and the cuts in public expenditure we've made,
amounting to well over 400 million dollars a year, have been
on the basis of such expert reports available to the public.
Now people don't demur at what's in these reports they
accept the facts. They acknowledge the validity of the
recommendation. It doesn't stop them criticising us when
we act upon them but in all these matters that we've clone
-the public's known why we did it on whose advice we acted
it's not been secret. It's not been delayed. It's been
available promptly and fully and we believe by this process
there's been a rational enquiry, rational development and
rational allocation of our natural resources and our human
resources such as no previous government has been willing
to bring about. And even while this campaign's been going
on there have been many such reports received. They're being
printed and a summary of them has been published. Now let
me mention some of them.
There is Sir James Vernon's report on the post office, the
biggest business in Australia but one which certainly needed
a review and investigation. And now that it has been made
available, Dr. Coombs will conduct the Royal Commission into
the rest of the Public Service. There has been no enquiry
into the Public Service in Australia for over 50 years.
There has been in the United States, Canada, Britain, so
many other countries but not here. We are the people who .7/ 
haethought about it. Then there's been Sir Walter Scott's
enquiry into government procurement. He pointed out the
inefficiencies, the waste, which have been caused by the
inherited system of purchase by the Australian Government.
Then there's Professor Crisp's report on the collection of
statistics and data. So often, departments and instrumentalities
have collected information and kept it to themselves,
not even given it to each other, still less the public. The
report here has been received and published. And I recall
the very significant ones that we've received previously.
It was Mr. Rattigan's committee'which gave us the basis for
the tariff cut across the board of 25%. It wag Sir John
Crawford's report which led to the transformation, the
strengthening, the widening of the tariff board into the
Industries Assistance Commission. It's now Tom Fitzgerald's
report which has made the public aware of the implications
of mining policies which we inherited. There's Professor
Karmel's various reports on the schools and on the open
university and there could have been no greater increase
in government expenditure on any subject than there has been
flowing from Professor Karmel's report on the schools. We
sdught it early, we published it immediately, we adopted it
in full and the Liberals in fact voted against the application
of the report twice, when it first came in both Houses and
in both Houses again when the Country Party and DLP at last
let it through. There's Professor Cochrane's report on adult
training and retraining. There's Mr. Cangen' s report on
technical education and further education and I conclude with
Mr. Justice Woodward's concluding report on the Aborigines.
Now, you will notice that these reports have been quite basic.
There have been no such wide-ranging basic reports into our
natural and human resources in the memory of anyone in this
room and they are all promptly available to you and to the
public. The only difficulty's been that after a dearth of
information before we camne in you've now had a flood of
information and we are accused of not letting the public
know fully the implications of our programs. I acknowledge
and I guess you, as practising journalists, would all
acknowledge the difficulty of getting through the full text .8/ 
8.
and facts and reconiunendations disclosed and made by these
expert bodies. But never let it be said that the public
wasn't fully informed. They were told what our objectives
were and when we have sought further advice they've been
told what the advice was. And I suppose this applies
particularly to the biggest new commitment that I've been
able to make on behalf of the government during this
campaign, and that is the commitment on the care and
education of boys and girls under five years of age. When
we came in, as I frankly admitted to you, and in my policy
speech before the December 72 elections, there was not the
information available in government circles state or
federal. There was no coordination of the information
between community groups and voluntary organisations. The
people who knew about these things had never been asked
for their views for the information, for the facts that
they had, their views as to what should be done about it.
We promptly asked a committee under Miss Joan Fry to make
a report on it. We asked the Social Welfare Commission,
under Mrs. Marie Coleman the first woman ever to be the
head of an Australian government instrumentality or
d~ partment we've asked the Priorities Review Staff in
the Department of the Special Minister of State to review
all these things, make recommendations and accordingly we
4 now have a fuller program than has even been proposed
before, for that 1,300,000 boys and girls under five
as many people under five as there are over 65. We would
never have ventured, surely, to neglect those 1.3 million
people over 65 as we have the 1.3 million under five. And
hundreds of thousands of them without anybody to look after
them no parent throughout the working day. Well, of
course it'll cost $ 130 million this coming financial year.
It's a very clear contrast to our opponents who would be
prepared to spend on this overall matter of day care and
pre-schools, $ 20 million a year. We've spent $ 18 million
in the last six months a big contrast. But you know why
we're doing it. Everybody's told. Nobody knew before we
collected the information and sought the advice. 
Now I suppose you'd expect me to say something about the
alternative package. I'm indebted to you for examining so
many aspects of it. It ought to be enough for me to refer
to some aspects myself. I gather there is to be in this
alternative package, if the public bought it, an incomes
and prices freeze. I must confess and I've devoted a great
deal of attention to the proposals, I find no company, no
organisation or employers or employees who is prepared to
support it and every country which has tried it over the
last year or so has now abandoned it. It was first started
on President Nixon' s support idea, two and a half years ago
in the United States, the Congress has at last abandoned it
as counter-productive, but one would have thought that any
effective freeze of prices would cover meat and fresh food.
Now, as one of my opponents has said, it's impossible it
may be possible to freeze meat and vegetables, but it's not
possible to freeze the pric~ es of it, and I'm not reassured
by my other opponent saying it can be done, it will be done.
Well, I wish they would agree on how it'd be done and then
of course there's the price of petrol the cat being let
out of the bag, the tiger being let out of the tank, the'
ESSO tank and the simple fact is that there is not a shred
of evidence to say that oil exploration in Australia is more
expensive or less profitable than in any other country in
the world. The only thing that's happened is that other
countries have usually put up their taxes and royalties very
highly. But we haven't. There's no need whatever to increase
the price of crude oil by 40% or any other percentage to
continue to get what has already been discovered in Australia
or to encourage people to go out and search further. If you
can't have a limitation on prices of such things as meat and
vegetables and fresh fruit, which everybody consumes, or the
price of petrol, which everybody directly or indirectly is
affected by, then it's very difficult to see how one can
have any limitation on prices by that method at all. And
then of course there's the freeze on incomes. I'm not impressed 
by the constant assertion that somehow the Arbitration
Commission's awards would be made inoperative. Now that
word does not come from Tony Eggleton, I'm sure it comes
from Ronald Ziegler, and the... but however impressive the
word may be, however impressed you may be by such statements
used in other circumstances, there is the fact that finally
the High Court would decide. And the Chief Justice, Sir
Garfield Barwick, said this in 1967 in the total wage case:
" The Parliament is unable itself to legislate the level of
wages to be paid, nor has it power to direct the Arbitrator
as to the level of wages he shall prescribe in the settlement
of a dispute as to wages." The constitutional power
requires that settlement of the dispute be left to the
arbitrator. I thought everybody knew that. I'm surprised
at anybody aspiring to be Prime Minister of the country
being ignorant of it or trying to conceal it. The fact is
that the only way to exclude the Arbitration Commission,
to make its awards inoperative, is to abolish it. As long
as it exists then, under the Constitution, it has the
authority to conciliate and arbitrate in the settlement
of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any
one State. If you abolish the machinery, then of course,
like the inter-state commission, it can't exercise its
constitutional responsibility. I don't believe the
Australian public will support the idea of abolishing the
Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Now,
in all these matters I was not reassured by a statement
Mr. Douglas Anthony issued today. " Mr. Snedden and I have
had discussions to try to tie in all the loose ends and to
look for weaknesses that probably exist." Now I would have
thought that Mr. Anthony, who for twelve months has been
urging the absolutely unprecedented and unprincipled course
that a House of Representatives, recently elected, should
be refused the money to carry on its program by a Senate
half elected 3 years ago and half 6 years ago I'm
surprised that he should have been urging this course so long
without having been able to evolve an alternative program.
Perhaps it's not so much to be wondered at that Mr. Snedden
hadn't been able to do it. 11/ 
But let me show in practice what has been done in some of
these respects because the two Right Honourable Gentlemen
have, in the past, had responsibility in fiscal and monetary
matters let me deal with some of the monetary matters.
There was, as you know, a very big dispute between them and
their colleagues about the value of the dollar before
Christmas 1971 and in that Holy Season there was an unholy
row for three days and for three nights. And the wrong
decision was made. Again there was a dispute as to the
inflow of overseas funds on loan. And in consequence for
the six months before we came in, the amount of money
circulating in Australia rose by 17%, There was no
equivalent increase in production. In fact there were a
very great number of men and women out of work. Productivity
increased by the money supply by 17% and the Treasury and
the Reserve Bank had been urging them throughout the year to
do something about the value of the dollar and the inflow of
overseas funds. No legislation is required for those purposes.
All that is required is an administrative decision. When we
came in, promptly we examined the position, we accepted ' the
advice and everybody, including all the leading economists in
Australia, right up to today's letter, have endorsed what
we've done. And none of the things we've done have earned
many plaudits at the time. We have trodden on many toes,
special interest groups, they resent it I feel, I hear, but
undoubtedly the public has benefited from it. Now these
were tough decisions. They were decisions which had been
shirked by our predecessors, they were decisions which we
had promptly made.
I conclude with a reference which I gather Mr. Snedden made
to you yesterday and which he-had also made in the Parliament,
and I would have thought that he would have understood the
situation better by now. Because, not only was he formerly
a Treasurer and should have known some of these other matters 12/ 
I quoted, but he was also an Attorney General and he stated
as regards these referendums, that there was no need to
carry the referendum to syncronise the elections for the
two Houses, * but the fact that the elections for two
Houses were being held at the one time, next Saturday,
would automatically syncronise them. of course, the
Constitution says that when there's been a double dissolution
the term of the Senators will date from the 1st July
preceding. The Constitution also says that Members of the
House of Representatives can have three years term from
the first meeting of their House. That means that as the
Constitution stands, the Senators would have to come up for
election before July 1976, somewhere in May 1976. The
House of Representatives wouldn't have to face the people
again until July 1977. Now not only does the Constitution
say this, history bears it out, because after the last
double dissolution in 1951, there was another Senate
election in April 1953 and a House of Representatives
election in April 1954. So that is a very clear example
why that referendum should be carried. Because the next
election should be, again, for both Houses at the same.
time and that is what the first referendum is designed to
achieve, and it was recommended back in 1958 by the-
Constitution Review Committee appointed by Sir Robert
in 1956. Now, I won't go through the other referendums
there are equally valid reasons for all of them. Three
of them date from recommendations dating from 1958, the
fourth one, the local government one, dates from what I was
saying to you before the last elections, what had been in
the Party Platform before that. They're well known. Local
government should be involved in the Australian national
financial set up. Ratepayers alone cannot be expected to
finance the things which federal and state governments and
public services can't most appropriately supply, but which
these days can be best supplied on a local basis, by the
councils, community groups and voluntary organisations. .13/ 
13.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I've said enough, I think, to illustrate the differences
there are before the people next Saturday, and I believe
that the government deserves their support because it
has a complete program. It has stuck to that program.
It's tried to keep faith with the people and we have
made available to the people all the advice and the
facts on the further developments of programs which we
were committed to introduce. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
QUESTION: Average weekly earnings for the March quarter
will be coming out in about two weeks time. They're expected
to show an increase in the past year of something like 17%.
They won't reflect the increases from the National Wage Case
or the GMH settlement or the Metal Trades Industries
Settlement that took place recently. Would you expect to
bump it up to something like 20 in the next two quarters.
The Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has pointed out
that part of the reason for the increase is that the wage
system at the moment is allowing large parts of the
workforce to double up on the national increases that it's
awarding. Now I was wondering whether you could tell us
and it's called a conference, between the parties for the
national wage case... I was wondering whether you could tell
us what instructions representatives from a Federal Labor
Government would have if they attended such a conference and
whether you could be a little more explicit about the form
your intervention would take in cases coming up before the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission from the unions
that you said could be ( unclear)
PRIME MINISTER: The attitude we would take before this
conference this is the conference which the Arbitration
Commission said in its judgment on the 1974 National Wage
Case it would be holding in 6 months' time to consider to
evolve a formula for relating the wages, the award payments
which it set, to any increase in the cost of living. You
know to bring about automatic regular cost of living
adjustments. Is that the one you're referring to, Mr Bracken?
Yes Well the attitude we would take before that conference
would be in accordance with the brief on indexation which 
-2-
the Cabinet approved and which was put before the Commission
during its hearing of that case. Half of the industrial
disputes in Australia in the last year have been due to the
fact that people have resorted to direct action to maintain
the value of their award wages. And we believe that by
having a regular adjustment of those wages and salaries
every quarter or half-year whatever the Commission agreeswould
reduce that sort of pressure. Quite apart from
being a matter of elementary justice. The Commission's
predecessor did adopt that from about 1921 to 1953. And the
course neither promoted nor put a brake on inflation. The
effect of it'was neutral. So that is the attitude we
would take. I suppose the brief on indexation which the
Department of Labour prepared and which the Cabinet endorsed
for this recent case, would be reviewed. But nevertheless,
that is the general attitude we would take at this conference,
which you remember my colleague, Mr Clyde Cameron applauded
when the Commission announced it in its judgement.
QUESTION: The election campaign so far has been largely
a contest between yourself and Mr Snedden. Has Mr Snedden
performed better than you thought he would.
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose hie had to.
QUESTION: You referred at some length, during your speech
to the fact that your government has released a number of
reports on a number of matters. But I would like to point
out that on a number of major questions, such as revaluation,
tariff cuts, and the Coombs Report and a number of others;
no reports were seen before the Government made its decisions.
Now in cases like this, do you intend to continue making
decisions without releasing the reports on major matters
and only releasing reports on minor ones.
PRIME MINISTER: T he Coombs Report was released on the
same day as, and in company with, the Budget papers in
August. It was considered in the preparation of the
Budget four weeks before that. There were a very great
number of budgetary implications in the Coombs Report. If 
-3-
we had released the Coombs Report before the Budget came
in there would inevitably have been speculation as to what
would be in the Budget. The Coomnbs Report was accepted in
part, rejected in other parts and accepted with modifications
in other parts again. So this was clearly a budgetary
document. It was tabled with the budgetary documents.
And so it doesn't come into the category of matters where
you release a report before you have made a decision.
Tariff Board reports, Industries Assistance Commission
reports, as they now are, are released immediately unless
the Commission itself recommends that the publication of
the report would cause speculation. where it so recommends,
and it hasn't in any of its reports up till now, we would
not publish the reports until the Government's decision had
been announced. But we have published all its reports up
till now as soon as they have been able to be printed, even
if the decision hadn't been made, because the Commission
itself said there would not be speculation if those reports
were published as soon as they could be printed.
QUESTION: You were elected eighteen months ago partly on
a promise of open government. And I can see that there has
been a great deal more information available to the people
in the various commissions you set up. However you were
elected more specifically on a promise of a freedom of
information act. This has not yet been forthcoming, some
public servants might say that an intelligent politician
breaks a stupid promise. However I note that the Queen
renewed the promise in her speech last February. Sir, are
you having difficulties in getting this bill out of the
bureaucracy, are there difficulties in implementing a
freedom of information act, have you as one of your close
advisers said, and he is very close at the moment, been
snowed by the public service.
PRIME MINISTER: I did undertake to introduce a freedom
of information act. The Queen made the same promise when
she opened the last session of the last Parliament, and the
bill has been drafted. And in my policy speech on Monday
fortnight I sta-ted we will proceed with our freedom of
information act. We will also appoint a civil ombudsman and
that is in the same general context,-we have already appointed 
-4-
a military ombudsman. I have instructed the Public
Service Board they may have already done it to repeal
the statutory rule 34B which makes it illegal for public
servants to comment on these matters. It has been discussed
between the Public Service organisations and the Public
Service Board. And on the agreement between them, I have
directed that the rule be abolished. The whole question
of relations with the Public Service will be among the
terms of reference of the Coombs' Royal Commission into the
Public Service.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I hadn't intended to ask you
this, but since you have just mentioned the point to us,
the understanding of those organisations with which some
of us are involved talking to the Public Service on
Section 34B is that far from repealing it, they are
devising a more complex, and in our view, no less
restrictive form of words, than exists at present. Now
if your understanding is that you have directed them to
repeal it, would you remind them that that was the
. intention.
PRIME MINISTER: No they are aware of it. I have told them
that there are to be no guidelines which are more
repressive than the regulation. The guidelines of course
wouldn't have the force of law. They would be a gloss
upon the provisions of the present act. But the regulations
which made certain courses illegal, are to be repealed.
I am told that the course I have directed to be taken, meets
the wishes of the Public Service organisations which have
been thrashed out in discussions with the Public Service
Board. I am rather sorry that it has taken so long, but I
am told that this is what they all wish now and so therefore,
at the earliest moment, I have done it. But the Public
Service Board, the public service organisations, all
interested people, will certainly be welcome to give their
views in writing and by word and through representatives, to
the Royal Commission on the Public Service. 
QUESTION: The formal structure fore pre-blection briefings
with the public service for the Opposition, fell through.
Do you intend to do anything about getting formal guidelines
for those properly working well before another election
and whether you are back in government, or whether you
are in opposition, will you work for rather more contact
with the public service for the opposition party during
the time before an election.
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't understand your question at
first, because I didn't realise you were referring to
briefings of spokesmen for the Opposition on these matters
during the run up to an election campaign. I made that
undertaking, I honoured it. Mr Cooley, the Chairman of
the Public Service Board, was immediately in touch with
Mr Snedden. You know the subsequent correspondence. I am
assured that what Mr Cooly offered to Mr Snedden was
fully in accordance with the British practice which I
undertook to apply in Australia. I have honoured my
obligations. I think it is a proper course. I don't
believe that any opposition should find itself in the
situation that we did, where the Public Service Board
had in fact sought permission from Mr McMahon to confer
with me and my designated shadow ministers, on any changes
in the case of a change of government and Mr McMahon wouldn't
allow the discussions to take place. I said that such
discussions should always take place. I might elaborate
that the difficulty for other members of the opposition
was that Mr Snedden would never designate who they would
be with. You couldn't have half a dozen people discussing
things with every permanent head of every department. But
I was perfectly willing for any person that he designated
as having the shadow responsibility for any department
to confer with the head of that department. But he never
designated any of them. He said he would nominate who
would be his ministers, he has never done it. If you can't
nominate who would be your Treasurer how can you nominate
who the lesser ones would be. Mr Snedden could have had
from the Public Service Board or from any permanent head
the full facilities that any Leader of the Opposition has had
in Britain. And I might point out that I have said that 
-6-
Mr Peacock for instance can be briefed by anybody in the
Foreign Affairs Department. I have said that Mr Snedden
can. And Mr Snedden has been fully briefed as to all
internal or external security arrangements to which the
Australia Government is a party. That is there is nothing
that I have said should be withheld from an alternative
Prime Minister.
QUESTION: Has there been any contact between the Opposition
and the public service during'the course of the Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been. For instance,
Bill Hayden has done this with Mr Chipp, to give an instance
I know. I have heard of no instanc3 where an opposition
spokesman wanting to be briefed on a particular matter,
hasn't been given that opportunity. I know of no instance
where it has been refused.
QUESTION: May I join you in quoting from the transcript
of your address to the pre-1972 election Press Club Lunch
in which you were asked, " will you publish Treasury's
detailed economic forecasts" and you replied not in a
referendum context " Yes, yes, yes, I would publish the
Treasury's economic forecasts." You criticised Mr Bury
for not having done so. And you said " I have been quite
firm in not giving any undertakings to do things which I
wasn't quite certain that an incoming government could do
in the lifetime of the Parliament, elected on the 2nd of
next month." Does this mean that you have not been
successful yet in getting the Treasury's economic forecasts
published and that you will do so in the life of the next
Parliament? PRIME MINISTER: I still incline to the view that they
should be published. But the contrary view is pressed upon
me by the authors of these documents and I suppose I can
su mmarise their view without injustice to them by saying
that if what they forecast or advise is to become public
property, they would be more reticient in what they write
and advise. It is a point of view which I have to weigh
carefully. But there are other advisers to me, I suppose 
-7-
there is no mystery about it Dr Coombs and Professor Gruen
for instance, who believe that these should be published.
That is my inclination, but the Parliament didn't go its
full life as you know. I would certainly think that within
3 years from the date I gave that undertaking, I will be able
either to fulfil it or to acknowledge that in the light of
further advice I don't believe I should honour it. But
it is a worrying question. I can't be dogmatic about it.
I'm still inclined to the view that these should be
published but it's not easy to know what's done in other
countries and to what extent. It's something that I want
to discuss further on the spot with them. But I would
think that well before 2 December 1975 I will be able to
give you a clear reply to it.
QUESTION: Yesterday, one of your friends in the press
gallery, suggested that you were in a position to make
political capital out of the Victorian Liberal Attorney-
General's granting a fiat to a group of citizens to
challenge the legality of State aid. Could you tell Us
how you can make political capital out of the fact that
Mr Hartley is one of those people seeking to challenge the
policies granting aid to independent schools and also that
another was your appointee to the Schools Commission.
I think Mrs Turner is associated with the D. O. G. S. in
seeking to overturn what apparently is still the
Government's policies.
PRIME MINISTER: I've never discussed the matter with
Mrs Turner. The fact is of course that she is one of
the members of the Karmel Committee which was unanimous
on these points. It maybe that the lady has changed her
mind. The document was signed some time ago and I think
by Mr Hartley and Mrs Turner and the other 30 odd signatories
to it. But the point is that whatever their views might have
been then or might be now, there could be no challenge in
the High Court to this legislation unless a State Attorney-
General gave his permission, gave his fiat, his let-it-bedone.
For ten years D. O. G. S. and others have been seeking
the permission of a State Attorney-General, Liberal or Labor,
in every State, to allow a challenge to be made to 
-8-
Commonwealth legislation providing funds for Church
schools. For ten years they have contacted every Attorney-
General in every State of both sides of politics. And
Mr Wilcox's predecessor or predecessors as Liberal
Attorneys-General in Victoria over the last ten years
always refused their permission, their fiat. Mr Wilcox
has granted his. So whatever may be the view now or
then of Mrs Turner and Mr Hartley and the other estimable
signatories, the fact is that however many signed it,
whatever there were, whatever they said, it would never
have got to the High Court but for an Attorney-General
having at loast been found after ten years, to give his
permission for it to be taken to the High Court. Now
in these circumstances it is regretable that the hundreds
of thousands of dollars will have to spent out of our
taxes in resisting such a claim in the High Court. The
challenge would never have got there but for a State
Attorney-General having given his permission. And it
happens to be the Liberal Attorney-General of the State
of Victoria.
QUESTION: I would like to move from Australia to
Foreign Affairs. Would your government if returned press
nations on the litoral of the Indian Ocean to regard the
re-opened Suez Canal as a non-military area.
PRIME MINISTER: All nations, around the shores of the
Indian Ocean and on all the islands in it, want the Indian
Ocean to be kept free of great power rivalry. I can't
speak for the government of South Africa, I don't think
it has expressed a view on it, I am not aware of it. But
it is certain that every other nation in and around the
Indian Ocean seeks to keep the great power rivalry out of
it. They don't want the Soviet Union and the United States
to escalate their rivalry in the Indian Ocean. And the
re-opening of the Suez Canal would of course facilitate
the passage of the very large fleets of the two super powers,
from the Mediteranean into the Indian Ocean. Certainly as
I understand it, they all want the Suez Canal re-opened,
but they don't want the present naval activity to be
escalated. Every one of them is unaninous in that regard. 
-9-
And we have co-operated with them in the relevant
United Nations Committees.
QUESTION: Yesterday you told us that your government
would not increase direct or indirect taxes in the next
budget. Was this a decision made in consultation with
Mr Crean and also, does it mean that if taxation scales
are restructured that the high income earner will also
be excluded from taxation?
PRIME MINISTER: I hadn't had a specific discussion
with Mr Crean before I attended that particular press
conference at least I know who my Treasurer will be
before I hold press conferences but his general view is
the same as mine that there is no need to have an overall
increase in direct taxation or an overall increase in
indirect taxation in order to fulfil the programs which
we've initiated, both those which are under way and those
which we are about to launch. There are of course, very
many more men and women working and productivity increased
by 6 percent last year as against 2 per cent in the
previous year, 1972. And as I said in the Policy Speech
in November 1972, we believe that our programs can be
financed from increases in productivity rather than
increases in taxation. So I make the overall assessment
as to direct and indirect taxation. Now as regards direct
taxation, in particular, I have mentioned the restructuring
of the tax scales it's a term I used in November 1972 and it's
a term I used last month. I've used it on both occasions
and it's the term I repeat now. And I've spoken on both
occasions in the context of the committee of inquiry into
taxation under Mr Justice Asprey, which Mr Snedden appointed
in September 1972. We supported the appointment of it and
Mr Crean and I have discussed these matters with
Mr Justice Asprey I myself of course have known him, oh
I suppose for well over thirty years and with members of
that committee. We haven't of course sought to know what
its recommendations will be, but we have asked that the
recommendations'be in our hands by 1 June that will give
us plenty of time to discuss the matters before we have our
Cabinet meeting on the Budget in August, which will be about 
4 weeks before we introduce the Budget in September. The
only suggestion that we've made to the Asprey Committee
which is not in its terms of reference as settled by
Mr Snedden is that it should consider taxation discrimination
against women. There was no such reference in its terms
of reference, we think there should be and we believe
that it will take that into account when it makes
recommendations on the whole range of matters. We have
not pre-empted the findings of this very expert committee.
QUESTION: In your first Budget you had a 20 percent
increase in government spending, you increased indirect
taxation and you had a deficit budget. How would you
have in your 1974/ 75 budget tax cuts, and a 20 percent
increase in government spending and how would be balance
the budget or bing down a surplus budget?
PRIME MINISTER: We might be in balance this year.
There's about seven weeks to go before the final accounts
for the year come in. We did budget for a deficit this
year but in fact we mightn't have a deficit. We might be
in balance this year, but as I believe that every economist
would advise in times when there is inflation, it is
inflationary to budget for a deficit, and we would therefore
expect to balance our budget or even, if other commitments
could still be met, to have a surplus budget this year.
Now your reference about a 20 percent increase. I take it
you are making a selective quotation from what was said
by me on Frost which you'll all be watching tonight.
Now perhaps I could get the quotation from this here just
to put in in full context. Mr Snedden apparently has given
Mr Frost some question to ask me, and one was about this
business with Syntec Newsletter, the people who brief
Mr Malcolm Fraser about whom Mr Snedden has at least said
he won't be Treasurer. Now, Mr Frost asked me: " would
there be an expansion needed by less than 40 percent but
more than zero" and I said yes. " What would you guess it
was" " midway, midway around 20 percent. Off hand I'd say
that, obviously there would be that amount in some fields
and less than that in others." " But the average would average
out at about 20 percent maybe, but'I wouldn't think any more 
-11-
than that." I should make it plain that the expenditure
by governments in the last year in Australia has not gone
up by as high a percentage as the expenditure by
individuals and companies. Government expenditure is
not rising by the overall national percentage.
QUESTION: Sir, in answer to the first question that
was asked today by Warrick Bracken, you said that the use
of the cost of living adjustment or indexation of wages
had neither promoted nor put a break on inflation, that
means it's useless as I've said. What then, in view of
your assessment of the uselessness of indexation as a
measure against wage cost inflation, do you propose to
control the problem which Warrick Bracken referred to,
of 20 percent and above increases in the wage costs
that are in prospect?
PRIME MINISTER: You would not be correct in taking
it that I said it would be useless. What I did say is,
it would bring justice to the mean and women working under
the awards of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission, I also said it would promote harmony in
industry. It would do both those things.
QUESTION: But you were saying it would be useless as an
economic tool against inflation, I take it.
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not saying one does it in the
context of inflation at all. It is neutral in its effect
on inflation. May I repeat again so you can take it
correctly. It will lead to justice for the mean and women
working under federal awardsand it will bring about harmony
in industry. Both are worthy objectives. It was for those
reasons that we sought indexation from the Commission in
the 1974 National Wage Case, it is for those reasons that
the Commission, for the first time for twenty years, decided
to consider the matter. It will do so within six months
we will promote that conference. 
-12-
QUESTION: I was going to ask you about housing but last
night down at Chelsea Town Hall, you said that you would,
the Labor Party could, get Issacs, Henty, Deaking and even
Flinders and Bruce. Mr Hawke said earlier this week that
the Labor Party could win by 20 seats. Mr Snedden said
last week that he could win by 15. Are you prepared to
give us a prediction now and if not could you tell us
what your views are on the wisdom of political leaders
making such forecasts?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm much more in agreement with Mr Hawke
than with Mr Snedden. I don't necessarily volunteer these
matters, but if I'm asked a question, of course I give a
civil reply and I believe a sensible one. I'm going to
treat you bush lawyers with respect. You're all the members
of the same rat pack as far as I'm concerned. I wish I
had the same freedom to pontificate as you have. Now
I want utter silence while I give this answer. You ought
to bring your wives and companions round during the trip
you know, it makes you much more agreeable. This has been
the most unharried, harmonious meal we've been able to
have for over a fortnight.........
PRIME MINISTER: The choice on Saturday is between a
confused and divided Opposition and a strong, united
Government. It's between an Opposition confused and
divided on inflation and a government which has shown it
can take tough courses of action to cure inflation. Its
between an Opposition whose policies brought about
inflation and a Government whose policies have produced
the biggest drop in the rate of inflation during the
March quarter of any of the worlds large industrial and
trading nations. Its between an Opposition pledged to
the sell out of Australian resources and a government
pledged to preserve and promote Australian ownership.
Its between an Opposition committed to cut back schools
expenditure by $ 300 million a year and a government that
has opened wide the door to new educational opportunities
for all Australian children. Its between an Opposition
representing rich sectional interests and a government 
-13-
representing all the people. Its between turning back
and moving forward. I believe the Australian people will
move forward. Forward to a brighter and better future. 



May 1974
VIP AIRCRAFT
ThuL Prhlio. Ministur, Mr E. G. WhiLlam said tonight:
" Any suggestion that I commandeered Mr Snedden's VIP jet for
my use this afternoon is totally false.
" Throughout the campaign Mr Snedden and I have each used one
of the two BAC 111 jets in the VIP Squadron. Mr Snedden hashad
exactly the same facilities at his disposal as I have.
" Last week the BAC III that I was using was temporarily
unserviceable. My staff and I transferred to a smaller and
slower aircraft. Mr Snedden continued to use a BAC III.
" On Tuesday the Governor-General made use of the BAC III in
which I flew to Melbourne on Monday. The aircraft required".
servicing after the Governor-General's flight.
" On the recommendation of the RAAF, the other BAC III was
temporarily made available to me. Mr Snedden was provided
with another, but equally fast VIP aircraft. This was the
most efficient and convenient arrangement for the RAAF and
for both Leaders. It took account of the transport requirements
of both Parties.
" Neither I nor any member of my staff gave any instructions
or advice on this matter, The arrangements were made by
the Department of Defence and the RAAF."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



STATEiENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
BAliKSTOWN MEETING. 15 , AY,-1974
Su_ PnBPFR ASKIN HAS SHOWN A RECKLESS AND
IRRESPONSIBLE INDIFFERENCE TO THE NEEDS OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND THE OPPORTUNITIES HELD OUT TO HIM BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FOR FRUITFUL CO-OPERATION,
0 THIS GREAT DEFENDER OF fDERALISM, THIS SELF-STYLED
APOSTLE OF COMMONWEALTH-STATE CO-OPERATION, HAS REJECTED
0@ NEARLY EVERY. INITIATIVE FOR CO-OPERATION PUT FORWARD BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DURING THE PAST 17 MONTHS.
HIS DOCTRINAIRE OBSESSION WITH STATE RIGHTS HAS COST
THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH WALES DEARLY.
IT HAS SET BACK BY MONTHS PERHAPS YEARS THEIR
PROSPECTS FOR BETTER URBAN TRANSPORT; FOR YOUTH CENTRES, FOR
HEALTH SERVICES, FOR REASONABLE LAND PRICES,
TIME AND AGAIN ~ ROBERT ASKIN HAS REFUSED EVEN
TO ACKNOWLEDGE OFFERS FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OF
HELP AND CO-OPERATION, MONTHS HAVE PASSED WITHOUT A REPLY
TO OUR LETTERS. c N* 
-2-
YET THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TREATED SIR ROBERT
ASKIN AND THE NEW SOUTH !' ALES GOVERNMENT WITH UNPARALLELED
GENEROSITY, OUR PAYMENTS TO NEW SOUTH WALES HAVE INCREASED
SUBSTANTIALLY IN EVERY AREA.
OUR TOTAL SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS TO NEW SOUTH
WALES ARE ESTIMATED AT $ 540,265,000 THIS FINANCIAL YEAR.
INDER MR. SNEDDEN'S. LAST BUDGET THESE PAYMENTS TOTALLED
$ 294,562,000 FOR 1972/ 73.
OUR TOTAL SPECIFIC CAPITAL GRANTS WILL GO UP FROM
$ 160,793,000 TO AN ESTIMATED $ 332.. 062,000.,
OUR GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS WILL GO UP FROM $ 537,000,000
TO AN ESTIMATED $ 581,000,. 000.
OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS OF ALL KINDS WILL'GO UP'FROM
$ 831,000,000 TOAN E TIMATED $ 1 121,00,000,
LET ME GIVE SOME SPECIFIC EXAMPLES, CAva 
IN SPECIFIC PURPOSE CAPITAL PAY'MWEINLTS, THE LAST
SNEDDEN BUDGET GAVE $ 10,522,000 FOR UNIVERSITIES; WE WILL t
GIVE $ 17,676,000. THE LIBERALS GAVE $ 10,637,000 FOR SCHOOLS,
WE WILL GIVE $ 32,029,009, THE LIBERALS GAVE $ 107,000 FOR
SENIOR CITIZEN CENTRES; WE WILL GIVE $ 310, n009, THE LIBERALS
GAVE $ 3,500,000 FOR HOUSING; WE WILL GIVE $ 86,000,00, THE
LIBERALS GAVE $ 2,821,000 FOR ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT' WE
WILL GIVE $ 3,715,000, THE LIBERALS GAVE $ 8,590,000 FOR THE
COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS PROGRAM; WE WILL GIVE $ 98,270 00,
IN SPECIFIC PURPOSE REVENUE PAYMENTS, THE LIBERALS
GAVE $ 32,155,000 FOR UNIVERSITIES: WE WILL GIVE $ 79,437,000,
THE LIBERALS GAVE NOTHING FOR TECHNICAL TRAINING: WE WILL
SGIVE $ 5,801,000, THE LIBERALS GAVE $ 15,046,000 FOR SCHOOLS;
WE WILL GIVE $ 34,053,000. THE LIBERALS GAVE NOTHING FOR
PRE-SCHOOLS. WE WILL GIVE $ 1,390,090. THE LIBERALS GAVE
NOTHING FOR URBAN IMPROVEMENT; WE HAVE GIVEN $ 5,066 099 FOR THE
WESTERN SECTOR OF SYDNEY ALONE, 
-4-
I HAVE TO ADMIT THERE IS ONE AREA WHERE OUR PAYMENTS
HAVE FALLEN DRASTICALLY. THAT IS IN UNEMPLOYMENT RELIEF.
THE LAST LIBERAL GOVERNAENT GAVE NEW SOUTH WALES
$ 37,220,000 FOR UNEMPLOYMENT RELIEF. OUR ESTIMATED TOTAL'FOR
THIS FINANCIAL YEAR IS $ 4,530,000, I ' U
' 4_ 6 LAND COMMISSION SIR ROBERT ASKIN HAS SHOWN UTTER CONTEMPT-FOR THE
HARDSHIPS SUFFERED BY YOUNG HOMESEEKERS IN HIS STATE, .1E HAS
DONE. NOTHING TO CHECK THE SOARING COST OF LAND IN NEW SOUTH
WALES. LAND COSTS IN SYDNEY ARE THE HIGHEST IN AUSTRALIA.
THE AVERAGE PRICE OF A BLOCK OF LAND IS $ 18,500. THE NEW
SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO USE ITS POWERS TO CHECK
THE LAND SPIRAL, DESPITE THE FACT THAT IN HIS 1970 ELECTION
CAMPAIGN SIR ROBERT PROMISED ACTION ON PRICES, INCLUDING A
ROYAL COMMISSION. HE HAS DONE NOTHING TO HONOUR THAT PROMISE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S POLICY IS TO ESTABLISH
LAND COMMISSIONS IN EACH STATE TO BUY UP TRACTS OF RESIDENTIAL
LAND AND SELL THEM AT FAIR'PRICES TO HOMESEEKERS.
LOOK AT THE SORRY RECORD OF DELAY AND OBSTRUCTION
BY THE ASKIN GOVERNMENT, 
I WROTE TO THE PREMIER ON 27 DECEMBER 1972 OUTLINING
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S LAND PROPOSALS AND ASKING FOR
EARLY MEETINGS. THE PREMIER WROTE ON 15 FEBRUARY NOMINATING
OFFICIALS FOR DISCUSSIONS.
I WE INFORMED SIR ROBERT ON 21 AUGUST 1973 OF THE
S AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S INITIAL OFFER OF $ 30 MILLION TO THE
STATES FOR 1973/ 74 FOR LAND COMMISSION PURPOSES. NOTHING
HAS BEEN RECEIVED FROM THE PREMIER APART FROM A FORMAL
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT DATED 30 AUGUST 1973.
NEW SOUTH WALES WAS TO GET $ 10.5 MILLION IN 1973/ 74
O WITH A SIMILAR AMOUNT IN 1974/ 75 FOR COMMITMENTS ENTERED INTO
IN 1973/ 74.
URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT
WE HAVE OFFERED NEW SOUTH WALES GRANTS TOTALLING
$ 28.6 MILLION FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROJECTS COMMENCED
IN 1973/ 74. OF THIS TOTAL, $ 12.6 MILLION WAS TO BE PROVIDED
IN 1973/ 74 AND THE REMAINDER OVER THE NEXT FOUR FINANCIAL
YEARS, THE DRAFT. AGREEMENT WAS SENT TO THE PREMIER ON
MARCH 1974 E IS STILL ARGUING
ABOUT MODIFICATIONS TO THE AGREEMENT. -y I 
-6-
YET THE PREMIERS OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND SOUTH
AUSTRALIA HAVE ALREADY SIGNED THE AGREEMENT. THEY SIGNED
IT ON 28 MARCH 1974. I SIGNED THE AGREEMENT ON 29 MARCH,
GROWTH CENTRES I WROTE TO THE PREMIER ON 21 AUGUST 1973 OFFERING C
MILLION IN 1973/ 74 FOR HOLSWORTHY/ CAMPBELLTOWN, BATHURST/
ORANGE AND GOSFORD/ WYONG, I WROTE AGAIN ON 11 SEPTEMBER
PROPOSING AN EARLY MEETING OF MINISTERS,
THE PREMIER REPLIED ON 19 NOVEMBER ASKING FOR AN
INDICATION, IN ADVANCE OF ANY SUCH MEETINGS, OF THE LIKELY
TERMS OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE.
DETAILED PROPOSALS WERE SUBMITTED TO THE PREMIER
ON 12 FEBRUARY 1974. THIS WAS ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE PREMIER
ON 22 FEBRUARY BUT THERE HAS BEEN NO FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE,
QUEANBEYAN BRIDGE.
ON 25 FEBRUARY I WROTE TO SIR ROBERT OFFERING THAT
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION SHARE THE COSTS
OF CONSTRUCTING A NEW BRIDGE OVER THE RAILWAY LINE AT
QUEANBEYAN AS PART OF A FOUR LANE DIVIDED ROAD LINK BETWEEN
CANBERRA AND QUEANBEYAN, WITH THE NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT
OF MAIN ROADS AND THE STATE RAILWAYS, THIS LETTER, AND A
-rrr nATIl 10n APRIL, HAVE RECEIVED FORMAL
I 
-7-
HOSPITALS WE ALLOCATED MILLION TO NEW SOUTH WALES FOR
CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW TEACHING HOSPITAL AT WESTMEAD,
THIS MONEY HAS NEVER BEEN USED.
ON 7 DECEMBER LAST SIR ROBERT ASKIN WROTE TO ME
REQUESTING THAT $ 500,000 OF THE ALLOCATION OF $ 4 MILLION
TO THE WESTMEAD PROJECT BE DIRECTED TOWARDS THE CONSTRUCTION
OF A 104-BED WARD AT THE LIVERPOOL DISTRICTHoSPITAL IN 1973/ 74
AND THAT A FURTHER CONTRIBUTIO N BE MADE TOWARDS THE EXPENDITURE
OF $ 1.5 MILLION IN 1974/ 75 WHICH WILL BE REQUIRED TO COMPLETE
THE WARD BLOCK. ON 28 FEBRUARY I REPLIED TO THE PREMIER AGREEING
TO THE ALLOCATION OF THE $ 500,000 BUT STATING THAT THE QUESTION
OF FURTHER SUPPORT FOR USE IN 1974/ 75 WOULD BE EXAMINED AGAIN
AFTER CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT BY THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION. THE LETTER SOUGHT THAT THE WARD BLOCK
DISPLAY SOME ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
CONTRIBUTION AND THAT IT BE REPRESENTED ON THE BOARD OF
LIVERPOOL DISTRICT HOSPITAL. IT WAS LEFT TO THE MINISTER FOR
HEALTH, DR. EVERINGHAM, TO TAKE THESE MATTERS UP WITH THE
MINI TER FOR HEALTH, N NEW SOUTH WALES. DR. EVERINGHAM WROTE TO
THE NEW SOUTH WALES mINISTER FOR EALTH IN MARCH REPEATING
THE CONDITIONS OF THE OFFER OF $ 500,000 FOR LIVERPOOL. No FORMAL
REPLY HAS BEEN RECEIVED FROM THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT TO
DATE. 



4r-V AUST ALIA 16 May 1974
TERRORIST ATTACK ON ISRAELI SCHOOL CHILDREN
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today
that he was deeply shocked by the incident at Ma'alot
in Israel in which 90 children had been held hostage
by guerillas and by the tragic deaths of 16 of these
innocents. Mr Whitlam reiterated Australia's condemnation
of all such acts of terrorism especially those resulting
in the loss of innocent lives and the injury of children.
He said that this action was a deplorable extension of
the shocking practice of taking hostages.
The Prime Minister added that events such as
those at Ma'alot could only prolong bitterness and
' hostility in the Middle East and harm the search for a
lasting peace which Australia so earnestly supported.
Canberra 73X)
L 1115. 



474
PRIME MINISTER 16 May 1974
ASSISTANCE TO STATE OF VICTORIA TO ALLEVIATE
FLOOD DAMAGE
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced
today that as a result of reports of extensive flooding in
Victoria he had urgently telegramed Mr Hamer offering
financial assistance for the alleviation of personal
distress and repair of damage. Mr Whitlam also announced
that the Australian Defence services had been requested
to provide whatever assistance could be given to alleviate
the effects of the flood.
" I am saddened and distressed to hear that a
soldier has drowned whilst engaged on flood relief
operations. Such tragic accidents compound the already
grave distress caused by floods", Mr Whitlam said.
Mr Whitlam went on to say that in a letter to
all Premiers dated 27 February he had outlined the
arrangements for financial assistance from the Australian
Government to the States in the event of natural disasters.
Mr Whitlam said that the offer which he made in that letter
applied in the case of the current Victorian floods. The
offer to Victoria includes financial assistance, on a
dollar for dollar basis, for the immediate relief of
personal hardship and distress. As well, under these
arrangements the Australian Government meets the whole
cost of approved rehabilitation and restoration measures
in Victoria above a base cost of $ 3.5 million.
Mr Whitlam said that the expenditure covered by
his Government's offer included the provision of emergency
food, clothing and accommodation, essential items of
furniture and personal effects of those in needy circumstances
as a result of the floods.
The Prime Minister said that tomorrow he would break
his return journey from Melbourne to Sydney and tour the
affected areas and, in particular, the Seymour area so as he
could see the extent of the damage and the hardship being
suffered by those affected.
Canberra 



S 1 L? 17 May 1974
1974 ELECTIONS
STomorrow's election will be the biggest ever held in Australia.
There are three ballot papers and record numbers of candidates.
In most States, and especially in New South Wales, the Senate
ballot paper is unusually long.
T All this will make voting arduous for many people.
It will test their care and their patience. I frankly acknowledge,
as I did at the outset of this campaign, the formidable task that
voters will face.
I need hardly stress that the size of the Senate ballot paper
is quite outside the Governmient's control. Record numbers of
Australians have exercised their democratic right to contest
the Senate election. Under the electoral law, voters must
number every square on the ballot paper if their votes are to
be counted. In these circumstances it is all the more important to
exercise' care at the polling booth. This is an election of
supreme importance. We cannot afford a wasted vote.
SI appeal to voters to take their time when voting. Do not
be unduly hurried or hustled. Check that you have numbered every
square in sequence, that no numbers have been repeated or left out.
0 Follow your how-to-vote card exactly.
If you make a mistake it is your right to obtain another
ballot paper and fill it in again. If in doubt about anything,
seek advice from an officer at the polling station.
The Electoral office has responded splendidly to the challenge
presented by this election. It is providing a record number of
booths at the polling stations.
I am satisfied that these arrangements will fully meet the nedc
of voters and keep delays to a minimum.
Every voter has a legal right to vote in the privacy of a booth.
There will be ample booths for this purpose. / 2 
if, however, a voter wishes to avoid any delay in queueing
for the use of a booth, he may conmaete his ballot paper anywv. here
in the precincts of the polling station. in doing so he should
be guided by the wishes of electoral officers.
it is important at all timLes to exercise patience and care.
Let us make every vote count. Let this great exercise in
democracy reflect the wishes of a diligent, intelligent and
responsible electorate.
SYDNEY AND CANBERRA
W, 17/ 5/ 74 a 



19 May 1974
PRIME MINISTER
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
The electors of Australia have voted to support their Government.
Their voice has been partly muffled by the peculiarities of the
electoral system. In New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and
South Australia there are some electorates with an enrolment of
only 50,000 aqd others with an enrolment of 80,000 or even more.
Nevertheless, some clear facts emerge.
The 12f Labor candidates won as many votes as the other 374
candidates combined.
The Government secured a higher percentage of votes on 18 May
1974 than on 2 December 1972. The combined Liberal, Country Party
and D. L. P. vote was lower than in 1972.
The majority in favour of the Australian Labor Party over the
coalition parties is far higher than that recorded in 1972.
Swings to the Government have been recorded in all the areas
of greatest concentration of population.
In other words, the mandate of 1972 has been renewed in so
far as the electoral system allows an accurate expression of the
people's will.
If Australia is to have an effective and stable parliamentary
democracy, then electorates must urgently be distributed to give a
more accurate reflection of the wishes of the people.
It is important that it should be realised at home and abroad
that whatever the position of the Government in the House of
Representatives in terms of seats may be, its position in the
nation is one of strong and continuing support.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 248
23 May 1974
APPOINTMENT OF DR P. S. LANG AND MR A. D. BRETT TO INDUSTRIES
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
Dr P. S. Lang and Mr A. D. Brett have been appointed Associates
of the Industries Assistance Commission, for the inquiry relating
to assistance for the promotion of rural products.
Dr Lang is a well known Victorian Grazier who has been
a member of the executive of President of the
Victorian Graziers Association and a Member of the executive
of. the Australian Woolgrowers and Graziers Council.
Mr Brett has life long experience in market research
and promotion. He was until recently Managing Director of
Beacon Research Company ( a market research organisation), a
director of Lintas Australia and N. Z. ( an advertising agency)
and Market Research adviser to Unilever Pty Ltd in Australia
and New Zealand.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



EMBARGOED: 7.30 P. M.
NATIONAL BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP,
WEDNESDAY 29 MAY 1974
Eleven days ago, we all voted to elect a new House of
Representatives and an entirely new Senate. Any doubt or delay
in the outcome stemmed not from any indecision on the part of
the electors, but from the complexity of our electoral laws.
The thrust and and clear meaning of your decision is beyond doubt.
You have returned the Government which you elected less than
18 months ago. You have returned us with a comfortable majority.
You have strongly re-affirmed our program of 1972 to expand
the opportunities for all Australians, and make those opportunities
more equal for all Australians.
In the House of Representatives, the House which decides
who shall govern, which alone has the right and power to decide
who shall govern, you have given us a solid working majority of
at least five, maybe 7.
Further, you have strengthened our position in the Senate.
You will recall that the Governor-General granted a dissolution
of both Houses on the grounds that the old Senate had twice
rejected six bills. These were bills to provide for more equal
electorates, two senators from each of the two territories,
universal health insurance and the petroleum and minerals authority.
These bills can now be passed and they will be.
Finally although this does not . directly determine the
results of Australian elections the percentage of Australians
Voting for the Australian Labor Party, the percentage of Australians
wanting th ' e return of this Government was decisively in our favour.
Some 200,000 more men and women voted for ALP candidates than for
the candidates of the Liberal and Country Parties, the D. L. P.
and their offshoots.
There should be no uncertainty in any quarter about our
ability and determination to carry out our program and to provide
strong, effective government, for the full term for which you have
once again elected us.
Let me emphasise two points. First, when parties in Australia
go to the people, they present, or have a duty to present, programs
designed for three years, the normal life of a Parliament. That's
what we did in 1972, and again last month. Governments should
be judged on their success or failure in that period. That was
the true meaning behind our successful appeal to you for a fair go.
You upheld that appeal.
Secondly, the nation's business, particularly its economic
affairs, may sometimes call for unpopular decisions. if a
Government, unbeaten and unbeatable in the People's House, can be
forced to an election by an irresponsible chance combination in
the Senate any time the national interest demands tough decisions,
then there is an end to firm, responsible Government. It would be
the beginning of the end of strong parliamentary democracy in
Australia. EMBARGOED: 7.30 P. M. 
-2-
It is insupportable to suggest that the same upheaval we
have just been through, the same falsification of democracy, to
use Sir Robert Menzies' indelible phrase should ever again be
attempted. It would not just be a question of holding an elected
government to ransom; it would be a matter of holding our whole
Parliamentary system to ransom.
I note a commnent made repeatedly made that the elections
polarised the Australian people that is to say, the poor vote
of thn minor parties and your clear choice between the major
part4-ies represented a sharp dividing of the people. This is SO
much nonsense. What you have done and I congratulate you upon
it is to restore the two-party system to a healthier state
than it has been for twenty years. It is only a sound two-party
system which has made democracy work effectively in the Englishspeaking
world.
So in two ways by rejecting the attempts of Senators to
destroy a duly elected Government, and by restoring strength to
the two-party system you have voted for strong parliamentary
democracy. So this is not just our victory, victory for the team you
elected in 1972 and confirmed in office eleven days ago. Not
just victory for the programn we have tried to implement according
to our pledges. It is your victory, the victory of an intelligent,
aware and, I believe, a basically idealistic people. The support,
the continued confidence of such a people is something profoundly
worth having, and I value it beyond words.
I recall that in the policy speech I said that we Australians
all faced together one of the great historic challenges of our timeto
make democracy work, to make the parliamentary system work and
make it work better. You have responded splendidly to that*
challenge. I said too that we shared with most nations of the world
another challenge the problem of fighting inflation while
fulfilling the wishes, hopes and needs of the nation, and protecting
the weaker sections of the community. This is the continuing task
not easy, not simple, but certainly not insuperable. it requires
co-operation, it requires courage. I am confident we have those
qualities in abundance in this nation.
Exactly one month ago, I asked you to let us get with
the job. We are back at work after the interruption. The Parliamen~ t
will meet as soon as possible after the completion of counting
for the Senate.
The legislative program for the twenty-ninth Parliament will
include the uncompleted business of the last Parliament outlined
by the Queen when she opened the last session threp months ago.
Its work will include the completion of our 1972 program and the
cxpansion of that program as I foreshadowed in the policy speech
one month ago national compensation, national superannuation,
modernisation of Australia's soc'tal welfare system, labour retraining,
help for home owners, national involvement in remodelling our cities
and centres and rebuilding our-education system, the provision of
care and education for pre-school children, the protection of
Australia's resources and the promotion of Australian'ownership. / 3 
-3-
Fellow-Australians:
The times ahead will not always be easy, but they can
be exciting and purposeful. We face the future as a strong,
prosperous, confident, united, respected nation. Together in the
months and years ahead, we shall all go ahead together. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Mi. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE CAIRNS CIVIC CENTRE,
CAIRNS, QUEENSLAND,
FRIDAY 31 M. AY 1974
THIS IS A VERY HAPPY OCCASION FOR ME. WHATEVER YOU
MAY THINK OF. MY FEELINGS TOWARDS QUEENSLAND, THERE CAN BE NO
DOUBT ABOUT MY FEELINGS TOWARDS CAIRNS. I CAME HERE FOR A FEW
DAYS JUST BEFORE THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN; I AM HERE AGAIN
IMMEDIATELY AFTER IT. I AM DELIGHTED THAT MY FIRST OFFICIAL
DUTY SINCE THE RE-ELECTION OF THE GOVERNMENT IS TO OPEN THIS
SPLENDID CIVIC CENTRE IN CAIRNS. IT WILL CONFIRM YOUR POSITION
AS QNE OF THE MOST PROSPEROUS AND DYNAMIC PROVINCIAL CITIES IN
AUSTRALIA. THE PLANNING OF THIS CENTRE BEGAN JUST TWO WEEKS AFTER
THE GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED IN 1972. 1 BELIEVE IT SYMBOLISES TWO
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S PRINCIPAL CONCERNS: ITS COMMITMENT TO THE
ARTS AND ITS COMMITMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT. YOU HAVE BEGUN
SOMETHING IN THIS CITY WHICH I HOPE WILL SERVE AS A MODEL NOT
ONLY FOR THE REST OF OUEENSLAND BUT FOR THE WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA.
OF ALL THE AUSTRALIAN STATES, QUEENSLAND IS BY FAR THE MOST
DECENTRALISED. IT HAS MANY THRIVING RURAL CENTRES. THE
VIGOUR, THE INDIVIDUALITY, THE VITALITY OF YOURS RURAL AND
PROVINCIAL CITIES SHOW HOW IMPORTANT IT IS FOR OTHER STATES
AND REGIONS TO CULTIVATE SIMILAR GROWTH CENTRES AWAY FROM
THE CAPITAL CITIES. 
-2-
TO DO SO IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT CITIES LIKE CAIRNS SHOULD ENJOY
THE SAME FACILITIES FOR CULTURE AND RECREATION THAT ARE AVAILABLE
TO THE PEOPLE OF BRISBANE, SYDNEYAND MELBOURNE. THIS CENTRE
IS AN EXCELLENT EXAMPLE OF WHAT CONCERNED AND VIGOROUS LOCAL
GOVERNMENT CAN ACHIEVE WITH THE SUPPORT AND CO-OPERATION OF
YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT AND THE LOCAL PEOPLE. I CONGRATULATE ALL
THOSE WHO HAVE WORKED FOR THIS BUILDING AND FOR THE IDEALS AND
PURPOSES IT EMBODIES.
THERE IS, PERHAPS, AN ADDED SIGNIFICANCE IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A CULTURAL CENTRE HERE IN CAIRNS. YOU STAND
AT THE MEETING POINT OF THREE CULTURES THE EUROPEAN, THE
ABORIGINAL AND THE TORRES STRAIT ISLAND. I BELIEVE YOU ARE
IN A UNIQUE POSITION TO ABSORB AND DISSEMINATE IDEAS AND STYLES
MAY
WHICHIWELL PROVE, IN THE LONGER PERSPECTIVE OF HISTORY, TO-BE
OF IMPORTANCE TO THE WHOLE WORLD.
WHEN MY GOVERNMENT SET OUT TO IMPLEMENT ITS POLICY IN
THE ARTS IT FACED SOME DIFFICULT'DECISIONS, THEY SPRANG FROM
THE FACT THAT WHILE AUSTRALIA WAS RICH IN ARTISTIC TALENT,
AND PROBABLY POTENTIALLY RICHER THAN ANYONE CAN EASILY IMAGINE,
IT LACKED THE RESOURCES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THAT TALENT.
VAST AREAS OF THE COUNTRY WERE WITHOUT EITHER THE PEOPLE OR THE
PLACES WHICH COULD CONTRIBUTE TO THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE ARTS. YET IF WE WERE TO DEVOTE OUR AVAILABLE FUNDS TO
BUILDING THE PLACES, WE WOULD NOT HAVE THE FUNDS TO SPEND ON
THE PEOPLE. ./ 3 
-3-
So WE WERE FORCED TO ESTABLISH CERTAIN PRIORITIES, AND OUR
PRIORITIES WERE THESE: FIRST, TO SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES,
TO MAINTAIN AND PROMOTE STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE; THEN TO SUPPORT
THE TRAINING OF ARTISTS, WHICH WOULD PRODUCE THE NEXT GENERATION
OF CREATIVE TALENT; THEN TO SUPPORT ACTIVITIES WHICH WOULD
INVOLVE COMMUNITIES, TO ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF LIFE AND ENSURE
AUDIENCES, WITHOUT WHICH NO ARTIST CAN SURVIVE; AND FINALLY TO
COLLABORATE WITH OTHER BODIES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE, TO GIVE THE
ARTS A BROADER.. BASE OF SUPPORT THAN A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ALONE
CAN PROVIDE. I AM GLAD TO SEE THAT HERE IN CAIRNS WE HAVE A PROJECT
IN WHICH ALL THESE OBJECTIVES CAN BE ACHIEVED. YOU HAVE CHOSEN
BY YOUR OWN INITIATIVE TO CREATE A CENTRE OF ACTIVITY, AND YOU
HAVE HAD THE SUPPORT OF YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT IN DOING SO.
YOU WILL BE LOOKING TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. FOR SUPPORT
FOR THE ACTIVITIES HERE, AND SO LONG" AS YOU AIM FOR EXCELLENCE
AND FOR THE WIDEST COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT, THAT SUPPORT WILL
NOT BE LACKING. THE ORGANISATION OF THIS CENTRE SHOWS THAT YOU HAVE
GOT YOUR PRIORITIES RIGHT, EXACTLY RIGHT. THE CITIES OF THE
WORLD ARE LITTERED WITH BUILDINGS ERECTED WITH THE BEST OF
INTENTIONS, BUT WITH A POOR UNDERSTANDING OF THE NEEDS OF THE
ARTS AND THE NEED OF LOCAL COMMUNITIES. CAIRNS IN THE FUTURE
WILL HAVE SOMETHING VERY DIFFERENT; A BUILDING CREATED IN
RESPONSE TO LOCAL" NEEDS. 
THE FACT IS THAT MANY OF THE MOST ORIGINAL AND
CONSTRUCTIVE ENTERPRISES IN THE ARTS HAVE COME FROM QUEENSLAND.
YOU DEVELOPED THE IDEA OF THE FLYING ARTS SCHOOL; YOU HAVE
MADE GREAT PROGRESS IN SUCH'FIELDS AS YOUTH ORCHESTRAS AND
YOUNG OPERA GROUPS. YOU HAVE MANAGED TO BUILD UP A RANGE OF
ACTIVITIES WHICH SERVE THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE WELL AND DO YOU
GREAT CREDIT. I MIGHT MENTION THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THROUGH THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS AND ITS BOARDS,
HAS ALREADY GIVEN MORE THAN $ 500,000 IN VARIOUS FORMS OF
SUPPORT TO THE STATE, AND A GOOD PART OF IT HAS GONE TO THE
NORTHERN PART OF QUEENSLAND.
IN THE PERFORMING ARTS, $ 130,000 HAS GONE TO THE
QUEENSLAND THEATRE COMPANY AND $ 35,000 TO THE TWELFTH MIGHT
THEATRE; THE QUEENSLAND BALLET COMPANY HAS RECEIVED $ 25,000
AND THE QUEENSLAND OPERA COMPANY $ 49,000. THE LARGEST SHARE
OF THE LITERATURE BOARD GRANTS TOTALLING $ 45,000 WENT TO
INDIVIDUAL WRITERS TO ALLOW THEM MORE TIME FOR WRITING.
THE VISUAL ARTS BOARD HAS GIVEN GRANTS TOTALLING $ 57,09n
TO INDIVIDUAL ARTISTS AS WELL AS $ 21,000 TO THE EASTAUS
ARTS SCHOOL, THE FLYING ARTS SCHOOL WHICH TAKES PAINTING
TO OUTBACK AREAS: $ 7,500 TO THE TOWNSVILLE ARTS SOCIETY
AND VARIOUS AMOUNTS TO OTHER GROUPS SUCH AS THE SOCIETY OF
SCULPTORS OF QUEENSLAND. 
THE QUEENSLAND FESTIVAL OF ARTS RECEIVED A $ 10,0' n)
GRANT AND THE TOlWNSVILLE PACIFIC FESTIVAL $ 2,000; THE CHILDRENS
CREATIVE ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATION $ 3,040 AND THE MT. [ SA CULTURAL
VACATION SCHOOL $ 2,130. CRAFTSMEN RECEIVED GRANTS TOTALLING
$ 42,000 AND MUSIC GENERALLY $ 132,000. AMONG THE MUSIC GRANTS
WAS ONE OF $ 12,360 TO THE OUEENSLAND CONSERVATORIUM OF MIUSIC
TO MAINTAIN A STRING QUARTET IN RE SIDENCE. ALONG WITH THESE
GRANTS $ 48,000 HAS BEEN GIVEN TO THE QUEENSLAND DIVISION OF
THE ARTS COUNCIL SPEC IFICALLY FOR TOURING PERFORMANCES IN
COUNTRY AREAS. THERE WAS ALSO A $ 10,000 GRANT FROM THE
FILM AND TELEVISION BOARD FOR THE PURCHASE OF EQUIPMENT FOR
THE BRISBANE FILM-MAKERS CO-OPERATIVE.
OUR COMMITMENT TO THE ARTS MUST BE SEEN IN
CONJUJNCTION WITH OUR COMMITMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT, FOR
PARTICIPATION IN THE ARTS, AND ENJOYMENT OF THE ARTS OFTEN
REFLECT LOCAL NEEDS, LOCAL TASTES AND, IN MANY CASES, LOCAL
CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL INFLUENCES. By PROMOTING MORE
VIGOROUS LOCAL GOVERNMENT WE ARE THEREFORE CULTIVATING A
MORE FERTILE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE ARTS CAN PROSPER.
LET ME GIVE YOU SOME IDEA OF WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA, AND PARTICULARLY IN QUEENSLAND.
IN MY POLICY SPEECH FOR THE 1972 ELECTIONS I SAID: " LET
THERE BE NO MISTAKE ABOUT LABOR'S DETERMINATION TO MAKE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT A GENUINE PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM."
THAT DETERMINATION STILL STANDS. IT WAS REITERATED IN MY
POLICY SPEECH FOR THE ELECTION ON 18 MAY IN THESE TERMS: 
-6-
" WE HAVE SOUGHT TO MAKE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A
GENUINE PARTNER IN AUSTRALIA'S FEDERAL SYSTEM,
WE HAVE REMODELLED THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO
ALLOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES TO MAKE
SUBMISSIONS AND TO ALLOW THE COMMISSION TO
MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE AMOUNTS OF MONEY
NEEDED TO REDUCE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS
AND WITHINSTATES AS TRADITIONALLY IT USED TO
DO AS BETWEEN THE STATES,
" THE ROLE WE ASSIGN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE
REAL ANSWER TO CHARGES OF CENTRALISM, UNDER
A VARIETY OF PROGRAMS WE HAVE PROVIDED LOCAL
GOVERNMENT WITH THE FUNDS TO UNDERTAKE A RANGE
OF ACTIVITIES PREVIOUSLY INADEQUATELY CARRIED
OUT OR TOTALLY NEGLECTED, THE AUSTRALIAN
ASSISTANCE PLAN, THE PROGRAMS FOR COMMUNITY
HEALTH, AREA IMPROVEMENT, THE NATIONAL ESTATE,
THE ARTS, TOURISM AND RECREATION AND ABORIGINES
ALL THESE PROVIDE FUNDS FOR COMMUNITY
ACTIVITIES TO BE ORGANISED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
WE DELIBERATELY HAVE MADE AND SHALL MAKE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT A VEHICLE FOR OUR LEGISLATION ON
AGED PERSONS'. HOMES AND HOSTELS, SHELTERED
EMPLOYMENT, HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, MEALS ON
WHEELS, HOME CARE AND NURSING, NURSING HOMES
AND HOMELESS MEN AND WOMEN, THESE ARE ALL
ACTIVITIES WHICH CANNOT BE CLOSELY REGULATED
FROM THE CENTRE AND ARE BEST PLANNED AND
IMPLEMENTED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORKING WITH
LOCAL COMMUNITIES, THEY JUSTIFY ASSISTANCE
FROM THE NATION'S FINANCES BUT NOT INCREASES
IN RATES, ,/ 7 
-7
" WE INSISTED ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATION
AT THE CONVENTION ON THE CONSTITUTION IN
SEPTEMBER LAST YEAR. VIE MADE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
REPRESENTATION A CONDITION OF PARTICIPATION
BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
" AT THAT CONVENTION I PUT THE CASE FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATION ON THE LOAN COUNCIL.
THE PREMIERS THEN, AND AT A SPECIAL PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE IN OCTOBER, TURNED DOWN OUR PROPOSAL
THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHOULD HAVE A VOICE AND
A VOTE IN THE LOAN COUNCIL."
WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW REGIONAL
GROWTH CENTRES IN QUEENSLAND. AFTER CONSULTATION WITH STATE
AUTHORITIES, THE CITIES COMIMISSION IN 1973 UNDERTOOK INITIAL
DEVELOPMENT STUDIES OF THREE AREAS IN QUEENSLAND TOWNSVILLE,
THE'FITZROY REGION AND THE MORETON REGION. OUR BUDGET LAST
YEAR~ ALLOCATED $ 14.4 MILLION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THESE
REGIONS IN THE CURRENT FINANCIAL YEAR. A REQUEST FOR A
DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILITY STUDY OF THE CAIRNS REGION HAS BEEN
RECEIVED BY THE CITIES COMMISSION FROM THE FAR NORTH QUEENSLAND
DEVELOPMENT BUREAU. THIS HAS BEEN SUPPORTED BY THE CAIRNS
CITY COUNCIL. THE COMMISSION HAS INDICATED TO THE COUNCIL
AND THE BUREAU THAT IT WILL CONSIDER THIS REQUEST WHEN ITS
FUTURE STUDIES PROGRAM IS BEING PREPARED. OFFICERS OF THE
COMMISSION HAVE DISCUSSED THIS MATTER, AND OTHER MATTERS OF
MUTUAL INTEREST, WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COUNCIL. AND THE
BUREAU. 191 / 8 
-8-
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF OTHER PROJECTS I SHOULD
MENTION THAT ARE OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO CAIRNS. NEW AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN CAIRNS WERE-COMPLETED IN DECEMBER 1973
AT A COST OF $ 730,000. A TELEPHONE ENGINEERING CENTRE AND
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR CENTRE ARE UNDER CONSTRUCTION AT A
COST OF $ 760,000 IN ADDITION, WE ARE CARRYING OUT
EXTENSIONS TO THE CAIRNS TELEPHONE EXCHANGE AT A COST OF
$ 760,000, WE. ARE BUILDING A NEW WORKS DEPOT FOR THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION AT A COST OF $ 154,000
AND EXTENDING THE LEVEE BANKS OF THE CAIRNS AIRPORT AT A
COST OF $ 158,00, PROPOSED ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO THE
CAIRNS POST OFFICE WILL COST A FURTHER $ 207,000.
I WANT TO LEAVE YOU IN NO DOUBT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
CONTINUING CONCERN FOR THE PROSPERITY AND DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR
CITY, YOUR REGION AND YOUR STATE. WITH THIS BUILDING,
CAIRNS HAS PLACED ITSELF IN THE FOREFRONT OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FOR THE ARTS. IT GIVES ME GREAT PLEASURE TO DECLARE OPEN
THE FIRST STAGE OF YOUR CULTURAL COMPLEX. IT WILL GIVE ME
GREATER AND CONTINUING PLEASURE TO REVISIT YOUR CITY, TO
OBSERVE ITS GROWTH AND PROSPERITY, AND SEE THE IMPORTANT
CONTRIBUTION OF THIS NEW CIVIC CENTRE TO THE LIFE AND
HAPPINESS OF YOUR CITIZENS, 



A4
EMBARGO: 5.00 pm
31 May 1974
Press Statement No. 252
STUDY ON SHIP REPAIR FACILITIES AT COCKBURN SOUND, W. A.
( Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam
and the Premier of Western Australia, the Hon.
Sir Charles Court, M. L. A.)
In a joint statement released today the Prime Minister
and the Premier of Western Australia announced that Maunsell and
Partners Pty Ltd of Perth, in association with Y-ARD ( Aust) Pty Ltd
of Canberra, had been commissioned to undertake a study of ship
repair requirements on the West Australian coast.
Maun sell and Y-ARD will report on the economic and
engineering feasibility of long term, staged development of
commercial ship repair facilities in Western Australia.
The report will also examine the feasibility of joint
planning for the development of these facilities along with Navy's
long term proposals for a naval ship repair capability at HMAS
STIRLING, Garden Island, W. A.
The study is to be completed in about four months and
will cost about $ 30,000. This cost will be shared equally by both
Governments. The study will be managed jointly by representatives
of both Governments.
CANBERRA. 



7'
PRIME MINISTER 31 May 1974
Press Statement No. 253
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY REPORT MUSHROOMS
The Prime Minister today released the report of the
Temporary Assistance Authority on Mushrooms.
on 8 March 1974, Mr Whitlam asked the Temporary Assistance
Authority whether it is necessary that urgent action be taken to
protect the Australian industry producing mushrooms and prepared
or preserved mushrooms in relation to the importation of mushrooms
in various forms.
In accordance with provisions of the Industries Assistance
Commission Act, the Authority reported on 5 April 1974 that he
considered no urgent action is necessary to protect the Australian
industry in relation to the importation of mushrooms of a kind
covered by the reference. Government action on the report had to
be held over pending the outcome of the elections.
The Prime Minister said the Government noted the comments
made by the Authority, particularly his comments that the nature
and extent of competition between the traditional Australian pack
of mushrooms in butter sauce and imported button mushrooms in brine
is far from clear; that an oversupply of locally canned mushrooms
had developed during 1972/ 73; that events since July 1973 cannot
be attributed wholly or mainly to competition from imports; and
that the increasing quantities of imported button mushrooms in
brine are catering for a demand in many ways distinct from the
demand for the Australian mushrooms in butter sauce.
Mr Whitlam. assured the industry that the Departments of
Primary Industry and Secondary Industry, together with other
interested departments would closely monitor the situation to see
whether any changed circumstances merited further action by the
Government. Mr Whitlam recalled that the question of long-term
assistance for the Australian mushrooms growing and processing
industry was referred to the Industries Assistance Commission at the
same time as the reference was sent to the Temporary Assistance
Authority. Because of problems in the industry which had been
brought to his attention, the Prime Minister shid that he was writing
to the Chairman of the Commission asking him to accord priority to
this inquiry.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



EMBARGO: 8.15 P. m.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE 21ST SYDNEY FILM FESTIVAL,
STATE THEATRE, SYDNEY, SUNDAY. 2 JUNE 1974
one of the most impressive aspects of the recent
election campaign was the public involvement and commitment of
men and women whose voices are not often heard in political affairs.
For me, there was no better, no more moving an example of this
than a meeting here in the Sydney Opera House only 5 days before
the people went to the polls.
On that day, about 20 men and women stood with me
before a capacity crowd in the Concert Hall and declared their
allegiance. My appreciation of their action was in no way diminished,
of course, by the fact that they declared their support for the
Government which I lead. Those men and women represented various
groups and occupations in our community. But, appropriately, in
Sydney's most striking symbol of cultural endeavour, the biggest
single group consisted of artists: novelists, poets, painters,
actors, producers and the like. I don.' t believe any of them will
feel belittled if I say they were led by bur only Nobel Prize
winner for literature, Patrick White.
These men and women did not talk simply about the
arts. Some stressed their belief in the need for Australia to
maintain a modern and independent stance in foreign policy. Some
stressed their concern about the environment and conservation
a concern which would have been particularly pertinent if stated
in this remarkably ornamented theatre. Some stressed a more
general concern about the type of society they wanted Australia to
be: Patrick White, for example, wanted to ensure the end of what
he described in a somewhat startling phrase as " the mental
constipation" of the past.
Nevertheless, a dominant concern for all of these
people was for the future of their own fields, for the future of
the arts in Australia. I don't think it is vain of me to say that they
believed that the present Australian government has done more for the
arts than any previous Australian government. I appreciated greatly
the willingness of those and other Australian artists to acknowledge
just what we have done. In politics, one doesn't always expect
such acknowledgements to be given. In this case, it was; and, if
I can be so bold, I believe that that recognition was justified.
Indeed through the Australian Council for the Arts alone, the
Australian government is providing $ 14 million for support to the
arts in Australia this financial year. In other words, our assistance
is twice that of 1972/ 73. Response to our new program has been
overwhelming. The Council for the Arts has received about 4,000
applications in the last year for assistance for various art forms
and has provided about 1,600 grants.,
One of the major objectives of our program has been to
help our artists in the pursuit of excellence. This pursuit would
not be possible if they did not have financial security. it is fair
to assume that already hundreds of Australians who would otherwise
be working in other fiplds or in other countries are now pursuing
professional careers in the arts in Australia for the first time.
/ 2 
-2-
The continued security of our artists, however, must
always depend on community support. That i ' s why our program has
emphasised the need to encourage the spread of interest and
participation in the arts throughout our society. In turn, this can
only be aided by the achievement of another major objective; for
the arts to help provide an expression of a national identity.
I believe the aim of community support is already starting to be
achieved. In a small way, the meeting at the Opera House 3 weeks
ago demonstrated this. Not many years ago, one might have expected
a lot of Australians to be unimpressed by a statement of endorsement
by a group of artists. Now, I think, Australians generally have
become sufficiently proud of their . achievements to pay attention
to them. In no area has the need for Australians to have the
opportunity to pursue excellence, to encourage community support and
to express a national identity been greater than in the film industry.
Although it had a vigorous anxd promising beginning, it has languished
for years. Yet there is no question that we have had people of
talent who have craved the chance to restore the industry, to create
worthwhile Australian films and to reach an Australian audience.
We are determined to give them that chance.
The prospects for the film industry look very bright
at present. Last year, seven Australian feature films were produced.
Already in 1974 nine Australian feature films * are in production in
addition to one financed by American interests. A further 16 feature
film projects are being planned and six of them are expected to go
into production during the next 12 months. Not only has there been
a great improvement in the number of films being produced in the
last two years; there has also been a great improvement in the
public response to those films. There have been several notable
examples of films which have attracted large crowds to our main
city cinemas. The Australian Government is seeking to ensure this
recent trend will develop further. It is making financial assistance
for film making available through two government bodies the Film
and Television Board of the Australian Council for the Arts and the
Australian Film Development Corporation. Since its formation in
February last year, the Film and Television Board has made 407 grants
worth nearly $ 2 million. These grants were given to individual film
makers and to organisations, such as film co-operatives to help
establish cinemas and distribute independently produced Australian
films; to the National Film Theatre for nationwide screenings of
films of specialised interests; and to film festivals in Sydney,
Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth. The Board has established a number
of community access video centres in the western suburbs of Sydney
and Melbourne and has similar plans for Brisbane, Adelaide, Whyalla
and Fremantle. The Board also plans to provide a cinema in each
capital city to show Australian films and for use by non-commerical
film makers and organisations for screenings, workshops and seminars. / 3 
-3-
The other main arm of Government assistance, the
Film Development Corporation, has helped with the financing and
promotion of feature films. It has recently been involved, for
example, in the promotion and exhibition of " The Cars that Ate Paris"
at the Cannes Film Festival. The Film Development Corporation
will soon be replaced by the Australian Film Commission. This
follows the Government's acceptance of a number of major recommendations
by the Tariff Board which enquired last year into motion picture films
and television programs. Cabinet has agreed that the new Film
Commission should be able to provide up to half the budget for an
Australian film. And in addition, to provide a promotion subsidy
for such a film. The precise amount of money to be made available
to the Commission is still being considered but it can expect more
funds than have been available to the Film Development Corporation.
I realise that there is still pressure within the film
industry for a major change in the distribution and exhibition
system for films within Australia. The Tariff Board did make some
recommendations in this area. But Cabinet considered that the
Constitutional barriers to the implementation of these recommendations
were too great. Nevertheless we will continue to watch this area of
the industry carefully to ensure as much as we can that the films
released from Australia's New Wave receive adequate distribution
and exhibition. The Government of course doesn't seek to stifle
the showing of overseas films in Australia. On the contrary, it is
part of our statedpolicy for all the arts that Australians can see
important works from overseas. A large canvas which hangs in
another public building in this city is controversial testimony to
that desire. Similarly, we regard it as important that film makers
and filmgoers are able to see the range of films that is offered at
a festival such as this. As the Sydney Film Festival comes of age,
I am glad, as the Head of a Government which has provided support
for its activities, to declare it open. 



EMBARGO: 5.00 PM
PRIME MINISTER 2 June 1974
Press Statement No. 254
Public Comment by Public Servants,
The Prime Minister announced today that the
Governor-General in Council had approved the repeal of
Public Service-Regulation 34( b) which has prohibited
public comment by officers of the Australian Public Service
on administrative matters. Mr Whitlam said the Government
had asked the Public Service Board to issue guidelines to
public servants explaining fully the effects of the repeal
and outlining the new arrangements.
The Prime Minister said the policy of the Government
and the Labor Party was that restrictions on freedom of
expression of public servants and former public servants
should be reduced to the minimum necessary for the
conduct of affairs of state.
" The Government believes that public servants should
have the maximum possible freedom to exercise the social
and political rights enjoyed by other citizens" Mr Whitlam
said. " This is a long-standing Government commitment in
line with our promise to introduce a Freedom of Information
Act for all Australians".
The repeal of Regulation 34( b) was in accordance
with the views of the Public Service Board which had
reviewed the Regulation after representations from the
Council of Commonwealth Public Servants' Organisation.
Mr Whitlam added that the Council of Commonwealth
Public Servants Organisations had been informed of the
Government's decision. Mr Whitlam said that interested
parties would be welcome to give their views on the
question of public comment by public servants to the Commission
of Enquiry into the Public Service which the Government
has announced. He said he had long felt that the blanket prohibition
contained in Regulation 34( b) was wrong and futile, though
he recognised that some restrictions were necessary.
" I expect that the restrictions will be substantially reduced
now that the Reguldtion has been repealed" Mr Whitlams. aid.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT A NATURALIZATION CEREMONY, LIVERPOOL COUNCIL CHAMBERS,
3 JUNE 1974
Australia has just come through a national election in
which, whatever you may hear to the contrary, there were clear
winners and clear losers. In the decision you are taking here this
evening, however, there are no losers, only winners. The nation
wins, because each new citizen represents an increase in the strength
of our national family and our national spirit. And each of you, as
a new citizen, wins personally from your choice to become an
Australian. By accepting our invitation to citizenship, you have
reaffirmed your earlier, perhaps hesitant, decision to seek your
future among us. Tonight you are identifying yourself officially
for the first time as Australians but you are not relinquishing
anything you hold dear from your past life. Since the arrival of the
first fleet in 1788, new settlers have been linking their own
future with that of this land people of two worlds blending in a
new loyalty to Australia. This has been our history and our strength
and is no less true tonight. You are adopting the most realistic
stance that you could adopt, one that accords with both the past and
the future, with your own interests and with the nation's interests.
Tonight you are acknowledging that your future is here
in Australia, but you are not attempting to sever the old roots that
will bind you forever to your first homeland. No one can dictate
to you what your deepest feelings should be what should be in your
heart tonight and I would not dare to try. Let me just say that
your official status from tonight confers on you two grounds for
pride, based on the strength of two cultures, two life-styles,
your ' share of the heritage'. In that respect you are to be envied
above those of us,, who share only one common heritage.
The cumulative impact of the 817,000 people who since
1949 have joined the national family-through citizenship has been
to change the very concept and content of that citizenship. Today,
people from more than 70 nations make up Australia, a nation
subservient to none, firmly and responsibly seeking its own destiny.
In the electorate of Werriwa alone, at the last census there were
57,000 people born overseas nearly one third of the total population
of the electorate. Thus we are creating a cohesive society of many
parts, where cultural diversity can lend interest, charm and enjoyment
to the national life without forfeiting that harmony, that inner sense
of belonging ' together with' is the expression of true nationhood.
One solid foundation for that harmony must be in
equal and indivisible citizenship rights. For that reason the
Government has already moved to end all discrimination in the conditions
of citizenship. Today we have one criterion, one oath, one ceremony,
with all discrimination banished. We make no distinctions on the
grounds of national origin or former citizenship, and certainly none
on the grounds of race. / 2 
-2-
The widespread approval given to this new approach is
shown by the great increase in the rate of citizenship applications
under the new provision which became operative on 1 December 1973.
In 1972 a total of 38,402 people were granted citizenship. In 1973
this figure jumped to 57,102 an increase of nearly 50%. Further,
for the four months up to the end of April this year citizenship
applications continued to increase at an even higher rate. The verdict
of those who in the past eighteen months have decided to join the
national family cannot be denied Australian citizenship today is
more desirable than at any time in our history. The symbols of a
strong independent nationhood are not a cheap gimmick, an empty
gesture meant to impress ourselves rather than the world. There is
a wide and deep current of agreement in our society about what our
true national identity should be.
There is another quite objective statistical measure
of the confidence migrants now feel in Australia's future. The success
of a national immigration program is shown not only in the personal
efforts and sacrifices of those establishing themselves in a new land.
It is revealed in the statistics of those who, having tried the
great adventure, leave Australia with no intention of returning.
Since the Labor Government came to power, these figures have declined
from 33,172 in 1972 to 30,325 last year. This is the first
significant decline since 1964 in what we call the ' migrant drift',
and represents a resurgence of optimism in what Australia offers to
newcomers. Many of the things which have persuaded you, and thousands
of your fellow-migrants, to become Australian citizens are the result
of one man's efforts on behalf of our migrant people. That man is
Al Grassby, the Minister for Immigration a great friend, a stalwart
colleague, a true patriot, a fine Australian. No one has worked
harder for the welfare of migrants and achieved more solid and lasting
benefits for them and their families. It is a sad and bitter blow to
O me and the government that we have temporarily lost the services of
Al Grassby. It is a tragic irony that the forces he opposed so
staunchly and successfullyas a Minister, as a member of Parliament
the forces of hate, of prejudice, of ignorance, of racial
distrimination have now helped to defeat him. I know you will regret
this event as profoundly as I do. I know you will repudiate the
campaign tactics used against him, just as I and all decent Australians
repudiate them. They have no place in Australia, they have no place
in the kind of open and tolerant society that Al Grassby worked so
hard to achieve. I pay tribute to him here tonight. Ceremonies such
as this, here and all over Australia, are eloquent testimony to the
achievements of his public career, the strength of his character, the
breadth of his vision and the power of his ideals.
On behalf of the Australian Government and people Ii
welcome you all as new citizens of our nation and wish you every
happiness and success in the future. 



PRIME MINISTER 4 June 1974
Press Statement No. 255
AUSTRALIA TO SEEK PRESIDENCY OF U. N. GENERAL ASSEMBLY NEXT YEAR
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, confirmed today's press
report that in ' March of this year, prior to the general elections,
Australia had begun actively to seek support for the candidature
' of the Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee, for the Presidency of
the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1975.
Mr Whitlam said that, on the assumption that
Senator Willesee would be re-elected to the Ministry and
reappointed as the Foreign Minister, the Government intended to
proceed with his candidature for the Presidency of the Assembly.
Mr Whitlam recalled that Senator Willesee had led the Australian
delegation to the General Assembly session last year, and was
alrea dy well known to many delegation leaders.
Mr Whitlan said that this action underlined the
importance which the Government attached to the United Nations in
its foreign policy and he recalled the constructive contributions
being made by Australia to the work of the United Nations. He noted
that in addition to its energetic support for the peacekeeping,
human rights, decolonisation, and economic and technical activities
of the United Nations, Australia is currently a member of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council which are major organs
of the United Nations under the Charter. As President of the
Security Council in October 1973, the Australian Ambassador to
the United Nations, Sir Laurence McIntyre, played an important role
in helping to achieve a ceasef ire resolution in the Middle East.
Australia's current term as a member of the Security Council ends
on 31 December this year.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government was determined to
maintain its forward-looking policies which had been so well received
in the United Nations.
Australia is a member of the Western European and Others
group in the United Nations, and it is the turn of that group to
nominate the candidate for the Presidency of the General Assembly in
1975. In March of this year preliminary soundings were started about
the possibility of the group endorsing Senator Willesee as its
candidate for the Presidency of the General Assembly in 1975.
Consultations with members of the group are continuing. The Prime
Minister recalled that Australia last held the Presidency of the
General Assembly in 1948/ 49 when the late Dr H. V. Evatt was President
of the Third Session of the General Assembly.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



PRIME MINISTER June 1974
Press Statement No. 258
APPOINTMENT OF ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER TO THE INDUSTRIES
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION Mr F. Pascoe
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, M. P."
announced today that Mr Frank Pascoe has been appointed as an
Associate Commissioner to the Industries Assistance Commission
for the inquiry into the clothing industry, which is part of
the Tariff Review program.
Mr Pascoe has had extensive experience as a senior
executive in manufacturing companies and organisations. He is
Chair~ man of Directors, Australian Development Ltd., and a director
of a number of other companies. He was President of the South
Australian Chamber of Manufactures in 1972/ 73, and is the first
President of the Amalgamated Chamber of Manufactures and Chamber
of Commerce, South Australia. Mr Pascoe is currently Deputy
President of the Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia.
CANBERRA. A. CT. 



_ AUST ALIA~
PRIME MINISTER June 1974
Press Statement No. 257
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT AT PORT MORESBY AIRPORT
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today that a $ 7.6 million contract had been awarded f or
major development works at the Port Moresby airport.
Mr Whitlan said the work included construction of
a new runway, taxiways, parking apron and associated works. The
project was being wholly financed by the Australian Government as an
aid project for the Papua New Guinea Government, and was the
culmination of close co-operation between the two governments
on all aspects of the airport development.
The contract had been awarded to Hornibrook/ Curtaii,
a joint venture formed by two companies based in Papua New Guinea.
It was expected that work would start this financial year, and that
the project would be completed by August, 1976.
Mr Whitlam said the new runway would be 2,750m ( 9,000 ft)
long, capable of handling fully laden Boeing 727-200 and 707 aircraft,
and also the larger Boeing 747 aircraft for viable and infrequent
operations. The present runway, which was designed for Constellation
type aircraft, was now becoming uneconomic to maintain as a heavy
duty pavement. The Prime Minister said the project had been designed
by the Australian Government Department of Housing and Construction's
Port Moresby office, which would also supervise construction.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



7-June 1974
Press Statement No. 259
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today that arrangements have now been completed with
the State Premiers for the meeting of the Premiers' Conference
and Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Friday 7 June.
The meeting will commence at 9.30 a. m. in the
House of Representatives Chamber.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 13. 



iIfo.
% w 1974
Press Statement No. 256
PRICE NOTIFICATION BY BRADMILL INDUSTRIES LIMITED
I have been notified by Bradmill Industries Limited
that the company accepts the findings of the Prices Justification
Tribunal in its report dated 13 May 1974.
When received, particulars of prices will be
available for inspection at the offices of the Prices
Justification Tribunal 10 Queens Road, Melbourne or 100 William
Street, Sydney.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



PRIME MINISTER
PRESS STATEMENT NO: J6
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE AUSTRALIAN
PUBLIC SERVICE
The Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today that His Excellency, the Governor-General had
appointed a Royal Commission to inquire into and report on the
Australian Public Service.
Mr. Whitlam said that the appointment of the Royal
Commission confirmed the undertaking first-given by the government
last December, when Mr. Barnard had announced that a Commission
of Inquiry into the Public Service would be appointed upon
receipt of the Post Office Inquiry Report.
Mr. Whitlam. went on to say that as the Vernon Commission
Report had been received and its major recommendations accepted,
the Government had now appointed the promised Royal Commission
into the Public Service.
In announcing the appointment of the Royal Commission
Mr. Whitlam recalled that in his policy speech, given on
29 April he had said:
' To promote further the efficiency of the Australian
Public Service, we shall establish a Royal Commission.
It will be headed by one of Australia's most distinguished
and experienced former public servants a great
servant of the Australian people Dr. H. C. Coombs".
Mr.-Whitlam said he was delighted that Dr. Coombs had agreed to
accept the Commission and that he would be so ably assisted by
the other Commissioners chosen. ./ 2 
r
-2-
The Prime Minister also announced that to assist
Dr Coombs in his Commission, the Governor-General had appointed
Mr P. H. Bailey, Deputy Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet; Professor Enid Campbell, Sir Isaac Isaacs Professor
of Law at Monash University; the Hon. J. E. Isaac, Deputy President
of the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; and
Mr P. R. Munro, Secretary of the Council of Commonwealth Public Service
Organisations, as Commissioners. The Commission would be assisted
by Dr P. S. Wilenski, who the Prime Minister announced would be seconded
to the Commission as its Special Advisor.
' Mr Whitlam went on to say that there had not been a
comprehensive inquiry into the Australian Public Service sinc * e 1920.
He said that in recent years many countries had appointed Inquiries
into their Public Services. Amongst these were Canada in 1962 by
the Glassco Commission, and Britain in 1968 by the Fulton Committee.
As well, Ireland and Germany had conducted wide ranging Inquiries
into their Public Services. Mr Whitlam said he had been informed that
a Royal Commission would be welcomed by all the Australian Public
Service staff associations and trade unions. He had also been informed
by the Public Service Board that it would welcome a Royal Commission.
Mr Whitlam reiterated the view expressed in his Garran
Oration in November 1973, that the Australian Public Service commanded
universal respect for its professionalism and impartiality. However,
the government was committed to modernising the national public
administration. This began with the re-allocation of administrative
functions and other initiatives taken by the Australian Government
since December 1972. An important step in this process was the
appointment of the Royal Commission into the Australian Post Office
under the Chairmanship of Sir James Vernon. The government's decision
to establish a Royal Commission into the Public Service was evidence
of its desire to continue this process.
Mr Whitlam said that the Terms of Reference ( attached) were
wide ranging and comprehended all the matters which have been the
subject of debate and representation to Government over a period of
many years. He said that the Commission would examine the role,
organisation and staffing of the Australian Public Service with a view
to improving efficiency, economy, adaptability, industrial relations
and the despatch of public business.
Mr Whitlam said it was expected that the Chairman of the
Commission, Dr H. C. Coombs, would shortly announce arrangements for
the conduct of hearings and for the submission of views by individuals
and organ isations. The Prime Minister said that it was anticipated that the
Commission would report within two years of its appointment, but that
it could, if it wished, make interim reports on those matters about
which it had concluded its deliberations.
Mr Whitlam said that the appointment of such a Commission was
an historic development in Australian public administration and one
which he hoped would lead to an Australian Public Service better
equipped to meet the future needs of the Australian people and
Australian Governments.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 66.667.74 
INQUIRY INTO THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE
TERMS OF REFERENCE
to inquire into and report upon the administrative
organization and services of the Australian Government, and
in particularthe purposes, functions, organization and
management of Australian Government Departments,
statutory corporations ana other authorities and
the principal instruments of co-ordination of
Australian Government administration and policy;
and the structure and management of the Australian
Public Service,
and to make reconmendations for improving efficiency,
economy, adaptability and industrial relations and the
despatch of public business:
AND, without restricting the scope of your inquiry,
We direct you, the said Commissioners, to give particular
attention to the following mattLers:-
the appropriate role of ministerial departments,
statutory corporations and other authorities;
relationship of the-Australian Public Service and
statutory corporations and other authorities with
the Parliament, Ministers and the community;
parliamentary scrutiny and control of
administration; responsibility and accountability of public
servants, and their participation in forming
policy and making decisions; / 2 
2
adequacy of the machinery available to assess
the relevance and economy of existing programs
in meeting government objectives;
the extent to which central management of the
Australian Public Service is necessary, and
internal control and co-ordination in that
Service, especially the functions of the Public
Service Board, the Auditor-General and the
Treasury; centralization, decentralization and delegation
of functions;
the principles applicable to staffing of
statutory corporations and other authorities:
personnel policies and practices, including
eligibility, recruitment, selection, appointment,
tenure, training ( especially management training),
promotion, classification, discipline, morale and
conditions of service of members of the Australian
Public Service, both generally and in relation to.
particular classes of persons;
the determination of salaries, wages and other
conditions of service of persons in the service
of the Australian Government, including those
serving overseas;
the rights of public servants as citizens; and
any other matters to which the attention of the
Commission is particularly directed by the Prime
Minister and in the course of the inquiry: / 3 
-3-
AND We further instruct you, the said Commissioners,
that it is not intended that you should make special inquiry
into, or special reference to, matters relating to postal and
telecommunigations services that were the subject of the
inquiry made in accordance with the Letters Patent issued by
Us on 22 February 1973, or to matters relating to
superannuation. 



OPENING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. EgG. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, CANBERRAV
ON 7 JUNE 1974
IT IS NEARLY TWELVE MONTHS SINCE WE LAST MET IN THIS
CHAMBER. IT HAS BEEN A MOMENTOUS PERIOD. OVERSHADOWING THE
PAST TWO MONTHS HAS BEEN THE ELECTION. BUT THAT IS NOW BEHIND
US, THE PEOPLE HAVE RETURNED MY PARTY TO OFFICE AND WE ARE NOW
GETTING ON WITH THE BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT,
THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO THE PROGRAMS OF SOCIAL
PROGRESS WHICH IT HAS GOT UNDER WAY SINCE DECEMBER 1972. THOSE
PROGRAMS HAVE GREATLY EXPANDED THE OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO
AUSTRALIANS, BOTH AS INDIVIDUALS AND AS MEMBERS OF COMMUNITIES.
MANY OF THEM, OF COURSE, INVOLVE THE CO-OPERATION OF THE STATES
AND THEIR INSTRUMENTALITIES. IN MY OPENING SPEECH AT THIS CONFERENCE LAST YEAR I SET
DOWN CLEARLY AND UNEQUIVOCALLY THE BROAD LINES WE WOULD FOLLOW
IN OUR RELATIONS WITH THE STATES.
THE STARTING POINT WAS SIMPLY THIS: WE BELIEVE THAT
THE TOTAL AMOUNTS OF ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO THE STATES IN THE PAST
HAVE, IN TERMS OF THE TASKS LAID UPON THEM, BEEN INADEQUATE. THE
RESULT HAS BEEN AN ACCUMULATION OF SERIOUS DEFICIENCIES ACROSS A
WIDE RANGE OF FUNCTIONS OF CRUCIAL IMPORTANCE IN THE WELL-BEING OF
OUR COMMUNITY: OVERCROWDED AND INSUFFICIENTLY STAFFED SCHOOLS,
AN INEQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF HEALTH SERVICES, HOPELESSLY
INADEQUATE AND UNCO-ORDINATED SYSTEMS OF URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT,
A HUGE BACKLOG OF UNSEWERED HOUSING, AN OVERCROWDING OF
POPULATION IN OUR MAIN CITIES, AND SO ON. / 2 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN A LARGE NUMBER
OF IMPORTANT INITIATIVES DESIGNED TO TACKLE THESE DEFICIENCIES'.
BROADLY, IT HAS MOVED ON TWO FRONTS. FIRST, IT HAS ESTABLISHED
NEW INSTITUTIONS AND NEW MECHANISMS FOR ASSESSING, ON A NATIONAL
BASIS BUT IN FULL CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES AND THEIR
AUTHORITIES, NEEDS AND PRIORITIES IN EACH OF THE MAIN AREAS OF
CONCERN* THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION, THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND THE EXPANDED GRANTS COMMISSION ARE SOME OF THE
MAIN EXAMPLES OF MANY THAT COULD BE CITED.
SECONDLY, THE GOVERNMENT HAS, ON THE BASIS OF THESE
EXPERT ASSESSMENTS, BEGUN TO PROVIDE LARGE AMOUNTS OF FUNDS TO
THE STATES. IN RESPECT OF TWO AREAS TERTIARY EDUCATION AND
PUBLIC HOUSING WE ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND
MADE APPROPRIATE ADJUSTMENTS TO THE LEVELS OF GENERAL PURPOSE
FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE STATES. IN OTHER AREAS, WE
UNDERTOOK NEW OR EXPANDED PROGRAMS OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE
ASSISTANCE DESIGNED TO ADD TO EXISTING STATE PROVISIONS IN THE
AREAS CONCERNED AND SO TO ACCELERATE IMPROVEMENTS IN STANDARDS.
THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR A BETTER AND FULLER LIFE WHICH
THESE PROGRAMS PROMISE ARE BECOMING INCREASINGLY EVIDENT AS TIME
GOES BY. WE WILL GO ON WITH THEM. THERE IS, HOWEVER, A NEED
FOR ALL OF US NOT TO TRY TO PUSH AHEAD SO FAST THAT THE ECONOMY
IS UNABLE TO MEET OUR DEMANDS.
I SAY THAT BECAUSE THE ECONOMY IS CURRENTLY
THREATENED BY A SERIOUS INFLATION. THAT INFLATION MUST BE
CURBED. THE GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO CURB I1% 9 o 93 
WE HAVE, IN THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS, TAKEN MAJOR STEPS
TO CHECK INFLATION. WE HAVE SET AN EXCHANGE RATE FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR APPROPRIATE TO OUR CIRCUMSTANCES'. WE PUT A
STOP TO THE EXCESSIVE INFLOW OF MONEY FROM OVERSEAS'. WE CUT
TARIFFS SHARPLY ACROSS-THE-BOARD, WE INCREASED TAXES BY OVER
$ 600 MILLION, ON A FULL-YEAR BASIS, IN OUR FIRST BUDGET.
THROUGH THESE AN]) OTHER MEANS WE STEADILY DRAINED OFF THE
EXCESSIVE LIQUIDITY PRESENT IN THE ECONOMY WHEN WE FIRST TOOK
OFFICE. IN DOING SO, WE HAD TO ACCEPT MUCH HIGHER INTEREST
RATES THAN MY PARTY FINDS PALATABLE. MANY OF THESE STEPS HAVE
BEEN CRITICISED BY THE VERY PEOPLE WHO COMPLAIN MOST LOUDLY ABOUT
INFLATION., I NOTICE, HOWEVER, THAT NEARLY ALL THE PROFESSIONAL
ECONOMISTS WHO HAVE COMMENTED ON OUR POLICIES HAVE SAID THEY
WERE RIGHT AND COURAGEOUS,
IN MY PRESS CONFERENCE ON 7 MAY IN SYDNEY I SAID
" WE ARE PREPARED TO STRENGTHEN ALL THE STEPS
WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN AND TO TAKE ANY OTHER STEPS
WHICH OUR ECONOMIC ADVISERS BELIEVE NECESSARY TO
DEFEAT INFLATION,"
I MEANT THAT. AND I TRUST THAT NOW, IN THE LIGHT OF THE
ELECTION CAMPAIGN, IT IS COMMON GROUND THAT INFLATION MUST BE
DEFEATED'. IF THERE IS ONE THING THE CAMPAIGN HAS MADE CLEAR,
IT IS THAT*. THERE ARE NO EASY WAYS OF CURBING INFLATION. NOR CAN
IT BE CURBED BY PUSHING ALL OF THE BURDEN OF DOING SO ONTO A
PARTICULAR GROUI'. A DOLLAR SPENT BY THE PRIVATE SECTOR ADDS
AS MUCH TO INFLATIONARY PRESSURES AS A DOLLAR SPENT BY THE PUBLIC
SECTOR. A DOLLAR SPENT BY A STATE GOVERNMENT. ADDS AS MUCH TO
INFLATIONARY PRESSURES AS A DOLLAR SPENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMEN' 1. 4 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS CURRENTLY SEEKING TO
RESTRAIN PRIVATE SECTOR SPENDING BY KEEPING MONEY TIGHT, IT
IS SEEKING TO ENCOURAGE SAVING AND) DISCOURAGE SPENDING BY
INCR~ EASING THE ATTRACTIVENESS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS. HENCE THE
RISE IN YIELDS ON GOVERNMENT SECURITIES THAT IS OCCURING IN THE
MARKET*' WE ARE FOLLOWING SUCH A MONETARY POLICY, NOT BECAUSE
WE LIKE ITS CONSEQUENCES IN TERMS OF FINANCIAL STRINGENCY AN)
HIGHER INTEREST RATES, BUT BECAUSE WE HAVE TO IF THERE IS TO BE
A CURB ON EXCESSIVE PRIVATE SPENDIN'
THIS MEETING, OF COURSE, IS CONCERNED WITH GOVERNMENT
SPENDING., THAT TOO MUST PLAY ITS PART IN ANY POLICY OF RESTRAINT.
IT GOES AGAINST THE GRAIN FOR ME TO SAY THAT BUT ALL
OF US HERE MUST ACCEPT THE REALITIES. INFLATION MUST BE CHECKED,.
AND IT MUST BE CHECKED DECISIVELY*
I KNOW I AM PREACHING TO THE CONVERTED BUT LET ME SAY
A LITTLE ABOUT THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AND OUTLOOK.
THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX ROSE BY 13#. 6 PER CENT IN THE
YEAR TO THE MARCH QUARTER. ITS RATE OF INCREASE WAS REDUCED IN
THE MARCH QUARTER BUT THE FUTURE FOR PRICES REMAINS OMINOUS
PRICES ARE BEING PUSHED ALONG BY A COMBINATION OF
EXCESSIVE DEMAND AND EXCESSIVE COST INCREASE, INCREASINGLYj
PEOPLE ARE ADJUSTING THEIR SPENDING BEHAVIOUR TO INFLATION,
MAKING THE PROBLEM SELF-PERPETUATING.
OVER THE PAST YEAR TOTAL SPENDING, IN REAL TERMS, ROSE
BY 10 PER CENT. MUCH OF THAT INCREASE WAS SATISFIEDv NOT FROM
OUR OWN PRODUCTION, BUT BY A VERY LARGE RISE IN IMPORTS', WE
WANTED THAT TO HAPPEN, AND IT HAS'. EVEN SO, DEMAND HAS
OUTSTRIPPED SUPPLIES SHORTAGES OF BASIC MATERIALS AND EVEN OF
SOME CONSUMER GOODS ARE WIDESPREAD. INDUSTRY IS OPERATING AT
FULL CAPACITY, SUBJECT ONLY TO CONSTRAINTS IMPOSED BY LABOUR AND
MATERIAL SHORTAGES AND, IN SOME CASES, INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES'* 
CREDIT AVAILABILITY RAS NOT SO FAR BEEN A MAJOR CONSTRAINT
MONETARY TIGHTNESS IS AT PRESENT CHIEFLY SERVING TO LIMIT THE
DEGREE TO WHICH PEOPLE AND FIRMS BID AGAINST ONE ANOTHER FOR
ALREADY SCARCE RESOURCES'*'
CONSUMER SPENDING IS BOOMING. PRIVATE INVESTMENT
ALSO IS MOVING UP STRONGLY* ALTHOUGH THE SUPPLY OF HOUSING
FINANCE HAS COME DOWN FROM THE EXTRAORDINARY HEIGHTS OF A
YEAR AGO, THE HOUSING INDUSTRY IS STILL VERY MUCH UND) ER STRAINt
IN THE RECENT MARCH QUARTER, FOR EXAMPLE, THE INDUSTRY COMMENCED
MORE DWELLINGS, IN SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TERMS, THAN IT HAS EVER
BEEN ABLE TO COMPLETE IN A QUARTER. s AT THE END OF MARCH,
THERE WERE 100,000 DWELLINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTIOM' SOME 30 PER CENT
MORE THAN A YEAR EARLIER. IT IS THESE PRESSURES THAT HAVE
CAUSED HOUSE PRICES TO RISE SO EXORBITANTLY AND PREVENTED
MONEYS APPROPRIATED FOR WELFARE HOUSING FROM BEING PUT TO
EFFECTIVE USE*' ALTHOUGH, IN-THE YEAR TO THE. MARCH QUARTER,'
MORE DWELLINGS IN TOTAL WERE COMPLETED THAN IN ANY PREVIOUS
COMPARABLE PERIOD, THERE WERE FEWER COMPLETED IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR THAN IN ANY OF THE PAST 15 YEARS'.
THE PUBLIC SECTOR TOO IS TRYING TO INCREASE ITS
SPENDING FASTER THAN THE AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES WILL PERMIV.
TIS IS ESPECIALLY TRUE OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURES, WHERE SUPPLY
CONSTRAINTS ARE PREVENTING BUDGETED FUNDS FROM BEING SPENT AND
TENDER PRICES WHERE TENDERS CAN BE OBTAINED ARE BEING DRIVEN
UP EVEN MORE THAN COST MOVEMENTS WOULD NECESSITATE. o
OUR POLICIES WILL BE DIRECTED TO BRINGING DEMAND BACK
TO AN APPROPRIATE LEVEL, WITHOUT THAT THERE CAN BE NO HOPE OF
CHECKING THE ACCELERATING TREND IN MONEY INCOMES, INFLATIONARY
EXPECTATIONS, SPURRED ON BY THE RAPID CLIMB IN PRICES, ARE
LEADING TO PRESSURE FOR VERY LARGE WAGE INCREASES AND TO0
EMPLOYERS PAYING THEM IN THE EXPECTATION THAT INFLATION WILL 
CONTINUE AND THAT THEY CAN THEREFORE BE PASSED ON AGAIN IN PRICES.
WE ALL OF US MUST BREAK THOSE INFLATIONARY EXPECTATIONSO;
WE MUST SHOW THAT THOSE WHO BANK ON DOUBLE-FIGURE INFLATION
CONTINUING WILL BE PROVED WRONG AND SEE THAT THEY FIND THE
LESSON AN EXPENSIVE ONE. IT HAS FOR SOME TIME BEEN EASY TO
BORROW MONEY, INVEST IN REAL ASSETS SUCH AS PROPERTY, AND
EMERGE WITH A HANDSOME PROFIT ARISING NOT FROM PRODUCTIVE
EFFORT BUT FROM INFLATION". WHEN, AS WE WILL, WE HEAR OF
SOME SUCH VENTURES GOING BADLY WRONG IN THE PERIOD AHEAD,
WE WILL KNOW THAT THE RISK ELEMENT HAS BEEN RE-INTRODUCED
INTO SUCH FORMS OF INVESTMENT.
OF COURSE, THE GOVERNMENT'S PRESENT POLICIES WILL
STEADILY BRING DEMAND BACK INTO LINE. THEY WILL GRADUALLY
SLOW THE INCREASE IN PRIVATE SPENDING AS TIME GOES BY.
BUT THAT WILL NOT BREAK THE PRESENT SPIRAL. AVERAGE
EARNINGS SEEM TO HAVE RISEN 16-17 PER CENT IN 1973-74 AND
IF PRESENT TRENDS WERE TO CONTINUE THEY WOULD BE LIKELY TO
RISE BY MORE THAN 20 PER CENT IN 1974-75. MOREOVER, WITH
PRICES RISING AT THE RATE THEY ARE, DEMANDS FOR NEW WAGE
INCREASES ARE BEING MADE LITERALLY WITHIN MONTHS OF THE LAST
DEMANY. THE SPIRAL MUST BE BROKEN'. THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION
TRIBUNAL, WHICH WE PROPOSE TO STRENGTHEN, CAN ONLY DO SO MUCHf.
IF THE SITUATION IS ALLOWED TO DRIFT, WE ARE LIKELY
TO END WITH THE WORST OF ALL WORLDS OUTPUT WILL SLOW, BUT
COST AND PRICE LEVELS WILL GO ON RISING, THE GROWTH OF
IMPORTS WILL EXERT A DAMPENING INFLUENCE: BUT THAT FACTOR
CANNOT BE CALLED UPON FOR EVEW.
I HAVE ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS ADVOCATED A REFERENCE OF
POWER OVER PRICES FROM THE STATES TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
SOME OF YOU, I REALISE, HAVE EXPRESSED DOUBTS OR MISGIVINGS ABOUT
THE IMPLICATIONS OF ANY TEMPORARY REFERENCE OF SUCH A POWER'.
o../ 7 
I DO FEEL, HOW EVE R, THAT THERE ARE ASPECTS OF THIS POWER
CURRENTLY VESTED IN THE STATES W9HICH ARE NOT BEING
EFFECTIVELY USED IN MOST STATES IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
INFLATION. THE MOST OBVIOUS EXAMPLE IS THE RAPID
ESCALATION OF LAND PRICES WHICH IN 1973 WERE OF THE ORDER
OF 30 PER CENT AND 40 PER CENT IN THE MAJOR STATE CAPITALS**
OUR CONCLUSION THEREFORE IS THAT VIGOROUS AND
DECISIVE ACTION IS NEEDED NOW AND IN THE MONTHS AHEAD,
INCLUDING IN THE BUDGET, TO TURN BACK INFLATION.
IN THIS, EVERYONE WILL HAVE TO PLAY A PART,
THAT INCLUDES GOVERNME~ NTS.* THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
DO WHAT IT HAS TO DO, BOTH IN THE AREAS OF SPENDING AND
COST-PUSH INFLATION. I MENTION HERE IN RELATION TO THE
LATTER THAT I HAVE ALREADY SET UP AN INTERDEPARTMENTAL
COMMITTEE, UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF MY OWN DEPARTMENT,
AND INCLUDING THE DEPARTMENTS OF THE TREASURY AND LABOUR,
TO PREPARE A REPORT FOR THE CONSIDERATION OF MINISTERS ON
THE VERY IMPORTANT CONFERENCE CALLED BY MR JUSTICE MOORE
TO CONSIDER METHODS OF WAGE FIXATION,
TODAY, HOWEYVER, WE ARE CONSIDERING ISSUES
RELATING TO GOVERNM4ENT SPENDING. AS I HAVE SAID,
GOVERNMENT SPENDING IS NOT MORE INFLATIONARY THAN PRIVATE
SPENDING, AS SOME OF OUR WILDER CRITICS SEEM TO ALLEGE.
BUT NEITHER IS IT LESS INFLATIONARY, IN ORDER TO HELP
BREAK INFLATIONARY EXPECTATIONS, WE MUST NOW SLOW THE RATE
OF INCREASE IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING. SOME PHASING DOWN
OR DEFERMENT OF SOME EXPENDITURE PLANS MUST OCCUR.' / 8 
AS REGARDS EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS WHICH ARE WHOLLY OUR
OWN RESPONSIBILITY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE LOOKING CLOSELY AT
ALL SUCH PROGRAMS AS IT PROCEEDS WITH PREPARATION FOR ITS
1974-75 BUDGET. WE ARE ANXIOUS TO SEE THAT THERE IS CONTINUED
SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS WITH THlE PROGRAMS WE HAVE BEEN IMPLEMENTING,
ESPECIALLY IN SUCH VITALLY IMPORTANT FIELDS AS EDUCATION AND
lEALTW.* AT THE SAME TIME, WE RECOGNISE THAT IT WILL NOT BE
FEASIBLE, IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES,-T0 ACHIEVE IN THE COMING
FINANCIAL YEAR THE RATES OF PROGRESS WITH ALL THESE PROGRAMS TO
WHICH EARLIER PLANNING AND EXPECTATIONS HAVE BEEN PITCHED.
WITH A NUMBER OF THM, WE WILL HAVE TO ACCEPT A SLOWER RATE OF
IMPLEMENTATION THAN WE HAD BEEN HOPING FOR. AS PART OF THE
BATTLE TO CONTAIN INFLATION WE WILL BE FOLLOWING A POLICY OF
RESTRAINT IN OUR OWN SPENDING. WE WILL ALSO BE LOOKING TO
THOSE OF OUR BUSINESS ENTERPRISES WHICH ARE NOT PAYING THEIR OWN
WAY TH1AT IS, WHOSE LOSSES ARE BEING IMPOSED ON THE TAXPAYER
TO LIFT THEIR CHARGES'. USERS MUST PAY MORE OF THE COSTS INVOLVEDM
FOR THE MOST PART, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
DECISIONS REGARDING EXENDITURE IN THE COMING YEAR ON PROGRAMS'
WHICH ARE WHOLLY ITS RESPONSIBILITY MUST NECESSARILY AWAIT THE
1974-75 BUDGET. BUT I ANNOUNCE NOW CERTAIN DECISIONS WHICH
ILLUSTRATE, BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, WHAT OUR APPROACH WILL BE.
THE POST OFFICE WE INTEND TO KEEP THE BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE POST
OFFICE IN 1974/ 75 TO NOT MORE THAN THE ACTUAL AMOUNT ALLOCATED
IN 1973/ 74. THIS WILL MEAN TWO THINGS'. FIRST, THE POST
OFFICE'S CAPITAL PROGRAM WILL HAVE TO BE REDUCED BELOW THE LEVEL
THAT'HAD BEEN INDICATED BY THE POST OFFICE'S FORWARD PLANNING' 
SECOND, EVEN TO FINANCE SUCH A REDUCED PROGRAM IT WILL BE
NECESSARY FOR THE POST OFFICE TO RAISE SUBSTANTIAL
ADDITIONAL REVENUE BY WAY OF INCREASED CHARGES. THE
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE IS AT PRESENT OPERATING AT VERY
MARGINAL RATES OF PROFITABILITY, AND THE POSTAL SERVICE IS
PRESENTLY RUNNING AT A LOSS WHICH WOULD BE OVER $ 70 MILLION
IN 1974/ 75. POSTAL AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS CHARGES WILL
HAVE TO BE INCREASED SO THAT AS A GENERAL RULE THE PRICES
PAID BY USERS OF THE SERVICES WILL MORE TRULY REFLECT
COMMERCIAL COSTS. ONE EFFECT OF THIS WILL BE TO REDUCE
DEMAND FOR NEW TELEPHONE SERVICES, WHICH IS AT PRESENT
INFLATED BY THE LOW PRICES BEING CHARGED RELATIVE TO THE
COST OF PROVIDING THE SERVICES'.
TO ILLUSTRATE THE SIGNIFICANCE OF WHAT I HAVE
SAID, I POINT OUT THAT ADVANCES TO THE POST OFFICE REPRESENT
THE LARGES~ T SINGLE ITEM OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
ON ECONOMIC SERVICES. ADVANCES TO THE POST OFFICE IN 1973/ 74
WILL AMOUNT TO $ 385 MILLION OUT OF A TOTAL EXPENDITURE ON ALL
FORMS OF TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS OF ABOUT $ 860 MILLION.
AS I HAVE-INDICATED, IT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR THE
POST OFFICE TO RAISE SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONAL REVENUE BY WAY OF
INCREASEr CHARGES. THIS IS ENTIRELY CONSISTENT WITH ONE OF
THE FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE AUSTRALIAN
POST OFFICE ( THE VERNON COMMISSION) NAMELY, THAT AN
OBJECTIVE IN SETTING CHARGES FOR POSTAL AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES SHOULD BE TO RECOUP FROM USERS THE COST OF THE
SERVICES AND ALSO TO PROVIDE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER FUNDS
GENERATED INTERNALLY SUCH AS DEPRECIATION AND PROVISIONS,
AMOUNTS EQUAL TO 50 PERCENT OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE IN EACH
YEARO 00/ 10 
1O.
CAPITAL WORKS AND OTHER CAPITrAL EXPENDITURE:
WE INTEND TO APPLY MOST STRINGENT RESTRAINTS ON
CAPITAL WORKS AND OTHER CAPITAL EXPENDITURE IN 1974-75 BY
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AUTHORITIES. THE
APPLICATION OF THESE RESTRAINTS WILL EXTEND TO PROJECTS IN
THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY AND THE NORTHERN TERRITORY,
WITH DUE RECOGNITION TO THE GOVERNMENT'S PRIORITIES IN THE
HEALTH AND EDUCATION AREAS. TILE FIELD Is A COMPLEX ONE AND WE
SHALL HAVE TO SORT OUT OUR PRIORITIES IN THE TIME AHEAD. AS
ONE SPECIFIC EXAMPLE, HOWEVER, I MENTION THAT IN THE CASE OF
CIVIL AVIATION CAPITAL WORKS WE SHALL IN 1974-75 HOLD ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE TO. NOT MORE THAN THE LEVEL OF EXPENDITURE. IN
1973-74. TO THAT END WE WILL BE TAKING ACTION TO SLOW DOWN
THE RATE OF DEVELOPMENT OF NEW AIRPORT WORKS. IN ADDITION, THE
CAPITAL WORKS PROGRAMS FOR CIVIL AVIATION IN THE YEAR 1974-75
WILL BE FRAMED ON THE BASIS OF THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISION TO
BE RECOVERING BY THE END OF FIVE YEARS 80 PER CENT OF THE
COST OF AIRPORT AND AIRWAY FACILITIES FROM THE USERS OF THOSE
FACILITIES. ACHIEVING THIS POLICY OBJECTIVE IS INVOLVING
MEETINGS WITH ALL SECTORS OF THE-AVIATION INDUSTRY, THE
MOST RECENT OF WHICH WAS HELD LAST WEEK. I ALSO ANNOUNCE
THAT WE SHALL LIMIT EXPENDITURE IN 1974-75 ON THE OPERATION
OF AIRPORT AND AIRWAY FACILITIES TO THE SAME REAL LEVEL AS
IN 1973-74. 
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICES SUBSIDY SCHEME:
THIS SCHEME AT PRESENT OPERATES TO KEEP THE
WHOLESALE PRICES OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS IN AREAS OUTSIDE
THE CAPITAL CITIES TO WITHIN 5 CENTS PER GALLON OF CAPITAL
CITY PRICES. THE SCHEME WOULD COST ABOUT $ 28 MILLION IN
1974-75. THE COOMBS TASK FORCE SUGGESTED THAT THE SUBSIDY
BE ABOLISHED, AND WE WOULD CERTAINLY HAVE BEEN ADOPTING THAT
SUGGESTION IN THE COMING BUDGET. WE SHALL IN FACT NOW ADOPT
IT WITHOUT FURTHER DELAY, WITH EFFECT FROM 1 AUGUST 1974.
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE:
IN 1974-75 WE INTEND TO APPLY A CEILING INCREASE
OF 2.6 PER CENT ON THE GROWTH OF FULL-TIME STAFF EMPLOYED
UNDER THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT. AFTER ALLOWANCE FOR AN
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF STAFF EXPECTED TO BE ON VARIOUS
FORMS OF LEAVE, THE CEILING INCREASE IN 1974-75 ON TOTAL
OPERATIVE STAFF EMPLOYED UNDER THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT
WILL BE 1 PER CENT.
THESE STAFF CEILINGS DO NOT OF COURSE TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT ANY TRANSFER OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES INTO OR OUT
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE.
THE FIGURE OF 2.6 PER CENT COMPARES WITH AN
AVERAGE COMPOUND GROWTH RATE FOR THE PERIOD JUNE 1962 TO
JUNE 1972 -THE LAST TEN YEARS OF LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY
GOVERNMENT -FOR FULL-TIME STAFF EMPLOYED UNDER THE PUBLIC
SERVICE ACT OF 3.87 PER CENT. / 12 
12.
THE STRINGENT RESTRAINT ON THE GROWTH OF STAFF
NUMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE WILL BE REFLECTED
NOT ONLY IN SALARY COSTS, BUT ALSO IN NON-SALARY DEPARTMENTAL
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
A SIMILAR LEVEL OF RESTRAINT WILL BE APPLIED TO
STAFF NUMBERS EMPLOYED BY AUTHORITIES THAT DO NOT COME
UNDER THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT.
DEFENCE PROGRAM: IN THE DEFENCE FIELD, FURTHER ECONOMIES WILL BE
ACHIEVED IN CIVILIAN MANPOWER. AS ANNOUNCED IN AUGUST 1973,
A MAJOR REDUCTION IN CIVILIAN MANPOWER IS BEING MADE IN THE
DEPARTMENTS OF DEFENCE AND SUPPLY DURING THE CURRENT YEAR
1973/ 74. THIS LARGE SAVING IS BEING ACHIEVED MAINLY By
ECONOMIES, AND THROUGH IMPROVED MANAGEMENT. IT HAS ALLOWED
RE-ALLOCATION OF AVAILABLE FUNDS TO HIGHER DEFENCE PRIORITIES
INCLUDING ESSENTIAL NEW FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENTS. PLANS
FOR THE 1974/ 75 BUDGET AS PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED IN DECEMBER
1973 ENVISAGE A FURTH-ER REDUCTION IN CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT IN
THE DEFENCE DEPARTMENT OF ABOUT 1500, EVEN THOUGH
LEGISLATION TO IMPLEMENT THE DEFENCE RE-ORGANISATION HAS BEEN
DELAYED BY THE PROROGUING OF PARL. IAMENT.
IN THE MUNITIONS FACTORIES, THE REDUCED SCALE OF
PRODUCTION NOW NECESSARY FOR DEFENCE PURPOSES WILL ALLOW THE
RELEASE TO TI'E CIVILIAN WORKFORCE OF A SUBSTANTIAL NUMBER OF
WORKERS INCLUDING MANY WITH SKILLS SCARCE IN THE PRESENT TIGHT
EMPLOYMENT SITUATION. THIS SURPLUS OF LABOUR OVER THAT ./ 13 
13.
ESSENTIAL TO PROVIDE THE SERVICES' REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNITIONS
IS NOT A NEW SITUATION BUT IS ONE WHICH SHOULD HAVE BEEN FACED
LONG AGO BY THE PREVIOUS COALITION GOVERNMENT. A SIMILAR BUT
MUCH LESS SEVERE SITUATION APPLIES IN THE R D ESTABLISHMENTS
AND TlIERE MAY BE A SMALL RESIDUAL PROBLEM IN THE SHORT TERM
AT WILLIAMSTOWN NAVAL DOCKYARD.
ANY REDUCTIONS IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT
WILL BE MADE AS FAR AS PRACTICAL BY NOT REPLACING THE NORMAL
WASTAGE OF PERSONNEL. RETRENCHMENTS WILL, HOWEVER, BECOME
NECESSARY IN CERTAIN AREAS FOR ONE THING TO KEEP THE RIGHT
SORT OF BALANCE IN EMPLOYMENT. WHERE DISMISSALS BECOME
NECESSARY THE GOVERNMENT WILL ENSURE THAT STEPS ARE TAKEN
TO HELP THE INDIVIDUAL CONCERNED TO MOVE INTO OTH-ER
EMPLOYMENT, INCLUDING SOME FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND
RETRAINING WHERE NECESSARY. I MIGHT ADD THAT THE GOVERNMENT
NOW HAS, FOR CONSIDERATION, A REPORT OF AN INTERDEPARTMENTAL
COMMITTEE, SETTING OUT GUIDELINES FOR ASSISTANCE FOR AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WHO BECOME REDUNDANT AN]) WOULD MAKE ITS
DECISION ON THE PROVISIONS OF THIS REPORT BEFORE DISMISSALS
TPKE PLACE. A REVIEW OF THE ARMY'S REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHT
OBSERVATION HELICOPTERS HAS BEEN COMPLETED AND THE PRODUCTION
PROGRAM WILL BE REDUCED FROM 75 TO 56 MILITARY AIRCRAFT.
AS A CONSEQUENCE PROPOSED ASSOCIATED PRODUCTION OF 116
HELICOPTERS WILL NOT NOW BE UNDERTAKEN. THE OVERALL SAVING
IN THE PROJECT WILL BE ABOUT $ 12 MILLION OVER THE NEXT FIVE / 14 
14.
YEARS. CONSEQUENTIAL EFFECTS ON EMPLOYMENT AT COMMONWEALTH
AIRCRAFT CORPORATION WILL BE EXAMINED IN THE CONTEXT OF AN
OVERALL RATIONALISATION OF THE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY.
I EMP111ASISE THAT THE FOREGOING ARE ONLY EXAMPLES
AND DO NOT CONSTITUTE A COMPREHIENSIVE LIST OF DECISIONS.
THAT MUST AWAIT THE PREPARATION OF THE 1974/ 75 BUDGET.
BUT TI-E EXAMPLES I HAVE GIVEN ARE, I BELIEVE, SUFFICIENT TO
DEMONSTRATE THE STRINGENCY OF THE APPROACH THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL BE TAKING AT THAT TIME.
AS REGARDS EXENDITUJRE PROPOSALS INVOLVING NEW
OR ADDITIONAL SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT TO THE STATES, WE WILL ALSO NEED TO APPLY STRICT
TESTS, BOTH AS TO HOW THE PROPOSALS MEASURE UP IN TERMS OF
NATIONAL INTERESTS AND AS TO TIMING, BEFORE WE CAN
CONTEMPLATE COMMITTING OURSELVES TO THEM.
I CAN, HOXEVrP., AT THIS POINT INDICATE OUR
PROPOSALS WITH RESPECT TO ROADS AND WELFARE HOUSING.
NO DOUBT YOU HAVE ALL SEEN THE BUREAU OF ROADS'
RECENT REPORT ON " ROADS IN AUSTRALIA". THIS RECOMMENDS
THlE PROVISION OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERMIENT ASSISTANCE FOR ROADS
OVER THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.
WE HAVE DECIDED HOWEVER TO RESTRICT THE PERIOD
OF THE NEXT ROAD ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION TO THREE ' YEARS.
OVER THE NEXT 18 MONTHS WE SHALL BE WORKING TO RATIONALISE
OUR SEPARATE ROAD AND URBAN TRANSPORT ASSISTANCE INTO A
CLOSELY CO-ORDINATED) AND INTEGRATED SET OF ARRANGEMENTS. 
AN IMPORTANT STEP IN THIS REGARD IS THE ACTION WE HAVE
ALREADY TAKEN TO COMBINE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S MAJOR
TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES UNDER ONE MINISTER AND WITHIN ONE
DEPARTMENT. THIS WILL FACILITATE EFFICIENT ALLOCATION OF
RESOURCES, BOTH BETWEEN THE VARIOUS TRANSPORT MODES AND
BETWEEN TRANSPORT AND OTHER AREAS OF INVESTMENT, AND WE
CAN NOW PROCEED MORE CERTAINLY TOWARDS THAT OBJECTIVE. MY
GOVERNMENT HOPES TO LEGISLATE BY THE END OF 1975 FOR A NEW
APPROACH TO TRANSPORT ASSISTANCE FOR THE STATES TO COMMENCE
IN JULY 1977. A PRINCIPAL AIM IN OUR INTENTION TO
LEGISLATE FOR THE 1977 TO 1980 PERIOD 18 MONTHS BEFORE ITS
COMMENCEMENT IS TO ASSIST YOU WITH YOUR FORWARD PLANNING.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE NEW ROADS ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION
WILL BE INTRODUCED IN THE FIRST SESSION OF THE NEW PARLIAMENT
AND WILL APPROPRIATE A TOTAL OF $ 1,120 MILLION AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS FOR ROADS
IN THE STATES. THIS IS LESS THAN THE AMOUNT OF $ 1,345 MILLION
THE BUREAU OF ROADS RECOMMENDED FOR THIS PERIOD; BUT THE
BUREAU'S REPORT MUST BE LOOKED AT IN A TOTAL ECONOMIC
CONTEXT AND IN THE LIGHT OF ALL OUR PRIORITIES RATHER THAN
IN TERMS OF ROADS OR TRANSPORT IN ISOLATION. THE $ 1,120
MILLION WILL BE MADE UP OF $ 348 MILLION FOR 1974-75,
$ 367 MILLION FOR 1975-76 AND $ 405 MILLION FOR 1976-77.
IN MY ELECTION POLICY SPEECH I ANNOUNCED THAT THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD DECIDED TO PRESS AHEAD WITH THE
CONSTRUCTION OF A NATIONAL ROADS SYSTEM IN THOSE AREAS WHICH / 16 
FALL WITHIN ITS OWN CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES AND
THAT, IN PARTICULAR, IT WOULD IN FUTURE TAKE RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE WHOLE COST OF CONSTRUCTING AND MAINTAINING THE
PRINCIPAL ROAD BETWEEN STATE CAPITALS AND OF EXPORT ROADS
TO AIRPORTS AND SEAPORTS. OUT OF THE TOTAL OF S1,120
MILLION PREVIOUSLY MENTIONED, WE WILL ALLOCATE A SUM OF
1400 MILLION OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS TO EMBARK ON THIS
MAJOR NEW INITIATIVE.
FULL DETAILS OF THE PROPOSED NEW PROGRAM OF
ASSISTANCE FOR ROADS WILL BE CONVEYED TO YOU SHORTLY.
IN DETERMINING THE OVERALL AMOUNT THAT WE-WOULD
BE ABLE TO MAKE AVAILABLE FOR ROADS WE HAVE, AS I INDICATED,
HAD TO TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION OTHER TRANSPORT PROGRAMS,
PARTICULARLY IN THE URBAN AREAS. WE SEE IMPROVED PUBLIC
TRANSPORT AS ESSENTIAL FOR IMPROVEMENT OF THE LOT OF OUR
CITY DWELLERS, AND WE PROPOSE TO PRESS ON WITH THE URBAN
PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROGRAMS WE HAVE INITIATED. THE
TREASURER STATED IN HIS BUDlGET SPEECH LAST YEAR THAT IT
COULD BE EXPECTED THAT OUR OUTLAYS IN THIS FIELD WILL
INCREASE RAPIDLY IN 1974-75 AND BEYOND AS THIS MAJOR NEW
CAPITAL WORKS PROGRAM GETS UNDER WAY. THAT PROSPECT STILL
HOLDS. WE ALSO SEE THlE RAILWAYS AS HAVING A VITAL ROLE IN
OUR ECONOMY, BUT THEY MUST BE MODERNISED AND MADE MORE
EFFICIENT. SO WE ALSO INTEND TO PRESS AHEAD WITH OUR
RAILWAY PROGRAMS. IN THIS REGARD, I RECALL THAT ONLY
RECENTLY I SIGNED AGREEMENTS WITH THE PREMIER OF SOUTH @ 17
16. 
17.
AUSTRALIA FOR THE NEW STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY LINE TO ALICE
SPRINGS AND ADELAIDE.
THE GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO ENSURE THAT LESS
PRIVILEGED FAMILIES IN OUR SOCIETY ARE NOT DENIED THE CHLANCE
TO LIVE IN ADEQUATE HOMES, AN) THAT MANY MORE LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES ARE GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO BUY HOMES OF THEIR
OWN. OUR PRESENT POLICIES ARE DIRECTED TO BRINGING ABOUT A
MORE BALANCED SITUATION IN THE HOUSING INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE.
THEY ARE DESIGNED BOTH TO EASE THE PRESSURE ON RESOURCES
AND THE CONSEQUENTIAL BIDDING UP OF COSTS AND PRICES IN
THE INDUSTRY AND TO MAKE ROOM FOR A MORE REASONABLE LEVEL
OF DWELLING CONSTRUCTION BY THE PUBLIC SECTOR. NOT ALL
THE STATES WERE ABLE, IN 1973-74, TO EFFECTIVELY USE THE
$ 218.5 MILLION ADVANCED TO THEM UNDER THE 1973 HOUSING
AGREEMENT. AS A RESULT, SOME MONEYS PROVIDED UNDER THE
AGREEMENT WERE NOT USED AT ALL AND WILL THEREFORE REMAIN
AVAILABLE F~ OR USE IN 1974-75.
SOME FUNDS WERE ALSO USED, IN 1973-74, AS IN
PREVIOUS YEARS, TO PURCHASE LAND FOR FUTURE USE BY STATE
HOUSING AUTHORITIES. IN THE YEAR AHEAD, HOWEVER, WE THINK
THAT ADVANTAGE SHOULD BE TAKEN OF THE EASIER CONDITIONS
LIKELY TO DEVELOP TO SWITCH THE BALANCE OF ACTIVITY FROM
LAND PURCHASE TOWARDS INCREASED BUILDING. AS PART OF THE
BATTLE AGAINST INFLATION MY GOVERNMENT HAS MADE AVAILABLE AND
IS OFFERING FUNDS TO YOU TO SET UP LAND COMMISSIONS TO
REDUCE LAND PRICES BY MAKING LAND AVAILABLE AT COST. WHILE 
18.
WE HAVE RECOGNISED THAT MONEY FOR WELFARE HOUSING SHOULD BE
MADE AVAILABLE THROUGH THE HOUSING AGREEMENT AT AN INTEREST
RATE OF ONLY 4 PER CENT, IT WOULD NOT BE APPROPRIATE FOR
THIS MONEY TO BE USED FOR THE PURCHASE AND DEVELOPM4ENT
OF LARGE ESTATES FOR SALE TO PEOPLE WHO WOULD NOT
QUALIFY UNDER THE MEANS TEST FOR WELFARE HOUSING. WE
LOOK FORWARD IN THE FUTURE TO THE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITIES
OBTAINING MOST, IF NOT ALL, OF THEIR LAND REQUIREMENTS
THROUGH THE LAND COMMISSIONS.
IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES WE ARE PROPOSING TO MAKE
ADVANCES OF $ 235 MILLION UNDER THE AGREEMENT IN 1974-75
IN ADDITION TO THE AMOUNT CARRIED FORWARD FROM 1973-74.
THIS WILL, IN FACT, MEAN A SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE IN THE
FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THE STATES FOR EXPENDITURE ON WELFARE
HOUSING. HOWEVER, IN VIEW OF THE LIMITATIONS WHICH THE
HOUSING AGREEMENT PROVIDES IN RESPECT OF THE FUNDS FOR
THE HOME BUILDERS ACCOUNT, IT IS PROPOSED TO DISCUSS WITH
TPE STATES AN AMENDMENT TO THE AGREEMENT WHICH WOULD
PERMIT A HIGHER PROPORTION OF AVAILABLE FUNDS TO BE
ALLOCATED TO THE HOME BUILDERS ACCOUNT WHEN CIRCUMSTANCES
WARRANT. WE THUS LOOK FORWARD IN 1974-75 TO THE COMPLETION
OF CONSIDERABLY MORE DWELLINGS IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR THAN IN
1973-74. BUT I SHOULD ALSO SAY THAT, IN THE LIGHT OF
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE AS THE YEAR UNFOLDS,
INCLUDING THE AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES FOR HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
AND THE ABILITY OF THE STATES TO PUT FURTHER FUNDS TO PRODUCTIVE
USE IN WELFARE HOUSING, WE STAND READY TO CONSULT FURTHER
WITH THE STATES ON THE PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL ADVANCES. / 19 
19.
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS MUST ALSO PLAY THEIR PARTS
IN BEATING INFLATION. MANY OF THE PREMIERS UNDERTOOK,
DURING THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN, TO CO-OPERATE WITH AN L-CP
GOVERNMENT, HAD THAT BEEN RETURNED, IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
INFLATION. THE FIGHT IS ON AND I HOPE THAT THE FULL
CO-OPERATION AND UNDERSTANDING OF THE STATE GOVERNN4ENTS
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE CONTROL OF LAND PRICES WILL BE
FORTHCOMING. IN 1973-74 TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES GREW
RAPIDLY. TAKING ALL FORMS OF PAYMENTS TO THE STATES
TOGETHER WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENTS' LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS,
THE INCREASE IS ESTIMATED AT OVER 20 PER CENT. EVEN
ALLOWING FOR THE EFFECTS OF INCREASES IN COSTS, THIS
REPRESENTS A VERY SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE.
THE CRUCIAL QUESTION, OF COURSE, IS THIS:
TO WHAT EXTENT HAVE THESE LARGE INCREASES IN FUNDS BEEN
TRANSLATED INTO REAL IMPROVEMENTS IN THE STANDARDS OF
STATE-PROVIDED SERVICES AND FACILITIES? IT SEEMS THAT,
PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELDS OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION,
RESOURCES HAVE BEEN OVERSTRETCHED AND INFLATION HAS EATEN
HEAVILY INTO THE MONEY SUMS AVAILABLE. BECAUSE OF
SHORTAGES OF'LABOUR AND MATERIALS IN THESE AREAS, THE STATES
AND THEIR AUTHORITIES HAVE IN SOME CASES BEEN UNABLE TO USE
ALL THE FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THEM.
THE PRESENT REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS
BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTS WERE 
ORIGINALLY SETTLED IN JUNE 19) 70 AND WERE INTENDED TO APPLY
OVER THE FIVE YEARS 1970-71 TO 1974-75. MY GOVERNMENT
ACCEPTS THE OBLIGATION TO REVIEW THE ARRANGEMENTS BEFORE
THE END OF 1974-75 WITH A VIEW TO DETERMINING WHAT CHANGES
IN THEM, IF ANY, SHOULD APPLY FROM 1975-76.
IN THE LIGHT OF WHAT I HAVE SAID ABOUT ACTION
PROPOSED IN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS,
WE HAVE GIVEN CLOSE ATTENTION TO WHAT WE CONSIDER IS BOTH
APPROPRIATE AN]) FEASIBLE BY WAY OF ADDITIONAL REVENUE
ASSISTANCE, AND SUPPORT FOR BORROWING PROGRAMS, FOR STATE
GOVERNMENTS. ON THE REVENUE SIDE, I SHOULD FIRST EXPRESS
OUR APPRECIATION OF THE MATERIAL YOU HAVE ALL PROVIDED ON
YOUR FINANCIAL POSITIONS THIS YEAR, AND YOUR PROSPECTIVE
BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN 1974-75.
ALREADY, BOTH AS A RESULT OF THE OPERATION OF
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS FORMULA AND OF THE SPECIAL
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WHICH WE AGREED TO PROVIDE TO THE
STATES THIS YEAR, TOTAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS IN
1973-74 ARE ESTIMATED TO SHOW AN INCREASE ON 1972-73 OF
$ 208 ' MILLION. WE HAVE CONCLUDED THAT THERE IS NO CASE
FOR ANY ADDITIONAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE THIS YEAR. WHILE
MOST STATES APPEAR LIKELY TO INCUR BUDGET DEFICITS THIS
YEAR, THE EXTENT OF THESE APPEARS TO US TO BE MANAGEABLE
GIVEN THE OVERALL ACCUMULATED POSITIONS ON REVENUE AND
./ 21 
21.
LOAN ACCOUNTS COMBINED AS AT 30 JUNE NEXT.
FOR 1974-75, THE OUTLOOK, AS PRESENTLY REVEALED
BY THE INFORMATION PROVIDED, IS FOR SUBSTANTIAL DEFICITS IN
THE ABSENCE OF ANY NEW TAXES OR CHARGES, AND BEFORE ALLOWING
FOR WAGE INCREASES THAT CANNOT BE FORESEEN BUT WHICH WILL
OCCUR THROUGH THE YEAR. IT IS HIGHLY RELEVANT THAT A
MAJOR ELEMENT IN THE PRESENT AND PROSPECTIVE BUDGETARY
POSITIONS OF THE STATES IS TO BE FOUND IN THE LOSSES
BEING MADE BY THEIR BUSINESS UNDERTAKINGS PARTICULARLY
THEIR RAILWAYS. HOWEVER THAT MAY BE, WE ARE LOOKING TO
THE STATES TO CLOSE THOSE GAPS FROM THEIR OWN RESOURCES.
THOSE RESOURCES, OF COURSE, INCLUDE VERY
SUBSTANTIAL INCREASES IN THE GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS-PROVIDED
UNDER THE FORMULA. EVEN SO, WE REALISE THAT THE CLOSING
OF THE STATES' PROSPECTIVE REVENUE GAPS WILL NOT BE EASY.
NOR HAVE MANY OF THE DECISIONS WE HAVE HAD TO TAKE DURING
THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS BEEN EASY. DECISIONS TO
TERMINATE THE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY, TO PHASE OUT THE
SUBSIDY ON THE PRODUCTION OF DAIRY PRODUCTS, TO
TERMINATE THE INVESTMENT ALLOWANCES, TO REDUCE TARIFFS, TO
REVALUE THE CURRENCY NONE OF THESE DECISIONS WAS EASY.
WE TOOK THEM BECAUSE THE PREVIOUSLY PREVAILING SITUATION
IN EACH CASE REPRESENTED A DISTORTION OF THE ECONOMY AWAY
FROM THE PUBLIC INTEREST GENERALLY AND TOWARDS A SECTIONAL
INTEREST. WE ACTED IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST; AND WE LOOK 
22.
TO THE STATE GOVERNMENTS TO DO LIKEWISE WITHIN THEIR OWN
DOMAINS. FOR EXAMPLE, A MOMENT AGO, I REFERRED TO THE
LOSSES OF STATE RAILWAYS. LET ME ADD A FEW WORDS.
UNDER OUR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROGRAM-AND
IN OTHER WAYS, WE WILL BE ENDEAVOURING TO HELP IMPROVE
AUSTRALIA' S RAILWAYS. WE HOPE YOU WILL COMPLEMENT OUR
EFFORTS BY LOOKING CAREFULLY AT THE OPERATING PROCEDURES
AND EXPENSES OF YOUR RAILWAYS. WE WOULD BE PREPARED TO
PROVIDE FUNDS FOR SUCH INVESTIGATIONS THROUGH OUR
PROPOSED TRANSPORT RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
AT THE PRESENT TIME THE STATE RAILWAY SYSTEMS
ARE INEFFICIENT, OUTDATED AND FACING ENORMOUS DEFICITS.
THIS IS WHY I OFFERED TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
RAILWAYS OF ANY STATE THAT WAS PREPARED TO TRANSFER
THEM. THAT OFFER STILL STANDS AND WE WOULD HOPE THAT IN
THE INTERESTS OF EFFICIENT TRANSPORT THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA
THE GOVERNMENTS OF VICTORIA AND QUEENSLAND WILL
RECONSIDER THEIR DECISIONS NOT TO DISCUSS THIS MATTER
WITH US. I HAVE SEEN RECENT NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF STATEMENTS
BY MR MORRIS, N. S. W. MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT, THAT HIS
RAILWAY SYSTEM WILL HAVE A DEFICIT THIS YEAR OF
$ 126 MILLION. TO OVERCOME THIS PROBLEM HE INDICATED IT
WOULD BE NECESSARY TO ATTRACT MORE BUSINESS AND SEVERELY
RATIONALISE RAIL OPERATIONS WHICH ARE NOT SOCIALLY OR / 23 
23.
ECONOMICALLY VIA. BLE AT T~ lE SA. ME TIME MR MORRIS
PLEDGED THAT THIS WOULD NOT INVOLVE THE SACKING OR
RETRENCHMENT OF STAFF. I B3ELIEVE THIS IS A STEP IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION. RAILWAY DEFICITS OF THIS MAGNITUDE ARE
UNACCEPTABLE AT ANY TIME BUT MORE PARTICULARLY SO IN THE
PRESENT CLIMATE.
WHAT I HAVE SAID EARLIER BOILS DOWN TO SAYING THAT,
WHILE WE DO NOT INTEND TO PROVIDE ANY ASSISTANCE OVER AND
ABOVE THAT ALREADY COMMITTED, WE ARE STANDING BY OUR
PRESENT COMMITMENTS. ONE OF THESE PRESENT COMMITMENTS BY WHICH WE
STAND IS TO HELP ALLEVIATE THE EFFECTS OF NATURAL
DISASTERS. THESE CAN THROW UNEXPECTED FINANCIAL BURDENS
ON THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES. I WROTE TO THE
PREMIERS EARLIER THIS YEAR SETTING OUT OUR POLICY IN THIS
AREA. I REAFFIRM THAT POLICY. IT PROVIDES VERY REAL
PROTECTION FOR THE STATES AGAINST WHAT COULD OTHERWISE
BE INTOLERABLE FINANCIAL BURDENS FOR THEM. IN ILLUSTRATION
OF THIS, I POINT OUT THAT WE HAVE LEGISLATED FOR PAYMENT
OF UP TO $ 71.5 MILLI-ON TO QUEENSLAND AND NEW SOUTH WALES
FOR RELIEF AND RESTORATION MEASURES FOLLOWING THE FLOODS
IN THOSE STATES EARLIER THIS YEAR, AND HAVE ALREADY
PROVIDED SOME $ 20 MILLION OF THIS. THIS ASSISTANCE IS,
OF COURSE, IN ADDITION TO THE QUITE LARGE COSTS OF MAKING
AVAILABLE MEMBERS OF THE ARMED SERVICES AND THE CIVIL
DEFENCE ORGANISATION AND THEIR EQUIPMENT FOR EMERGENCY / 24 
24.
RESCUE AND RELIEF OPERATIONS.
I MENTIONED EARLIER THE ADJUSTMENTS WHICH WE
MADE TO GENERAL PURPOSE FUNDS PROVIDED TO THE STATES IN
1973-74 TO OFFSET THE COSTS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
BUDGET AND THE GAINS TO THE STATES' BUDGETS, RESULTING
FROM OUR NEW OR EXPANDED COMMITMENTS IN THE FIELDS OF
WELFARE HOUSING AND TERTIARY EDUCATION. THESE ADJUSTMENTS
WERE MADE IN PURSUANCE OF A GENERAL PRINCIPLE WHICH
MIGHT, IN SHORTHAND TERMS, BE REFERRED TO AS THE
" OFFSETS PRINCIPLE". AND WHICH I OUTLINED IN MY OPENING
SPEECH AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE LAST YEAR. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS FIRMLY COMMITTED TO THIS PRINCIPLE
AND WILL PURSUE ITS APPLICATION WHEREVER APPROPRIATE. I
HAVE INFORMED PREMIERS OF OUR INTENTION TO DO SO IN
RESPECT OF INITIATIVES WE ARE TAKING IN THE FIELDS OF
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS AND ASSISTANCE FOR DESERTED WIVES, AND
I EXPECT THAT FURTHER CASES COULD ARISE AS WE DEVELOP OUR
POLICIES IN OTHER AREAS.
IN CONSIDERING THE SIZE OF THE LOAN COUNCIL
BORROWING PROGRAMS* WE COULD SUPPORT, WE HAVE BEEN VERY
CONSCIOUS THAT MANY OF THE PROJECTS BOTH THOSE ALREADY
UNDER WAY AND NEW PROJECTS PROPOSED WHICH THE BORROWING
PROGRAMS SUBMITTED BY THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES
WOULD COVER WOULD BE VERY DESIRABLE. INDEED, PROGRESS
WITH MANY OF THEM IS A NECESSARY INGREDIENT FOR
ACHIEVEMENT OF OUR OBJECTIVES IN SUCH VITALLY IMPORTANT 
AREAS AS EDUCATION, HEALTH, URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
AND URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT GENERALLY. WE WILL
BE PROVIDING SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASED FUNDS IN THE COMING
FINANCIAL YEAR, BY WAY OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS,
UNDER THE NEW PROGRAMS WE HAVE INITIATED IN THESE AREAS,
AND WE WILL BE AIMING TO PRESS AHEAD WITH THESE IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES.
WE HAVE ALL RECOGNISED THAT CERTAIN ITEMS
NAVE AN INDISPUTABLE PRIORITY AND URGENCY. NONE OF USCAN
DOUBT THAT IT IS ONE OF OUR MOST PRESSING OBLIGATIONS
TO INCREASE THE SUPPLY OF SERVICE) LAND FOR PROSPECTIVE
HOME BUILDERS. THE PRICE OF LAND FOR RESIDENTIAL
BUILDING MUST BE REDUCED. THERE . IS NO DISPUTE THAT A
SUSTAINED COLLABORATIVE EFFORT IS REQUIRED TO ELIMINATE
THE SEWERAGE BACKLOG IN OUR MtkJOR CITIES AND TOWNS. IT
IS SURELY NOT A MATTER.-OF DE--ATE THIAT OUR INADEQUATE
PUBLIC TRANSPORT'SYSTEMS NEED IMM1EDIATE IMPROVEMENT.
ON ALL OF THESE MATTERS THE OBJECTIVES OF OUR
RESPECTIVE GOVERNMENTS ARE EVIDENTLY IN HARMONY. OUR
MUTUAL ASSESSMENT OF PRIORITIES SHOULD BE REFLECTED IN
THlE WIAY W4E SPEND THE FUNDS AVAILABLE. WHERE WE HAVE
PROVIDED ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO OVERCOME A BACKLOG SITUATION,
SUCH AS EXISTS WITH RESPECT TO SEWERAGE AND URBAN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT, THEN I AM SURE THAT YOU WILL WANT TO MAINTAIN
YOUR OWN EFFORT IN THESE FIELDS.
AGAINST TIHAT BACKGROUND, WE ARE PREPARED TO
SUPPORT SOME INCREASE IN BOTHY GOVERNMENT AND " LARGER AUTNORITY" ./ 26 
26.
BORROWINGS. IN BRIEF. OUR PROPOSAL FOR THE-BORROWING
PROGRAMS FOR STATE WORKS AND THE " LARGER" SEMI.-GOVERNMENTAL
BORROWING PROGRAMS IS THAT THE " BASIC" PROGRAMS BE INCREASED
IN 1974-75 BY 10 PER CENT. IN THE CASE OF THE BORROWING
PROGRAMS FOR STATE WORKS, THIS WOULD BE BEFORE TAKING
ACCOUNT OF THE OFFSETS FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION. IN
ADDITION, WE ARE PREPARED TO SUPPORT SPECIAL TEMPORARY
ALLOCATIONS FOR QUEENSLAND, IN 130TH THE GOVERNMENTAL
AND SEMI-GO'TEP. NENT AREAS, FOR FLOOD RESTORATION WORK,
AND ALSO CERTAIN ADDITIONS TO THE " LARGER" AUTHORITIES
PROGRAMS FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA A
PERMANENT ADDITION FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND A SPECIAL
TEMPORARY ADDITION FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
IN FIGURE TERMS, THIS MEANS THAT WE WILL
SUPPORT, SUBJECT TO THE USUAL CONDITIONS, A
STATE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM OF ' 935 MILLION. THIS CONSISTS
OF A " BASIC" PROGRAM OF i, 925 MILLION, WHICH IS AN
INCREASE OF 10 PER CENT BEFORE TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE
OFFSETS FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, PLUS A SPECIAL TEMPORARY
ALLOCATION FOR QUEENSLAND OF APPROXIMATELY $ 10 MILLION
FOR FLOOD RESTORATION WORK.
THE " LARGER" AUTHORITIES PROGRAM OF $ 636 MILLION
WHICH WE PROPOSE CONSISTS OF A " BASIC" PROGRAM OF
$ 610.5 MILLION AN INCREASE OF 10 PER CENT PLUS A
PERMANENT ADDITION OF $ 10 MILLION FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND
SPECIAL TEMPORARY ADDITIONS OF $ 9.6 MILLION FOR QUEENSLAND / 27 
27.
AND $ 6 MILLION FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IN ADDITION sTATES HAVE SUBMITTED
AN ESTIMATED " SMALLER" AUTHORITIES BORROWING REQUIREMENT
OF $ 162 MILLION, COMPARED WITH ESTIMATED ACTUAL RAISINGS
THIS YEAR OF ' 0143 MILLION; IN LINE WITH PAST PRACTICE,
NO OVERALL LIMIT lS PROPOSED FOR THESE BORROWINGS.
DETAILS WILL BE CONVEYED IN THE LOAN COUNCIL
MEETINGS. WHAT I HAVE SAID ABOUT ALL THESE PROGRAMS,
WHETHER OURS OR THE STATES, HAS BEEN AGAINST THE SETTING
THAT I MENTIONED EARLY IN MY STATEMENT THAT GOVERNMENT
SPENDING MUST PLAY ITS PART IN THE POLICY OF RESTRAINT.
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THIS WILL BE ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE
PREMIERS AS IT IS BY US.
HAVING SAID THAT, I WANT TO TURN FINALLY TO
WHAT I SAID IN CONCLUDING MY OPENING ADDRESS TO THE
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE LAST YEAR.
I EXPRESSED THE HOPE THEN " THAT THIS WILL BE
-BOTH THE LAST OF THE OLD-STYLE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND
THE FIRST OF A NEW TYPE".
I SAID THEN, AND STILL BELIEVE, THAT OUR EXISTING
STRUCTURES ARE INADEQUATE FOR " TRULY CONSTRUCTIVE, TRULY
CO-OPERATIVE FEDERALISM".
DURING THE PAST 12 MONTHS WE HAVE-WRITTEN TO EACH
OTHER IN GREATER DEPTH AND BREADTH THAN, I BELIEVE IT WOULD
./ 28 
28.
BE TRUE TO SAY, PRIME MINISTERS AND PREMIERS HAVE DONE AT
ANY TIME SINCE FEDERATION. OUR OFFICERS HAVE MET ON
MANY OCCASIONS AND SO ALSO HAVE OUR MITNISTERIAL COLLEAGUES.
THERE ARE MANY AREAS WHERE WE HAVE FOUND
DlFFERENCES, BUT THERE ARE MANY MORE IN WHICH WE HAVE
QUICKLY BEEN ABLE TO REACH AGREEMENT. AND I PAY TRIBUTE
TO ALL OF YOU FOR WHAT YOU HAVE DONE IN HELPING US IN
THE NEW OUTREACHES OF GOVERNMENT TO SERVE THE PEOPLE
THROUGH COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ANI THE
LIKE. I LOOK TO CONTINUING CLOSE CONTACT AND
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN US. SUCH CONTACT AND CO-OPERATION
EXTENDSACROSS THE FIELDS OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, HOUSING,
TRANSPORT, LAND, THE ENVIRONMENT AND URBAN IMPROVEMENT
AS WELL AS THE IMPORTANT AREAS OF MINING AND OF ABORIGINAL
DEVELOPMENT. IF WE ARE TO MAKE PROGRESS TOWARDS A COW-ION
UNDERSTANDING AND ATTITUDES TOWARDS NATIONAL PRIORITIES,
IT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR US TO MAINTAIN REGULAR CONTACT.
I LOOK TO CONSULTATION EITHER AMONG OURSELVES OR, WITH
OUR AGREEMENT, AMONG THOSE OF OUR COLLEAGUES WHO ARE
CARRYING THE MAIN RESPONSIBILITY, OR AT OFFICER LEVEL.
ONE PARTICULAR AREA I HAVE IN MIND IS THE
WELFARE AND ENVIRONMENT OF THOSE WHO LIVE IN OUR CITIES,
AND PARTICULARLY OUR GREAT CAPITALS. WE WILL BE PROPOSING
THAT MINISTERS AND OFFICIALS DEVOTE THEIR ENERGIES DURING
THE REST OF THIS YEAR TO A RENEWED CO-OPERATIVE ATTEMPT
/ 29 
29.
AT CLARIFYING ISSUES ON WHICH CO-OPERATIVE ACTION IS
ESSENTIAL AND ADVISING APPROPRIATE PROGRAMS.
LET US DEMONSTRATE TO THE PEOPLE WHOM WE ALL
SERVE THAT WE CAN TRANSCEND THE DIFFERENCES WHICH
SEPARATE US AND SEEK TOGETHER A COMMON BASIS FOR ACTION
ON ISSUES THAT AFFECT EVERY CITIZEN. 



AUST RALIAL
L PRIME MINISTER 7 June 1974
Press Statement No. 261
MESSAGES TO ISRAELI LEADERS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today that he had sent messages to the new Israeli
Prime Minister, Mr Rabin and to the outgoing Prime Minister,
Mrs Meir. In his message to Mrs Meir the Prime Minister
praised her for her leadership of Israel during a difficult
period of its history and in particular for the negotiation of
disengagement agreements with Egypt and Syria.
In his message of congratulations to Mr Rabin,
the Prime Minister expressed the hope that the disengagement
agreements would lead to a just and lasting peace.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUSTRAL IA
PRIME MINISTER June 1974
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 263
NITROGENOUS FERTILISERS SUBSIDY
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, M. P."
announced today that legislation extending the Nitrogenous
Fertilisers Subsidy Act until 31 December 1975 would be introduced
into Parliament later this year. Mr Whitlam said that this action
was in accordance with the Government's commitment to continue
the present subsidy pending a report on the matter from the
Industries Assistance Commission.
Mr Whitlam said that under the Industries Assistance
Commission Act,+ assistance could not be continued beyond
31 December 1975 in the absence of a report from the Commission.
Mr Whitlam said the Industries Assistance Commission
had been asked to advise on the amount and duration of any
subsidy and the consequences of limiting any such assistance to
a maximum tonnage per farmer.
Under the present subsidy scheme the subsidy is paid
at the rate of $ 78.74 per tonne of contained nitrogen. It is
paid on nitrogenous fertilisers manufactured and sold for use in
Australia and in certain circumstances on imported nitrogenous
fertilisers, provided the full benefit is passed on to the user.
Subsidy payments in 1972/ 73 amounted to $ 13.1 million.
The Government recognised the regional importance of
nitrogenous fertilisers to sugar producers, horticulture and
sections of other rural industries.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government's decision on
assistance beyond 31 December 1975 would be taken after receiving
the Commission's report which has been requested by September 1975.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



4AUS RL AL June 1974
Press Statement NO. 264
THE DUKE OF GLOUCESTER
Throughout his long life the Duke of Gloucester
showed a sense of duty worthy of his high station and
royal position. He had close links with Australia
over the last half-century. He represented his father,
King George V, at the 150th Anniversary of the
foundation of Melbourne. In 1945, Prime Minister
Curtin sought and secured the appointment of the
Duke of Gloucester as Governor-General of Australia.
He remained with us for two years. His last visit
to Australia was to represent his family at the
Anniversary of Anzac.
On behalf of the Australian people I have sent
a message of our deepest sympathy to the Queen on the
death of her uncle.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER 11 June 1974
Press Statement No. 265
NEW MINISTRY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said that since
the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party had re-elected the
whole ministry, he had proposed to the Governor-General
that the Ministry continue in office with only such
changes as were necessary to take account of the defeat
of the Minister for Immigration, Mr Grassby, and changes
in administrative arrangements.
The Prime Minister said that he had seen the
Governor-General and that with his agreement he was now
making known details of the Ministry and of administrative
changes which would be submitted to the Governor-General
tomorrow. The Ministry changes will be
Dr. Cairns becomes Deputy Prime Minister as well
as Minister for Overseas Trade
Senator Wriedt becomes Minister for Agriculture
instead of Minister for Primary Industry
Mr. Cameron becomes Minister for Labor and
Immigration instead of Minister for Labour
Senator Wheeldon becomes Minister for Repatriation
and'-Compensation
Mr Bishop becomes Postmaster-General
Mr Enderby becomes Minister for Manufacturing
Industry, instead of Minister for Secondary
Industry and Minister for Supply.
There are no specific responsibilities attaching
to the position of Deputy Prime Minister. However, the
Prime Minister said that in recognition of the special
interests of Dr. Cairns in the economic area, the Priorities
Review Staff would in future report to him and the proposed
Adjustment Assistance Agency would be responsible to him.
/ 2
I 
-2-
Senator Wriedt becomes Minister for Agriculture
rather than Minister for Primary Industry at his own
specific request. The functions of his Department will
remain unaltered but the change in name recognises
practice overseas and in most Australian States. Mr Ives
will continue to be Secretary of the Department.
Mr Cameron will hold the new portfolio of Labor and
Immigration. To his existing functions as Minister for
Labour will be added control of assisted migration.
In this way, it will be possible to ensure that migrants
are brought to Australia only when suitable jobs are
available and in a way that will ensure welcome and
understanding from unions and management. Other Immigration
functions will also be undertaken for the time being
by Mr Cameron but will later be transferred to such
Departments as Foreign Affairs, Education and Social
Security. Mr Whitlam recalled that Mr Cameron had served as
Opposition Shadow Minister for Immigration.
Dr Ian Sharp, Secretary to the Department of Labour,
will become Secretary to the new Department. Mr R. E. Armstrong,
Secretary to the Department of Immigration, will become
special adviser to the Minister and the new Department on
immigration matters.
Following his election as the only new Minister,
Senator Wheeldon becomes Minister for Repatriation and
Compensation. As such, his functions will be wider than
those of the former Minister for Repatriation in that
this function is now seen as part of a wider total function
of compensation for deserving groups in the community.
The purpose of creating the new Department is to
transform the old Department of Repatriation into a more
comprehensive whole. There is no question of abolishing
the Department: it will be expanded, and there will be
no diminution in the care and concern for returned servicemen
only extension of the functions of the Department to cover
all aspects of compensation.
The Repatriation Commission will continue to operate
as at present, under the Chairmanship of Mr Kingsland, who
will be appointed head of the new Department of Repatriation
and Compensation. The compensation function will include
such matters as Commonwealth employees compensation,
seamen's compensation, natural disasters, air accidents,
the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation and Defence Service
Homes Loans Insurance and the proposed Australian Government
Insurance Office. 
r .7 -3-
A new responsibility of the Minister and his
Department will be to co-ordinate action needed to put into
effect the recommendations of the Woodhouse Committee on
National Rehabilitation and Compensation. The report of
the Committee is expected by the end of the month.
Senator Bishop will become the new Postmaster-General.
He takes this portfolio from Mr Bowen and will be responsible
for presiding over the establishment of the two new Commissions
the Postal Commission and the Telecommunications Commission
proposed by the Royal Commission on the Post Office under
Sir James Vernon.
Mr Enderby becomes Minister for Manufacturing
Industry in place of his former portfolios of Secondary
Industry and Supply. The new name given to this Ministry
reflects the addition to it of the manufacturing functions
of the Department of Supply.
The Prime Minister said that the new head of the
Department of Manufacturing Industry would be Mr N. S. Currie,
at present head of the Department of Supply. The
Department of Supply will be abolished and most of its
functions will be included in the new Department of
Manufacturing Industry.
Responsibility for the proposed Australian Government
Purchasing Commission, which will be set up following
recommendations to this effect from the Committee on
Government Procurement under the Chairmanship of
Sir Walter Scott, will be with the Special Minister of
State, Mr Bowen. 



AUS! HALIA
PRIME MINISTER 12 JUNE 19711
Press Statement No. 266
SCREENING OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT PROPOSALS
In his 29 April Policy Speech the Prime Minister said
that the Government would proceed with the further definition
of guidelines for foreign investment in Australia and would
extend the present systems of surveillance into a general
screening process under the co-ordination of the Treasurer.
Mr Whitlam today announced the establishment of new
machinery as part of the development of more extensive
systems of surveillance by the Government of foreign investment
in Australia. A new interdepartmental committee is to be estalished
to examine and provide advice on foreign investment proposals.
which come under notice through the exchange control mechanism
and do not involve the takeover of Australian businesses.
The new committee will report to the Treasurer and
will comprise representatives of the Treasury, the Department of
the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Department of Overseas Trade,
the Department of Minerals and Energy, the Department Manufacturing
Industry and the Reserve Bank. Representatives of other
departments will be co-opted to the committee as appropriate in
the examination of particular proposals.
The new committee will thus parallel and complement
the existing Committee on Foreign Takeovers. Like that committee,
its functions will be purely advisory.
The establishment of the new committee will not affect
the existing procedures under which applications for exchange
control approval for individual foreign investment proposals
are processed through the Reserve Bank.
Mr Whitlam added that, in addition to~ reporting on
foreign investment proposals arising through the exchange control
mechanism, the new committee will be asked to bring forward, for
the Government's consideration, detailed proposals for the
screening of foreign investment activities which do not involve
exchange control approvals for example, investment proposals
which would be financed by foreign interests from funds available
to them from Australian sources. 
-2
" For the AAA to urge greater spending on rbads
demonstrates that it is living in the past.
" All the beautiful-looking freeways in the world won't
stop cities from finally choking in atmospheric pollution and
' seizing' in the streets from vehicle congestion. Sydney and
Melbourne have been recording heavier-than-ever atmospheric
pollution figures recently and fast, comfortable and economical
public transport is the only alternative to the disaster that
befell Los Angeles.
" There. the building of more and more freeways simply
encouraged greater use of cars until the point was reached where
Los Angeles achieved doubtful fame for the size and density of
its smog problem which brought with it respiratory and other
complaints on a large scale.
" Now, the city is turning away from the freeway, and
the automobile, and reverting to urban public transport. In
this it is doing what most major cities Of the world had done
already. " Simply pouring out money for roads is outdated. if
we had unlimited funds for them we would be pointing our cities
down the same road to disaster as Los Angeles." Mr Jones added.
CANBERRA 12 JUNE 1974 
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
Second Whitlam Ministr'y
1. Prime Minister
2. Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Overseas Trade
3. Minister for Minerals and
Energy
4. Minister for Social Security
Leader of the Government in
the Senate, Attorney-General
and Minister for Customs and
Excise
6. Minister for Foreign Affairs
7. Treasurer
8. Minister for Services and
Property and Leader of the
House
9. Minister for the Media and
Manager of Government
Business in the Senate
Minister for Defence
11. Minister for Agriculture
12. Minister for Northern
Development and Minister
for the Northern Territory
13. Minister for Labor and
Immigration
14. Minister for Education
Special Minister of State
and Minister Assisting the
Prime Minister in Matters
Relating to the Public
Service
16. Minister for Repatriation
and Compensation
17. Minister for Urban and
Regional Development
18. Postmaster-General
19. Minister for Housing and
Construction THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
THE HON. JIM CAIRNS, M. P.
THE HON. R. F. X. CONNOR, M. Pb
THE HON. BILL HAYDEN, M. P.
SENATOR THE HON. LIONEl MURPHY, Q. C.
SENATOR THE HON. DCN WILLESEE
THE HON. FRANK CREAN, M. P.
THE HON. F. M. DALY, M. P.
SENATOR THE HON. DOUGLAS McCLELLAND
THE HON. L. H. BARNARD, M. P.
SENATOR THE HON. K. S. WRIEDT
THE HON. REX PATTERSON, M. P.
THE HON. CLYDE R. CAMERON, M. P.
THE HON. KIM E. BEAZLEY, M. P.
THE HON. LIONEL F. BOWEN, M. P.
SENATOR TIlE HON. J. M. WHEELDON
THE HON. TOM UREN, M. P.
SENATOR THE HON. R. BISHOP
THE HON. LES JOHNSON, M. P. 
-2-
Minister for Transport
21. Minister for Health
22. Minister for Manufacturing
Industry
23. Minister for the Capital
Territory
24. Minister for the Environment
and Conservation
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs
26. Minister for Science,
Minister Assisting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs
in Matters Relating to
Papua New Guinea and Minister
Assisting the Minister for
Defence
27. Minister for Tourism and
Recreation and Vice-President
of the Executive Council. THE HON. C. K. JONES, M. P.
THE HON. D. N. EVERINGHAM, M. P.
THE HON. KEP ENDERBY, M. P.
THE HON. GORDON BRYANT, M. P.
THE HON. MOSS CASS, M. P.
SENATOR THE HON. J. L. CAVANAGH
THE HON. W. L. MORRISON, M. P.
THE HON. F. E. STEWART, M. P.
JvF: / 1 7k 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
WEDNESDAY 12 JUNE 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, I am sorry to keep you
waiting but I have been out at Government House with the rest-of
the ministers for the swearing-in of the new minister and the
swearing in of ministers who have new portfolios or changed
portfolios. The significance of the ministerial changes is
briefly that two departments have been abolished and one department
has been quite transformed, immensely exalted. I don't know
whether you noticed that a great amount of the work which has
hitherto been done by the Department of Supply, which has now been
abolished, will be done by the proposed Australian Government
Purchasing Commission which Sir Walter Scott's committee recommended.
Yesterday we asked the Parliamentary Draftsman to prepare the
general framework for that bill to establish the Australian
Government Purchasing Commission and also the Australian Postal
Commission and the Australian Telecommunications Commission, both
of which were recommended by Sir James Vernon's* Royal Commission;
and then a new statistics bill which has been recommended by
Professor Crisp's committee.
Es the Western Australian representative here?
I thought I might give a message to you. Yesterday, on page 3,
there was an article " Delay seen on Eyre sealing" and it
comprised a report of remarks by the Premier of Western Australia,
Sir Charles Court, concerning the Eyre highway....
Interjection: We published your reply this morning.
PRIME MINISTER: I believe it was published on page 5. You are doing
pretty good tor me in the West Australian; the troublt is not at
this end. But there are two particular comments which I might make
to this wider audience. One concerns this statement:
" The attitude of the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam,
to the Eyre Highway could further delay the sealing of the road"
also: " Sir Charles said: ' It was obvious Mr Whitlam
believed that Australia finished at Adelaide'."
In fact, my Government is the only one which has
produce a plan to see that the Eyre Highway is trafficable end-to-end.
Up till now it has been a very clear case of wasted government funds.
The old Commonwealth Aid Grants have been spent by Western Australia
in sealing the Western Australian part of the Eyre Highway but there
has not been any comparable expenditure on the South Australian part.
I don't criticise the South Australian Government for that because
the Eyre Highway, is clearly very much less important to South
Australia than it is to Western Australia. It is, however, a road
which the Australian Government can build and maintain under the
Constitution. The very first paragraph, of Section 51 of the
Constitution, which lists the Australian Parliament's responsibiliti~ s
says: "... trade and commerce with other countries and among the
States". It's in that context that my Government proposed to the
Premiers last Friday and also it was in accordance with what I put
in the Government's policy speech a month ago that we would build
and maintain the principal roads between the capitals. We are *~ 2 
entitled to do so; they are inter-state roads, they are part of
trade and commerce among the States. And accordingly, the definite
propQsal was made for this and other national roads in South Australia
ahd ptoposals were made to all the Premiers for national roads the
other national roads being those to-and from ports and airports
and between the Territories and the surrounding States.
I notice that Sir Charles Cutler, the Acting
Premier of New South Wales both the Sir Charles's seem to have
been a bit excited after Friday commented on the Hume Highway:
" This is' another example of the futility of continuing the
arrangements which have hitherto prevailed for our principal roads."
The Humne Highway is seventy miles too long, and it is too circuitous,
too steep, too narrow in many parts? there again, we have promised
in particular between Goulburn and Holbrook to see that the road
is adequate. There is no prospect, as things used to apply, of
having a decent road between Sydney and Melbourne. I believe the
whole of Sir Charles Cutler's remarks were not published, but I
will be interested to receive a reply to a letter I sent on this
subject before the end of April to the Premier of New South Walesthat
was before he went away actually, 28 April. We have suggested
that there should be co-operation in locating the new road.
Any questions?
QUESTION: I quote from the first paper you are believed to read
each morning, " The Age". Sir, on 15 May you are reported to as having
said: " There will be no increase in either direct or indirect taxes
in this year's Federal budget". Sir, with all the economic
problems facing the Government, will you be-able to honour that
election promise?
PRIME MINISTER: I will make no comments on budgetary matters. I am
quite happy to discuss matters which flow from the Premiers Conference,
of course, but I will not answer questions, as you know, about
budgetary matters.
QUESTION: You were prepared to during the campaign, sir. What's
changed? PRIME MINISTER: The budget is imminent.
QUESTION: Do you regret that there are not more new members in the
ministry? PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to answer that question. The general
situation is that the Caucus has endorsed the attitude which the people
expressed, that the ministry should be given a fair go. And
accordingly, every minister was returned who was still in the Parliament.
I don't know what the odds would beaqainst that. I don't think any
of you who were pontificating on this matter would have ventured to
believe that every minister would be returned.
QUESTION: May I remind you that several times in Parliament last year
the Treasurer, Mr Crean, urged investors not to sell their shares,
saying that the economy was sound and they would not lose out by
keeping their shares? Over the last week or so, share prices have
dropped to their lowest level for 7 years, although there has been
some recovery. In one day nearly $ 800 million was lopped off the
market value. How concerned are you about the falling share market
and what steps will your re-elected Government take to restore
confidence in the market?. 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: The Australian economy is basically very sound,
and any company which is engaged in useful occupation should have
complete confidence as to its future.
, QUES4ION: In view of your remarks to the Premiers about risk-taking,
restoring risk-taking to entrepreneurial activities, do you see a
moral distinction between putting people into unemployment for
reasons of economic management and putting people out of business
for reasons of economic management?
PRIME MINISTER: My reference was to land speculation. My reference
was not as wide as entrepreneurial activities overall. There are
very many entrepreneurial activities which are very valuable to
the community and they should prosper. There has been an unhealthy
degree of land speculation. The States have permitted it and it
appears that some of the speculators will burn their fingers.
QUESTION: Sir, is there any further development on the project, which
was delayed or rejected by the Federal Government before, for an oil
refinery by the Alwest group and bauxite mining? Can you give us
an up-to-date statement of what your Government's position is on that
project? And have you heard from Sir Charles the Second about
that project?
PRIME MINISTER: Sir Charles has sent nothing in Writing to me about
it. I had a very general discussion with Sir Charles Court last
Thursday afternoon in Canberra on the eve of the Premiers Conference
about the general attitude of the Australian Government to the two
issues which arose in the Alwest connection namely overseas ownership
or control and the environment. So there was a general discussion on
those two matters. In the Premiers' Conference there was also discussion
on an agenda item which the Australian government had listed
concerning the environment. The proposal was that there should be
joint environmental impact statements by the Australian Government
would have to make a decision itself, such as projects which involved,
the expenditure of loan f unds ( where the Australian Government's
responsibility flows from its membership of the Loan Council) and
export projects in the private sector ( where the Australian Government's
responsibility arises from its constitutional jurisdiction over exports).
There was also reference in the Premiers Conference under another
agenda item to the Australian Government's responsibility as r~. gards
aboriginal lands. Some of those, of course, could be affected by
exports such as minerals in the Northern Territory or in th neighbouring
two States. But there's only been a general discussion between--1
Sir Charles Court and me on this subject. There's been nothing specific
about Alwest and there will, I expect, be further correspondence fromthe
people involved in the project, -nne has come yet.-
QUESTION: Those environmental standards that were-set when the
project camne up last time do they still apply from-the Commonwealth's
point of view, the need for the study to be made at the expense of
the participating company?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, that's our general approach. -We have been
given no reasons to vary that approach. The West Australian Government
hasn't examined, or hadn't examin-ed, some of the environmental factors
which we believe relevant, and-ti-Australian G'overnment didn't have
sufficient time to determine all the environmental factors on Alwest
to its satisfaction. Its preliminary view was that there were.. some
unsatisfactory features environmentally in Alwest. But I know'of
no further correspondence. 
7~ v 7 7
I. 77
I7. .7 7 t77.7 .* fry:.-
7. .7 77
777.77 7 77 7 7
7
1
' 7 7
.2
. V.
7t~ ~ 7(. 777~ I.
.77 7
7 7.
" W 77 7 .7
7. ' 7'
.77( I -/ 7 7
7 7( ( 7
J I.
' 7 77
7 * jv7 7 7 7.;
7 ii
I 77
7 7777 7 .7
7
7, cv, 7 7
7 7%,
* 1 7
77 .7
7, 1
7 73
7 7. 
-4-
QUESTION: Sir, if the New South Wales Government won't co-operate
on the Hume Highway, will the Commonwealth go ahead and build it
itself? PRIMt MINISTER: I won't assume that the New South Wales Government
won't co-operation. All I am saying is that it has been very dilatory.
But the highway will be built, I trust with the New South Wales
Government's co-operation, because it would have a very great deal
of the information concerning topography and geology; and also
there was a joint Commonwealth/ State inquiry on some of the route
in the last seven years or so in studying what should be the nature
of the access that Tumut in New South Wales has to its biggest
market, Canberra.
QUESTION: How do you regard China's attempts to prevent the
screening of the Antonioni film in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm surprised that there should have been any
attempts to prevent the screening of any film. I haven't seen the
film, but at all events it is being screened, I'm told. The only
thing that comes within Australian Government juristiction by any
stretch of the imagination would be the A. B. C. Well the A. B. C.
under this government is free to do what it likes.
QUESTION: Sir, do you accept Dr Cairns' suggestion that the Caucus
should have more say in economic matters, and how far would you be
prepared to go in this direction?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, this is not a view of Dr Cairns alone; it
is a view which we all hold.
QUESTION: Have you given Dr Cairns any indication that sometime in
the future he might have responsibility for the IAC? If so, is this
a firm undertaking or not, and when will it happen?
PRIME MINISTER: You don't expect me to publish conversations that
I have with any other individual, even so close an associate as.
Dr Cairns. As regards the IAC, it has been my responsibility from
its inception it will remain so for quite some time; I would expect
until Mr Rattigan's successor is appointed. I want to be sure that
the IAC is well established in the very greatly expanded role that
it now has. It's a much more important body than the Tariff Board.
I want to see that it's given every encouragement to the wider range
of activities it has compared with the Tariff Board.
QUESTION: In your statement last night explaining the ministerial
changes, you referred to the need to absorb migrants in suitable
jobs, but you didn't refer to the principle of migration according
to family reunions. Does the absorption of Immigration into Labour
mean any change of emphasis?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, what you're referring to concerns assisted
migration. I noticed my statement was paraphrased by some of the
newspapers. They referred to migrants coming in. That's how it was
represented. What I did say was that migrants are brought in where
there are jobs. To get it fully: " Mr Cameron . will hold the new
portfolio of Labor and Immigration. To his existing functio ' ns as
* Minister for Labour will be added control of assisted migration.,
In this way, it will be possible to ensure that migrants are broiught
to Australia only when suitable jobs are available and in a way that
will ensure welcome and understanding from unions and management%.
IOther Immigration functions will also be undertaken for the time 
being by Mr Cameron but will later be transferred to such
Departments as Foreign Affairs, Education and Social Security."
There are already some migrant functions which are with other
departments, such as Commonwealth Hostels an excellent board
6f d~ ectors and the Department of Housing and Construction.
Foreign Affairs will deal with admission visas. Education, of
course and Social Security will make provision for particular
aspects of migrants as well as other parts of our population who
seek additional attention to those generally available. But the
principle remains, as it has throughout our term of office, that
we believe the best migrants, the migrants who are happiest and
most successful in Australia, are those who are encouraged to
come here, not by Government but by their friends and families.
Family reunion is the biggest component in the Australian
Government's migration policy.
QUESTION: In your statement this morning on foreign investment,
you mentioned the creation of a new inter-departmental committee
to look at foreign investment. Will this mean there are now two
screening committees on foreign investment? And will the new one
look at asset acquisition by foreign interests and land acquisition?
PRIME MINISTER: They are separate committees. One is the takeovers
committee which has been operating since Mr McMahon was Prime Ministerthat
seems a long way back and the other, this new one which
will deal with investment. The existing committee, the takeovers
committee doesn't of course deal with new investment; it only deals
with investment in existing companies. It also has some deficiencies,
as I pointed out during the election campaign, in that it doesni't
deal, for instance, with the takeover of assets as distinct from
the taking over of shares; and it doesn'* t -deal with the taking
over of minority Australian shareholdings even if they are quite
important to the country.
QUESTION: In a radio interview in Melbourne during the election
campaign, you seemed to express some doubts about the continuance
of Qantas flights into South Africa. Could you expand upon
that please?
PRIME MINISTER: I forget what I was asked and I forget what my
response was to any question on it. I'm not sure I remember a
reference to this. I didn't volunteer any remarks about it but I
suppose the general attitude that we would have in mind is that
Johannesburg is not the only, nor, maybe, the most appropriate
point for Australia's national airline in Africa.
QUESTION: What are your personal feelings about losing Mr Barnard
as your deputy?
PRIME MINISTER: You all know, you would expect, that I voted for
Mr Barnard. You would not have expected anything else in view of
our long association. Mr Barnard took the result as you all would
expect him to take it very well, promptly, well, nobly.
QUESTION: Will you protest again to the French Government over the
resumption of nuclear tests in the Pacific area?
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Willesee will be making any comments. He
already has.
QUESTION: Any comment sir on the Indian one?
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Willesee has made a comment on thatf also. 
-6-
QUESTION: Do you feel precluded by your statements during the
ele tion campaign from considering introducing option preferential
voting? PRIME MINISTER: No. I think optional preferential voting is all
the more necessary. What I have said in the past, and it's still
my view, is that first-past-the-post is not an appropriate voting
system for Australia because we've become used to the preferential
system for a couple of qenerations. Its quite clear, however, that
the system has to be simplified and it would be appropriate, it
would seem, to permit people to vote for one candidate only if that
is their wish. At the moment you've got to vote for all candidates
on the ballot paper even if it's 73, as it was in the New South Wales
Senate ballot paper, or twelve, as it was in my own electorate of
Werriwa for the House of Representatives. If you don't number every
square in a proper sequence then your vote is invalid. It's wasted.
The Department's education campaign was very successful indeed.
The number of informals in New South Wales for the Senate was only
12%. That's a remarkable tribute to the application and interest
of the Australian voters. But it's quite absurd that one has to
number every square in those circumstances. It's the most complicated
voting system in the world. And I believe our whole parliamentary
system has been held up to ridicule by the fact that we will be
without a Parliament in a parliamentary democracy, as we like to
regard it, for three months or even longer. So my colleague,
Mr Daly, the Minister for Services and Property, has in mind, I believe,
to bring in legislation to simplify the electoral system to give
people more choice than they have now. If you still want to number
every square you would be free to do so.' And your preference would
be given full regard. It would be taken into account. But you
wouldn't have to number everybody on the ballot paper if you were
satisfied with indicating your support for one candidate only.
It's your own lookout then if that candidate comes, say, third and
you ' ye missed the opportunity of having a second choice between
those that are ahead of him or her. That is, it will simplify it
and it will give people a choice. At the moment the Australian
voters don't have a choice. You've got to number everyone even if,
as would apply to all of us, we wouldn't know a fraction of them.
QUESTION: The Government intends to legislate on that in this session
of Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe this is Mr Daly's intention. It's not
come before Cabinet yet, but give us time. We're a pretty active
ministry but we haven't been able to decide that one yet.
QUESTION: On the migration question, as far as unassisted migration
is concerned, who will actually control the components of unassisted
migration? There are family reunions and sponsorship and government
recruitment? Now who is going to control unassisted migration?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Cameron will have the same responsibilities for
the time being as Mr Grassby had. The degree of relationship which
gives you a priority for submission is the same:
QUESTION: So the categories will remain as such?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been no change in any of those matters.
Quite obviously a closer relative will come here earlier than a
distant one. 
-7-
QUESTION: How long before the transfer of the various sections
Iof immigration to the other departments?
PRI4J MINISTER: I don't know. There may have to be legislation.
I don't know.
QUESTION: . In your opening address to the Premiers' Conference,
Mr Whitlam, you stressed that the examples that you presented that
day were only an example of the Government's attitude for the Budget.
You said they would serve to demonstrate the stringency of the
approach that the Government would be taking at that time. Does
that stringency of approach apply to the government's collections
as well as to its spending?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to give any more instances. I was
able to give those instances in advance of the Budget because they
had some relation to what the States are expected to do too. I
Swanted to demonstrate to the States that we were not asking them
to do anything in respect to their business enterprises that we
were not intending to do ourselves. There are some Government
expenditures which are more important than others. There are some
which are more readily deferred than others. There are business
enterprises which should be paid for by the user instead of by the
taxpayers. The proposition was put to us, in effect, that we
should pick up the losses on the New South Wales Railways $ 120 million.
We are prepared to accept the railways if they will hand them over
to us. I can imagine that with proper planning the Australian
Railways could be a modestly successful enterprise. Certainly in
the south-eastern part of this continent, the railways, with proper
co-ordination say, the whole area betw6eii Adelaide and Brisbane
and to the south-east of that line would be a very successful
transport system. There is no other continental land mass of
comparable area where you have so many different and less co-ordinated
systems. I believe that we just have to be quite blunt about it. It
is not the Australian Government's proper responsibility to the
taxpayer to say that we have to pay for the losses any State
railway system runs up. We aren't accountable for running the systems
as things stand at the moment, but it is put to us that we should pick
up the tab for the losses. Similarly, Sir Charles Cutler mentioned
his hospitals, the charges there. Well, I reminded him that just as
we were prepared to accept the railways we are also prepared to go
halves in the cost of running the hospitals if the patients in
standard wards are exempted from fees. That used to be the case
when there was last a Labor Government in the Australian Parliament.
It was a sensible arrangement; it ought to be restored.
QUESTION: At the Premiers' Conference you seemed to me to talk with
a quite new seriousness about countering inflation and you talked
about an economic freeze which would both break expectations,
inflationary expectations, and drastically reduce the pressure on
resources. Do you think the Australian community has to accept a
higher rate of registered unemployed as a cost of getting inflation
under control?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it certainly does not. And I didn't say that
either. For instance, any diminution of commercial construction
will certainly be picked up by an expansion of welfare housing. It's
an absurd position that in the financial year ending this month a
muc h greater amount has been made available to the States for welfare
housing, housing commission, housing trust construction. than ever
before in our history, and yet fewer houses were built than for, I 
-8-
think, fifteen years past. And my speech pointed out that there
will be more money available for welfare housing this year and if
mor&amp; is required it will be found. I didn't say there would be more
uinemjlloyment. I thank you for giving me the opportunity to repeat
what should have been plain to anybody who was there or who read
the text: that there was no suggestion for increased unemployment.
QUESTION: In your speech to the Canberra branch of the Labor Party
on Saturday you spoke about the Premiers' Conference, that it was
no longer dignified or effective and no mileage for Prime ministers
or Treasurers in dealing in one or two days with the Premtiers to
cut up the national cake. Can you give us some idea how next year
you would imagine the Premiers Conference will be conducted. on
Saturday you spoke of the discussions taking place over weeks or
even possibly months?
PRIME MINISTER: There are three components * of our financial
arrangements with the States. One is the capital works, the loan
funds. We agreed to an increase of just over 10 per cent in the
loan funds for State Governments, for the larger serni-government
authorities and no limit at all was placed on the borrowings by the
smaller authorities, those that want to borrow up to half a million
dollars. So that was the loan funds. There was an increase of
per cent in effect. Some of the States said they needed more,
and one State, for instance, quoted the case that to build an
identical school today with. a school for which a tender was let
seven months before the price had gone up 40 per cent. We saw
no excuse for accepting a tender 40 per cent higher than one seven
months before. There ought to be better management than that. The
next component with our financial relations'with the States concerns
the revenue assistance, and that's under a formula. The Act states
what the increase should be there. The increase in the ' coming
financial year under the formula will be about 18 per cent a very
considerable increase. Inflation has produced a still larger
percentage increase in the amount of that revenue assistance. I
made it plain this year I thought I made it plain 12 months
before that the formula would be applied, that I would not be a
party to haggling with no preparation about increases in the formula.
If the formula is deficient, then it ought to be amended; and the
present formula is the subject of legislation expiring at the end
of next year. If any variations are sought in the formula they can
be considered and may be made before the end of next June. But the
formula was applied and it involved an increase of 18 percent.
There have been of fsets for tertiary education for which the Australian
Government finds the whole of the cost now. The remaining component
is the special purpose grants the tied grants as-the States like
to refer to them. There have never been such large sums made
available in special purpose grants as have been made available by
my Government, and the prospective increase in those this year will
receive 28 percent more than in the year just ending 28 per cent
more. We find it is much more satisfactory to have specific purpose
grants because only in that way will one overcome the mis-government
which we inherited from our predecessors, which they were prepared to
condone and which we are not.
I've given you the examples of the interstate roads.
Now here we are entitled under the Constitution to build and maintain
those roads ourselves. It's a complete waste to have the Eyre
Highway half surfaced and half unsurfaced. One State does it; the
other State doesn't. Neither can compel the other to do-it or to
leave it undone. The Australian Government could have done the lot. 
-9-
It now will. Similarly the Hume Highway. We all know the way
they were messing about ever since the war. There was no chance
of gotting it before the end of this century. The Australian
Gbver~ inent can do it, and it will embark upon it in this coming
Parliament. There are very many instances like this. If my
Government hadn't made specific purpose grants or offered them there
would have been no prospect of having reasonable public transport
systems in the State capitals. There would have been no prospect
of getting the State capitals completely sewered. There would
have been no possibility of getting adequate services in the post--wal
suburbs or reviving the suburbs which were developed 100 years ago.
Now in all these things improvements could only be done if there are
specific purpose grants. The States have always been able, for
instance, to go ahead with a bridge across the Brisbane River to
link South Brisbane and Roma Street. Nobody did a thing about it
until we made the offer, and since the election they've decided
to accept the offer. And in Melbourne nobody ever did anything about
having the same number of tracks all the way between Melbourne and
Footscray they used to vary; there's no purpose in having more
than the minimum number or to put the third track in from Caulfield
to Mordialloc. It's now being done, and quadrupling the railway
the whole way from Penrith to Sydney. We are making specific purpoLgrants
and as we have told the Premiers there would probably be
28 per cent more funds this year than last year. But because of
our interest in the spending of it, it will be better spent.
QUESTION: Is it your intention, or have you offered, a job to
Mr Grassby?
PRIME MINISTER: I have not been in touch-with Mr Grassby in any way
on this subject.
QUESTION: At the Premiers' Conference you listed on the agenda
the question of control over prices. We understand in your private
talks the Premiers raised the question of control over incomes, it
seemed to get to nowhere. Can the public now accept that the question
of control over prices by the Federal Government is dead?
PRIME MINISTER: Until New South Wales and Victoria act in this matter,
I think it must be accepted as dead. About incomes, the fact is, o,:
course, I think the Premiers realise this, that they can't refler
any matter to the Federal Parliament which they themisclv-ca-' n.)
exercise at the moment. And no State Parliament can exc~ rcist,:
over incomes which come within the purview of the AuFtralian
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. They can only ref-r 1
question of incomes outside Commonwealth awards. Now of ti-r
were prepared to do that, but I think they accept that i** c,. inon~ wc L . A
awards can override, within the constitutional limits of th-t
Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commuissioni, any Statk3L
So it could only be a partial reference which they could make.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I represent New York and Isra~ eli YLd-i:; 11
magazines which represent an opposing philosophy in Jewish lii&gt;
the philosophy of Zionism.... ( unclear) long histor-y Jews have alwa'
lived between non-Jews although they have suffered persecution, thny
have continued the development of the nation.... ( unclear) to build
a new human society based on justice and equality. Could I say that
you achieved with that attitude? 
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's rather too wide a subject for me
to Vnkture an opinion at this notice or within the scope of this;
conference. What I would like to say is that my Government is
delighted that the prospects for the survival of the State of Israel
and for peaceful relations between all the nations of the Middle
East and, one would hope, the future of refugees in the Middle
East are now much brighter than the last time we had a conference
such as this. Dr Kissinger worked wonders between Egypt and
Israel and now seems to have done so between Syria and Israel,
and I would like to point out that the Australian Government has had
some effect, obviously only marginal, in bringing about this improved
relationship. We have been blackguarded amply for having kept our
heads and tried to contribute, but things are very much more hopeful
than we had ventured to believe they could be last time we had one
of these conferences. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
TO THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE FEDERAL
COUNCIL OF THE TRANSPORT WORKERS' UNION OF
AUSTRALIA, CANDERRA, 12 JUNE 197L4
IN NO AREA OF GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY IS THERE A
GREATER NEED FOR MODERNISATION AND REFORM THAN IN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT. IN NO AREA ARE THERE GREATER CONSTITUTIONAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE OBSTACLES IN THE WAY OF SUCH REFORM, IN NO AREA
IS THE COST TO THE PUBLIC OF OUR PRESENT ADMlINISTRATIVE
CONFUSION AND PHYSICAL D'ILAPIDATION GREATER AND MORE ENTRENCHED.
OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEMS ARE OUTDATED, INEFFICIENT AND UNECONOMICAL.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM IS FRAGMENTED AND VAGUELY DEFINED.
TRANSPORT IS THE CINDERELLA SERVICE OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR. IT
WILL-REMAIN SO UNTIL FAR-REACHING REFORMS ARE ACHIEVED.
LOOK AT THE DIMENSIONS OF THE PROBLEM. WE ALL KNOW
THE NOTOROUS BURDEN THAT OUR RAILWAYS HAVE INHERITED FROM A
COL0141AL PAST. THE NATION IS STILL PAYING A HEAVY PRICE FOR
RAILWAY SYSTEMS CENTRALISED ON STATE CAPITALS AND CONSTRUCTED
ON INCOMPATIBLE GAUGES. THE POWER OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT
TO LEGISLATE ON TRANSPORT IS ILL-DEFINED. APART FROM A GENERAL
POWER TO LEGISLATE IN RESPECT OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TERRITORIES,
THERE IS NO SPECIFIC PROVISION IN THE CONSTITUTION GIVIN4G THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT POWER IN RELATION TO ROADS OR ROAD
TRANSPORT. OUR POWERS IN RESPECT OF INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND
EXPORT ROADS IN FACT DERIVE FROM OUR POWERS OVER TRADE AND
COMMERCE. 
-2-
FOR MANY YEARS THE STATE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN AN
INSUPPORTABLE BURDEN ON STATE GOVERNMENTS, DISTORTING THEIR
BUDGETS AND DEPLETING THEIR RESOURCES AT THE EXPENSE OF OTHER
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES, ALL'FORMS OF TRANSPORT URBANI
RURAL AND INTERSTATE HAVE FALLEN DEEPER AND DEEPER IN DEBT
AND OBSOLESCENCE, THE PROBLEM HAS BEEN THAT WHILE THE
STATES HAVE LACKED THE FUNDS TO PROVIDE MODERN TRANSPORT, THE
COMMONWEALTH-IN GENERAL HAS LACKED THE POWERS, ON TOP OF
THAT WE HAVE A MULTIPLICITY OF TRANSPORT UNIONS, ORGANISED ON
A FRAGMENTED FEDERAL BASIS, TENDING TO REINFORCE AND PERPETUATE
THE INEFFICIENCIES ENGENDERED BY INTERSTATE RIVALRY,
THE GOVERNMENTS AIM IS TO PROVIDE A NATIONAL
TRANSPORT POLICY WHICH WILL ENSURE THAT EACH FORM OF TRANSPORT
FULFILS THE ROLE TO WHICH IT IS BEST SUITED WHETHER ROAD,
RAIL, SEA OR AIR, WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT STEPS,
WE AMALGAMATED THE OLD DEPARTMENTS OF SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT
AND CIVIL AVIATION, WITHIN NORMAL LIMITS, AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT TRANSPORT ACTIVITIES ARE NOW CONDUCTED WITHIN ONE
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT, THIS ENSURES OPTIMUM CO-ORDINATION
AND A TRANSPORT SYSTEM CAPABLE OF COPING EFFECTIVELY WITH
DEMANDS AT MINIMUM COST TO THE NATION, THIS POLICY IS IN
DIRECT CONTRAST TO THE COMPLETE LACK OF CO-ORDINATION UNDER
PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATIONS, I REMIND YOU THAT IT IS THE POLICY
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY TO SEEK A REFERENDUM TO GIVE THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT COMPLETE POWERS TO MAKE LAWS WITH RESPECT
TO ALL FORMS OF TRANSPORT, MEANWHILE WE ARE MAKING GRANTS TO THE STATES
TO UPGRADE THEIR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT; WE ARE INCREASING 
-3-
OUR GRANTS FOR ROADS; AND WE WILL CO-OPERATE WITH THE STATES
IN RESPECT OF ROAD SAFETY, ROADS AND UNIFORM ROAD LAWS,
OUR BASIC AIM IS TO INCREASE EFFICIENCY AND IMPROVE SERVICE
TO THE PEOPLE, THE STATE RAILWAY SYSTEMS ARE THE BEST, OR RATHER
THE WORST, EXAMPLE OF THE INADEQUACY OF OUR TRANSPORT SERVICES,
IT WILL HELP IF I EXPLAIN EXACTLY HOW WE APPROACH THIS
PROBLEM AND THE DIFFICULTIES THAT FACE US, BRIEFLY, THE
STATE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN STARVED OF THE CAPITAL RESOURCES
NEEDED TO MAINTAIN THEIR COMPETITIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY, THEY
ARE GEARED TO OPERATE ON A STATE LEVEL RATHER THAN A NATIONAL
LEVEL, FOR THE MOST PART THEY OPERATE WITH ANTIQUATED ROLLING
STOCK AND EQUIPMENT, YET AUSTRALIA NEEDS A MODERN, EFFICIENT
RAILWAY SYSTEM TO PLAY ITS PROPER ROLE IN THE NATION'S
DEVELOPMENT, IT WAS FOR THIS REASON THAT IN 1972 IN ONE OF THE
FIRST ACTS OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT I OFFERED TO ACCEPT
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE RAILWAYS OF ANY STATE PREPARED TO
OFFER THEM, VICTORIA AND QUEENSLAND REFUSED EVEN TO DISCUSS THE
OFFER, DISCUSSIONS WITH THE OTHER FOUR STATES HAVE BEEN GOING
ON FOR SOME TIMEI AND IT IS HOPED THAT DECISIONS CAN BE MADE ON
TWO OF THEM SHORTLY, TO ENABLE OUR PROGRAM TO REVITALISE THE
INTERSTATE RAILWAY NETWORKS TO GET UNDER WAY, FOR THIS PURPOSE,
THE BUREAU OF TRANSPORT ECONOMICS, AT THE REQUEST OF THE AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE TRANSPORT MINISTER IS EVALUATING MAINLINE UPGRADING
PROGRAMS TO ENABLE AN ORDER OF PRIORITY FOR WORKS TO BE ESTABLISHED, 
-IIIN
SOME STATES THERE HAS BEEN CONSIDERABLE PROGRESS. AGREEMENTS
HAVE BEEN SIGNED WITH SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO BUILD STANDARD-GAUGE
LINES FROM TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS AND TO CONNECT ADELAIDE
TO THE EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE LINE AT CRYSTAL BROOK, THE
COMPLETION OF THE LATTER PROJECT WILL MEAN THAT ALL MAINLAND
CAPITAL CITIES WILL BE FINALLY CONNECTED TO STANDARD GAUGE.
THERE REMAINS, HOWEVER, A SIGNIFICANT SHORTAGE OF ROLLING STOCK
SUITABLE FOR. USE ON THE INTERSTATE RAIL NETWORK, AND THE STATE
RAILWAYS ARE HAVING TO TURN AWAY BUSINESS. THIS SHORTAGE MUST
BE OVERCOME. THE GOVERNMENT IS CURRENTLY LOOKING AT A
PROPOSAL TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL ROLLING STOCK FOR THE STATES
THROUGH THE COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS, DUE TO BE RENAMED THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS.
ONE OF OUR GREAT INSTRUMENTS FOR THE REFORM AND
CO-ORDINATION OF NATIONAL TRANSPORT WILL BE THE INTER-STATE
COMMISSION. THE GOVERNMENT WILL INTRODUCE A BILL TO REESTABLISH
THE COMMISSION WHEN PARLIAMENT RESUMES. IN MY 1972
POLICY SPEECH I SAID:
" THE INTER-STATE COMMISSION WAS INTENDED TO END
THE CENTRALISATION FOSTERED BY ALL THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS THROUGH THEIR RAILWAY SYSTEMS. IT
SHOULD NOW PROVIDE NOT ONLY FOR THE CO-ORDINATION
OF OUR SIX MAINLAND RAILWAY SYSTEMS AND OUR MAJOR
PORTS IN THE PERIOD BEFORE THE COMMONWEALTH, LIKE
OTHER FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS, INEVITABLY TAKES
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RAILWAYS AND PORTS; IT IS
ALSO THE IDEAL INSTRUMENT FOR CO-ORDINATING OUR
MAJOR ROADS AND SHIPPING LINES AND AIRLINES AND
PIPELINES... 
" A FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL PROMPTLY
RESTORE THE MACHINERY THE CONSTITUTION INTENDED
AND VEST IT WITH THE COMMONWEALTH'S FULL
CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS TO PLAN AND PROVIDE
MODERN MEANS OF COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE
STATES,"
THE PLANNING NECESSARY FOR THE RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE COMMISSION IS BEING CARRIED OUT IN THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT.
As I UNDERTOOK IN MY POLICY SPEECH LAST APRIL, WE WILL
INTRODUCE LEGISLATION FOR THE COMMISSION THIS YEAR, ,/ 6 
-6-
I WANT TO DEAL IN A MOMENT WITH SOME ISSUES OF SPECIAL
CONCERN TO YOUR UNION, FIRST LET ME TOUCH BRIEFLY ON THREE
AREAS WHERE THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN PROMPT ACTION TO IMPROVE
OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM,
URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN THE 1973-74 BUDGET THE TREASURER
ANNOUNCED AN ALLOCATION OF $ 32,1 MILLION FOR ASSISTANCE TO THE
STATES FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROJECTS IN 1973-74 ( INCLUDING
$ 1 MILLION FOR RESEARCH AND PLANNING), A FURTHER $ 1140. MILLION
IS TO BE PROVIDED IN FUTURE YEARS FOR PROJECTS COMMENCED IN
1973-74, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS FINANCING
OF THE COST OF APPROVED PROJECTS ON A GRANTS BASIS, THREE
STATES VICTORIA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA
HAVE SO FAR SIGNED THE AGREEMENT UNDER WHICH FUNDS ARE TO BE
PROVIDED, THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT ADVISED LAST WEEK
THAT IT IS WILLING TO SIGN THE AGREEMENT IN ITS PRESENT FORM,
AND ARRANGEMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE FOR THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
TO SIGN THE AGREEMENT THIS WEEK, TASMANIA HAS ALSO ACCEPTED
THE AGREEMENT, ,/ 7 
-7-
INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND EXPORT ROADS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS
HAVE PROVIDED ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES FOR ROADS SINCE 1926, THE
CURRENT COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS LEGISLATION WILL EXPIRE ON
JUNE, IN MY ELECTION POLICY SPEECH ON 29 APRIL, I ANNOUNCED
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD DECIDED TO PRESS AHEAD WITH
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A NATIONAL ROADS SYSTEM IN THOSE AREAS WHICH
FALL WITHIN ITS OWN CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES, IN PARTICULAR,
IT WOULD IN FUTURE TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE WHOLE COST OF
CONSTRUCTING AND MAINTAINING THE PRINCIPAL ROAD BETWEEN STATE
CAPITALS, AND OF EXPORT ROADS OF PARTICULAR SIGNIFICANCE,
INCLUDING NORTHERN BEEF ROADS, OTHER RURAL ROADS JOINING MINES
TO SEAPORTS, AND URBAN ROADS TO MAJOR SEA AND AIR TERMINALS,
AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE LAST FRIDAY I ANNOUNCED
THAT THE NEW ROADS ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION WOULD APPROPRIATE
A TOTAL OF $ 1,120 MILLION IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS FOR ROADS IN THE STATES, OF THIS
SUM, $ 400 MILLION WILL BE ALLOCATED OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS
FOR INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND EXPORT ROADS, THE NEW ROADS
ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION WILL BE INTRODUCED IN THE FIRST SESSION
OF THE NEW PARLIAMENT, ,/ 8 
SAFETY STANDARDS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ACTIVELY INVOLVED
WITH THE STATES IN FORMULATING MOTOR VEHICLE STANDARDS AND
TRAFFIC LAWS ON A NATIONAL BASIS, THIS IS BEING DONE THROUGH
THE AUSTRALIAN TRANSPORT ADVISORY COUNCIL, WHICH HAS A SERIES
OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES, THE Tll, U PARTICIPATES IN THOSE CONCERNED
WITH VEHICLE PERFORMANCE, TRAFFIC CODES AND TRANSPORT OF
DANGEROUS GOODS, THE COUNCIL HAS ENDORSED THE AUSTRALIAN DESIGN
RULES FOR MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY, WHICH INITIALLY APPLIED TO
CARS BUT ARE BEING EXTENDED TO TRUCKS AND BUSES, THE COUNCIL
IS ALSO CONCERNED WITH SAFETY OF INTERSTATE BUSES AND HAS
ENDORSED A UNIFORM SCHEME OF COMPULSORY INSPECTIONS, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS PREPARED TO LEGISLATE TO COVER
INTERSTATE OPERATORS NOT CONTROLLED BY STATES, FOLLOWING
A RECOMMENDATION BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ROAD SAFETY, THE
GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO DECIDED TO SET UP A IATIONAL AUTHORITY ON
ROAD SAFETY AND STANDARDS TO ADVISE THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT
ON ROAD SAFETY, INCLUDING PROPOSALS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
THE STATES FOR THIS PURPOSE, 
THE CREATION OF A MODERN EFFICIENT TRANSPORT SYSTEM
REQUIRES THE CO-OPERATION OF TRANSPORT WORKERS AND THEIR UNIONS,
YOUR INDUSTRY DEMANDS A STRONG, MODERN, UNITED UNION, THE
DIFFICULTIES OF DEALING WITH DIFFERENT STATES AND TRANSPORT
AUTHORITIES ARE GREAT ENOUGH, SUCH DIFFICULTIES ARE INCREASED
IF THE TRANSPORT UNIONS THEMSELVES ARE INEFFICIENTLY ORGANISED
OR WASTE THEIR ENERGIES IN INTERNAL CONFLICTS, IN SHORT, WE
NEED A RESPONSIBLE APPROACH FROM YOU TO HELP US IMPLEMENT
OUR IMPORTANT PROGRAMS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE NATION AND THE
INDUSTRY, TRANSPORT UNIONS MUST WORK TOGETHER TO HELP US
COMPLETE OUR TASK,
THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE NEED TO KEEP UNIONS
FULLY INFORMED AND INVOLVED IN MATTERS THAT AFFECT YOU, WE
HAVE DONE OUR BEST TO DO SO. lIE INVITED A UNION REPRESENTATIVE
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DISCUSSIONS ON THE TRANSFER OF STATE
RAILWAYS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IF
A DECISION TO TRANSFER IS MADE A CONFERENCE WILL BE CALLED OF
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENT. OFFICERS, AC, TU, AND UNION
REPRESENTATIVES TO ENSURE THAT THE TRANSITION PERIOD IS
SMOOTHLY CARRIED OUT, 
-1-
UNION GOODWILL
WILL BE ESSENTIAL IN FORMULATING A NATIONAL TRANSPORT POLICY,
YOU HAVE AN INDUSTRY WITH MANY DIFFERENT AND SOMETIMES
COMPETING UNIONS, IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, FOR EXAMPLE, ENGINEDRIVERS
AND MEN SERVICING ROLLING STOCK BELONG TO A STATE UNION
DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS EMPLOYEES,
THIS SITUATION HAS SIGNIFICANTLY DELAYED OUR NEGOTIATIONS TO
TAKE OVER THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS, MY POINT IS SIMPLY
THAT DEMARCATION DISPUTES ARE NOT CONDUCIVE TO A NATIONAL
TRANSPORT POLICY, THEY MUST BE REDUCED, IF A NATIONAL RAILWAY
SYSTEM BECOMES A REALITY, THEN A NATIONAL UNION REPRESENTING
RAILWAY EMPLOYEES WILL BE NEEDED TO LOOK AFTER INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS,
WAGES AND CONDITIONS'OF SERVICE ON A NATIONAL SCALE, I HOPE
YOU WILL WORK TOWARDS IT, / 11 
THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO A POLICY OF ENCOURAGING
THE AMALGAMATION OF TRADE UNIONS, ITS ATTEMPTS LAST YEAR
TO AMEND THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT TO MAKE
AMALGAMATION. PROCEDURES SIMPLER WERE FRUSTRATED TWICE BY THE
SENATE, WHILE THE NUMBER OF UNIONS IN AUSTRALIA HAS DECLINED
SLOWLY OVER THE YEARS FROM 375 IN 1956 TO 305 IN 1972 THIS
LARGE NUMBER OF SEPARATE UNIONS REPRESENTS A TOTAL MEMBERSHIP
OF A LITTLE OVER 2 MILLION, SUCH A DISPERSAL OF PEOPLE
AMONG SO MANY SEPARATE UNIONS HAS SERIOUS IMPLICATIONS, THERE IS
THE INEVITABLE DUPLICATION OF WORK AND RESOURCES WHICH PRODUCES
WASTED EFFORT, THE FRAGMENTATION OF UNION RESOURCES IN TERMS
OF STAFF, FINANCE AND FACILITIES IMPOSES GRAVE LIMITATIONS ON
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THEIR WORK, RESEARCH RESOURCES OF UNIONS
LIBRARIES AND RESEARCH STAFF ARE MEAGRE AND SUFFER BADLY IN
ANY COMPARISON WITH HIGHLY ORGANISED EMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS, AND
AS WE KNOW, THE LARGE NUMBER OF UNIONS GIVES RISE TO DEMARCATION
DISPUTES WHICH ARE A COMMON OCCURRENCE IN THIS COUNTRY,
AT PRESENT, FOR AN AMALGAMATION PROPOSAL TO BE ADOPTED,
TWO CONDITIONS MUST BE SATISFIED: AT LEAST HALF THE MEMBERS MUST
VOTE AND MORE THAN A HALF OF THE FORMAL VOTES MUST EE IN FAVOUR
OF THE AMALGAMATION, UNDER THE GOVERNMENT'S PROPOSALS IT WOULD
BE NECESSARY MERELY FOR A MAJORITY OF THOSE VOTING TO APPROVE OF
THE PROPOSALS: IT WILL NOT BE NECESSARY FOR 50 PER CENT OF
THE MEMBERS TO VOTE IN AN AMALGAMATION, 
THE KEY TO INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY IS EFFICIENt EMPLOYEE
ORGANISATION, WHILE OUR OPPONENTS HAVE OBSTRUCTED OUR EFFORTS
TO MODERNISE AND DEMOCRATISE AUSTRALIAN TRADE UNIONS, UNION
CAN STILL WORK FOR MORE RESPONSIBLE AND EFFICIENT ORGANISATION
IN THEIR OWN WAY, I COMPLEMENT THE TWU, ON THE AWARD
RECENTLY NEGOTIATED FOR YOUR MEMBERS IN THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY
AND THOSE EMPLOYED BY GENERAL CARTAGE FIRMS UNDER THE FEDERAL
TRANSPORT WORKS AWARD A KEY AWARD WITH A BEARING ON THE WHOLE
TRANSPORT INDUSTRY, THIS AWARD WAS NEGOTIATED BY DIRECT AND
FREE DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE PARTIES, IT INCLUDES A SETTLEMENT
OF DISPUTES PROCEDURE WHICH THE GOVERNMENT REGARDS AS ESSENTIAL
TO GOOD INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, ADHERENCE TO THE SPIRIT OF SUCH
A PROCEDURE BY ALL PARTIES SHOULD ENSURE THAT THE PRODUCTIVE
CAPACITY OF THE INDUSTRY AND THE REAL INCOME OF EMPLOYEES ARE
NOT IMPAIRED BY INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES, ,/ 13 
THERE IS A PARTICULAR PROBLEM IN YOUR INDUSTRY WHICH
TYPIFIES THE ARCHAIC CONDITION OF OUR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS,
WE HAVE FIVE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION REGISTRATION SYSTEMS IN
THIS COUNTRY, THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT REQUIRES
AN EMPLOYER OR EMPLOYEE ORGANISATION TO BE REGISTERED UNDER
THE ACT BEFORE IT CAN REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION SYSTEM, THERE IS A SIMILAR
REQUIREMENT IN.-THE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION LEGISLATION OF
HEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN
AUSTRALIA. IN ORDER TO REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE SYSTEMS IT IS NECESSARY FOR A FEDERAL UNION TO
HAVE ITS MEMBERS IN EACH OF THE FOUR STATES IN A UNION
REGISTERED UNDER THE STATE LEGISLATION,
THE RESULT IS THAT THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE STATE
BRANCH OF A FEDERAL UNION AND A STATE UNION ARE OFTEN
AMALGAMATED, WITH THE SAME OFFICERS, BOOKS, THE ONE SYSTEM
OF MEETINGS, ONE MEMBER REGISTER AND ONE ELECTION OF OFFICERS,
SOMETIMES THE RULES OF EITHER THE STATE OR FEDERAL UNION ARE
ADHERED TO, THE OTHER SET BEING IGNORED, SOMETIMES A MIXTURE
OF RULES IS ADOPTED, THE WHOLE SYSTEM CAUSES INDUSTRIAL STRIFE
THROUGH DEMARCATION DISPUTES AND COMPETITION FOR UNION
MEMBERSHIP WITHIN THE SAME INDUSTRY, s/ 1/ 4 
-114
WE HAVE TRIED TO REMEDY THIS PROBLEM. THE INDUSTRIAL
COURT IN FEBRUARY 19F-9 DREW ATTENTION TO THE URGENCY OF THE SITUATION
AFTER HEARING AN APPLICATION INVOLVING YOUR UNION AND ITS NEW SOUTH
WALES BRANCH. AT THE CONCLUSION OF ITS JUDGEMENT IN MOORE v DOYLE,
THE INDUSTRIAL COURT SAID:
" A SYSTEM OF TRADE UNION ORGANISATION IS URGENTLY NEEDED
W'JHICH WOULD ENABLE THE ONE BODY TO REPRESENT ITS RELEVANT
MEMBERS IN BOTH THE FEDERAL AND STATE ARBITRATION SYSTEMS
AND IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE FOR FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES
TO EXAMINE THE QUESTION WHETHER ORGANISATIONS AND TRADE
UNIONS CAN BE PROVIDED WITH SUCH A SYSTEM.
". WE HAVE DECIDED TO REFER OUR JUDGMENT IN THIS MATTER AND
THESE REMARKS TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE COMMONWEALTH
IN THE HOPE THAT IT MAY BE POSSIBLE, AFTER CONSULTATION
BETWEEN COMMONWEALTH AND STATE ATTORNEYS-GENERAL, THE TRADE
UNIONS, BOTH FEDERAL AND STATE, AND OTHER INTERESTED GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES TO ARRANGE FOR THE EXAMINATION OF THE IMPORTANT
ORGANISATIONAL MATTERS TO WHICH WE HAVE REFERRED." I
DESPITE THIS URGENT APPEAL THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT AND
THE ANTI-LABOR STATE GOVERNMENTS DID NOTHING. SO IN JANUARY LAST
YEAR I WROTE TO THE PREMIERS OF N'EW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND AND
WESTERN AUSTRALIA SUGGESTING THAT THEY CONSIDER ADOPTING A SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL AIMED AT PROVIDING SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM.
THE PROPOSAL PROVIDED FOR THE "/ RECOGNITION" I OF A STATE BRANCH OF
A FEDERAL UNION UNDER STATE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION LEGISLATION.
A " RECOGNISED" STATh BRANCH WOULD NOT HAVE A LEGAL IDENTITY
DISTINCT FROM THE FEDERAL UNION BUT WOULD EXIST AS PORTION OF
THE FEDERAL UNION AND ACT AS THE FEDERAL UNION WITHIN THE STATE
INDUSTRIAL JURISDICTION. OUEENSLAND REFUSED TO C07OPERATE AND
WE HAD NO RESPONSE AT ALL FROM 14EW SOUTH WALES, THE STATE WHERE
THE PROBLEM IS MOST ACUTE. 
[ EVERTHELESS, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ITSELF PASSED
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT TO DEAL
WITH SOME OF THE PROBLEMS RAISED BY THIS CASE. IN ADDITION
THE GOVERNMENT APPOINTED MR JUSTICE J. B. SWEENEY, ASSISTED
BY MR [ fCGARVIE, AND MRK. D. MARKS, TO CONDUCT
THE INQUIRY INTO THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE CASE. HIS HONOUR'S
REPORT IS EXPECTED ABOUT THE END OF THIS MONTH.
WE HAVE RECOGNISED FROM THE START THAT MODERN AND
EFFICIENT PUBLIC TRANSPORT DEPENDS ON MODERN AND EFFICIENT
ADMINISTRATION AND MODERN AND EFFICIENT UNIONS. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS PLAYED ITS PART. ' IE HAVE BEEN GENEROUS WITH
FUNDS AND GENEROUS WITH IDEAS AND INITIATIVES. WE LOOK
CONFIDENTLY TO THE CO-OPERATION OF THE STATES AND YOUR GREAT
UNION IN BRINGING ABOUT A NEW DEAL, LONG OVERDUE AND LONG
AWAITED, FOR TRANSPORT IN OUR COUNTRY. 



13 June 1974
PRESS STATMENT NO. 268
VISIT TO CANADA BY THE MINISTER FOR SERVICES AND PROPERTY
The Prime Minister, the Honourable E. G. Whitlam,
today announced that the Honourable F. M. Daly, Minister
for Services and Property, will study the conduct of the Federal
elections in Cahiada, where polling is to take place on 8 July.
Mr. Whitlam said. that, in view of the great public
interest in electoral administration following the recent
Australian elections, the elections presented an excellent
opportunity to study the Canadian system with the possibility of
improving the Australian legislation.
Having regard to the period of three months required
for the completion of the current Australian Senate elections,
the Australian Government is particularly anxious to examine in
depth the methods used and the time required for the finalisation
of elections in Canada. To this end, Mr. Daly would visit
several of the Provinces in addition to Ottawa.
He would also be looking at several other aspects of the
Canadian electoral legislation and procedures whilst the election
is in progress, including voting procedures, political party
campaign expenditure and a limitation thereon, allocation of time
on television and radio for the promulgation of election matter,
the " blackout" period prior to the elections, and, newspaper
advertising. These aspects of electoral legislation were
particularly relevant In view of the electoral legislation which
the Government proposed to introduce early in the next Session.
The Government is determined to improve the Australian
Electoral system and will ensure that the-Electoral Office is given
adequate facilities to administer our elections efficiently. The
structure, systems and facilities of the Australian Electoral
Office are currently being examined and the Government proposes to
engage a Management Consultancy firm to assist the Australian
Electoral Office and the Board in this examination.
The Minister will be accompanied on his visit by Mr. F. Ley,
Chief Australian Electoral Officer and Mr. I. F. Weise, Australian
Electoral Officer for Queensland.
CAN BE RRA 



4
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT No. 2coq
t VI) Wf-' I q79f
AUSTRALIAN GOVERN4MENT TO ASSIST SYDN4EY
THEATRE
The Australian Government will provide financial
assistance to enable the Nimrod Theatre Company to establish
a permanent theatre in Sydney.
The Government has approved a grant of $ 123,64r
to the company to help pay the cost of its new theatre
in Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
The Minister for Tourism and Recreation,
Mr Frank Stewart, has approved the grant after receiving
advice from the Australian Council for the Arts.
The money has been provided under the Capital
Assistance program of the Department of Tourism and
Recreation for recreational projects. The Nimrod Theatre
Company, a non-profit organisation, was formed about
4 years ago to provide alternative theatrical activities
to those provided through established companies.
In 1972 it gained the use, on a
rent-free basis;' of an old salt and tomato sauce factory
in Elizabeth Street, Sydney, to replace its small and
inadequate premises in Darlinghurst. The company has
refurbished the building at a cost of $ 204,000.
It has raised about $ 75,000 towards this by public appeal.
The Government grant will pay the balance owing
for the refurbishing.
The grant represents an expansion of the Government's
capital assistance program for recreational projects as
these have primarily been given in the past for sporting
and similar activities. I
The Nimrod theatre will provide a valuable
recreational facility for people in Sydney, especially
those in the inner suburban area. / 2 
-2-
The grant will encourage a group of enterprising
theatre people who can be relied upon to provide valuable
community theatre services.
The Nimrod Theatre provides an opportunity for
the Department of Tourism and Recreation to give its
Capital Assistance Program a wider perspective and to
emphasise the importance of all forms of recreation.
The Department of Tourism and Recreation
will continue to co-operate with the Australian Council
for the Arts in providing cultural facilities for all
the Australian people.
The Nimrod Theatre is especially deserving of
assistance as it has pursued an adventurous artistic
policy, both in relation to established works and
experimental the tre.
It has won the respect of the theatrical
profession and rapidly growing support from the public.
The Australian Council for the Arts already
provides aid for the employment of professional theatrical
people for the theatre and for production costs. Its
grant this year has increased from $ 39,000 to $ 75,000.
CANBERRA A. C. T.
( Note o Press Gallery:
The PM and Mrs Whitlam are attending a performance
at the Nimrod Theatre tonight. They will be available
for photographs with the cast of the current production
abou: 8 p. m.) 



PRIMEMINISTER 14 June 1974
Press Statement No. 270
MEMORIAL SERVICE
FOR FIELD M'ARSHAL HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
-THE DUKE OF GLOUCESTER
Arrangements have been made with the Bishop of
Canberra and Goulburn, the Right Reverend C. A. Warren,
for a memorial service for the former Governor-General
of Australia, His Royal Highness The Prince Henry,
Duke of Gloucester, who died in London on 10 June. The
service will be held at St. John's Church, Canberra,
when the Parliament meets in July, probably in the
second week of the sitting. Details of the arrangements
will be announced when dates for the parliamentary
session have been decided.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



. j AUSTRAI. A. L 14 June 1974
Press Statement No. 271
Urban Public Transport
The Australian Government has successfully completed
negotiations for a $ 73 million program for a major improvement
in urban public transport in the six capital cities.
All States have now signed the Urban Public Transport
Assistance Agreement in which thr Australian Government will provide
two-thirds of the cost of urban transport projects in the capitals.
Under the agreement the following non-repayable grants
will be made to the States over a 5 year period:
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South AustraliA
Western Australia
Tasmania $ 28.57 million
$ 18.59 million
$ 12.30 million
9.77 million
1.89 million
$ 790,000
In addition, the Australian Government will provide
$ 3 million for research and planning.
While the $ 73 million eaxmarked for the procramwillbe spent
in the capital cities, provision is also contained in the agreement
to extend its scope to major provincial cities such as Newcastle,
Wollongong and Geelong. Projects to be undettaken under the new agreement,
and the Australian Government grants to be given for them, include:
NEW SOUTH WALES New electric double-deck cars for
the suburban system
Signalling improvements in the
Sydney; station area
Signalling improvements in the
Strathfield area
Work towards the quadruplication
of railway line between Granville
anO Penrith $ 30.5 million
3.0 million
2.85 million
8. R9 million 
-2-
Improvements to interiors of
busses and trains
Modernisation of railway
electricity sub-stations 680,000
$ 970,000
VICTORIA 2 additonal tracks and asociated works
for the South Kensington-Footscray
railway route 3.07 million
A 3rd track and additonal platform
at intermediate stations on the
Caulfield-Mordialloc line 4.07 million
Additional track and 2 additonal
stations on the Sunshine-Deer
Park West line $ 1.27 million
2nd track and platform alteration
on the Macleod-Greensborogh line $ 810,000
Signalling improvements for
railway system 3.66 million
QUEENSLAND Cross river rail link to Roma
Street station
Electrification of the suburban
railway line from Darra to
Ferny Grove
Additional trackage for northern
corridor, Roma Street station
to Northgate
SOUTH AUSTRALIA Christie Downs railway extension
including additional track from
Brighton to Port Stanvac to be
electrified Glenelg tram route upgrading
New buses
WESTERN AUSTRALIA 5.58 million
5.34 million
1.41 million
8.00 million
$ 530,000
$ 870,000
Pedestrian access bridge to Central
Bus Station $ 630,000
Bus access road from Fitzgerald
Street to Central Bus Station $ 160,000
New buses $ 900,000
TASMANIA New buses
Ticket issuing machines $ 670,000
$ 100,000 / 3J 
-3-
I am delighted that the States have finally seen their
way clear to accept this major initiative by the Australian Government.
The Australian Government has already allocated almost
$ 73 million for projects that were scheduled to commence during
the current financial year. We had intended to spend $ 32 million
during this year but because of delays caused not only in settling
the agreement, but also because of the recent interruption to the
Parliamentary machinery the expenditure will not be anything like that.
This means that Urban travellers will be forced to wait longer before
they start to enjoy the benefits flowing from our program.
Projects already in the program include new rolling stock
for rail, bus and tram services, the provision of additional rail
trackage where necessary, the creation of exclusive bus rights of
way in certain cities and a number of other projects which will
improve the comfort and convenience of our public transport systems.
The final step necessary to get this program under way is
the ratification of the Agreement by the Australian Parliament. The
bill to achieve this final step had been introduced in the previous
Parliament but was not passed before Parliament was disolved. I am
determined to reduce any further delays to the minimum and will ensure
that the necessary legislation obtains priority in the early sitting
of the current Parliament.
We are closely watching our commitments in the immediate
future to ensure that they can be met during the current economic
climate. At the recent Premiers' Conference I stated that we proposed
to press on with the Urban Public Transport Program we have initiated.
As the Treasurer stated in his Budget speech last year, our outlays
in this field will increase rapidly in 1974/ 75 and beyond.
We are fulfilling our commitment to improve a neglected part
of our cities, a part which must be improved if the cities are to
be attractive places in which to live and work. I expect that the
benefits will be flowing to the regular traveller in the near future
as some of the less costly projects that are extremely attractive
are introduced into the transport system. 



Press Statement No. 272
14 June 1974
WIFE OF PRIME MINISTER TO LAUNCH NEW ANL SHIP
( Statement by the Australian Minister for Transport, the
Honourable C. K. Jones, M. P.)
The Australian Minister for Transport, Mr C. K. Jones,
said today that Mrs Margaret Whitlam, the wife of the Prime
Minister, would launch the Australian National Line's new vessel,
Australian Emblem, in Japan on 9 August.
The launching of the 23,000 tonne vehicle/ deck container
vessel would take place at the Kawasaki Heavy Industries Shipyard
in Kobe, and was scheduled to enter the Australian/ Japan trade in
December this year.
Mr Jones said that the new ship would join the Eastern
Searoad Service, an integrated container service, comprising the
Australian National Line, Flinders Shipping Company Limited,
Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd, IK' Line) and a consortia of three
other Japanese Lines, Nippon Yuesn Kabushiki Kaisha
Mitsui-O. S. K. Lines Limited and Shinnihon Steamship Co.
Limited Line).*
This large, fast vessel was the first of the E. SS.
second generation and had been designed to meet the requirements
of the trade between the two countries particularly in respect
of refrigerated cargo.
" The vessel's design is a further development of the
concepts well known to the Australian National Line. It embodiesthe
vehicle deck and cellular container concepts. This ensures
fast handling and turnabout times. This feature has particularly
attracted shippers to the Eastern Searoad Service," Mr Jones said.
The vessel had an overall length of 223 metres, a beam
of 30 metres and a draft of' 10.36 metres. It also had a capacity
of 1410 x 5.9m containers.
Another vessel of the same type on order for the Flinders
Shipping Company Limited, an Australian Flag Company, was scheduled
to join the E. S. S. Service in mid-1975. The cost of both vessels
was $ 209~ each. 



NQ 87 DAE 17 June 1974
STATEMENT BY PRIME IaNISTER AFTER FRENCH NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that
the Australian Government had reason to believe that the
French Government had exploded a nuclear weapon device in the
atmosphere over Mururoa atoll today 17 June.
The Prime Minister said that it was a matter of
9 deep concern to the Australian Government that the French
Government had proceeded to yet another program of nuclear
testing in the Pacific, which was likely to lead to the
deposit of radio active fallout within Australian territory.
The feelings of the Australian Government and people against
these tests had been made kn~ own in the past in the clearest
way. Nothing had changed in the Australian attitude since
' I last year. The Prime Minister said: " The fact that this
further test has been held is all the more regrettable
because a new French Government is now in office, and
because I have sent a message to the new French President
expressing the sincere desire to develop relations between
our two Governments and peoples. These relations have been
regrettably affected during recent years by the dispute over
nuclear testing in the Paz-ific, which we had not sought but
which had become inevitable when our repeated protests were
consistently ignored."
The Australian Government had noted the French
Government's statements expressing an intention to cease
/ 2 
2-
atmospheric testing after the present series was completed.
As Senator Willesee had pointed out. these statements were
a step in the right direction, but the French Government
had not given the Australian Government any satisfactory
commitment that further atmospheric tests would not be
held. The new French Government could not claim to be in
ignorance of the strong feelings of the Australian people
that there should be no atmospheric test in the Pacific, or
indeed anywhere. 9
The Prime Minister recalled that on 22 June 1975
the International Court of Justice had made an order
granting to Australia interim measures of protection which
required France to refrain from conducting any further tests
which might lead to the deposit of radio active fallooat on
Australian soil. This order of the Court had been ignored by
France in 1975 and was now being ignored again. MIr ? 7hitlam
said that he had hoped that the French Government would abide
by this order and be prepared to co-operate in having this
continuing dispute resolved in a responsible mrainer by the
International Court in accordance with international law.
This had not proved to be the case. but the Prime Pinister
reaffirmed that, for its part, Australia would continue to
seek resolution of the dispute by the Court, and work vigorously
elsewhere for a complete cessation of nuclear weapons testing. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY 18 JUNE 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, you know that the applications
to the Chief Australian Electoral Officer, for recounts in Queensland
and Western Australia have been rejected. The count is already complete
also in Tasmania and South Australia. The count is not finished yet in
either New South Wales or Victoria. It appears unlikely that the results
will be so close as to justify a recount in either of those States.
Accordingly, I think that we can go ahead on the assumption that the
Parliament will meet on Tuesday 9 July. It will be opened by the
Governor-General, Sir Paul Hasluck. He will leave Canberra the
following day and the Governor-General designate, Sir John Kerr will
arrive later that day and then on Thursday, Sir John Kerr, we expect,
will be sworn in in front of the two Houses which with him constitute
the Parliament. I should also like to tell you that the Australian
Government has received confirmation that the Chinese Government
exploded a nuclear weapon device in the atmosphere over its territory
yesterday. We understand that the Chinese explosion was somewhat less
than a megaton in size, and that it appears to have occurred at Lop Nor
at about 4 p. m. yesterday. It is a matter of deep concern to the
Australian Government that the Chinese Government has conducted a
further nuclear test which is likely to lead to the deposit of radio
active fallout not only within its own territory but over a wide
area including, in the longer term, Australia.
Since the establishment of diplomatic relations with
China in December 1972, the Australian Government has made known to
Chinese leaders its opposition to Chinese nuclear weapon tests on a
number of occasions. On 10 April last year the Government made a
formal protest to the Chinese Government expressing Australia's strong
opposition to the conduct of nuclear weapons tests and reaffirmed the
Australian Government's view that atmospheric nuclear weapons testing
is contrary to international law; during his visit to China in May
last year, Dr. Cairns re-stated-the.. Australian position to Premier
Chou En-lai; I issued a statement ex pressing deep concern following
the last Chinese nuclear test on 27 June last year; and soon afterwards
formal notes of protest-were delivered both to the Chinese Foreign Ministry
in Peking and the Chinese Embassy in Canberra. Most recently, I
vigorously re-stated the Australian position during my meeting with
Chairman Mao Tse-Tung on 2 November.
Since China does not accept the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice and is nota party to the 1928 General Act
for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, it is not feasible
for Australia to initiate proceedings against China in the Court.
Nevertheless, the Australian Government considers that the Chinese
Government, as well as the French Government, has a clear obligation
towards the international community to prevent the dangers of
environmental pollution. The present Australian Government has
consistently opposed nuclear weapon testing by all countries and will
continue to work vigorously for a complete cessation of such testing. / 12 
-2
Are there any questions that you would like to ask?
QUESTION: In the last few weeks there have been a number of nuclear
explosions; the Indians, the French, the Chinese. And there has also
been President Nixon's decision to give nuclear assistance to both
Israel and Egypt. Now you Sir, have only made a comment on the French
tests and today on the Chinese tests; no comment has come on the
Indian tests or President Nixon's decision. Have you any comment on
those two?
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Willesee the Foreign Minister, has previously
made statements, I think on two occasions, about the Indian testing.
The Indian testing of course was claimed to be for peaceful purposes
and it was underground. The Chinese and the French testing have been
in the atmosphere. We have no details of the offers which President
Nixon has made to Egypt and Israel in the nuclear energy field.
We would hope that these offers like all transfers of nuclear technology
equipment or materials, will be carried out under the most stringent
safeguards. QUESTION: Have you formally protested to Russia or China over the
nuclear testing?
PRIME MINISTER: Arrangements are in hand in this matter with respect
to France and China. Russia and the United States have not tested and
Britain has not tested in the atmosphere for over ten years.
QUESTION: Does this mean that Mr. Renouf, for instance, will seek
to see the Chinese and French Ambassadors?
PRIME MINISTER: I have got no more to say on this at the moment.
I am not going to have those other foreign offices reading about
matters in the newspapers before any contact has been established
between them and our representatives.
QUESTION: Do you remain satisfied with the effect of the credit
restrictions on the building and housing industries; are you
concerned that too severe an impact is being made by the shortage of
finance in this area?
PRIME MINISTER: The reduced liquidity in general has of course had an
effect on the construction industry. It was intended to have an effect
on the construction industry. It is regrettable that most of the State
Governments have not acted where they could in these matters. It is only
because of the action that the federal Government has taken within the
constitutional powers available to it that there has been a reduction
in the cost of land for instance. And there has been some reduction
in the respective commercial construction of buildings. It ought to be
possible for people to get housing land more cheaply. It ought to be
possible for them to build houses more cheaply. It appears that each
,-of those things will come about. our regret is that that we have had to
-, rely entirely in most cases, right along the eastern seaboarid, on
federal initiatives in this regard; the States have been utterly inert.
In Victoria in fact the State Government has used Australian Government
housing funds to give a boost to land inflation Sunbury and Melton. 
-3
QUESTION: Do you agree with Premier Dunstan's claim that your
treatment, financial treatment, of the States and your economic policies
are contrary to Labor policy?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't agree with it. Of course I don't. I don't
depart from Labor policy in any respect. I carry it out.
QUESTION: Mr. Wran is reported this morning as saying that Mr. Dunstan
jumped the gun in making his comments before next week's discussions on
consumer tax. Do you agree that he jumped the gun in making that statement?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't comment in terms like this.
QUESTION: On dealing with the States, Mr. Ejelke-Petersen took time off
on Friday on radio and television to accuse you of trying to smash the
States. Is that a valid criticism?
PRIME MINISTER: No, as far as I could tell from the newspaper reports
of Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's telecast and broadcast, and I went to the authentic
organ in these respects, the Brisbane Courier Mail, he regurgitated at the
expense of the Queensland taxpayers and therefore at the expense of the
Australian taxpayers in general, the thesis which he developed at inordinate
length at the Premiers Conference. You heard him say it. You notice that
not a single other representative supported him. Sir Gordon Chalk, the
other representative from Queensland at the Premiers Conference exhibited
notable irritation when he was not showing boredom at what Mr. Ejelke-
Petersen had to say. The interesting part of Mr. Bjelke-Petersen ' s
thesis I thought was that he was suggesting that my Government should
do what the Chifley Government had done in the late 19401s. I would be
very happy to do so, he didn't acknowledge however, that there were in
the aftermath of the war, in the last few months of the war, options
available to the Australian Government which are not available to the
Australian Government in peacetime. He was suggesting for instance that
we should subsidise products which featured in the Consumer Price Index.
The Chifley Government did do that. That is true. The Chifley Government
was also able to restrain the overall position as regards prices and
incomes for some months. Mr. Ejelke-Petersen was wishing that the
Australian Government of today should do what the Australian Government
was able to do at the conclusion and in the aftermath of the war.
It was an interesting position in one way, but it didn't grab the interest
of anybody else at the Premiers Conference.
QUESTION: In 1969 you advocated a new federal system which was based
on a House of Representatives for international and nation-wide matters,
an assembly for each of the bigger States, and separate regional
assemblies for areas outside the cities. Could I ask whether you are
still in favour of such a proposal and would you comment on the
practicalities of it being implemented?
PRIME MINISTER: I commented on the practicalities at the time. I believe
I said that if we were making arrangements for our continent today that
what you say is what we would try to achieve. I didn't say that I thought
it was practicable now. But nevertheless I think there is some use in
looking at the overall geographic and economic situation where possible.
The State boundaries were not set by Australian politicians. They were
set by British public servants in the middle of last century or earlier.
Local government boundaries were set mostly by State politicians about
years ago. Now nobody really looking at the best way to govern
Australia in the circumstances which have developed where settlement
has taken place, where resources have been discovered would suggest that
0/ 
our State boundaries are ideal. In fact very few people would say that
they had very much relevance. Again I think most people would realise
particularly looking at the way settlement has changed in the last
quarter of a century, that local government boundaries haven't
got very much relevance. Nevertheless, while I think it is fair
enough looking at some of these things with fresh eyes, I am not
suggesting that these things are immediately practicable.
QUESTION: Mr. Dunstan said over the weekend that he believed that it
was essential for the Labor Party to decide at its federal conference
that the federal Government should give a fixed percentage of income
tax back to the States. Could you tell us your views on this matter
and do you agree with that?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't agree with that. I don't remember any reports
that Mr. Dunstan has said that. I remember Mr. Snedden saying it.
But I don't agree with it. The reason is that Australia is very variable
in its taxability. If the States were to raise through their own income
taxes on individuals and companies, the amount of money which they receive
from the Australian Government by way of revenue assistance now, we would
have the situation where income tax rates in Victoria would ye very much
lower than they are. In the other four States they would be very much
higher. our position in Australia is quite different from say the
position in the United States. In the United States you will find
east and west, New York, California, north and south, Illinois and Texas;
states of comparable population and economic power. In Australia we do
not have that situation. None of us can expect to see that situation.
And in those circumstances in Australia it is necessary to have income
tax on individuals and on companiesraised by the one government. And
that must be the Australian Government. There is no question that that
is the Australian Labor Party's attitude. It has been for over 30 years.
It was thrashed out between Prime Minister Curtin and the Premiers,
particularly Premier McKell, back in 1942. And it is quite clear in the
ALP's platform that there should be an Australian Government monopoly in
the raising of income tax. And that is not a matter on which there is a
division of opinion until three months ago, between the Labor Party on
one side, and the Liberal/ Country Parties on the other side. It is the
principle on which Sir Robert Menzies and his successors all acted.
It is quite idle to suggest we ever could in Australia have a situation
where income tax of a certain percentage went to the States. It would
not be fair to the States; because they need a variable degree of
assistance in their revenues and that is what happened. My Government
has refined the process of specifying to an increased degree the amount
of assistance, the nature of assistance which the Australian Government
will give to the State Governments. The State Governments have the
responsibility in a great number of fields where the Australian Government
wishes to see government services upgraded. The only way to get those
government services upgraded we believe, is to specify how the money will
be spent. South Australia has been much more co-operative in this field
than the other States. It has come to an agreement with the Australian
Government in all the relevant fields, urban public transport, sewerage,
land commissions, regional development Monarto where the Australian
Government has responsibility if a State Government-gives it authority
as in the construction of railways there to. We have made a very great
commitment over $ 80 million to connect Adelaide to the rest of
the Australian railway system; also another $ 80 million to have an
all-weather railway from that system in South Australia to the Northern
Territory. It is a very clear example of where a flat rate assistance
to the States doesn't help the States who need it most. 
QUESTION: During the election campaign you mentioned, you foreshadowed,
various amendments to the Prices Justification Act. And Mr. Crean also
said that he thought it might be sensible to have a second tribunal
simply to look at the question of retail price rises. I just wondered
in your consideration of the amendments to the Act, do you now favour
expanding the resources of the existing tribunal to cope with retail
prices or whether in fact, to introduce a second tribunal?
PRIME MINISTER: It will be some months before anything can be done
along these lines. The resources of the Tribunal are being expanded as
quickly as it can digest those additional resources. The Tribunal does in
fact deal with some retail matters already because of all the largest
retail companies in Australia that fall within its pervue.
QUESTION: On the tax question Mr. Whitlam, would the Commonwealth
Government be prepared to collect State consumer taxes on behalf of
the States as it now does for payroll taxes for the States?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter was raised at the Premiers Conference, and
I said we will consider any suggestions you make but there is no
commitment in this regard. You will remember that the Tasmanian
Government imposed a tax on tobacco, the people who sold tobacco products,
and this was challenged in the High Court by the Australian Government.
It was supported by most if not all of the State Governments.
And in constitutional terms it was upheld but the particular technique
of raising it was rejected by the High Court. There was some reference
to this at the Premiers Conference; the general question of consumer
taxes; and I said that we would be prepared to discuss any proposition
they put up. They are in fact discussing it, the States are, their
officials with our officials, they wanted our officials to be there also,
on Thursday in Melbourne. But there is no commitment to raise it.
But obviously we are ready to co-operate with them in discussing any of
these matters.
QUESTION: They seemed to be under the impression when they left the
Premiers Conference that there was a commitment.
PRIME MINISTER: There is certainly a commitment if you like to discuss
any proposition they put up.
OQUESTION: Do you accept the role of Dr. Cairns, as described for
himself as Deputy Prime Minister, as something of an overall co-ordinator
of economic policy?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember this description but it certainly
would be expected, I expect, that Dr. Cairns would take a great interest
in economic policy. Of course he should, and he has.
QUESTION: Do you support the view by Dr. Cairns that the introductiQn
of colour television should be deferred as an anti-inflationary measure?
PRIME MINISTER: I think this is quite an arguable proposition. But we
discussed this over a year ago and we all thought then that it was too.
l. ate to thin it out. Too many investments have been made to delay it. / 16 
QUESTION: Could I ask the same question about Dr. Cairns comment on
the metric conversion, whether it should be delayed or suspended?
PRIME MINISTER: Well you ought to ask Mr. Morrison about this. It is
already in many respects far advanced. I think I might be able to give
you some percentages of what has been done already there. Primary
Industry is 75% metricised now, and will be wholly so in 1976.
About 70% of the cost of converting the steel industry has already been
expended, in the transport industry, freight rates are completely converted.
And taking into account the conversion of road signs, which is to take
effect on 1 July, more than 90% of the total outlay has been expended.
Over 70% of the new road signs have already been constructed. Metrication
of the building and construction industry is well advanced. Of all
public works projects for this coming year, 64% is to metric design.
Now there may be fields other to those where it would be possible or
advantageous to defer or thin out metrication.
QUESTION: Were you disappointed to hear Mr. Dunstan who has so long
been a supporter of yours, publicly attack you over your attitude to
the States at the ALP meeting in South Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I wasn't disappointed, I wans't surprised. I am used to
Premiers making such statements this year, in past years, whether they are
Labor or Liberal or Country Party in one notable instance; or whether the
person in my position is Labor or Liberal; but never I trust,
Country Party! If I was in Mr. Dunstan's position, I might speak as he
has if he was in my position, I am certain that he would speak and act
as I have. The only difference between Mr. Dunstan and the other Premiers
is that he is a more effective speaker. The only th--na tiiat I volunteer
in this respect is ' 1h: t I wouldn't like local government to believe that
the attitude of the Australian Government, the Labor Government, or the
Labor Party in general accords to the views that Mr. Dunstan has expressed
about local government in his State. The role of local government in
Australia varies very greatly from State to State. In Queensland for
instance, local government is responsible to a much larger extent for
expenditure of the total public expenditure, national, state, local
government, than any of the other States. In South Australia I believe
it is responsible for a very small percentage of the total governmental
expenditure. The Labor Party has had at successive federal conferences
the supreme policy making body of the party, emphasised the increasing
responsibility of local government. And to take one specific instance
which Mr. Dunstan mentioned, the platform states that the administrative
arrangements should be altered to include on the Loan Council a
representative that is chosen by local government and semi-government
authorities in each State. I tried to do that last September, to
alter the financial agreement under which the Loan Council operates,
by having a representative chosen by the council of an alderman in each
State sitting on the Loan Council beside the representative of the State
Government and the representative of the Australian Government.
My efforts failed. I was trying to carry out the ALP's policy in that
respect. But we have done a very great deal for local government and
we intend to do more. It is because the State Government have in some
cases downgraded or ignored, or outsted local government, that we find
so mnay of the growing centres of Australian population badly serviced.
For instance it was unconscionable that the Sydney Water Board or
the Melbourne Metropolitan Board of Works should be so denied proper
financial resources. It is for that reason that we have madedeliberate
efforts to enable them to carry out their functions. And there is no doubt
that the Australian people responded to that effort. In that local
government referendum for instance, it was carried in New South Wales
and it was close to being carried in Victoria. It wasn't close to being
carried in the smaller States. 
7.
But in the large States it is realised that the proper facilities for
communities depends on local government getting a fairer share, having a
fairer go. I think you all should have a copy of that book we produced
last month, Australian Government Assistance to Local Government projects,
I commend it to you. You will'see the range of programs which we
have, the number of federal Departments which are involved and the way
that local government can get assistance from them.
QUESTION: In an interstate commission, which you propose to re-establish,
will you widen its powers to use it to control prices of goods travelling
interstate, using it as an anti-inflationary vehicle?
PRIME MINISTER: That is a very good idea. I will take it a-board.
There may easily be such a constitutional power available to the
Australian Government if and when it sets up the interstate commission.
You will remember that the Commission, the Constitution says that there
shall be an interstate commission. The Chifley Government set up one in
1912 I think, and then the members were appointed for 7 years and their
terms expired in 1919. No new members were ever appointed. Then the
Menzies Government in 1950 being a new broom, abolished the Act.
Now Mr. Snedden I was interested to see, asked a question in the last
Parliament about re-establishing it and I gave him an answer, it was
on the last day, it appeared in the weekly hansard, that we propose to
set it up immediately after the double dissolution. Those were prophetic
words, I am confirmed in my intention. Mr. Jones has been working on it
for some time. I will get the Attorney-General's Department to look into
your proposal. I think it is a very good one, excellent one. The number
of goods which go interstate is not great, but they are significant of
course, this is what South Australia has found. It has been unable to
although it has price justification procedures, it hasn't been able to
apply them to goods coming interstate. And New South Wales and Victoria
don't have such procedures and therefore their manufacturers or
retailers can exploit the smaller States which do have those procedures. 



NQ DATE
M/ 88 18 June 1974
CHINESE NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that
the Australian Government had received confirmation that the
Chinese Government had exploded a nuclear weapon device in the
atmosphere over its territory yesterday.
The Australian Government understood that the Chinese
explosion had been somewhat less than a megaton in size, and
that it appeared to have occurred at Lop Nor at about 4 p~ m.
yesterday. Mr Whitlam said that it was a matter of deep concern
to the Australian Government that the Chinese Government had
conducted a further nuclear test which was likely to lead to the
deposit of radio-active fallout not only within its own
territory but over a wide area including, in the longer term,
Australia.
S Since the establishment of diplomatic relations with
China in December 1972, the Australian Government had made known
to Chinese leaders its opposition to Chinese nuclear weapon tests
on a number of occasions. On 10 April 1973, the Government made
a formal protest to the Chinese Government expressing Australia's
strong opposition to the conduct of nuclear weapon tests and
reaffirmed the Australian Government's view that atmospheric
nuclear weapons testing was contrary to international law;
during his visit to China in May 1973 Dr Cairns re-stated the
Australian position to Premier Chou En-lai; he himself had
issued a statement expressing deep concern following the last
Chinese nuclear test on 27 June 1973; and soon afterwards formal
o/ 2 
notes of protest had been delivered both to the Chinese
Foreign Ministry in Peking and the Chinese Embassy in
Australia. Most recently, he had vigorously re-stated the
Australian position during his meeting with Chairman Mao
Tse-tung on 2 November 1973.
Since China did not accept the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice and was
not a party to the 1928 General Act for the Pacific Settlement
of International Disputes, it was not feasible for Australia
to initiate proceedings against China in the Court. Nevertheless9
the Australian Government considered that the Chinese Government,
as well as the French Government, had a clear obligation
towards the international community to prevent the dangers of
environmental pollution. The present Australian Government had
consistently opposed nuclear weapon testing by all countries and
would continue to work vigorously for a complete cessation of
such testing. 0 I 



J I HALIAL
PRIME MINISTER June 1974
A Press Statement No. 273
The Prime Minister, the Minister for Overseas Trade and the
Treasurer, the Ministers for Defence and for Labor and
Immigration and the President and Secretary of the A. C. T. U.
conferred in Canberra this morning.
It was decided that the committee composed of representatives
of Australian Government departments, the Australian
Council of Salaried and.-Prfessional Associations and the
Council of Commonwealth Public Service Organisations should
further investigate the possibility of obtaining alternative
work within existing establishments conducted by the Department
of Manufacturing Industry. The committee will report as
soon as practicable. Meantime no action will be taken by
the Government to reducqe employment within those establishments.
It was also decided that the Ministers for Overseas Trade,
for Urban and Regional Development and for Manufacturing
Industry and officers of the A. C. T. U. and the unions concerned
will discuss the effect of imports on employment in the
textile, clothing and footwear industries.
CANBERRA.. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 4.00 PM
b AUTHALIA,, L
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 274
June 1974
VISIT OF PRIME MINISTER TANAKA
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that
the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Kakuei Tanaka, would visit
Australia from 31 October to 6 November 1974.
Mr Whitlam recalled that during his visit to
Japan in October 1973 he had invited Mr Tanaka to visit
Australia and Mr Tanaka had accepted this invitation.
Mr Tanaka's visit will be the first by a
Japanese Prime Minister since Mr Tanaka's predecessor,
Mr Eisaku Sato, camne to Australia in October 1967.
In welcoming Mr Tanaka's visit, Mr Whitlam
said that it would represent a further significant step
in the development of friendly and co-operative relations
between Australia and Japan.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 275
June 1974
BRITISH NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST
The Australian Government has repeatedly made
clear its opposition to nuclear weapons testing by any
country in any environment. In particular the Government
has given its strong support to resolutions in the
United Nations directed against nuclear weapons testing
which is known to have been conducted systematically over
the years by the United States and the Soviet Union. Very
recently it has protested against French and Chinese nuclear
weapons tests in the atmosphere. It has expressed its
concern to the Indian Government about its recent
underground test.
The platform of the Australian Labor Party
expressly opposses the development, proliferation, possession
and use of nuclear weapons.
The Australian Government is disappointed to
learn therefore that the British Government has conducted
a nuclear weapons test underground in the United States,
after a long interval of nine years. This has occurred at
a time when other recent developments have justifiably
increased apprehension in the international community about
the nuclear arms race.
The Australian Government earnestly hopes that the
forthcoming Summit talks between the Soviet Union and the
United States will make real progress towards the ultimate
objective of a complete ban on all nuclear weapons testing.
CANBERRA. A. C. T
7-



g3
EMBARGO 8.00 P~ rm. SATURDJAY 90 JUNE 197LI
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE SECOND NATIONA~ L CONVENTION OF THE INDUJSTRIAL RELATIONS
SOCIETY " INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS THE POWER GAME"
CHEVRON HOTEL, SUJRFERS PARADISE, SATURDAY 29 JUNEF 3,97
THIS IS MY SECOND ADDRESS AS PRIME MINISTER TO THE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA. SINCE I SPOKE TO
YOU JUST OVER A YEAR AGO AT TERRIGAL, I SUPPOSE I HAVE LEARNED
MORE ABOUT THE SORT OF " POWER GAME" THAT TOOK PLACE IN THE
BRITISH TV' SERIES THAT CARRIED THAT TITLE. IHAVE HAD ONE
EXPERIENCE THAT NEVER SEEMED TO THREATEN THE ORDERED
MACHIAVELLIAN LIVES OF THE PROTAGONISTS OF THAT SERIES-I
HAVE SURVIVED AN ELECTION. HAVING SAID THAT, I WILL IGNORE THE
OBVIOUS ALLUSION To TV DRAMAS CONTAINED IN THE TITLE OF
YOUR SEMINAR, INSTEAD, FOR A MOMENT I W4ILL PURSUE AN ANALOGY
APPROPRIATE TO OUR SPORTS-MINDED NATION.
IN THE POWER GAME OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS A MOST PECULIARLY MIXED ROLE. AS A
LAW-MAKER, IT HAS SOME OF THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE GOVERNING BODY 0-
A SPORTING CODE. IT HAS SOME OF THE FUNCTIONS OF AN UMPIRE OR
REFEREE IN HELPING . TO SEE THOSE RULES IMPLEMENTED. AT TIMES
IT ACTS AS A COACH IN HELPING TO GUIDE THE OPPOSING TEAMS IN THE
PLAYING OF THE GAME. AND, AS A MAJOR EMPLOYER, THE GOVERThIENT
IS ALSO, OF COURSE, A KEY PLAYER. THE ONLY ROLE IT H4AS
ABANDONED SINCE 1972 IS THAT OF TRYING INEFFECTUALLY TO BE THE
EQUIVALENT OF THlE JUDICIAL TRIBUNAL OF A SPORT IN COLLECTING
FINES FOR WHAT SOME MIGHT JUDGE TO BE FOUL PLAY. DESPITE THE
COMPLEXITY OF ITS POSITION, THE OBJECTIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ROLE IS CLEAR: IT'MUST SEEK TO REDUCE THE HEAT, MINIMISE THE
CONFLICT IN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS. 
TO DO THIS IT MUST PURSUE TWO GOALS. IT MUST CREATE
A BODY OF LAWS TO ENABLE AUSTRALIA TO HAVE THE MOST MODERN
INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM TO AV/ OID UNNECESSARY CONFLICTS. IT MUST ALSO
HELP CREATE AN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE
FINANCIAL CAUSES OF MANY DISPUTES ARE AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE
ERADICATED. THE PROVISION OF MODERN INDUSTRIAL LAWS WAS THE PRIME
AIM OF THE AMENDMENTS TO THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT
WHICH THE GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED INTO THE PARLIAMENT LAST YEAR.
THESE AMENDMENTS WERE TWICE REJECTED BY THE SENATE AND THE
GOVERNMEN4T WAS OBLIGED TO SHELVE THEM, AT LEAST TEMPORARILY.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT AIMS CONTAINED IN THOSE AMENDMENTS
WAS THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE AMALGAMATION OF TRADE UNIONS.
THE EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF UNIONS IS ONE OF THE GREAT
PROBLEMS DEDEVILLING INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
THERE HAS BEEN A SLIGHT DECLINE IN THE NUMEER OVER THE YEARSFROM
375 IN 1956 TO 305 IN -1972 B3UT THAT IS STILL TOO MANY.
OF THOSE UNIONS, 158 HAD LESS THAN 1,000 MEMBERS; 82 HAD BETWEEN
1,00Q0 AND 5,000 MEMBERS; 28 BETWEEN 5,000 AND 20,000;
23 BETWEEN 20,000 AND 50,000; AND ONLY 14 HAD A MEMBERSHIP
OF OVER 50,0OOR. ONE NEEDS TO LOOK NO FURTHER THAN GOVERN4MENT
INSTRUMENTALITIES TO GET SOME IDEA OF THE EFFECT THIS HAS.
A TOTAL OF 28 UNIONS ARE REPRESENTED IN THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL' S
DEPARTMENT; WORKERS IN THE SYDNEY MAIL EXCHANGE ARE COVERED
BY NO LESS THAN 20 UNIONS. THE WORKFORCE OF TRANS-AUSTRALIA
AI . RLINES IS COVERED BY NO FEWER THAN 26 UNIONS, THiE MEN AND
WOMEN EMPLOYED BY THE COMMONWEALTHi RAILWAYS DELONG TO J14 UNIONS. 
I NEED ONLY DESCRIBE AN AIRLINE JOURNEY TO INDICATE THE
ABSURD COMPLEX-ITY THAT EXISTS. IF I WERE TO FLY FROM SYDNEY TO
MELBOURNE I WOULD RUN THE GAMUT OF AT LEAST 3 UNIONS. MY FLIGHT
BOOKING W1OULD BE TAKEN BY A MEMBER OF THE FEDERATED CLERKS UNION.
I WOULD BE DRIVEN TO THE AIRPORT BY A MEMBER OF THE TRANSPORT
111ORKERS UNION. MY PLANE SEAT WOULD BE ALLOCATED BY A MEMBER OF
THE FEDERATED CLERKS UION. MY BAGGAGE WOULD BE TAKEN BY A
MEMIBER OF THE TRANSPORT WORKERS UN'IONI. THE PASSENGER LIST WOULD BE
C HECKED BY A MEMBER OF THE AIRPORT TRANSPORT OFFICERS' FEDERATION.
SECURITY FOR THE FLIGHT WOULD BE HANDLED BY A MEMBER OF THE
FEDERATED MISCELLANEOUS WORKERS' UNION. THE AIRCRAFT WOULD BE
CHECKED BY MEMBERS OF THE PROFESSIONAL PADio ENGINEERS INSTITUTE
OR THE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY OF ENGINEERS OR THE AMALGAMATED ! AETAL
tIORKERS' UNION OR THE ELECTRICAL TRADES UNION, OR THE ASSOCIATION
OF LICENSED AIRCRAFT ENGINEERS. THE PLANE WOULD BE FUELED BY A
MEMBER OF THE TRANSPORT ! JORKERS UNION. IT WOUJLD BE CLEARED FOR
TAKE-OFF BY THE CIVIL AIR OPERATORS' OFFICERS ASSOCIATION. IT WOULD
BE CREWED BY MEMBERS OF THE FEDERATION OF AIR PILOTS, THE FLIGHT
ENGINEERS ASSOCIATION AND THE AIR HOSTESSES ASSOCIATION, THE FOOD
SERVED ON THE PLANE WOULD BE COOKED BY THE LIQUOR TRADES UNION.
THE EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF UNIONS CREATES PROBLEMS BOTH FOR
THEIR MEMBERS AND FOR THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE. THE FRAGMENTATION
OF UNION RESOURCES IN TERMS OF STAFF, FINANCE AND FACILITIES
IMPOSES LIMITATIONS ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THEIR WORK. THE
RESEARCH RESOURCES OF UNIONS ARE MEAGRE AND SUFFER BADLY IN
ANY COMPARISON WITH HIGHLY ORGANISED EMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS.
THE FRAGMENTA1ION CAN LEAVE UNIONS IN AN ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE POSITION
IF THEY ARE DEALING WITH A WILL ORGANISED EMPLOYERS GROUP OR A
A
MAJOR COMPANY. TAKE THIE EXAMPLE OF EM~ PLOYEES OF fM ILT I-NAT IONAL
CORPORDATION. THE AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES OF SUCH A CORPORATION MIGHT 
WELL BELONG To 6 UNIONS OR MlORE. IN ANY NEGOTIATIONS THOSE UNIONS'
ARE CONFRONTED BY AN ORGANISATION WITH THE BACKING OF ENORMOUS
FINANCIAL POWER AND OTHER RESOURCES. IT PLACES THE EMPLOYEES AT
AN ENORMOUS DISADVANTAGE FOR THEIR INTERESTS TO RE REPRESENTED
BY DIFFERENT GROUPS OF VARYING SIZE WHEN CONFRONTED BY SUCH
CORPORATE COHESION. THE DISPERSAL OF UNIONS MUST ALSO INEV/ ITABLY
DIMINISH THEIR POLITICAL INFLUENCE.
THE COMMUNITY SUFFERS BECAUSE THE LARGE NUMBER OF UNIONS GIVES
RISE TO DEMARCATION DISPUTES WHICH ARE A COMMON OCCURRENCE IN THIS
COUNTRY. AN EXAMPLE OF THE PROBLEM CAN BE FOUND IN THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL'S TEPARTMENT WHERE AT LEAST SIX UNIONS OR
ASSOCIATIONS ARE ELIGIBLE TO COVER EMPLOYEES IN THE TECHNICAL
GRADES. ACTION BY ONE ORGANISATION TO IMPROVE THE CAREER
STRUCTURE OR TO CHANGE THE RANGE OF WORK OF ITS MEMBERS CAN
IMPINGE ON THE RIGHTS OF MEMBERS OF OTHER ORGANISATIONS.
DEMARCATION DISPUTES ARE A READY SOURCE OF PUBLIC
EXASPERATION WITH UNIONS. IT IS NOT SURPRISING IF THE PUBLIC
BECOMES EXTREMELY ANNOYED THAT IT IS DENIED A BASIC SERVICE FOR
SOME TIME BECAUSE OF A STRIKE FOUGHT NOT EVEN OVER WAGES AND
CONDITIONS PUT BECAUSE OF A POWER STRUGGLE BETWEEN UNIONS.
YET THE CONCILIATION AND PREITRATION ACT AT PRESENT
MAKES IT UNNECESSARILY DIFF ICULT FOR UNIONS TO AMALGAMATE.
AT PRESENT, FOR AN AMALGAMATION PROPOSAL TO BE ADOPTED, TWO
CONDITIONS MUST BE SATISFIED: AT LEAST HALF THlE MEMBERS MUST
VOTE AND MORE THAN HALF OF THE FORMAL VOTES MUST BE IN FAVOUR
OF THE AMALGAMATION. IN CONTRAST, THE GOVERNMENT ' S AMENDMENTS
WOULD MAKE IT NECESSARY MERELY FOR A MAJORITY OF THOSE VOTING
TO APPROVE OF AMIALGAMIATION; IT WOULD NO LONGER BE NECESSARY
FOR 50% OF THE UNION MEMBERS INVOLVED TO VOTE ON THE ISSUE. 11/ 5 
ALTHOUGH IT HAS BEEN TWICE REBUFFED BY THE SENATE, THE
GOVERNMENT WILL PERSIST IN ITS ATTEMPTS TO ACHIEVE THIS VITAL
LEGISLATIVE CHANGE.
THE GlOVERNMENT IS ALSO DETERMINED TO SIMPLIFY THE
PRESENT SYSTEM OF INDUSTRIAL REGISTRATION. AUSTRALIA HAS FIVE
INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION REGISTRATION SYSTEMS. THE AUSTP LIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT REQUIRES AN EMPLOYER OR
EMPLOYEE ORGANISATION TO BE REGISTERED UNDER THE ACT BEFORE
IT CAN REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION SYSTEM. THERE IS A S: MILAR REQUIREMENT IN THE
INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION LEGISLATION IN hIEW SOUTH ' JALES, QUEENSLAND,
SOUTi AUSTRALIA AND ' ESTERN AUSTRALIA. THE EFFECT OF
REGISTRATION UNDER EACH OF THESE LEGISLATIVE SYSTEMS IS THAT
EACH REGISTRATION CREATES AN ORGANISATION WITH ITS OWN LEGAL
IDENTITY. THIS CREATES ABSURD COMPLICATIONS IN INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS, COMPLICATIONS WHICH WERE POINTED OUT BY THE AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRIAL COURT IN THE CASE OF MOORE V DOYLE IN FEBRUARY ] 069.
AT THE CONCLUSION OF THEIR JUDGMENT IN THAT CASE, CHIEF JUSTICE
SPICER, MR JUSTICE SMITHERS AND PIR JUSTICE KERR ( AS HE THEN WAS)
SAID: " A SYSTEM OF TRADE UNION ORGANISATION IS URGENTLY
NEEDED WHICH WOULD ENABLE THE ONE BODY TO REPRESENT
ITS RELEVANT MEMBERS IN BOTH THE FEDERAL AND STATE
ARBITRATION SYSTEMS AND IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE FOR
FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES TO EXAMINE THE QUESTION
WHETHER ORGANISATIONS AND TRADE UNIONS'CAN BE
PROVIDED WITH SUCH A SYSTEM.
WE HAVE DECIDED TO REFER OUR JUDGMENT IN THIS MATTER AND 
6.
THESE REMARKS TO THE ATTORNEY-C-ENERAL FOR THE COMMONWEALTH
IN THE HOPE THAT IT MAY BE POSSIBLE, AFTER CONSULTATION
BETWEEN COMONWEALTH AND STATE ATTORNEYS-GENERAL, THE TRADE
UNIONS, BOTH FEDERAL AND STATE, AND OTHER INTERESTED
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES TO ARRANGE FOR THE EXAMINATION OF
THE IMPORTANT ORGANISATIONSL MATTERS TO WHICH WE HAVE
REFERRED.
DESPITE THIS URGENT APPEAL THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT AND
THE NON-LABOR STATE GOVERNMENTS DID NOTHING. SO IN JANUARY LAST
YEAR I WROTE TO THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND AND
WESTERN AUSTRALIA SU3GESTING THAT THEY MIGHT CONSIDER ADOPTING A
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL AIMED AT PROVIDING SOLUTIONS TO THE
PROBLEM. THE PROPOSAL PROVIDED FOR THE " RECOGNITION" OF A STATE
BRANCH OF A FEDERAL UNION UNDER STATE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION
LEGISLATION. A " RECOGNISED" STATE PRANCH WOULD NOT HAVE A LEGAL
IDENTITY DISTINCT FROM THE FEDERAL UNION BUT WOULD EXIST AS A
PORTION OF THE FEDERAL UNION AND ACT AS THE FEDERAL UNION WITHIN
THE STATE INDUSTRIAL JURISDICTION. THE PREMIER OF OUEENSLAND
INDICATED THAT HIS STATE DID NOT FAVOUR THE FEDERAL BODY OF THE
UNION BEING THE BODY RECOGNISED UNDER STATE LAW. THE OREMIER OF
NEW SOUTH '! ALES SAID THAT HIS GOVERNMENT WAS STILL CONSIDERING
THE MATTER.. HESTERN AUSTRALIA DID NOT REPLY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS APPOINTED AN INQUIRY UNDER
MR JUSTICE L. B. SWEENEY TO EXAMINE THE PROBLEMS DISCLOSED DY THE
MOORE V DOYLE CASE. THE JUDGE HAS BEEN ASKED TOEXAMINE THE
DESIRABILITY OF A SYSTEM OF ORGANISATION AND/ OR REGISTRATION WHICH
WOULD ENABLE THE ONE BODY TO REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN BOTH
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE ARBITRATION SYSTEMS, HOW THIS COULD EE
ACHIEVED, THE EFFECT OF EXISTING REGISTRATION SYSTEMS ON EMPLOYER 
AND EMPLOYEE ORGANISATIONS AND THE PROBLEMS AND DIFFICULTIES TO
WHICH THE P. RESENT SYSTEMS GIVE RISE. WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND
N~ EW SOUTH WALES HAVE INDICATED THEY WOULD CO-OPERATE WITH THE
COMMITTEE, WHILE THE Q~ UEENSLAND PREMIER SAID, AFTER THE OUEENSLAND
INDUSTRIAL REGISTRAR HAD INFORMED M4R JUSTICE SWEENEY OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT' S POLICY, THAT THE QUESTION OF HOW HIS GOVERNMENT
IVOULD BE ABLE TO FURTHER ASSIST THE COMMITTEE WOULD BE KEPT
UNDER REVIEW. HIS REPORT IS EXPECTED ABOUT THE END OF THIS
MONTI]. ITURN NOW TO THE SECOND GOAL WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
MUST PURSUE TO HELP MAINTAIN HARMONIOUS INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS:
THE CREATION OF AN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH
THE FINANCIAL CAUSES OF MANY DISPUTES ARE MINJIMISED. IT
SHOULD BE CLEAR TO ALL BY NOWI THAT MUCH OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ACTIVITY IS DEDICATED TO THIS END. OUR POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
HAVE BEEN DIRECTED TOWARDS. REDUCING AND EV/ ENTUALLY ERADICATING
INEQUALITIES IN OUR SOCIETY WHILE AT THE SAME TIME MAINTAINING
A HEALTHY PATTERN OF EFFICIENT ECONOMIC GROWTH. AT THIS POINT
I WOULD LIKE PARTICULARLY TO EMPHASISE OUR EFFORTS TO CREATE A
MORE EQUAL SOCIETY.. THE ACHIEVEMENT OF EQUALITY MEANS MUCH MORE
THAN SIMPLY PROVIDING HIGHER WAGES AND SALARIES. IT MEANS
PROVIDING A RANGE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES TO SATISFY THE
REASONABLE NEEDS OF ALL CITIZENS A1ND TO CREATE REASONABLE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL CITIZENS. -THIS IN TURN MEANS THE
CREATION OF THE BEST COMMUNITY SERVICES THAT THE COUNTRY
CAN AFFORD. IT IS NO COINCIDENCE THAT IN OUR FIRST iSMONTHS
IN OFFICE WE HAVE CONCENTRATED SO MUCH OF OUR EFFORTS IN THE
FIELDS OF EDUCATION, HEALTH AND URBAN AND REGIONAL DFVELOPMENT. 
AN INCREASED WAGE ALONE IS NOT GOING TO ENSURE THAT A WORKER'S
CHILDREN WILL RECEIVE A PROPER EDUCATION. AN INCREASED WAGE
WILL NOT GUARANTEE THAT WORKER'S FAMILY ACCESS TO HIGH OUALITY
MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL CARE AT A REASONABLE COST. AN INCREASED
WAGE WILL NOT GRANT HIM ADEOUATE TRANSPORT, ROADS, CHILD CARE
FAC&gt;' flIES, RECREATION OUTLETS AND THE LIKE. IT WILL NOT
EVEN NECESSARILY GUARANTEE HIM PROPER HOUSING, PARTICULARLY
I t~ TVES IN A CITY WITH RAMPANT INFLATION IN LAND PRICES.
THE PROVISION OF ADEQ7UATE SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES
OF THIS KINE ;' 7UST DEPAND ONIBROAD COMMUNITY ACTION; AND THAT
MEANS GOVERNMENTIACTION. THAT IS WHY SO MUCH OF OUR PUBLIC
SPENDING HAS BEEN DIRECTED TOWARDS BUILDING NEW SCHOOLS AND
TRAINING NEW TEACHERS; TOWARDS ESTABLISHING COMMUNITY HEALTH
CENTRES AND HOSPITALS IN CLOSE PROXIMITY TO WHERE PEOPLE
( NOT JUST DOCTORS) LIVE; TOWARDS THE PROVISION OF BASIC
FACILITIES IN THE MASS OF SUBURBS WHICH HAVE PEEN NEGLECTED
SINCE THEIR EMERGENCE IN THE POST-WAR YEARS; TOWARDS THE
CREATION OF NEW CITIES; AND TOWARDS THE BUILDING OF MORE
HOUSING FOR LOW-INCOME EARNERS.
FORTUNATELY, THE ELECTORATE HAS JUST GIVEN THE
GOVERNMENT A FURTHER THREE YEARS IN WHICH TO PURSUE THESE
GOALS. THEIR FULL ACHIEVEMENT WILL, OF COURSE, TAKE LONGER
THAN THAT. JBUT WHEN THEY ARE ACHIEVED, WAGE AND SALARY
EARNERS WILL NO LONGER BE QUITE AS DEPENDENT ON THEIR PAY
PACKETS FOR THE SATISFACTION OF THESE NEEDS. THIS WILL, IF
YOU LIKE, MOVE ALL OF US AT LEAST SOME DISTANCE AWAY FROM
WHAT MIGHT BE TERMED AN INCOMES MENTALITY. EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITIES AND SERVICES MUST IN ITSELF REDUCE SOME OF THE
CAUSES OF CONFLICT IN OUR SOCIETY AND IN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS. 
TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS AND INDEED TO ACHIEVE ANY
KIND OF RE-ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES WE MUST, OF COURSE,
MAINTAIN A HEALTHY ECONOMY. W'OULD EMPHASISE MY USE OF THE
WORD MAINTAIN IN MY LAST SENTENCE.. CONTRARY TO WHAT SOME
PROPHETS OF DOOM ARE NOW SAYING, ' IUSTRALIA HAS AN ESSENTIALLY
HEALTHY ECONOMY. D) ESPITE WHAT OUR ECONOMIC JEREMIAHS MIGHT
SAY, THE LAST 18 MONTHS HAVE BEEN MARKED BY EXCEPTIONALLY
RAPID GROWTH. LET ME GIVE A FEW EXAMPLES TO DEMONSTRATE THIS.
GROSS NATIONAL EXPENDITURE ROSE IN REAL TERMS BY 12.4 PERCENT
IN THE YEAR TO THE MIARCH QUARTER OF 19/ 4, COMPARED WITH
IN THE PREVIOUS YEAR AND PERCENT IN TH E YEAR BEFORE THAT.
GROSS NON-FARM PRODUCTION INCREASED BY PERCENT COMPARED WITH
4.2 PERCENT AND 3.3 PERCENT IN THE PREVIOUS TWO. YEARS. CIVILIAN
EMPLOYMENT INCREASED BY MORE THAN 200,000 OR 4., 5 PERCENT, THE
LARGEST PERCENTAGE INCREASE IN ANY COMPARABLE PERIOD SINCE 11I
ALTHOUGH THE SHARE MARKET . MIGHT NOT REFLECT IT, COMPANY INCOME
HAS INCREASED BY 18. q PERCENT.
SOME PROBLEMS DO EXIST IN CERTAIN INDUSTRIES. RUT I T
WOULD BE WRONG TO SEE ALL OF THOSE DIFFICULTIES AS INDICATING
AN OVERALL ECONOMIC PROBLEM OR, TO BE DEFENSIVE FOR A MOMENT,
TO BLAME THE GOVERNMENT FOR THEM. IT IS SURELY AT LEAST
QUESTIONABLE FOR A CAR MANUFACTURER TO BLAME THE 93OVERNMENT FOR
ITS FAILURE TO CAPTURE A LARGE ENOUGH SHARE OF THE MARKET FOR
ITS PRODUCTS WHEN THE LATEST FIGURES FOR MOTOR VEHICLE
REGISTRATIONS SHOWS THEY ARE RUNNING AT A HIGH LEVEL. I I/ i q 
THE FACT REMAINS, HOWEVER, THAT AUSTRALIA, IN COMMON
WITH OTHER COUNTRIES, IS UNDERGOING A PERIOD OF EXCESSIVE
INFLATION,' IN CASE ANYONE SHOULD THINK THAT THIS IS A NEW
DISCOVERY FOR US, SOME OF YOU MAY REMEMBER'MY ADDRESS TO THE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SOCIETY IN ( MAY LAST YEAR" " IT HAS
ALREADY BECOME CLEAR," I SAID THEN, " THAT THE THREAT OF
INFLATION WILL BE THE MOST SERIOUS ECONOMIC PROBLEM FACING
OVER NMENT." AT ANOTHER POINT IN MY ADDRESS I SAID:
" LET THERE BE NO DOUBT OF HOW SERIOUSLY my GOVERNMENT REGARDS
THIS PROBLEM OR THE STRENGTH OF OUR DETERMINATION TO TACKLE IT."
' E HAVE EXHIBITED SUCH A DETERMINATION EVER SINCE WE CAME INTO
OFFICE. As SOON AS WE-WERE ELECTED IN 1972, WE REVALUED THE
DOLLAR TO CUT THE PRICE OF IMPORTS AND WE ESTABLISHED THE
DEPOSIT REQUIREMENT TO REDUCE THE INFLOW OF FOREIGN MONEYS.
WE EFFECTIVELY REVALUED THE DOLLAR TWICE AFTER THAT. V! E HAVE
TIGHTENED MONETARY POLICY TO REMOVE THE EXCESSIVE AMOUNT OF
MONEY IN THE ECONOMY, IN JULY WE CUT ALL TARIFFS By 25/ 1 IN
ORDER TO DECREASE THE PRICE OF IMPORTS AND TO RESTRAIN LOCAL
PRICE RISES BY INCREASING COMPETITION. W" E HAVE ESTABLISHED THE
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL WHICH HAS UNDOUBTEDLY PLAYED A
SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN RESTRAINING PRICE INCREA-0ES. ',-;. ITEVER OUR
CRITICS MIGHT SAY,. WE EVEN RESTRAINED THE GROWTH IN GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURE, / 11 
DESPITE THESE MEASURES, WE NEED TO TAKE FURTHER
ACTION TO BEAT INFLATION. THE VERY BUOYANCY WHICH HAS BEEN
A FEATURE OF OUR ECONOMIC GROWTH HAS HAD ITS DISADVANTAGES;
DEMA1ND HAS CONTINUED TO BE EXCESSIVE. THAT IS WHY, AT THE
PREMIERS CONFERENCE EARLIER THIS MONTH, I ANNOUNCED FURTHER
MEASURES TO CURB INFLATION. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IS EXAMINING ITS OWN EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS SO THAT IT CAN PLAY
ITS PART, SAID THEN THAT WE WOULD LIMIT THE BUDGET ALLOCATION
FOR THE POST OFFICE IN 107LI-1075 TO NOT MORE THAN THE ACTUAL
AMOUNT ALLOCATED IN 1973-1974; WE WOULD PUT RESTRAINTS ON
CAPITAL WOtR-KS AND OTHER CAPITAL EXPENDITURE BY THE GOVERNMENT;
WE WOULD ABOLISH THE PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICES SUBSIDY SCHEME;
WE WOULD LIMIT THE GROWTH OF THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE;
WE WOULD REDUCE THE AMOUNT RECOMMEN DEDFOR SPENDING ON ROADS
BY THE BUREAU OF ROADS. AT THE SAME TIME THE GOVERNMENT FOUND
IT NECESSARY TO HOLD DOWN THE INCREASE IN FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
TO BE PROVIDED TO THE STATES IN 1074-1975, IN DOING THIS, I
CALLED ON THE STATES TO PLAY THEIR PART IN BEATING INFLATION.
THE GOVERNMENT'S MEASURES HAVE INEVITABLY AROUSED SOME
HOSTILITY. IT TAS BEING SAID THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
FORCING THE STATES TO RAISE TAXES AND CHARGES. IT IS ONLY FAIR
TO POINT OUT THAT IT COULD BE JUST AS EASILY SAID THAT THE STATES
ARE TRYING TO FORCE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT T'O RAISE IT'S TAXES
AND CHARGES. FOR IF MORE MONEY IS NEEDED FOR STATE SERVICES
IT CAN BE MADE AVAILABLE IN ONE OF ONLY TWO WAYS: EITHER BY THE
COMMONWEALTH RAISING MORE MONEY A1ND PASSING IT ON TO THE STATES
OR BY THE STATES THEMSELVES RAISING EXTRA MONEY. IT IS ALL VERY
WELL FOR THE STATES TO EXPECT THE COMMONWEALTH TO CARRY THE FULL
OPPROBRIUM FOR UNPOPULAR MEASURES AIMED AT RAISING EXTRA MONEY. 
IDO NOT THINK IT IS UNREASONABLE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
TO EXPECT THE STATES TO SHARE IN SUCH PROBLEM. THERE IS ANOTHER
POINT TO BE MADE ABOUT THE ACCUSATION THAT THE* AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS FORCING THE STATES TO RAISE TAXES AND CHARGES.
OUR MAIN EMPHASIS HERE IS, IN FACT, ON ECONOMIC RATIONALITYPUBLIC
ENTERPRISES -BOTH COMMON4WEALTH AND STATE MUST GO CLOSER
TO PAYING THEIR OWN WAY; THEIR SERVICES MUST BECOME MORE CHARGES
G4rU4S ERS AND LESS CHARGES ON TAXPAYERS. AT THE SAME TIME, THEY
MUST BECOME MORE EFFICIENT. ADMITTEDLY ALL GOVERNMENTS IN
AUSTRALIA FACE THE PROBLEM THAT IT IS LEFT TO THEM TO CONDUCT
THE LEAST PROFITABLE ENTERPRISES. BUT THIS SHOULD BE wo EXCUSE
FOR AVOIDING RATIONAL CHARGES AND EFFICIENT OPERATION. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ACCEPTING ITS SHARE OF THE RESPONSIBILITY
IN THIS DIRECTION. IT ASKS NO MORE THAN4 THAT OF THE STATES.
AT LEAST SOME OF THE CRITICISM THAT HAS BEEN-DIRECTED
AGAINST US HAS COME FROM THE VERY PEOPLE WHO HAVE URGED ACTION
UPON US AND EVEN AT TIMES OVER THE VERY MEASURES THEY HAVE
SUGGESTED. THiE PRICE OF LAND AND HOUSING IS A GOOD EXAMPLE$
ONE OF THE MOST DAMAGING ELEMENTS IN THE INFLATIONARY BOOM
IN THE PAST YEAR OR SO HAS BEEN THE SOARING PRICE OF HOUSES.
NIOW, DUE TO THE CUTTING DOWN OF-THE PREVIOUSLY EXCESSIVE FLOW
OF FINANCE INTO BUILDING., HOUSE PRICES APPEAR TO BE TENDING TO
FLATTEN OUT. PRICES OF COSTLIER HOUSES HAVE TENDED TO DROP.
WHILE NO GOVERNMENT LIKES TO SEE INTEREST-RATES FOR HOME-BUYING
INCREASE UNDULY, WE MUST PURSUE THIS SITUATION FOR A WHILE
IF WE ARE TO HAVE ANY CHANCE OF DELIVERING A SOLID BLOW TO
INFLATION IN THIS AREA.-W~ E MUST DESTROY THE SELF-FULFILLING
PROPHECY OF MANY PEOPLE THAT THE PRICE OF LAND WILL ALWAYS RISE
MORE RAPIDLY THAN INFLATION. WE MUST ALSO REDUCE THE EXCESS DEMAND
IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR OF THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IF WE ARE TO 
NONE OF THE DECISIONS THAT WE HAVE HAD TO MAKE HAVE
BEEN EASY. WE WILL BE EXTREMELY VIGILANT. TO MAKE SURE THAT, IF
ANY. UNPREDICTABLE OR EXTREME RESULTS FLOW FROM OUR MEASURES, WE
CAN TAKE APPROPRIATE ACTION. I CERTAINLY GIVE THAT PLEDGE IN
THE AREA OF EMPLOYMENT. TESPITE THE MORE SENSATIONAL HEADLINES,
DOES ANYONE REALLY BELIEVE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY,
WHICH OWES ITS EXISTENCE AND SURVIVAL TO WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS,
WOULD PURSUE POLICIES DESIGNED TO PUT THOSE PEOPLE OUT OF WORK?
VE CAME INTO GOVERNMENT, PLEDGED TO RESTORE FULL EMPLOYMENT.
WE ACHIEVED THAT OBJECTIVE VERY QUICKLY. WE WILL CONTINUE TO
PURSUE IT. THE KIND OF ADJUSTMENT WHICH WE ARE TRYING TO MAKE
TO THE USTRALIAN ECONOMY IS A COMPLEX AND DIFFICULT EXERCISE.
WE HAVE ALREADY SHOWN A FLEXIBILITY OF APPROACH TO MEET
CHANGED NEEDS OR OVERCOME PROBLEMS THAT MIGHT ARISE, OUR
RELAXATION OF THE OVERSEAS CAPITAL DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS AND
OF STATUTORY RESERVE DEPOSITS ARE EXAMPLES OF THIS FLEXIBILITY,
THERE CAN BE NO DENYING, HOWEVER, THAT DEMAND INFLATION HAS
BEEN A PROBLEM FOR SOME TIME AND ACTION TO COUNTER HAS BEEN
NECESSARY. WHAT WE MUST DO NOW IS AVOID ANOTHER PROBLEM, COST-PUSH
INFLATION. TO DO THIS, WE WILL NEED THE CO-OPERATION OF THE
WHOLE COMMUNITY. INDUSTRY MUST MODERATE ITS PRICE INCREASES,
As. I HAVE MENTIONED, THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL HAS HELPED
IN THIS AREA, IF THE SENATE IS WILLING, WE WILL BAN COLLUSIVE
PRICE FIXING BY COMPANIES, EMPLOYEES MUST ALSO PLAY THEIR PART.
WE CANNOT CONTINUE TO HAVE ANNUAL WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES OF
THE ORDER OF 20%. 
-14-
EMPLOYEES SEEKING THESE INCREASES ARE IN DANGER OF BECOMING
LIKE SQUIRRELS IN A CAGED WHEEL: NO MATTER HOW FAST THEY RUN,
THE WHEEL ( INFLATION) ONLY GOES FASTER THEY STILL DO NOT
ADVANCE. IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS
INTERESTED IN THE IDEA OF SOME FORM OF REGULAR COST OF LIVING
ADJUSTMENTS TO WAGES AND SALARIES, OR WAGE INDEXATION, TO USE
THE CURRENTLY POPULAR TERMa EMPLOYEES WOULD NO LONGER FEEL
COMPELLED TO SEEK HUGE INCREASES AS A HEDGE AGAINST INFLATION
IF THEY WERE OFFERED SOME REAL INCOME PROTECTION. ' 4E THEREFORE
WELCOME THE DECISION OF THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION
COMMISSION IN ITS 19/ LI ' NATIONAL WAGE CASE JUDGMENT TO CALL A
CONFERENCE "/ TO-SEE WHETHER CONSENSUS CAN BE REACHED ON THE TWO
COUNTERACTING ISSUES WAGE FIXATION METHODS AND WAGE
I NDEXAT ION" THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT A REVIEW OF THESE ISSUES IS
TIMELY. THE ' ATIONAL WAGE INCREASE OF ABOUT WEEK
BECOMES QUITE MEANINGLESS IN PROTECTING THE INTERESTS OF THE
LOWER PAID WORKERS WHILE INDUSTRY AWARDS ARE BEING INCREASED
BY AGREEMENT IN INDEPENDENT NEGOTIATIONS AT LEVELS RANGING
FROM $ 15 TO $ 25 A WEEK. THE ULTIMATE RESULT OF THIS PROCESS
WILL BE THAT THE WAGES OF WORKERS IN INDUSTRIES COVERED BY
STRONG UNIONS WILL INCREASE DISPROPORTIONATELY TO THOSE OF
WORKERS WHO RELY ENTIRELY ON THE COMMISSION FOR WAGE MOVEMENTS.
THE IDEA OF WIDENING THE WAGE NEGOTIATING PROCESS WHICH TAKES
PLACE IN SUCH INDUSTRIES AS THE METAL TRADES ON AN ANNUAL BASIS
TO INCLUDE ALL SECTORS OF INDUSTRY IS, IN THE GOVERNMENT'S
VIEW, A GOOD ONE IF IT CAN BE ACHIEVED. 



ESTABLISHMENT OFDIOATCRLTOSWHKUAT
reltinswihouwit Nroilmsi ha h xhneofrpeetto
importaneA um Mnstrali atnohid reprenin inte
Middl m ast negoun. e oa h salsmn fdpoai
* M Th appointmenthof the firstAnugst raleAbssnado
touKuwait walstxete texiannounced shrlty. , bu as 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 2/ 6
1 July 1974
NEW MEMBERS OF AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE
ARTS AND ITS BOARDS
The Prime minis-ter today announced the names of 46
new members of the Australian Council for the Arts and its
seven specialist boards. These new members will replace
foundation members of the Council and Boards whose terms end
on 30 June. In announcing the names the Prime Minister said that
he had decided to implement at this stage the principle of
rotating membership on which the new organisation would be based.
The system meant that the Council and Boards would have an annual
changeover of a proportion of the membership while keeping a
working continuity of experienced people. Over a period of
years this system would enable many Australians to participate
in the work of the Council. It would also ensure a flow of
new ideas and values.
The Prime Minister said that the list of new appointments
included many people who had put their names forward in response
to a public request by the Council for people wishing to serve
in this way. The Prime Minister expressed his thanks to the many
hundreds of people who had offered their services. He said that
these names would be kept on a list for future reference when new
vacancies occurred. The enthusiastic response from such a wide
sector of the community was a matter for great encouragement.
Mr Whitlam said that he wished to express his great
gratitude to those members ending -their terms of office. " The
establishment phase of any new national institution necessarily
involves a period of difficulty and considerable dedication on the
part of those involved," he said. " In the case of the Council for
the Arts, many of Australia's best artists and many people from
the general community with very heavy personal responsibilities
have been willing to give most generously of their time and interest
to plan an organisation appropriate to the particular needs of the
arts and to sit on boards and committees to establish policies
and decide on financial allocations. Without the generosity and
enthusiasm of these people we would not have succeeded in generating
the degree of activity and wide interest in the arts which have
become apparent over the last 18 months. The sacrifices made by
members with busy careers indicate a dedication to the interests
of the arts of which Australia may feel truly proud". 
-2-
Mr Whitlam said that the new appointments had been
made with a particular eye to one aspect of Government policy in
the arts namely the aim of increasing awareness, appreciation
and participation in the arts throughout the general community.
" We must at all times ensure through the Council for the Arts
that Australia provides for the interests of its best professionals
and enables people to plan and pursue careers in the arts at the
very highest level in their own cou ' ntry. However this objective
would be empty without a commensurate degree of community
interest and involvement," the Prime Minister said. " Many of the
new members will be able through their background and experience to
contribute to policies which will enable the arts to pervade the
whole texture of our society so that no citizen will be deprived
of an opportunity to enjoy what the arts have to offer either as
a participant or as a member of -the interested public."
The list of members appointed from 1. July is as
follows: COUNC IL
CHAIRMAN Professor P. KarmelA. C. T. Chairman, Australian
Universities Commission
GENERAL Mr J. Menadue,
Mrs B. Burstall
Mr Justice R. M. Hope
Mr C. P. Bogard
Dr K. McKinnon
Mr W. Curran N. S. W.
Victoria N. S. W.
N. S. W.
A. C. T.
Victoria Managing Director,
News Ltd.
Teacher: La Mama Theatre
Chairman, Old Tote Theatre
Managing Director, Home
Units of Australia Pty Ltd:
Director, Nimrod St
Theatre. Chairman, Australian
Schools Commission
Secretary, Australian
Meat Industry Employees'
Union: Potter
Mr E. Costanzo
BOARD CHAIRMEN
Mrs Nancy Keesing
Mr John Mostyn
** Mrs Marea Gazzard
** Mr John Baily N. S. W. Editor " La Fiamma"
( See Board Lists for State and
Qualification)
Literature Board
Theatre Board
Crafts Board
Visual Arts Board 
** Mr Phillip Adams
** Mr Ken Tribe
** Mr Dick Roughsey
GOVERNMENT, Sir John Bunting, C. B. E.
Mr A. P. Renouf, O. B. E.
Mr J. H. M. Oswin
ARTISTS Mr David Williamson
Professor Ian Turner
Miss Doreen Warburton
Mrs Barbara Manning
Mr John Curro
Mrs Joan Campbell
THEATRE BOARD
CHAIRMAN Mr John Mostyn
Mr Colin Cave
Mr Anthony Steel
Mr Tom Brown
Mrs Patricia Wynn
Mr Don Crosby
Mrs Dorothy Sherry
Mr John Sumner Film and Television Board
Music Board
Aboriginal Arts Board
Department of
Cabinet Department of
Department of
Victoria Victoria N. S. W.
Tasmania Queens land
W. A.
N4. S. W.
Victoria S. A.
N. S . W.
S. A.
N. S. W.
Tasmania Victoria the Prime Minister and
Foreign Affairs
the Media
Playwright Writer: Associate
Professor of History,
Monash University
Director, Q Theatre:
Actress Director: Theatre in
Education Conductor, Queensland
Youth Orchestra
Potter Chairman, Friends of the
Opera Director, Adult Education
Theatre Administrator
Theatre Consultant
Theatre patron
Actor Board member Tasmanian
Youth Theatre: Theatre
Royal Director and Administrator,
Melbourne Theatre Co.
/ 4 
Miss Tessa Mallos
Dr Allan Coles
Mr William Hannan
VISUAL ARTS BOARD
CHA IRMAN
Mr John Baily
Mr R. Robertson-Swann
Mr David Thomas
Mr Fred Williams
Mrs Ann Lewis
Mr James Gleeson
Mr Geoff Parr
Mr James Davenport
Mr Neil Clerehan
Professor Ralph Elliott
Miss Lenore Nicklin
MUSIC BOARD
CHAIRMAN
SMr Ken Tribe
Mr Don Banks
Mr John Hopkins
Mr John Painter
Mrs Elizabeth Silsbury
Mr Bruce Clarke -4-
N. S. W.
Queens land
Victoria Adelaide N. S. W.
N. S. W.
Victoria N. S. W.
N. S. W.
Tasmania N. S. W.
Victoria
A. C. T.
N. S. W.
N. S. W.
A. C. T.
Victoria N. S. W.
S. A.
Victoria Actress Head, Department of
Physical Education,
Queensland University
Writer: Director:
Teacher engaged in migrant
education. Gallery Director
Sculptor: teacher
Gallery Director
Painter Private Gallery
Painter: Writer
Photographer: Painter
President, Contemporary
Art Society
Architect Master of University House:
President, Australian
Society for Education
through Art
Journalist
Lawyer: President,
Musica Viva
Composer Victorian College of Arts:
Conductor Cellist Teachers' College, S. A.,
Music Education
Composer of Contemporary,,
POP, Rock and Jazz Music 
Mr Craig McGregor
Mr Harry Bluck
Mr John Winther
Mrs N. Giese
Mr Mike Williams N. S. W.
W. A.
N. S. W.
N. T.
N. S. W. Music Critic and Writer
Secretary, W. A. Branch
Musicians' Union of
Australia General Manager,
Australian Opera
President, Arts Council
of Australia DivisiorO
Journalist, Jazz Performer
CRAFTS BOARD
Chairman Mrs Marea Gazzard
Mr Les Blakeborough
Mrs J. de Gruchy
Mr M. Isaacs
Mr R. J. Richards
Mr F. Belgiorno-Nettis
Mr T. Heath
Mrs Solvig Baas-Becking
Mr Dennis Colsey
Mrs Karin Le Mercier
Mr Ross Hohnen
FILM AND TELEVISION BOARD
Chairman Mr Phillip Adams
Mr Tom Jeffrey
Mrs Dawn Brown N. S. W.
Tasmania Queensland N. S. W.
S. A.
N. S. W.
N. S. W.
A. C. T.
Victoria S. A.
A. C. T.
Victoria N. S. W.
Victoria Potter Potter Designer: Gallery
Director Solicitor, patron
Jeweller: Curator
Patron
Architect: Writer
Weaver: President Crafts
Association, A. C. T.
Designer: Chairman,
Regional Galleries
Association of Australia
Manager Design Centre,
Adelaide President, Industrial
Design Council
Film Producer
President, P. D. G. A.:
T. V. Producer
Teacher: Film
appreciation / 6 
-6-
Mr Jim McQuaid
Mr R. Mason
Mrs Irma Whitford
Miss Patricia Longmore
Mr Ross Tzannes
Dr Peter Pockley
Mr William Ferris
Mr M. Carroll
LITERATURE BOARD
Chairman
SMiss Nancy Keesing
Mr Tom Shapcott
Mr Richard Walsh
Mr David Malouf
Mr Richard Hall
Miss Elizabeth Riddell
Miss Rosemary Wighton
Mr V. Williams
Mrs Lorna Hannan
Mr Noel McCainsh
Mr Barrett Reid N. S. W.
N. S. W.
W. A.
Victoria N. S. W.
N. S. W.
N. S. W.
S. A.
N. S. W.
Queensland N. S. W.
N. S. W.
N. S. W.
N. S. W.
S . A.
W. A.
Victoria Queens land
Victoria Theatrical Employees'
Union Film Producer
Eduction Officer, W. A.
Secondary Teachers'
College: Producer,
Film and Video Material
Film Maker
Lawyer: President, Sydney
Film Festival
Adviser, Public Affairs,
University of New South
Wales Managing Director,
International Venture
Corporation Associate Producer,
S. A. Film Corporation
Poet: Novelist
Accountant: Poet
Publisher: Writer
Education: Poet
Playwright Poet: Journalist
Writer and Editor
Poet
Writer: Teacher
English Department, James
Cook University of
Northern Queensland:
Editor. Poet: Librarian / 7 
ABORIGINAL ARTS BOARD
Chairman Mr Dick Roughsey
Mr Mick Miller
Mrs Vi Stanton
Mr Albert Lennon
Mrs Kitty Dick
Mr Wandjuk Marika
* Mr Harold Blair
Mr Albert Barunga
Mr Terrence Widders N. T.
Queens land
N. T.
N. T.
Queens land
N. T.
Victoria W. A.
N. S. W. Aboriginal painter and
writer School teacher of Cairns.
Member of Association for
Cultural Education of
Children of the Peninsula.
Has great knowledge of
North Queensland where he
is well known.
Part-Aboriginal deeply
involved in giving
encouragement in arts and
craft activities to
Northern Territory
Aboriginal women, Vice-
President of No.. Themn
Territory Aboriginal
Development Foundation.
A leading member of the
Pitjantjatjara of northwest
South Australia.
A leader in ceremonial
life among the women of
Weipa in north Queensland.
Tribal leader at Yirrkala
in Arnhem Land. Known
for his deep understanding
of traditional life.
N oted tenor engaged as
a music teacher with the
Victorian Education
Department. Sponsor of
the Harold Blair Holiday
Scheme for Aboriginal
children from outback
areas. Leading Aboriginal
councillor at Mowanjum in
Western Australia and
member of many Aboriginal
committees.
Armidale Teachers' College.
Involved in country
program for the revival
of interest in traditions.
Trainee film maker. / 8 
-8-
* Mr Ken Colbung
Mr Samuel Gararaj
Mr Edward Koiko Mabo
Mr Jack Phillipus
Ms Leila Rankine
Mr William Reid W. A.
Darwin, N. T.
Townsville Queens land
Alice ' Springs
S. A.
Bourke, N. S. W. Co-ordinator of Aboriginal
Cultural Enterprise
Society, Perth. Active in
fostering the arts in the
Aboriginal urban
communities. Traditional artist of the
local school and leading
figure in community
affairs. A Murray Islander, living
in Townsville. Responsible
for establishment of
Townsville Aboriginal
Advancement League, Black
Community School and
Aboriginal Legal Service.
A talented performer of
both traditional and
contemporary Torres
Straits song and dance.
Traditional artist and
ritual leader.
Actively involved in the
Institute of Narrative
and Music of Aborigines
Inc.
Active in Aboriginal
advancement and welfare
projects. Expert
craftsman.
Continuing member but not as Chairman
** Continuing Chairman
* Continuing member
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
2 JULY 1974
Ladies and gentlemen, first I can inform you of some
appointments. The Government has decided to appoint Mr Philip
Evatt, B. Sc., as a Judge of the Australian Industrial
Court; Mr Justice Starke of the Victorian Supreme Court and
Mr John Dixon of Melbourne to the Board of Trustees of the
Australian War Memorial; and Brigadier A. B. Stretton as
Director-General of the Natural Disasters Organisation. The
brigadier will be promoted to major-general. Cabinet has also
approved the re-appointment of Mr J. L. Burke, barrister, and
Mr M. Dempsey, accountant, as members of the Taxation Board
of Review. Mr Walsh can give you biographies of the gentlemen
concerned. Mr Walsh will also give you press statements concerning
appointments to the Industries Assistance Commission. I'll
just briefly mention the persons involved. Mr Peter Westerway
is to be a commissioner and, after the act has been amended
to permit the ceiling on the number of appointments to be
raised from the present nine to eleven full-time commissioners,
Mr Frank Pascoe will be appointed as the tenth commissioner.
He was recently appointed as associate commissioner for the
inquiry into the clothing industry and, as you know, he is
the president of the South Australian Chamber of Manufactures
and now the first president of the amalgamated Chamber of
Manufactures and Chamber of Commerce of South Australia, and
he is deputy president of the Associated Chambers of Manufactures
of Australia. There are some other associate commissioners
who have been appointed. Dr Melville for the inquiry into the
financing of rural research; Mr Fisk for the inquiry into
the dairy industry and rural reconstruction; Mr J. Poulton
for the inquiry into paints, varnish and lacquers; Mr Kevin
Brown for the inquiry into electrical machinery and equipment.
Mr Colin Grace, whose present term as an associate commissioner
expires on the 16th of this month, has been re-appointed on
a temporary basis in order to finalise a number of inquiries
on which he has been engaged, and the acting Premier of New
South Wales has agreed to make the services of Dr Dunn of the
New South Wales Department of Agriculture available for the
inquiry into the financing of rural research, subject to
certain administrative arrangements being satisfactorily
concluded. Here again, if you want the biography of the
appointees, Mr Walsh can give them to you.
Cabinet yesterday received the Cochran Committee report
on labour market training. We are getting it printed as soon
as possible and expect to be able to table it next week.
Similarly, we are trying to get copies printed as soon as
possible of the report by Mr Justice Woodhouse of the New
Zealand Court of Appeal and Mr Justice Meares of the New
South Wales Supreme Court into the national compensation and
rehabilitation scheme. You'll remember that was appointed at
the beginning of last year and last March its charter was
extended to cover compensation and rehabilitation for sickness
in general, not merely for people injured on the roads or in
factories or in the home. That also we hope to be able to
table and thus publish next week.
Are there any questions you would like to ask me? ./ 2 
QUESTION: We received a cable from Cairo which says in
part: " The Palestine Liberation Organisation welcomes the decision"-
welcomes, Sir, is the word " of the Australian Government to
allow it to open an information centre in Sydney' I ask, has
the Government in fact granted such permission and have you
any comment to make on the whole question?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government has received no approach on this
matter at all. It knows nothing other than it has read in the
newspapers on it.
QUESTION: Does your silence on the attack by Senator Brown
on Mr Marshall Green indicate, as has been suggested, your tacit
approval of what he said?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you're putting such an allegation to
me so directly and promptly so that I can refute it. I wasn't
proposing to dignify or magnify Senator Brown's attack. It is
a miserable in fact a cowardly thing to attack an ambassador.
An ambassador cannot reply. If Senator Brown has any information
which would indicate that Ambassador Green has not conducted
himself with propriety in his present post it is his duty to
give it to the Foreign Minister or to the Prime Minister. He
has given no such information. I don't believe there is any
such information. I read in the papers that he is keeping it
for some rally to mark the Fourth of July. If there's any
information it shouldn't be kept for an occasion like that
it should have been promptly put at the disposal of the
responsible minister. From what I know of Mr Green and I've
known him for ten years in Washington, in Jakarta and in
Canberra he is, as you all know, a singularly alert, active,
articulate man. I don't believe that any member of the U. S.
Congress would have any justification to criticise an
Australian ambassador who had said or done in the United States
what Mr Green has done in Australia. Mr Green is one of the
most experienced of America's diplomats. He has had experience
for over 30 years in the western Pacific. And not only did
the Government approve his appointment that's obvious, of
course, from the fact that he became ambassador here but it
welcomed his appointment. Mr Green is a man whose experience
and qualifications would have entitled him to the embassy in
Tokyo or the liaison office in Peking. I believe it is a
singular indication of the importance that America attaches to
her relations with Australia that Mr Green was appointed to
Canberra. QUESTION: Have you contacted Mr Green or caused a message
to be sent to him dissociating yourself and the Government from
the senator's attack?
PRIME MINISTER: I've seen Mr Green since, as you would have
expected. I've been in Canberra some days since this. Mr Green
doesn't need to be reassured of my attitude to him or his country.
QUESTION: Indications are that unemployment may worsen during
the last half of this year that the economic situation may worsen
during the last half of this year. Do you have any information
supporting or refuting these indications and what are your views
and your information on the economic situation? 
PRIME MINISTER: You mention there are " indications". Now
specify them. I know of two events which are said to be
indications. One is that Leyland have put off 1,000 people;
but the motor car industry is producing as many vehicles as
ever. It's not the Government's fault if Leyland finds it
more difficult to sell its products than other companies find
it to sell theirs. The other field is in the textile industry.
People who lose their jobs in the textile industries in the
State capitals are, we believe, able to find other employment
which they like just as well. In regional areas there can be
a difficulty there, but the cure for that is not to ban the
imports of textiles or to put a prohibited tariff on them.
There's no need to burden the Australian consumer because of
some regional difficulty. What we are doing and there has
been a committee of our ministers considering it, and there
is a conference pending between my ministers and State ministers on
the decentralisation or regional aspects of this question for
something needs to be done to improve regional developments in
many areas. I notice that the Victorian Government and the
Victorian Minister for Decentralisatiop have been singularly
vocal in these matters, not least, of course, during the recent
election campaign. Their arguments would have carried very
much more weight if they had stuck to the facts. If State
ministers were to specify areas of regional development they
would find that the Australian Government is very happy to
collaborate with them. The Australian Government is very
happy to collaborate with them. The Australian Government has
taken the initiative in the biggest regional development
project, Albury-Wodonga. We are very happy to collaborate with
other States which have designated such areas. Our attitude
to Bathurst and Orange, which New South Wales has designated,
evidences that; and there have been for the last dozen years,
I suppose, four other areas apart from Wodonga which Victoria
has designated Ballarat, Bendigo, the area of Warrnambool,
Portland and Hamilton, and the Latrobe Valley. You might
remember there was a debate on the Latrobe Valley in the
House of Representatives a few months ago on this very point.
We are very happy to collaborate with State Governments in
regional development but, as in all these things, one needs to
plan properly and co-operatively. We've shown that we are anxious
to do this.
QUESTION: I was speaking specifically of the Associated
Chamber of Manufactures/ National Bank survey which indicated
that something like 73% of businesses or companies surveyed were
extremely pessimistic.
PRIME MINISTER: Well those are expressions of opinion. Give
me some facts. I've quoted the two that I am aware of.
QUESTION: Ever since your address on Saturday night to the
Industrial Relations Society, when you said that we couldn't go
on with wage increases at 20% a year, there's further evidence
that wage-price pressures are increasing. Is there anything that
you can say now that you couldn't say then about the Government's
strategy in face of this, and in particular is there anything you
can say about how quiickly the Government is going to take action
with so many wage negotiations currently overhanging the economy? 
PRIME MINISTER: No, I've got nothing to add to the prepared
remarks which I made on Saturday night.
QUESTION: Would you consider following or giving a lead to
the lead put up by four of your backbenchers in Victoria yesterday
that pay rises for M. P. s should be postponed for some time in
the fight against inflation?
PRIME MINISTER: You will remember that the Act on this subject,
the Remuneration Tribunal Act, provides that the tribunal can
make recommendations concerning judges' salaries and ministers'
salaries and can make determinations concerning members'
salaries, ministers' allowances and the salaries of first division
members of the public service.-Now I'll read-what th ' e Act says
on this very aspect: " If either House of the Parliament within
fifteen sitting days of that House, after a copy of the
determination has been laid before that House, passes a
resolution disapproving of the determination, then if
the determination has not come into operation... I interpose
there to say that the Tribunal can fix a date for determination.
Well, if the determination does not come into operation " or
if the determination has come into operation, the determination
shall not have any force or effect in respect of a period on or
after the day on which the resolution was passed." So it's open
to the Parliament, either House, to disapprove of a determination.
QUESTION: If I asked for your personal opinion, would you
consider following or leading
PRIME MINISTER: I don't choose to express my personal opinion.
I'm the man in the Parliament who has the highest salary. it
would be very easy for me to get kudos by expressing a view.
I prefer to consider this in a collective way.
QUESTION: You said that Senator Brown's comments were cowardly
and miserable. Do you intend to tell him so face to face?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't propose to magnify this issue. I suppose
I'll speak to him. I'm not going to call him in. I don't propose
to answer any further questions on this matter.
QUESTION: Sir, do you disagree with Clyde Cameron's forecast
yesterday that unemployment will increase?*
PRIME MINISTER: I was speaking to Clyde Cameron quite a lot
yesterday. I didn't hear him make that forecast. I appreciate
that it's necessary to ask, Do I approve of what some particular
critic or reporter or colleague has said? I wish you chaps would
take responsibility for the unpleasant things which you want me to
answer.
QUESTION: Mr Cameron said yesterday, " I've felt for a long
time that unemployment will rise."
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't know he had.
QUESTION: He also says, " We are in fact taking steps which
are based upon the possibility that this will happen.' What steps
will those be? 
PRIME MINISTER: I believe you've already been given a statement.
I think you were given a statement last night concerning the
Structural Adjustment Board, for which legislation was approved
yesterday, and I think you were also given information concerning
the action we're going to take on the Cochrane Report which I've
already mentioned to you the one about retraining.
QUESTION: The question of wage indexation awaits Mr Justice
Moore' s conference.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Then are there any moves which will speed up the
holding of the conference, which I think would take place about
September?
PRIME MINISTER: The holding of the conference is an initiative
by Mr Justice Moore, the president of the Australian Conciliation
and Arbitration Commission. Clearly, therefore, it should be
left to him. We said that we were happy to support that initiative.
I think we've shown that, including on Saturday at the Industrial
Relations Society Seminar at Surfers Paradise, where both
Mr Cameron and I supported the idea.
Perhaps I should have mentioned another thing about
Senator Brown. I'm sorry that his statement of the declaration
of the Senate poll in Victoria, of all places, took out of the
papers I think, relegated t6 the third page of the Melbourne
Sun, which is a pretty comprehensive medium the comments made
on the same occasion, of all places by Mr McManus. I notice,
not for the first time, that he said he had been offered the
post of Ambassador to the Vatican. He was never offered the
post of Ambassador to the Vatican. At the time that Australia
established diplomatic relations with the Vatican at the time
that Australia appointed an ambassador to the Vatican I was the
Foreign Minister, and Senator McManus was never approached nor,-
if it's not too harsh for me to say, was he ever considered.
QUESTION: While we're talking about senators, does the
Government intend to provide Senator Steele Hall with any
increased facilities or staff? If so, why?
PRIME MINISTER: Senator Steele Hall hasn't written to me or
spoken to me about the matter.
QUESTION: I understand there was a meeting of ministers and
Treasury officials at the Lodge last night. Was the tenor of
that meeting optimistic that the Government would be able to
both contain or reduce inflation and maintain employment and
that it would be able to do both together?
PRIME MINISTER: It was a private meeting both before, during,
and after dinner. So don't expect me to state
or to repeat the views which the wide number of men there
expressed. The object of it was for me to have the benefit of an
exchange of views with and between the Government's senior
economic advisers. And I do this not infrequently. Not as
often as I'd like to, but... 
QUESTION: Do you consider immigration more important as an
instrument of foreign policy rather than one of domestic, social
and economic policy?
PRIME MINISTER: Immigration, as far as the present Australian
Government is concerned, involves people who were born overseas
and who have migrated to Australia; our prime objective is to
make them happy in this country, and to see that they get as
good opportunity, individually and as families, as it is
possible for the country to provide as their new home. I notice
that you still get some references to a mass immigration program.
The Government has no mass immigration program at all. Its
efforts are directed to making migrants feel at home in Australia.
QUESTION: How can you emphasise family reunion and yet give
the Immigration Department to Mr Clyde Cameron, the Labour
Minister, where the obvious orientation is going to be towards
manpower needs, considering that family reunion has the least
requirements for manpower policies and national need?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Cameron, as Minister for Labour and
Immigration, naturally has the prime responsibility for
determining what the opportunities are for permanent migration
to Australia that is, for people coming here who want to
live here permanently and obviously, therefore, want to maintain
themselves when they come here. It's quite an unreasonable and
cruel thing to permit, still more to encourage, people to come
to Australia as permanent residents if there aren't jobs
available for them. I notice there's a great deal of speculation
in the newspapers on this subject arising from fomentation by
members of the old Department of Immigration when it was an
individual department. It's true that that department fell down
very badly in respect of Australia's urban affairs and foreign
affairs, but it has got many skills which are appropriate to be
retained and which will be retained in the augmented Department
of Labour and Immigration. Nevertheless, there are some aspects
which were left to that department and which obviously would be
better handled by other departments. For instance, it has already
been decided that the administration of the Immigration
Guardianship of Children Act should be transferred to the
Minister for Social Security; and that the administration of
the Immigration Education of Children Act be transferred to
the Minister for Education; and that the policy and issue of
passports for Australian citizens should become the responsibility
of the Foreign Minister. And other matters are being considered
with the general object in mind of assuring efficiency of
administration and humanity of administration.
QUESTION: Have you or Mr Daly been able to reach any agreement
with the-Opposition parties or their leaders on the procedures
to be adopted for the proposed joint sitting of Parliament this
month? PRIME MINISTER: Mr Daly at this moment is studying the Canadian
federal elections, where it is expected that a result will be
achieved rather more efficiently and promptly than was the case
in the Australian federal election. I haven't spoken to him
about this for a couple of weeks, I think. 
QUESTION: Has the rise in the price of phosphatic rock,
combined with the fall in the price of meat, given you any
reason to reconsider the decison to abolish the superphosphate
bounty at the end of this year?
PRIME MINISTER: I can only repeat that if any industry or
region--. believes it is disadvantaged by the increase in the
cost of superphosphate then it can make an application to the
Department of Agriculture to see if there's a prima facie case
for a reference by me to the Industries Assistance Commission.
There has already been one successful proposition of that nature
put to me by the department and one unsuccessful one. The cost
of superphosphate as a fertiliser in Australia is lower than
in pretty well any other country in the world. At last
Australia might find it profitable, therefore, to develop her
own very considerable resources of phosphate, those near
Mt Isa, in the hands of Australia's greatest and most prosperous
company. QUESTION: When do you propose to announce the appointment of
the inquiry into security services?
PRIME MINISTER: I'Id say in a couple of weeks.
QUESTION: Do you intend to make public the findings of the
inquiry some of the hearings of that inquiry?
PRIME MINISTER: Terms of reference, yes. Findings,. almost
certainly, in respect to procedures to review decisions which
are thought to have affected public servants or immigrants.
Hearings, that will be up to the judges.
QUESTION: If the Palestine Liberation Organisation approached
the Government, does that....
PRIME MINISTER: Do not speculate. Wait until the matter
happens. Wait until there is such a proposition.
QUESTION: The metal trades unions have said they will press
ahead with new wage claims despite your call for restraint last
Saturday. Do you feel that this is a legitimate stand for
the unions to take at the moment and do you agree with your
Labour Minister, Mr Cameron, who said yesterday the metal
trades....
PRIME MINISTER: Here it comes again! Do I agree with one of
my colleagues? Yes, go on.
QUESTION: do you agree with Mr Cameron who said yesterday
the metal trades workers were only trying to keep pace with the
public service?
PRIME MINISTER: Where did he say all these things? I spent
most of yesterday morning, afternoon and night with him and he
didn't say any of these things to me! There's only one person
I listen to on Macquarie and he sounds more funereal than
Mr Cameron. Mr Jack Devereux was at Surfers on Saturday night
talking with me. He had my oration. He didn't express the view 
to me that you attribute to the union of which he is head.
I notice that an assistant secretary was reported a day later
as commenting that he was not there and hadn't, at that time,
received his copy of the oration.
QUESTION: This week we're getting the third instalment of the
long-running Bulletin serial on ASIO. Are you concerned that
these documents have leaked out? Do you think they've damaged
the security service or the Government? Have you asked for an
inquiry on how they've leaked out and have you any results
from the inquiry? And will this be one of the things being
looked at by the Royal Commission?
PRIME MINISTER: Any of You who wants the full text of the ASIO
document entitled " Croation Nationalist Movements and Activities
in Australia" can get a copy of it from Mr Walsh immediately
after this gathering disperses. Anybody who wants to know the
titles and the dates of the other documents in this category
which were prepared by ASIO can similarly get that list from
Mr Walsh as soon as this gathering disperses.
QUESTION: Senator Greenwood said these documents were
unclassified.? PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't be releasing this document if I
were not satisfied that it was completely genuine! But even so
I wouldn't be releasing it but for the fact that the Director-
General of ASIO has assured me that there is no confidential
material in it whatever. All the material in these articles
could have been got from any bookstore, and the dates, the facts,
the quotations were available in newspapers and magazines which
were freely available in Australia. There is nothing in these
documents which ASIO has sought or received in the course of
its statutory duties. in releasing this document I am assured
by the Director-General that the security of the country is not
in any way jeopardised. There is no confidential information in
these documents at all. Security is not involved and therefore
I am making it available to you through Mr Walsh if you're
interested in it. Perhaps I could refresh your memory about
this in general by quoting an answer which the Attorney-General
provided for our colleague, Dr Klugman. You'll see it in
House of Representatives Hansard of 13 December last. Dr Klugman' s
question was: " Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn
to the statement by Mr Robert Mayne, Assistant Editor of the
Sun-Herald, that he was approached by Mr Peter Coleman, M. L. A.,
and a senior officer of the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation to work for a magazine called Analysis and ( b)
that the organisation would supply material to discredit members
of the Australian Labor Party." To that the Attorney-General
provided the answer " Yes". Dr Klugman also asked: " If so,
who was this senior officer of the organisation and ( b)
is he still in the employment of the organisation?" To that
the Attorney-General answered: " The officer concerned is still
in the employ of the organisation. The supply of material
about individual citizens to be used in the media of which this
case was an example was wholly unwarranted and outside the
functions of ASIO. The Director-General of Security has informed
me that some time after he assumed office he discontinued the
practice of giving background briefs to journalists." The
documents to which you refer were among some scores of document 
prepared from 1962 onwards. The preparation of these documents
was discontinued by ' the present Director-General of Security
before the present Government was elected. The material was
given to a selected number of journalists.
QUESTION: Well we know the author of these documents?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I should say the employee of ASIO who was
referred to in the Attorney-General's reply to Dr Klugman is the
author of all these documents. He's still in the organisation.
He is there, I am sure, doing-work which does relate to the
organisation. I therefore don't believe that I should mention
his name.
QUESTION: Do you welcome the election of Mr Percy Tucker as
Leader of the Opposition in Queensland,. and are you happy with
the way it comes out?
PRIME MINISTER: It's not up to me to express a view on a matter
such as that. Whom any Parliamentary Labor Party chooses to
hold office in it is entirely a matter for that party. I've
known Mr Tucker, of course, for very many years. He is a family
friend of mine as well as a personal friend. I'm sure I can
work very effectively with him. I congratulate him. 



AUSTR AI PRESS STATEMENT NO. 278
2 July 1974
APPOINTMENTS TO THE INDU TRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Th( Prime Minister, Mr Whitlan, announced today
that he has recommended to the Executive Council the appointment
of Mr P. 13. Westerway as a Commissioner of the IAC. The
Prime Minister also announced~ the appointment of Dr J. Melville,
CMG and Messrs Fisk, Poulton, Brown and Grace as Associate
Commissioners of the Industries Assistance Commission.
Mr Westerway's appointment will fill the vacancy
created by Mr N. V. Watson whose term as a Commissioner expired
on 30 June 1974. Mr Watson, however, will continue to carry
out the functions of the Temporary Assistance Authority to which
he was appointed on 1 January 1974.
Mr Westerway, who is an Economics Graduate of Sydney
University and post graduate student of the London School of
Economics has held positions in university, television,
advertising and broadcasting. Hle is also a former'General
Secretary of the New South Wales Branch of the Australian Labor
Party. His interests include consumer protection, economic
planning, education, mass media and social welfare. He has
contributed to various branches of the media and academic
journals, and travelled widely, at various times on the
invitation of Governments.
Dr Melville has been appointed for the inquiry into
the financing of rural research. He was formerly Director of
the Grasslands Division of the New Zealand Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, and for seventeen years a
Director of the Waite Agricultural Research Institute of the
University of Adelaide. He was also Chairman of the Australian
Wool Industry Conference from. l964-66.
Mr Fisk has been appointed for the inquiry into the
dairy industry and rural reconstruction. He has had extensive
experience as a consultant in rural administration and rural
economics, and owns and manages a grazing proyerty near Braidwood
His previous appointments include Member of the
Consultative Committee to the Asian Development Bank on the Asian
Agricultural Survey7 Visiting Professor at the University of
the South Pacific; and Visiting Fellow, Nuffield College, Oxford,
Presently he is a Professorial Fellow in Economics in the Research
School of Pacific'Studies, ANU. / 2 
Mr J. Poulton has been appointed for the inquiry into
paints, varnishes and lacquers. He is Director of Olex Cables
Pty. Ltd. and President of the Australian Electrical Manufacturers'
Association and has life long experience in the tyre and cables
industries with Olympic Consolidated Industries Ltd.
Mr K. Brown is General Manager of Pak Pacific
Corporation Pty. Ltd., President of the Printing and Allied Trade
Employers Federation of Australia, Member of ACMA executive and
was a member of the Crisp Committee on Data Integration.
Mr Brown has been appointed for the inquiry into electrical
machinery and equipment.
Mr C. Grace, whose present term as an Associate
Commissioner expires as from 16 July 1974, has been re-appointed
on a temporary basis in order to finalise a number of inquiries
on which he is currently engaged.
Mr . Whitlam also announced the Government's intention
to amend Section 5 of the Industries Assistance Commission Act
1973 to increase the establishment of the Commission to eleven.
Although the full complement of nine Commissioners has been
appointed since the Act come into operation on 1 January 1974
the present workload and known future commitments arising from
references that the Government intends sending to the Commission
over the next three years have highlighted the need for the
appointment of an additional Commissioner.
The Prime Minister stated that Mr F. Pascoe, who was
recently appointed an Associate Commissioner for the inquiry into
the clothing industry, would be appointed as the tenth Commissioner.
Mr Pascoe has had extensive experience as a senior executive in
minufacturing companies and organisations. He is Chairman of
Directors, Australian Development Ltd., and a director of a number
of other companies. He was President of the South Australian
Chamber of Manufactures in 1972-73, and is the first President
of the Amalgamated Chamber of Manufactures and Chamber of Commerce,
South Australia. Mr Pascoe is currently Deputy President of the
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia.
Mr Wvhitlam also said that the Acting Premier of New
South Wales, Sir Charles Cutler has agreed to make the services
of Dr Dun of the N. S. W. Department of Agriculture available to
the IAC for inqiuiry into the financing of rural research, subject
to certain administrative arrangements being satisfactorily
concluded.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



I Hi.. I A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT 1O. 279
2 July 1974
NEW APPOINTMENTS
Cabinet has approved the following appointments:-
1. Mr P. G. Evatt, as a judge of the
Australian Industrial Court.
2. Mr Justice Starke, of the Victorian Supreme
Court, and Mr John Dixon of Melbourne, to the
Board of Trustees of the Australian War
Memorial.
3. Brigadier A. B. Stretton as Director-General
of the Natural Disasters Organisation.
Brigadier Stretton will be promoted to Ma3or-
General.
Cabinet has also approved the re-appointment of
Mr J. L. Burke, Barrister, and Mr N. Dempsey, Accountant, as
members of the Taxation Boards of Review.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 281
2 July 1974
NEW LAND DEAL FOR NORTHERN TERRITORY ABORIGINALS
The Prime. Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced that
Cabinet had accepted in principle the recommendations made in
the Second Report of the Aboriginal Land Rights Commission.
, Mr Whitlam said that the recommendations provided for
full Aboriginal ownership of all existing reserves in the
Northern Territory and certain other lands and for the establishment
of a Land Commission to enquire into Aboriginal land claims and
land needs outside the Reserves. Aboriginal Regional Land
Councils and Land Trusts would be incorporated to hold title
and administer land matters.
Cabinet authorised preliminary drafting of a comprehensive
Aboriginal Land ( Northern Territory) Bill with a view to the
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs introducing the Bill into the
Parliament during the Budget Sittings. Final drafting must,
however, await full consultation with the Northern Territory
Aboriginals through their Land Councils, which are at present
considering the Report's recommendations.
Cabinet also authorised the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
to appoint an Interim Land Commissioner, in order to hasten action
on suchmatters as the provision of land for the Gurindji of
Wave Hill and for Aboriginal groups in towns. Any such
appointment would be without prejudice to the outcome of discussions
with the Aboriginals.
Drafting of Bills to provide for the incorporation of
Aboriginal groups and communities, and for the establishment of an
Aboriginal Land Fund is already well advanced. The Aboriginal
Corporations Bill will allow the incorporation of Aboriginal
Councils, some of which could hold land in accordance with the.
Commission's recommendations. Other lands would be held by
Trusts to be established under the proposed land legislation.
The Land Fund will provide for the purchase of lands in
the Northern Territory as recommended by the proposed Aboriginal
Land Commission. It is proposed, however, that the Fund should
be used for land purchases in the States as well as in the
Northern Territory.
ThXe Minister for Aboriginal Affairs will be discussing the
Commission's Report with State Ministers responsible for
Aboriginal affairs. This matter was discussed at the recent
Premiers' Conference.
CANBERRA. ACT. 



.11 AUSTRLIA&amp;
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEM4ENT NO. 280
2 July 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSIS ' ANCE COMMISSION REPORT PAPER
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Industries Assistance Commission in its report on paper.
The Government's decision to implement the
Commission's recommendations will mean that a general rate
of duty of 20 percent will apply to uncoated and coated
printing and writing papers which represents a slight
increase in the level of protection for uncoated papers
compared with the existing specific General rate of $ 48.225
per tonne and a slight decrease from the existing General
rate of 22 for coated papers. The Commission also
recommended that wrapping papers be dutiable at minimum rates.
With the effective rate of protection being about the
same as the recommended nominal rate of 20%, the industry is
low cost by Australian standards.
Mr Whitlam said that details of the customns tariff
chftnges arising from the Government's decision will he announced
when administrative arrangements to implement them have been
finalised. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



-,, AUTAL, AL Press Statement No. 282
3 July 1974
QUEENSLAND FLOODS LOANS TO. SPORTING BODIES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, aftnounced
today that the Australian Government had agreed to provide
financial assistance to Queensland for the provision of
loans to needy sporting bodies whose assets sustained
severe damage as a result of the floods which occurred
in the first quarter of this year.
The loans would be made by the State
Government to those bodies which had exhausted alternative
sources of finance to a maximum amiount of $ 10,000 repayable
over 7 years at a concessional interest rate.
The Prime Minister said that Australian
Government assistance, which is an extension of previously
agreed relief measures with Queens-land, will be in the form
of an interest free loan repayable in equal annual instalments
over an eight year period commencing 30 June 1977.
The Prime Minister added that assistance is
also being provided to New South Wales on a similar basis.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 8.30 PM
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G, WHITL4M, QC, M, P,,
TO TH! E ' NATIONAL RURAL PRESS CLUB DINNER, AT THE LAKESIDE
INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, CANBER. RA
4I JULY 13/ 4
ON THE 14 DECEMBER LAST YEAR I WROTE TO DR STUART
HARRIS AND ESTABLISHED A WORKING GROUP ON RURAL POLICY IN
AUSTRALIA, IN THAT LETTER I SAID:
" I ENVISAGE THAT YOUR GREEN PAPER WILL BE
PUBLISHED WITH THE AUTHORITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT BUT WITHOUT FORMAL APPROVAL.
IN THAT FORM I HOPE IT WILL PROVIDE A BASIS
FOR WIDESPREAD DIALOGUE IN THE PARLIAMENT,
IN RURAL ORGANISATIONS AND IN THE COMMUNITY
GENERALLY. I
THE DIALOGUE TO WHICH I THEN REFERRED HAS NOW
BEGUN. IAM GRATEFUL, MR CHAIRMAN4 FOR THE OPPORTUNITY YOUR
INVITATION HAS GIVEN ME TO PARTICIPATE IN THAT DIALOGUE. 
4
-2-
AN IMPORTANT OPPORTUNITY FOR MEANINGFUL DIALOGUE
HAS BEEN CREATED BY SENATOR KEN WRIEDT, WHO WILL NOW MORE
APPROPRIATELY BE KNOWN AS THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE,
HIs INITIATIVE TO IMPROVE COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMING COMMUNITY WAS THE
CONVENING OF THE RURAL FORUM, THE FIRST OCCASION ON WHICH
ANY GOVERNMENT HAS INVITED ALL MULTI-PURPOSE FARMING
ORGANISATIONS TO DISCUSS THE PROBLEMS OF THE INDUSTRY WITH
GOVERNMENT, THIS FORUM WILL NOW BE AN ANNUAL EVENT, I AM
PLEASED THE SECOND MEETING TO BE HELD TOMORROW HAS BEFORE
IT SO WIDE-RANGING AND CONSTRUCTIVE A DOCUMENT AS THE
GREEN PAPER ON RURAL POLICY,
FEW OF MY MINISTERIAL APPOINTMENTS HAVE GIVEN
ME AS MUCH REAL SATISFACTION AS THAT OF SENATOR KEN WRIEDT,
HIS SINCERITY, ABILITY AND COMMITMENT HAVE RECEIVED
CONGRATULATIONS FROM MANY QUARTERS, I UNDERSTAND THAT HE
NOW KNOWS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A CORRIEDALE AND A
MERINO: INDEED, WHEN IT COMES TO HAVING AN EFFECTIVE
MINISTER, I BELIEVE TO COIN A PHRASE YOU HAVE NEVER
HAD IT SO GOOD, ,/ 3 
-3-
THE GREEN PAPER WHICH WILL BE DISCUSSED AT THE
RURAL FORUM TOMORROW IS THE FIRST COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT
OF AUSTRALIAN RURAL POLICY FOR OVER 20 YEARS. I BELIEVE
THAT ALL OF US WHETHER IN GOVERNMENT OR IN RURAL INDUSTRY,
ARE INDEBTED TO THE MEMBERS OF THIS WORKING GROUP AND WILL
REMAIN SO INDEBTED FOR MANY YEARS TO COME. THE REPORT
IS INDEED A SENSITIVE AND INTELLIGENT DISCUSSION OF THE
PROBLEMS FACED BY RURAL INDUSTRIES AND OF THE PRINCIPLES
WHICH SHOULD GUIDE GOVERNMENT ACTION IN MEETING THOSE
PROBLEMS. BEARING IN MIND THE VERY SHORT TIME IN WHICH
THIS REPORT WAS WRITTEN THE JOB DONE BY THE PEOPLE INVOLVED
IS TRULY QUITE EXTRAORDINARY.
THE OBJECTIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT IN REQUESTING A
GREEN PAPER INDICATES OUR GENERAL APPROACH TO THE MAKING
OF DECISIONS IN THE RURAL SECTOR AND INDEED FOR OTHER
INDUSTRIES. IT SHOWS THE WAY A LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL MAKE
DECISIONS AFTER FULL PUBLIC ENQUIRY AND FREE PUBLIC DEBATE.
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION,
WHICH IS THE FIRST INDEPENDENT BODY TO INQUIRE INTO, ASSESS
AND REPORT UPON ALL REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE. AS YOU WOULD
BE AWARE, THE REPORTS OF THE COMMISSION ARE NOW GENERALLY
PUBLISHED BEFORE THE GOVERNMENT MAKES ITS DECISION SO THAT
MEANINGFUL PUBLIC DEBATE CAN OCCUR. i ,/ 4 
-4IPERHAPS
EVEN MORE THAN OTHER SECTORS I BELIEVE
THAT THE IMAGE OF RURAL INDUSTRIES HAS SUFFERED BY THE
ARROGANT ATTITUDES OF SOME POLITICANS, AND, IF I MAY BE
PERMITTED A SOMEWHAT PARTISAN NOTE, OF ONE PARTICULAR
POLITICAL PARTY, THEY OFTEN MAKE THE ASSUMPTION THAT
RURAL INDUSTRIES HAVE A RIGHT TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE
WITHOUT PUBLIC INQUIRY AND JUSTIFICATION, THE PROCESS OF
DECISION-MAKING OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT EXEMPLIFIED IN
THE NEW ROLE OF THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
AND IN THE PUBLICATION OF THIS GREEN PAPER WILL ASSIST
IN BREAKING DOWN THE BELIEF OFTEN THE MISCONCEPTION
OF MANY URBAN RESIDENTS THAT RURAL INDUSTRIES RECEIVE
UNFAIR PRIVILEGES AT THE TAXPAYERS' EXPENSE.
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ARE CAPABLE OF JUDGING
WHETHER OR NOT A GOOD CASE FOR ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN
PRESENTED AND AS TAXPAYERS THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO RECEIVE
IT. THE REPRESENTATIVES OF RURAL INDUSTRIES HAVE IN THE
PAST UNDERESTIMATED THE IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATING THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ABOUT THEIR PROBLEMS AND OF CONVINCING
THEM WHENEVER REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE ARE MADE. THE
PUBLICATION OF THIS GREEN PAPER WILL GO A LONG WAY IN
EDUCATING THE BROADER PUBLIC, INCLUDING ECONOMISTS, ABOUT
SOME OF THE SPECIAL PROBLEMS FACING RURAL INDUSTRY, PROBLEMS
WHICH INVOLVE GOVERNMENT POLICY. 1 11/ 5 
WHILST I WOULD NOT PURPORT TO SUMMARISE THE GREEN
PAPER ITSELF I WOULD LIKE TO HIGHLIGHT SOME ASPECTS OF THE
REPORT WHICH I BELIEVE TO BE OF PARTICULAR SIGNIFICANCE.
FIRST IS THE MANNER IN WHICH THE REPORT EMPHASISES THAT A
NATIONAL RURAL POLICY IS AN INTEGRAL PART OF A NATIONAL
ECONOMIC POLICY AND THAT IT MUST BE JUDGED IN TERMS OF ITS
CONTRIBUTION TO NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL OBJECTIVES.
MANY OF THE REPORT'S MORE SPECIFIC COMMENTS ARE IN FACT
CONCERNED WITH THESE BROADER NATIONAL OBJECTIVES. MUCH OF
ITS VALUE DERIVES FROM ITS ASSESSMENT OF PARTICULAR PROBLEMS
AND PROPOSALS MEASURED BY THE STANDARD OF NATIONAL GOALS OF
EFFICIENCY, OF WELFARE AND OF EQUALITY.
ONE SUCH CONSIDERATION WHICH THE WORKING GROUP
IDENTIFIES IS THE INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS. THE REPORT NOTES
" THE POSITION OF THE CONSUMER IS PROPERLY BEING GIVEN
GREATER CONSIDERATION THAN IN THE PAST". THIS PERSPECTIVE
WILL ENHANCE THE VALUE OF THIS REPORT IN PROMOTING A WIDER
UNDERSTANDING OF RURAL POLICIES. THE WORKING GROUP
CORRECTLY NOTES THAT THE QUITE ABSURD RESTRICTIONS UPON
MARGARINE HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED " THE IMAGE" OF ALL RURAL
PRODUCERS. MANY URBAN RESIDENTS WHO ARE AWARE OF THESE
RESTRICTIONS WOULD REGARD THEM AS TYPICAL RATHER THAN AS
THE ABERRATION THEY IN FACT ARE. IF IN OUR DELIBERATIONS
WE CONTINUE TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS,
AS THE REPORT RECOMMENDS, THEN I BELIEVE WE WILL ENSURE THE
BROAD ACCEPTABILITY OF THE DECISIONS WHICH WE MAKE. is 1/ 6 
-6-
THE GREEN PAPER CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE MARKET
AS THE MOST EFFECTIVE METHOD OF ALLOCATING PRODUCTIVE
SOURCES IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR. IT ALSO RECOGNISES
HOWEVER, THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS A PROPER ROLE TO
INTERVENE IN THE OPERATION OF THE MARKET, PARTLY TO IMPROVE
THE MANNER IN WHICH THE MARKET OPERATES AND PARTLY TO
COMPENSATE FOR ITS, AT TIMES, HARSH CONSEQUENCES. IN
MANY OF THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISIONS I BELIEVE IT IS TRUE
THAT WE HAVE ACCEPTED THE PRIMACY OF THE MARKET TO A GREATER
EXTENT THAN SOME THOUGHT OR FEARED POSSIBLE. IT IS
USEFUL TO HAVE THE BASIC PRINCIPLE EMPHASISED IN THE MANNER
THAT IT HAS BEEN BY THE WORKING GROUP,
I WOULD NOW LIKE TO DISCUSS SOME OF THE PRINCIPLES
OUTLINED IN THE REPORT.
ONE OF THE OUTSTANDING ANALYSES IN THIS DOCUMENT
IS THE DISCUSSION OF UNCERTAINTY AND INSTABILITY IN RURAL
INDUSTRY. THE RESEARCH UNDERTAKEN FOR THE WORKING GROUP
SHOWS THAT FLUCTUATIONS IN BOTH PRICE AND OUTPUT ARE
TYPICALLY GREATER FOR AGRICULTURE THAN FOR OTHER INDUSTRIES.
A SURVEY CONDUCTED FOR THE WORKING GROUP BY THE COMMISSIONER
FOR TAXATION SHOWED THAT OVER 40 PER CENT HAD FLUCTUATIONS OF
PER CENT OR MORE IN THEIR YEAR-TO-YEAR INCOMES COMPARED
WITH NO MORE THAN 23 PER CENT FOR OTHER BUSINESS AND
1/ PER CENT FOR WAGE EARNERS. I 
-7-
IN CASE SOME OF YOU MAY BELIEVE THAT THIS IS A
NEW REVELATION FOR ME MAY I QUOTE FROM A SPEECH I DELIVERED
AT A DINNER FOR THE AUSTRALIAN FARMERS' FEDERATION IN
OCTOBER OF LAST YEAR. I SAID THEN, " THE CHIEF CHARACTERISTIC
OF YOUR INDUSTRY, WHATEVER GOVERNMENT IS IN POWER, IS ITS
VULNERABILITY. MORE THAN ANY OTHER SECTOR OF THE ECONOMY YOU
ARE SUBJECT TO UNPREDICTABLE AND IMPONDERABLE CIRCUMSTANCES.
YOU ARE AT THE MERCY OF THE SEASONS, AT THE MERCY OF WORLD
CURRENCY RELIGNMENTS, OF FLUCTUATING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS,
GLUTS AND SHORTAGES.", THE DETAILED TREATMENT OF THIS MOST
SIGNIFICANT ASPECT OF RURAL INDUSTRY PRESENTED IN THE GREEN
PAPER WILL SURELY PROVE TO BE ONE OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
PRACTICAL MATTERS FLOWING FROM OUR CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT.
I AM SURE THAT IT WILL BE A FEATURE OF YOUR DISCUSSIONS TOMORROW.
THE REPORT DISCUSSES THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN
PROVIDING PROTECTIVE SERVICES FOR THE INDUSTRY SUCH AS
QUARANTINE, RESEARCH AND EXTENSION AND IN IMPROVING THE
BARGAINING POWER OF INDIVIDUAL PRODUCERS THROUGH MARKETING
SCHEMES AND THE PROMOTION OF CO-OPERATIVES. FURTHER, THE
REPORT CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE SPECIAL ROLE A GOVERNMENT HAS
IN ASSISTING OUR AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES TO ADJUST TO ECONOMIC
CHANGES. WE HAVE RECENTLY RECObNISED THE PROBLEMS OF STRUCTURAL
ADJUSTMENT IN OTHER INDUSTRIES AS REQUIRING COMPREHENSIVE
GOVERNMENT ATTENTION AND HAVE MADE SPECIAL PROVISION FOR COUNTRY
TOWNS WHICH DEPEND TO A SIGNIFICANT EXTENT ON A SINGLE FIRM.
THE COMMENTS IN THE GREEN PAPER WILL ASSIST US IN THE FURTHER
DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMS. ./ 8 
ONE SECTION OF THE REPORT HAS RECEIVED RELATIVELY
LITTLE ATTENTION TO DATE. IT IS THE CHAPTER CONCERNING THE
WELFARE OF RURAL PEOPLE, THE WORKING GROUP ACKNOWLEDGES THE
BREVITY OF ITS EXAMINATION OF THE PROVISION OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
IN RURAL AREAS. THE REPORT ASSISTS US IN MOVING AWAY FROM
WHAT MIGHT BE TERMED AN INCOMES MENTALITY. So MANY OF THE NEEDS
OF OUR CITIZENS AND THE PROVISION OF ADEQUATE SERVICES MUST
DEPEND ON BROAD COMMUNITY ACTION AND THAT MEANS GOVERNMENT
ACTION. THE CONCERN OF THE WORKING GROUP TO EXPAND THE SCOPE
AND VARIETY OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR PEOPLE WHO CHOOSE TO LIVE
IN RURAL AREAS WILL AFFECT THE GOVERNMENT'S CONSIDERATION OF
THE MORE DETAILED REPORTS WE SHALL RECEIVE ON POVERTY,
EDUCATION, HEALTH AND THE PROVISION OF WELFARE SERVICES.
I TRUST THIS ASPECT OF THE REPORT WILL NOT BE LOST IN YOUR
CONSIDERATION OF WHAT SOME WOULD REGARD AS THE MORE PRACTICAL
ASPECTS OF RURAL POLICY.
IT WOULD BE REMISS OF ME NOT TO MAKE SOME COMMENT ON
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GREEN PAPER AND THE MANY DECISIONS
WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN IN RELATION TO RURAL POLICY. PERHAPS I
SHOULD BEGIN BY ACCEPTING THE COMMENTS IN THE GREEN PAPER ON
THE DIFFICULTY OF COMMUNICATION WITH PEOPLE IN RURAL AREAS.
THIS DIFFICULTY IS OF COURSE ACCENTUATED IN THE HEAT OF AN
ELECTION CAMPAIGN. I NOW COME TO SPEAK TO YOU AT THE ONLY TIME
WHEN A POLITICIAN CAN AFFORD TO BE BIPARTISAN IMMEDIATELY AFTER
AN ELECTION. I BELIEVE THAT MUCH OF THE CRITICISM AND INDEED
VILIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN UNWARRANTED. MUCH HAS
BEEN POLITICALLY MOTIVATED AND I HAVE BEEN IN POLITICS TOO LONG
NOT TO ACCEPT THAT AS PART OF THE GAME. NEVERTHELESS THE PUBLICATION
OF THIS GREEN PAPER ENABLES US TO PLACE THE GOVERNMENT'S PAST
DECISIONS IN THEIR PROPER PERSPECTIVE. 
THE WORKING GROUP MAKES FREQUENT REFERENCE TO
CONCESSIONS AND SUBSIDIES WHICH ARE OF GREATEST ADVANTAGE TO THE
MORE WEALTHY PRIMARY PRODUCERS. MANY OF THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISIONS
WHICH HAVE BEEN MOST SEVERELY CRITICISED RELATED TO CONCESSIONS
AND SUBSIDIES OF THIS NATURE. THEY HAD BEEN INTRODUCED AT A TIME
WHEN THE PREOCCUPATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS TO
INCREASE PRODUCTION TO EARN FOREIGN EXCHANGE. THAT TIME HAS
PASSED. THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE IGNORE THE VITAL IMPORTANCE
OF ECONOMICALLY HEALTHY AND EFFICIENT INDUSTRIES, INDUSTRIES
WHICH DESPITE ALL THE ATTENTION GIVEN TO MINERAL DEVELOPMENT
STILL PROVIDE OVER HALF OF OUR EXPORTS, IT SIMPLY MEANS THAT
IT NO LONGER PAYS US AS A NATION TO DEVELOP FARMS MORE RAPIDLY
THAN IT WOULD PAY YOU YOURSELVES TO DEVELOP THEM. POLICIES OF
THIS KIND ONLY EXACERBATE THE PROBLEMS OF MATCHING SUPPLY AND
DEMAND. I AM ACUTELY CONSCIOUS OF THE FACT THAT MANY OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S POSITIVE POLICIES DO NOT HAVE THE SAME OBVIOUS
IMPACT ON THE FARMER AS HAS THE WITHDRAWAL OF SOME CONCESSIONS.
ONE EXAMPLE IS OUR DECISION TO ESTABLISH AN ANIMAL HEALTH
LABORATORY TO PROTECT OUR LIVESTOCK INDUSTRY FROM FOOT AND MOUTH
AND OTHER EXOTIC DISEASES. IT WILL COST $ 56 MILLION
APPROXIMATELY THE ANNUAL COST OF THE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY
YET THE BENEFITS TO RURAL PRODUCERS WILL BE INFINITELY GREATER.
THEY MAY NOT BE REFLECTED IN TERMS OF MONEY IN THE POCKET, BUT
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE DISEASES WHICH THE LABORATORY IS DESIGNED
TO PREVENT WOULD WIPE OUT $ 2,000 MILLION IN EXPORT TRADE
OVERNIGHT, 
ANOTHER CLEAR EXAMPLE OF THE WAY THE GOVERNMENT'S
POLICIES HAVE ASSISTED PRIMARY PRODUCERS INDIRECTLY IS THE
TARIFF CUT, THE VALUE OF THIS IS HIGHLIGHTED BY THE GREEN
PAPER'S ADOPTION OF A TARIFF COMPENSATION ARGUMENT FOR RURAL
CONCESSIONS. I NOTE WITH SOME PLEASURE THE EXTREMELY FAVOURABLE
COMMENTS MADE BY THE WORKING GROUP ON THE GOVERNMENT'S EXCHANGE
RATE AND TARIFF POLICIES, THE VALUE OF THE TARIFF CUT IS LESS
TANGIBLE, LESS IMMEDIATE AND LESS DIRECT THAN THE CONCESSIONS
WHICH WE HAVE REMOVED, I SUPPOSE THAT WE ALL COME TO BELIEVE
THAT WE DESERVE WHAT WE ARE USED TO RECEIVING, CIRCUMSTANCES
CHANGE AND PRIORITIES CHANGE: A GOVERNMENT IS NOT BEING
" ANTI-RURAL" IF IT RECOGNISES THAT,
IT IS ALSO POSSIBLE NOW TO ASSESS THAT OTHER REPORT
WHICH HAS RECEIVED SO MUCH ATTENTION IN RURAL AREAS, THE
REPORT OF THE COOMBS TASK FORCE, THAT REPORT REPRESENTED A
CLEARING OF THE DECKS TO MAKE ROOM FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S OWN
PRIORITIES AND TO GET RID OF THE ACCUMULATED DEADWOOD OF YEARS
OF AD HOC DECISION-MAKING, WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SEEKS
IS A NATIONAL RURAL POLICY BASED ON SUSTAINABLE PRINCIPLES, PRINCIPLES
THAT ALL AUSTRALIANS CAN ACCEPT, THE GREEN PAPER PROVIDES US
WITH SUCH A SET OF PRINCIPLES, ITS CONVENOR, DR STUART HARRIS,
WAS, I SHOULD NOTE IN PASSING, A MEMBER OF THE COOMBS TASK FORCE,
HE HAS PRODUCED A DOCUMENT WHICH I BELIEVE WILL PLACE AUSTRALIAN
RURAL POLICY ON A MORE SOUND, MORE ACCEPTABLE AND MORE PERMANENT
BASIS, THAT BASIS IS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THE APPROACH ADOPTED
BY THE EARLIER TASK FORCE OF WHICH HE WAS A MEMBER, , Il 
I SHOULD PERHAPS REFER TO TWO ITEMS UPON WHICH THE
COOMBS TASK FORCE REPORTED BUT UPON WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED
NOT TO ACT, DROUGHT BONDS AND THE AVERAGING PROVISIONS OF THE
INCOME TAX LEGISLATION, THE GREEN PAPER REPEATS MANY OF THE
CRITICISMS OF THE AVERAGING PROVISIONS, IT RECOGNISES, HOWEVER,
AS THE GOVERNMENT DID, THAT THEY ARE AMONGST THE FEW EXISTING
MEASURES DIRECTLY ALLEVIATING THE PROBLEM OF INCOME INSTABILITY
FOR PRIMARY PRODUCERS, NOT A SUBSIDY BUT A RECOGNITION OF THE
SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES OF RURAL PRODUCTION, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
NOW CONSIDER THE RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE GREEN PAPER WHICH SEEK
TO REFORM AND SYSTEMATISE OUR TREATMENT OF THIS PECULIAR
CHARACTERISTIC OF YOUR INDUSTRY,
IN THIS RESPECT MAY I MAKE ONE ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATION
FOR DEBATE, THE GREEN PAPER NOTES THAT, GENERALLY SPEAKING,
ALL RISK CROP INSURANCE IS NOT AVAILABLE IN AUSTRALIA, THE RECENT
FLOODS IN SOME PARTS OF OUR COUNTRY HAVE EMPHASISED THIS GAP,
AS YOU WOULD BE AWARE, WE INTEND TO ESTABLISH AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE, PERHAPS YOU COULD CONSIDER IN
YOUR DELIBERATIONS TOMORROW WHETHER THIS NEW INSTITUTION SHOULD
ESTABLISH A FACILITY OF THE KIND DISCUSSED IN THE REPORT,
THE ARGUMENT IS OFTEN ADVANCED THAT PEOPLE IN RURAL
AREAS SUFFER FROM SEVERE COST OF LIVING DISADVANTAGES FOR WHICH
THEY SHOULD RECEIVE COMPENSATION, OUR POLICIES ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHARGES AND ON THE PETROLEUM PRICE SUBSIDY SCHEME HAVE BEEN
CRITICISED FROM THIS POINT OF VIEW, I THEREFORE READ WITH
PARTICULAR INTEREST THE COMMENTS ON THIS MATTER IN THE GREEN PAPER,
THE WORKING GROUP STATES THAT THE ARGUMENT THAT PEOPLE IN RURAL
AREAS SUFFER COST OF LIVING DISABILITIES IS NOT PROVEN, THEY
HIGHLIGHT THE VALUE IN TERMS OF LIVING STANDARDS OF THE LOWER LAND
PRICES AND THE % M4L= ER NEFD FOR FXPENDITURE ON TRAVEL_ TO AND F WORK, 
12.
THE REAL DISABILITY LIES IN THE AREAS OF PUBLIC
SERVICES, THE GOVERNMENT'S APPROACH HAS RECOGNISED THIS FACTS
ONE OF OUR EARLIEST DECISIONS WAS TO ESTABLISH THE SPECIAL
ALLOWANCES FOR ISOLATED CHILDREN. I DO NOT NEED TO REPEAT THE
HIGH PRIORITY THAT THE GOVERNMENT ATTACHES TO EDUCATION, WE ARE
DETERMINED TO SEE THAT INEQUALITIES IN OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM ARE
ABOLISHED INCLUDING INEQUALITIES WHICH ARISE FROM GEOGRAPHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS. THERE ARE, OF COURSE, OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES WHICH
REQUIRE HEAVY SUBSIDIES, IT IS A BASIC QUESTION OF PRIORITIES TO
DECIDE WHICH SHOULD BE SUBSIDISED, THE SUBSTANTIAL LOSSES ON
RURAL PASSENGER SERVICES OF STATE RAILWAYS CAN IMPOSE INTOLERABLE
BURDENS ON GOVERNMENT FINANCES. WE HAVE FACED DECISIONS ON SUCH
PRIORITIES. THE RURAL CRITICS OF THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD KNOW
THAT IT COSTS UP TO $ 20,000 PER CONNECTION TO PROVIDE AUTOMATIC
TELEPHONE SERVICES IN AREAS WITH LESS THAN 200 TELEPHONES, TEN
TIMES MORE THAN IN THE CAPITAL CITIES. YET OUR MUCH CRITICISED
DECISION TO INCREASE TELEPHONE RENTALS FOR NON-METROPOLITAN
SUBSCRIBERS WILL REDUCE THE OPERATING LOSSES OF $ 100 MILLION IN
19/ 1-72 ON COUNTRY POSTAL AND TELECOMMUNICATION CHARGES BY ABOUT
$ 18 MILLION PER ANNUM. THIS DECISION SHOULD BE CONTRASTED WITH
THE ISOLATED CHILDREN ALLOWANCES. WE ARE A GOVERNMENT COMMITTED
TO IMPROVEMENTS IN HEALTH, EDUCATION AND WELFARE. THIS IS A
MATTER OF PRIORITIES; IT IS NOT A MATTER OF ANTI-RURAL BIAS,
PEOPLE MAY CRITICISE OUR PRIORITIES, THAT IS THEIR RIGHT, As
LONG AS THE DEBATE ABOUT OUR ATTITUDE TO RURAL COMMUNITIES IS
CONDUCTED IN THOSE TERMS I WILL BE HAPPY TO PUT OUR CASE. ,/ 13 
13,
NOTHING HOWEVER, EXASPERATES ME MORE THAN THE BASELESS
ACCUSATION THAT LABOR IS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY OR THAT I AM
PRIMARILY CONCERNED WITH THE CITIES, LABOR IS NEITHER AN URBAN
NOR A RURAL PARTY, WE ARE A NATIONAL PARTY GUIDED BY NATIONAL
CONSIDERATIONS, OF COURSE WE MUST BE CONCERNED WITH THE PLACES
WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS LIVE, PARTICULARLY AS THE GENERAL ISSUE
OF THE CITIES HAD BEEN IGNORED IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS UNTIL WE
MADE IT AN ISSUE, THAT DOES NOT DETRACT FROM MY CONCERN, OR
MY PARTY'S CONCERN, FOR THE PROBLEMS AND NEEDS OF RURAL COMMUNITIES,
NOW THAT THE ELECTION IS OVER, LET US STOP THESE
BASELESS ACCUSATIONS, LET US RENEW THE DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE WHOM YOU REPRESENT, I COULD NOT
THINK OF A MORE PROPER BASIS FOR THIS DIALOGUE THAN THE
EXCELLENT GREEN PAPER WHICH YOU WILL DISCUSS TOMORROW,
L W 



PRESS STATE: E: T No.. 294j
J1 " LYJLz
TARIFF BOARD REPORTS PROPYIEN7 OXIDE DERIVATIVES
FILM4 PROCESSIN'G INDUSTRY, e'. DVERTISI--G FILM,
( VALUE FOR DUTY)
The Prime Minister, Alr. W,-hitlam, announced today that
the Government has accepted the recommendations of the Tariff Board
in its reports on propylene oxide derivatives and film processing
industry, advertising film ( value for duty).
With regard to propylene oxcide derivatives Mr. Whitlam
said the Government's decision to implement the 3oard's
recommendations will mean th. at a General rate of euty of
will apply to the principal products covered by the report,~ polyols
( used in the manufacture of polyurethane foam) and glycols ( primarily
used'in the production of polyester resins and surface coatings).
Presently these goods are dutiable at minimumn rates. Mr. T-hitlam
said the Government noted the Board's misgivings as-to whether the
local manufacture of these goods warranted assistance but accepted
the Board's judgement on the level of protection for the local
industry pending a review of the chemical industry as a whiole in
1975. There will be no change in the duties currently applying
to the other goods covered by the report except for a minor
variation in respect of some chemically pure surface active agents
and some goods of New Zealand origin.
The decision in respect of the film processing report will
mean that minimum rates of duty will apply to exposed cinematograph
film; a General rate of 35% will apply to graphic arts film ( negative
and positive) and minimum rates of duty will apply to other goods.
Provision will also be made for by-law admission of certain exposed
film. A detailed statement of the Customs tariff changes
involved arising from the Government's decision will be issued
by the Minister for Customs and -, xcise when arrangements have
been finalised to implemnent the new.. duty rates.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



DEPARMN OF
NQ DATE
M/ 97 6 July 1974
U. S. S-R./ AUSTRALIA SCIENTIFIC EXCHANGES AGREEMENT
T -he Prime Minister and Acting Foreign Minister,
Mr Whitlam, today announced the first stage in the
implementation of the U. S. S. R./ Australia Scientific Exchanges
Agreement. This, he said, was the appointment of convenors of
five groups of Australian scientists who, with their Soviet
counterparts, would study the possibilities for scientific
cooperation between Australia and the including
the establishment of joint research programs.
The Scientific Exchanges Agreement was initialled
in Canberra in February this year during the visit to Australia
of a Soviet Scientific Delegation.
During the visit the Delegation agreed with
Australian Officials on the establishment of five working
groups of scientists to investigate areas of possible
scientific cooperation.
The five groups will be in the fields of radio
0 astronomy, the earth sciences, entomology, plant industry and
textile technology. The initial meetings of the groups will probably
start during September in Moscow.
The Australian convenors for these groups, and their
Soviet counterparts are, respectively:
Radio Dr J. P. Wild, FRS, Mr V. S. Troitsky,
Astronomy Chief, CSIRO Division Deputy Director Scientific
of Radiophysics. Research Radiophysics
Institute of the Ministry of
Higher and Middle Specialised
Education of the RSFSR.
Earth Mr I. E. Newnham, Mr V. A. Magnitsky,
Sciences Director, CSIRO Chief of Laboratory Research
Minerals Research Institute of Earth Physics,
Laboratories. USSR Academy of Science.
Corresponding member of the
USSR Academy of Science. ./ 2 
Entomology Plant Industry
Textile Technology Dr D. F. Waterhouse, FRS,
Chief, CSIRO Division of
Entomology. Dr L. T. Evans, Chief,
CSIRO Division of Plant
Industry.
Dr M. Lipson,
Chief, CSIRO Division of
Textile Industry. Mr M. S. Gilyarov,
Chief of the Laboratory
of Evolved Morphology
and Animal Ecology, USSR
Academy of Sciences.
Corresponding member
of USSR Academy of
Science. Mr D. oD Brezhnev,
Director Plant Research
Institute, Vavilov
and
Mr A. A. Sozinov,
Director, All USSR
Selection Genetic
Institute,
Mr B. S. Golovastikov,
Director, Central
Research Institute of
Textile Industry, Mos*.
Mr Whitlam said that other members of the Australian
groups had already been chosen. He added that the Scientific
Exchanges Agreement was an important step in furthering bilateral
relations between Australia and the It would also
benefit the scientific communities of both countries. 



AUS RLIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 284A
7 July 1974
COMMUNITY RELATIONS CONSULTANT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam announced today
the appointment of the Honourable A. J. Grassby as Special
Consultant to the Australian Government on Community Relations.
Mr Whitlam said that the appointment was to lay
the foundations for legislative and administrative action to
ensure the abolition of all forms of discrimination on the basis
of race, colour or creed in Australia and to ensure a continuing
program to enable the Australian community as a whole to benefit
from the rich cultural and linguistic heritage which Australia
has acquired after 25 years of mass migration. Above all the
appointment is the first step of new initiatives to ensure that
the hopes and aspirations of the 3 million people who have settled
in Australia since World War IT have the fullest opportunities
for realisation. il
The Australian Parliament has responsibility to
legislate with respect to aborigines, migrants and international
treaties and obligations. Australia has not yet ratified the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
which was adopted by the United Nations in December 1965 and
which came into force in January 1969.
This convention has already been ratified by
78 countries, including Britain, Canada and New Zealand.
Earlier this year Australian Attorney-General ( Senator
Murphy) introduced legislation which would have enabled Australia
to implement the convention.
This legislation lapsed when the old Parliament
was dissolved and Mr Whitlam said that Mr Grassby would also advise
on the form in which the legislation would be introduced in the
new Parliament. Mr Whitlam said that Mr Grassby would be appointed
commissioner under the legislation when it was passed by Parliament.
In the meantime he will act as adviser to the
Australian Government on matters of community relations affecting
migrants and other ethnic groups in Australia. / 2 



NQ DATE
M/ 96 8 July 1974
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTS
The following is the text of a statement issued
by the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, in Canberra on 8 July:
" The Trime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that
the Australian Government had reason to believe that the
French Government had exploded today another nuclear device
in the atmosphere in the Pacific.
The Prime Minister said he wished to reiterate
that, as he had said on 17 June, this further action of the
French Government was a matter of deep concern to the
Australian Government and that the feelings of the Australian
W Government and people against these tests had not changed.
Mr Whitlam said that his Government had protested by formal
note to the French Government as recently as 18 June 1974
concerning the conduct of a further test in the racific." 



. o
LP RIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 286
8th July 1974
MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR H. P. H. TI'E PRINCE HENRv
Arrangements have been made with the Bishop
of Canberra and Goulburn, the Right Reverend C. A. Tarren,
for a Memorial Service for the former Governor-General of
Australia, His Royal Highness The Prince Henry who died in
London on 10 June, to be held at John's Church,
Canberra at 9.00am on Thursday 18 July.
The Prime Minister, Ministers and' Members of
Parliament will be among the conqreration.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. jI 1 



EMBARGO: 8. 30 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE GOVERNORGENERAL'S
DINNER, TUESDAY 9 JULY 74
SIR PAUL HASLUCK'S LONG AND REMARKABLE CAREER
HAS BEEN LANDMARKED BY AN EXTRAORDINARY NUMBER OF " FIRSTS",
TO OPEN A PARLIAMENT AND FAREWELL IT ON THE SAME DAY
IS A RECORD LIKELY TO STAND FOR A VERY LONG TIME.
THIS OCCASION IS ABOVE ALL A PARLIAMENTARY OCCASION.
WE FAREWELL A FORMER COLLEAGUE OF 20 YEARS.
THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, HOWEVER, IS A CONSTITUENT PART
OF A PARLIAMENT WHICH CONSISTS OF THE QUEEN, THE SENATE
AND THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. AS THE QUEEN'S
REPRESENTATIVE IN AUSTRALIA, HIS EXCELLENCY IS PART
OF THIS PARLIAMENT, So IT IS DOUBLY FITTING THAT
THIS MEMORABLE DAY IN THE LIFE OF THE PARLIAMENT
AND, I TRUST, A MEMORABLE DAY CROWNING A VERY
MEMORABLE CAREER SHOULD END HERE. 
-2-
AND A GREAT CAREER IT HAS BEEN INDEED
A CAREER OF HIGH ACCOMPLISHMENT BY A MOST HIGHLY
ACCOMPLISHED AUSTRALIAN, THE LIST IS EXTRAORDINARY
JOURNALIST, AUTHOR, HISTORIAN, ACADEMIC, CIVIL
SERVANT, DIPLOMATIST, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT,
MINISTER OF THE CROWN, VICEROY-A CAREER
REMARKABLE IN ITS DIVERSITY, YET EQUALLY REMARKABLE
IN ITS CONSISTENCY, THERE HAS NOT BEEN A PRO-CONSUL
OF MORE DIVERSE ATTAINMENT SINCE CICERO.
THIS SHINING CAREER HAS ONE CLEAR, CONSISTENT THEME,
THE SERVICE OF AUSTRALIA AND THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA,
IN ONE CAPACITY OR ANOTHER, HE HAS BEEN IN THE SERVICE
OF THE CROWN AND THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE
FOR AN UNINTERRUPTED THIRTY-FIVE YEARS,
IN THE BRIEF PERIODS WHEN HE WAS NOT HELPING TO MAKE
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY, HE WAS TEACHING IT OR WRITING IT,
AND NO LESS REMARKABLE, LADY HASLUCK,
AN HISTORIAN IN HER OWN RIGHT, OF ELEGANCE AND
CHARM IN HER WRITING AND HER PERSON ALIKE, 
-3-
AROUND THIS ROOM ARE SCORES OF MEN AND
WOMEN WHO HAVE BEEN CLOSELY ASSOCIATED WITH HIS
EXCELLENCY IN VARIOUS PERIODS OF HIS CAREER, WHO
HAVE WORKED WITH HIM OR WORKED UNDER HIM.
THERE ARE THOSE OF US WHO WERE HIS PARLIAMENTARY
COLLEAGUES, MANY OF THEM. HIS FORMER MINISTERIAL
COLLEAGUES. THERE ARE PUBLIC SERVANTS WHO SERVED
HIM AS MINISTER, AND THERE ARE PUBLIC SERVANTS
WHO WERE HIS COLLEAGUES WHEN HE TOO, WAS A PUBLIC
SERVANT. I MIGHT BE FORGIVEN IF I SINGLE OUT
FOR MENTION THOSE WHO WERE ASSOCIATED WITH HIM ON
A UNIQUE OCCASION OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO THIS NATION.
HE WAS THE FIRST PERSON TO PRESENT CREDENTIALS
TO THE FIRST SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED HATIONS, 
His COLLEAGUES IN NEW YORK WERE MR. ARTHUR TANGE, fiR.
JOHN MOORE, MR. ALAN RENOUF AND MISS JULIA DRAKE-BROCKMAN.
SIR ARTHUR TANGE HAS BECOME SECRETARY OF THE DEFENCE DEPARTMENT,
fiR, JUSTICE MOORE HAS BECOME PRESIDENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION, MR. RENOUF HAS BECOME
SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, AND MISS
DRAKE-BROCKMAN HAS BECOME MRS.' MOORE. OUR FIRST PERMANENT
MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS IS ASSEMBLED HERE AGAIN TONIGHT
TO FAREWELL ITS CHIEF,
HIs EXCELLENCY HAD THE UNIQUE EXPERIENCE OF COMING TO
HEAD AS MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS, THE DEPARTMENT IN WHICH
HE HAD SERVED.
THERE IS A NICE SYMMETRY ABOUT HIS EXECUTIVE CAREER.
AS HE HIMSELF RECORDS IN THE PREFACE TO THE SECOND VOLUME
OF HIS WAR HISTORY, HIS PROMOTION TO THE MINISTRY WAS HASTENED
BY THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION OF 1951; HIS LAST FORMAL DUTY WAS TO OPEN
A PARLIAMENT WHICH WAS CREATED THROUGH A DOUBLE DISSOLUTION WHICH
HE HIMSELF HAD GRANTED. HE DID NOT ATTAIN THE PRIME MINISTERSHIP,
BUT WITHOUT IN ANY WAY DEROGATING FROM THE DISTINGUISHED CANDIDATES
WHO SOUGHT THE LEADERSHIPOF THE LIBERAL PARTY AFTER THE TRAGIC
EVENT OF DECEMBER 1967, IT IS NO SECRET TH. AT AT THE TIME I WOULD
HAVE REGARDED PAUL HASLUCK AS THE MOST FORMIDABLE OPPONENT,
I AM NOT SAYING THAT WE WOULD HAVE LOST THE ELECTIONS IN 1972,
BUT PERHAPS WE MIGHT NOT HAVE WON, 
HOWEVER THAT MAY BE, HE DID COME TO HEAD
ONE OF THE MOST EFFECTIVE AND EXPEDITIOUS EXECUTIVE
COUNCILS WE HAVE EVER HAD, IT WAS A HAPPY, HARMONIOUS,
HEADY TRIUMVIRATE. FOR THOSE TWO WEEKS IN DECEMBER, 1972,
THERE WAS TOTAL PRIVATE AND PUBLIC UNANIMITY AMONG ALL
TWENTY-SEVEN MINISTRIES, AND IN THOSE DAYS WE STRUCK
AN ACCORD WITH THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL WHICH HAS REMAINED
UNMARREDI UNDIMINISHED, HIS GOVERNOR-GENERALSHIP, THE CIRCUMSTANCES
IN WHICH HE WAS PLACED AS GOVERNOR-GENERAL,
CONFIRM CONCLUSIVELY, IF CONFIRMATION WERE NEEDED,
THREE GREAT TRUTHS: THE ABSOLUTE FITNESS OF APPOINTING
AUSTRALIANS TO AUSTRALIAIS HIGHEST POSITION, THE
ABSOLUTE FITNESS OF POLITICIANS TO HOLD THAT OFFICE
AND THE ABSOLUTE ABILITY OF OPPOSING POLITICIANS TO
BURY PARTISANSHIP IN THE SERVICE OF THE NATION, 
-6-
SIR PAUL HASLUCK'S CAREER IS ITSELF A
TRIBUTE TO THE BASIC STRENGTH AND STABILITY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM WHICH HE SERVED FOR
SO LONG WITH SUCH FIDELITY, AT A TIME WHEN
PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY IS EVERYWHERE UNDERGOING
TREMENDOUS STRESSES WHICH CHALLENGE ITS BASIC ASSUMPTIONS,
WHICH CHALLENGE ITS VERY SURVIVAL, IT IS GOOD TO BE
REMINDED OF THE TRUE SOURCES OF ITS STRENGTH AND
TO HAVE IN THE PERSON AND CAREER OF OUR OWN GOVERNORGENERAL,
A POWERFUL, LIVING REMINDER OF THE HUMAN
QUALITIES BY WHICH ALONE THAT STRENGTH CAN BE
MAINTAINED, 



I2
MEDIA RELEASE INDEPENDENCE AND PAPUA NEW GUINEA
STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ASSISTING THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN
AFFAIRS IN MATTERS RELATING TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA, MR. BILL
MORRISON. The Minister Assisting the Foreign Minister in Papua New
Guinea matters, Mr. Bill Morrison, said today that the
Australian Government would co-operate closely in achieving
Papua New Guinea's goal of independence. He was commenting
on the resolution passed yesterday by the House of Assembly
in Port Moresby affirming that P. N. G. would move to
independence as soon as practicable after a constitution
had been enacted.
He said pending the final decision of the House of Assembly
to declare a date for independence for Papua New Guinea,
the Australian Government will conduct its relations with
the Government of Papua New Guinea as a Government of an
independent nation to which Australia has certain special
and inescapable obligations.
Mr. Morrison added, " What exists today in P. N. G. is a
state of defacto independence"
Even in the areas where Australia reserves ultimate
respon sibility until independence, mainly Defence and
Foreign Relations, Papua New Guinea is already exercising
day to day control and determining its own policies. The
Minister said that even before self government, Papua New
Guinea had appointed a Min1ister for Foreign Relations and
Defence. 
-2-
The Minister said that with Australia's encouragement,
Papua New Guinea had taken its place in the international
community and established contacts as if it were an
independent entity.
All this accords with the Australian Government's policy
that the transition from self government to independence
be smooth, in the same way that the granting of self
government on December 1 of last year had largely been a
formalisation of what already existed.
Mr. Morrison said that the question of the date of independence
should be kept in perspective. He recalled the statement
made by Mr. Somare in the House of Assembly on Monday, 8
July " We all know that independence will be coming
fairly soon and really the question of the exact
date is not all that important."
Mr. Morrison said that despite the present preoccupation
with the date of independence, the real challenges facing
the Government and people of Papua New Guinea concern
economic and social development.
Among these challenges, which are being effectively handled
by the P. N. G. Government, are rural development, which is
at the heart of social justice in any nation at an early
stage of development; the best use of available
resources, both manpower and the natural resources with
which Papua New Guinea is blessed. Employment opportunities
must be found for the rapidly growing num ber of job-seekers
in urban areas. The Papua New Guinea Government is also
facing up to questions like the best utilisation of foreign
aid, the formulation of a land policy and an investment
policy. 
-3-
Mr. Morrison said that it would be unfortunate if preoccupations
over the exact independence date were to consume
energy and attention which, in the interest of the future of
Papua New Guinea, must necessarily be directed to resolving
the real challenge-, which have been expressed by the
leaders of Papua New Guinea.
jLy , O/ 7
For further information, contact:
BILL PINWILL
726328 ) Office
733371) 



EMBARGO: 8.30PM FRIDAY 12 JULY 1974
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P,,
TO THE AUSTRALASIAN INSTITUTE OF MINING AND METALLURGYI
HOMESTEAD HOTEL, BRISBANE, 12 JULY 1974
THE OBJECTS OF YOUR INSTITUTE WERE DEFINED
IN THESE TERMS 81 YEARS AGO:
" TO PROMOTE THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
CONNECTED WITH THE ECONOMICAL PRODUCTION
OF THE USEFUL MINERALS AND METALS, AND
THE WELFARE OF THOSE IN THESE INDUSTRIES,
BY MEANS OF MEETINGS FOR SOCIAL INTERCOURSE,
AND THE READING AND DISCUSSION OF
PROFESSIONAL PAPERS, AND TO CIRCULATE BY
MEANS OF PUBLICATIONS AMONGST ITS MEMBERS
AND ASSOCIATES, THE INFORMATION THUS
OBTAINED." 
-2-
IT IS TO THAT SPIRIT OF PROFESSIONAL
DETACHMENT, OF SCHOLARLY CONCERN, THAT I HOPE TO
APPEAL IN ADDRESSING YOU TONIGHT, I TRUST THAT
YOUR PROFESSIONAL TRAINING AND GOOD JUDGEMENT
WILL LEAD YOU TO THE SAME CONCLUSIONS, THE SAME
CONSIDERATIONS OF NATIONAL INTEREST, THAT HAVE
GUIDED THE GOVERNMENT IN FRAMING ITS POLICIES
TOWARDS OUR GREAT MINING INDUSTRIES, I KNOW
THAT MEN SUCH AS YOU, MEN WHOSE SKILLS AND LEARNING
AND DEDICATION HAVE HELPED CREATE THESE INDUSTRIES
AND LEAD THEM TO PROSPERITY, WILL WANT TO SEE
THEM PRESERVED AND STRENGTHENED AND KEPT AS FAR
AS POSSIBLE IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS, I BELIEVE YOU
HAVE AS GREAT AN INTEREST AS I DO IN FOSTERING
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THESE INDUSTRIES, I BELIEVE
YOU WILL ACKNOWLEDGE THE URGENT ENVIRONMENTAL
PROBLEMS CREATED BY MINING IN A WORLD WHOSE
RESOURCES ARE FINITE, I BELIEVE YOU WILL RECOGNISE
THAT THE CLAIMS OF OUR ABORIGINAL PEOPLE FOR LAND
RIGHTS AFFECT ALL AUSTRALIANS, BUT HAVE A SPECIAL
RELEVANCE TO THE MINING INDUSTRY, I BELIEVE, TOO,
THAT AS CONCERNED PROFESSIONAL MEN, YOU WILL
ACKNOWLEDGE THE DUTY OF MODERN GOVERNMENTS TO
HUSBAND NATIONAL RESOURCES AND ENSURE THAT OUR
MINERALS ARE SOLD AT FAIR PRICES ON WORLD MARKETS, 
-3-
SOON AFTER WE CAME TO OFFICE LAST YEAR,
THE GOVERNMENT RESOLVED TO EXERCISE ITS
CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE EXPORT
OF OUR RAW AND SEMI-PROCESSED MINERALS.
WE DID THIS TO ACHIEVE A REASONABLE LEVEL
OF EXPORT PRICES AND A BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
OF AUSTRALIAN MINERAL RESOURCES. OUR POLICIES
ASSERT THE AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN THE DEVELOPMENT AND
MARKETING OF AUSTRALIA'S MINERALS. WE ARE
TAKING THIS COURSE, NOT IN ANY DOCTRINAIRE
SPIRIT, BUT FROM A RECOGNITION OF THE PRACTICAL
AND INESCAPABLE REALITIES OF WORLD TRADE.
THE EXPLOITATION AND MARKETING OF MINERAL
RESOURCES IS NOT MERELY A NATIONAL CONCERN, BUT AN
INTERNATIONAL CONCERN. IT IS CERTAINLY MORE THAN A
STATE CONCERN. MANY OF THE CORPORATIONS WITH WHICH
WE ALL HAVE TO DEAL HAVE BUDGETS SEVERAL TIMES THAT
OF THE STATE OF QUEENSLAND. THE ONLY GOVERNMENT IN
AUSTRALIA THAT CAN DEAL WITH THESE LARGE CORPORATIONS
IS THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. THE ONLY GOVERNMENT IN
AUSTRALIA WITH INTERNATIONAL STANDING AND RECOGNITION
IS THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. 
-4-
THERE IS NOTHING NOVEL OR SURPRISING ABOUT
THIS, THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION PROVIDES, AS THE
VERY FIRST OF THE POWERS GRANTED TO THE AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 51, THE POWER TO MAKE
LAWS ON " TRADE AND COMMERCE WITH OTHER COUNTRIES."
IN VIEW OF THAT, IT IS AN ODD ARGUMENT INDEED TO
SAY THAT WE ARE INTERFERING IN THE RIGHTS OF THE
STATES IN ASSERTING OUR RESPONSIBILITY IN THIS WAY,
IT IS TRUE THAT OUR PREDECESSORS IN GENERAL KEPT
OUT OF THIS FIELD, No DOUBT THEY FELT THEY HAD
GOOD REASONS FOR DOING SO, I SIMPLY ASK YOU TO
ACCEPT THAT OUR ASSERTION OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY IN WHAT WE BELIEVE
IS THE NATIONAL INTEREST IS FULLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE LETTER AND SPIRIT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
IF IT WERE NOT, I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT OUR APPROACH
WOULD BE CHALLENGED IN THE HIGH COURT, IT HAS NOT
BEEN CHALLENGED: AND I REJECT THE SUGGESTION THAT
BECAUSE WE HAVE ASSERTED THE NATION'S CONCERN AND
RESPONSIBILITY IN THIS CRUCIALLY IMPORTANT AREA,
WE ARE INTRUDING IN STATE AFFAIRS, nNE MAY ASK:
ARE WE " INTRUDING" IN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION,
IN THE CARE OF THE NATIONAL ESTATE, IN* THE ARTS,
IN NATIONAL COMPENSATION, IN EDUCATION, IN CHILD
CARE, MERELY BECAUSE WE ARE DOING WHAT OUR
PREDECESSORS NEGLECTED TO DO? 
DESPITE MUCH FOREBODING WHEN OUR POLICIES
WERE INTRODUCED, THEIR ADVANTAGES HAVE BEEN AMPLY
DEMONSTRATED, THE INTRODUCTION OF CONTROLS HAS
GIVEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT A MUCH BETTER
KNOWLEDGE OF THE MINERAL INDUSTRY, ITS OVERSEAS
TRADE AND THE TERMS OF ITS CONTRACTS, WHILST
CONFIDENTIALITY HAS BEEN SCRUPULOUSLY OBSERVED,
IT HAS NEVERTHELESS BEEN POSSIBLE FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
MINERALS AND ENERGY TO GIVE MATERIAL ASSISTANCE
AND ADVICE ON WORLD PRICING TRENDS AND TO
CO-ORDINATE THE EXPORT ACTIVITIES OF AUSTRALIANMINING
COMPANIES ON A NATIONAL BASIS, THUS WE HAVE
STRENGTHENED THE NEGOTIATING AND BARGAINING POWER OF
OUR EXPORTERS, WE ARE ABLE TO ENSURE THAT OUR
RESOURCES ARE SOLD OVERSEAS AT WORLD MARKET PARITY
PRICES, No LONGER CAN OUR CUSTOMERS PLAY THE GAME
OF DIVIDE AND RULE TO EXTRACT LOWER PRICES FROM OUR
COMPANIES AND CONCESSIONS FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S APPROACH HAS BEEN
ONE OF FIRM BUT FAIR DEALING IN THE INTERESTS OF BOTH
AUSTRALIA AND OUR TRADING PARTNERS, AND I BELIEVE
OUR ACTIONS HAVE ALREADY HELPED YOU TO OBTAIN SIGNIFICANT
INCREASES IN THE PRICE OF OUR IRON ORE AND COAL EXPORTS
AN EXTRA $ 67 MILLION A YEAR TO DATE IN INCOME FROM IRON ORE
AND AN EXTRA $ 210 MILLION OVfR TWELVE MONTHS IN EXPORT INCOME
FROM COAL, IN THIS WAY ALL AUSTRALIANS ARE BENEFITING
FROM THE CONCENTRATION OF OUR BARGAINING POWER, 
-6-
MY COLLEAGUE, THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS
AND ENERGY, HAS ALREADY SAID THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S
EXPORT CONTROL POWERS WILL NOT BE EMPLOYED
CAPRICIOUSLY OR VEXATIOUSLY. THIS IS A UNANIMOUS
ATTITUDE AMONG MEMBERS OF THE CABINET, WE HAVE
ASSURED OUR TRADING PARTNERS, ESPECIALLY JAPAN,
THAT WE ARE SEEKING NO MORE THAN A FAIR PRICE
IN OUR MINERAL CONTRACTS WITH THEM, IT WOULD
BE UNREAL TO SEEK PRICES HIGHER THAN THE MARKET
WILL BEAR WHEN ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF SUPPLY
ARE USUALLY AVAILABLE, WE HAVE TAKEN EVERY
OPPORTUNITY TO EXPLAIN OUR POLICIES TO OUR
TRADING PARTNERS IN BILATERAL CONSULTATIONS AND
IN INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS CONCERNED WITH
MINERALS TRADE, CLEARLY, AGAIN, THIS IS A TASK
ONLY A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CAN PERFORM, 
-7-
I HAVE EMPHASISED THE NEED FOR FAIR RETURNS
FROM THE SALE OF OUR MINERALS. ONE STATE THAT HAS
NOT HAD FAIR RETURNS IS QUEENSLAND A STATE WHERE
MINING HAS A LONG AND PROUD HISTORY GOING BACK TO
THE DISCOVERY OF COAL AT IPSWICH IN 1827. I AM
PLEASED TO LEARN THAT THE OUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
HAS AT LAST TAKEN STEPS TO INCREASE THE SCALE OF
ITS ROYALTY RECEIPTS. I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE
ACTIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OVER THE LAST
18 MONTHS HAVE CREATED A SITUATION WHERE IT HAS NOT
ONLY BEEN POSSIBLE BUT CONSPICIOUSLY IMPERATIVE FOR
THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT TO DO SO.
EVEN BEFORE THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CAME TO OFFICE, nUEENSLAND'S SCALE OF ROYALTY RECEIPTS
WAS, IN RELATION TO THE VALUE OF ITS MINING OUTPUT,
THE LOWEST AMONG ALL THE IMPORTANT MINERAL-PRODUCING
STATES. AT THE SAME TIME, THE OUEENSLAND MINERALS
INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE HAS AN EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH DEGREE
OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP, PARTICULARLY IN THE DEPOSITS OF
WEIPA BAUXITE AND CENTRAL QUEENSLAND COAL, AND THE
EXPORT PRICES OBTAINED FOR QUEENSLAND COAL WERE
GENERALLY MUCH LOWER THAN THE RULING INTERNATIONAL
LEVELS FOR SHIPMENTS OF COKING COAL OF SUCH QUALITY.
IF I MAY SAY SO WITHOUT BOASTING, IT IS IN PART DUE
TO MY GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES THAT YOUR RETURNS ARE
BEING RAISED. 
-8-
SOON AFTER TAKING OFFICE, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SOUGHT NEGOTIATIONS WHICH HAVE ENABLED YOUR COAL
PRODUCERS TO OBTAIN VERY MARKED INCREASES IN THEIR
EXPORT SELLING PRICES, IN TURN, THE WIDENING
DISPARITY BETWEEN THE VALUES OF YOUR MINERAL
PRODUCTION AND THE FLAT-RATE ROYALTY RETURNS TO
THE OUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS PROMPTED SIR GORDON CHALK
TO BEGIN NEGOTIATIONS WHICH WOULD INCREASE THE
ROYALTY RECEIPTS. SIR GORDON HAS A VERY STRONG CASE,
THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF HOW THE EFFECTIVE PURSUIT
OF NATIONAL POLICIES BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
CAN BRING DIRECT BENEFITS TO THE REVENUES OF A STATE,
I HOPE THIS CO-OPERATIVE PROCESS CAN BE CONTINUED,
YOU WILL PERCEIVE TWO CONSTANT THEMES IN
OUR MINERAL AND MINING POLICIES THE PRESERVATION
OF AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND THE MAXIMISING OF
BENEFITS TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FROM THE SALE OF
OUR NATURAL RESOURCES, THE SECOND OF THESE WAS THE
MAIN THEME OF MR. T. M. FITZGERALD'S CELEBRATED PAPER
ON THE MINING INDUSTRY, HE POINTED OUT THAT LACK OF
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN STATE GOVERNMENTS AND THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN POLICIES FOR MINERAL
DEVELOPMENT HAD DEPRIVED THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE OF
BENEFITS THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO DEMAND, 
CONTRARY TO THE OPINION GENERALLY HELD UNTIL RECENTLY,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN PROVIDING VERY
LARGE TAXATION CONCESSIONS FOR MINERAL ENTERPRISES,
NOT ONLY FOR THEIR INITIAL ESTABLISHMENT BUT ALSO
FOR THEIR LATER EXPANSION, CONTRARY TO ANOTHER
IMPRESSION, THE MAJOR PART OF THE TAX CONCESSIONS
CANNOT BE REGARDED MERELY AS TEMPORARY CREDITS,
I DO NOT WANT TO RECOUNT IN DETAIL THE
SUBSTANCE OF THE FITZGERALD REPORT, YOU WILL ALL
BE FAMILIAR WITH IT, I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT ITS
PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS HAVE BEEN REBUTTED, LET ME
JUST EMPHASISE THAT THE REPORT DOES NOT CONDEMN
TAX CONCESSIONS IN THEMSELVES, WHAT IT DOES SHOW
IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, THROUGH THE INCOME-TAX
SYSTEM, ARE IN EFFECT SUBSTANTIAL CONTRIBUTORS OF FUNDS
TO THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURES OF EXPANDING MINERAL
ENTERPRISES, WHEN YOU REMEMBER THAT THE ULTIMATE SOURCE
OF THE MINING COMPANIES' PROFITS -OUR SUPERB NATURAL
RESOURCES OF IRON ORE, COAL, BAUXITE, NICKEL AND OTHER
MINERALS ARE PUBLIC ASSETS, AND EXHAUSTIBLE PUBLIC
ASSETS, YOU MUST CONCLUDE THAT. THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
DESERVE TO RECEIVE A GOOD AND PROPER SHARE OF THE
INCOME FROM THESE RESOURCES, 
10
I REMIND YOU THAT THE WHOLE QUESTION
OF TAX CONCESSIONS AND ROYALTIES FOR YOUR
INDUSTRY HAS BEEN REFERRED BY US TO THE
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION. WE HAVE
ASKED THE COMMISSION " TO INQUIRE AND REPORT ON
THE EFFECT OF TAXATION CONCESSIONS AND ROYALTIES
ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND EFFICIENCY OF THE PETROLEUM
AND MINING INDUSTRIES AND TO ADVISE WHETHER AND IN
WHAT WAYS WE SHOULD OFFER ASSISTANCE TO OR IMPOSE
ROYALTIES ON THESE INDUSTRIES." 
11
I STRESS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IS COMMITTED TO THE CONTINUATION OF SIGNIFICANT
CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN MINING. THIS INVESTMENT
SHOULD NOT INVOLVE LOSSES TO THE NATIONAL REVENUE,
NOR SHOULD IT PRIMARILY PROMOTE FOREIGN. PROFITABILITY.
I AM AWARE OF THE BENEFITS THAT THE MINING INDUSTRY
HAS BROUGHT TO OUR NATION AND TO THIS STATE. THE
WHOLE THRUST OF MY ARGUMENT IS THAT ALL AUSTRALIANS,
INCLUDING QUEENSLANDERS, SHOULD HAVE BENEFITED
MORE FROM THIS DEVELOPMENTD GOVERNMENTS HAVE NOT
TAKEN FULL ADVANTAGE OF OUR RESOURCES IN TERMS OF
PROMOTING THE WELFARE OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
MY GOVERNMENT INTENDS TO DO SO IN THE FUTURE.
LET ME SAY A WORD ABOUT THE PROCESSING
OF MINERALS. THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY IS TO
ENCOURAGE THE TREATMENT AND FABRICATION OF MINERAL
RESOURCES IN AUSTRALIA, AT EVERY STAGE OF PROCESSING
THE VALUE OF THESE RESOURCES IS GREATLY INCREASED.
WE WELCOME THE DECISION OF A GROUP OF INTERNATIONAL
IRON AND STEEL PRODUCERS, HEADED BY BHP., TO
STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF PRODUCING SEMI-FINISHED
STEEL PRODUCTS IN AUSTRALIA, WE ARE DEEPLY INTERESTED
IN THE POSSIBLE ESTABLISHMENT OF STEELWORKS IN
OUEENSLAND AND IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA SO THAT THE
SHIPMENT OF QUEENSLAND COAL TO WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CAN BE COMPLEMENTED BY THE BACK-LOADING OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIAN IRON ORE TO QUEENSLAND, 
12
HERE AGAIN, A QUESTION OF NATIONAL INTEREST
IS RAISED. IF COAL AND IRON ORE ARE TO BE BROUGHT
TOGETHER FOR THIS ADMIRABLE PURPOSE, CLEARLY THIS
CAN BEST BE DONE BY SHIPS OF THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL
LINE. INTERSTATE TRADE IS AS MUCH THE PROPER ROLE
AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AS
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE IN OUR ECONOMIC LIFE IS
WELL KNOWN. IT HAS BEEN RECOGNISED BY EVERY
STATE GOVERNMENT EXCEPT QUEENSLAND. IT IS A
MATTER OF REGRET THAT THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
HAS REFUSED TO ALLOW THE A. N. L. TO ENGAGE IN
INTRASTATE TRAFFIC EXCEPT ON THE SINGLE ROUTE
BETWEEN GLADSTONE AND WEIPA,
I SHALL DEAL BRIEFLY WITH TWO ASPECTS OF
MINING THAT CURRENTLY EXERCISE THE GOVERNMENT.
HIGH AMONG THE GOVERNMENT'S AMBITIONS IS TO GIVE
NATURAL RIGHTS TO OUR ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, WE ARE
DETERMINED THAT THEIR INTERESTS WILL BE PRESERVED
IN ANY MINING OPERATIONS. MR. JUSTICE E. A. WOODWARD'S
REPORT ON LAND RIGHTS FOR ABORIGINES IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY WILL FORM THE BASIS OF OUR APPROACH TO
THIS QUESTION. WHILE THE INTERESTS OF MINING
COMPANIES WILL BE RESPECTED AS FAR AS POSSIBLE,
WE REGARD THIS AS AN ISSUE OF BASIC HUMAN JUSTICE
TRANSCENDING COMMERCIAL CONSIDERATIONS. 
13
NEXT, THE ENVIRONMENT, I AM W SURE
NOT
YOU WILLADISPUTE THE VIEW THAT AUSTRALIA MUST
ADOPT A BALANCED NATIONAL APPROACH TO THE
CONSERVATION OF OUR NON-RENEWABLE MINERAL
RESOURCES. IT IS IMPORTANT THAT CONSERVATIONISTS
RECOGNISE THE CONTRIBUTION TO OUR EXPORT EARNINGS
BY THE MINING INDUSTRY, OUR RELIANCE ON MINERALS TO
PROVIDE THE COMFORTS AND CONVENIENCE OF MODERN LIFE,
IT IS EQUALLY IMPORTANT THAT THE MINING INDUSTRY
RECOGNISE THE WIDER COMMUNITY PRIORITIES OF SOME
LAND USE DECISIONS AND PUBLIC CONCERN ABOUT THE
REHABILITATION OR ALTERNATIVE USE OF LAND AFTER
MINING HAS CEASED. IN RECOGNITION OF THIS, THE
GOVERNMENT HAS ENDORSED THE USE OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT STATEMENT PROCEDURE, IT HAS BEEN OPERATING
THIS PROCEDURE ON AN ADMINISTRATIVE BASIS FOR SOME
TIME, LEGISLATION HAS BEEN DRAFTED TO PUT IT ON. A
FIRMER BASIS AND ENSURE THAT ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
RECEIVE GREATER CONSIDERATION IN DECISION-MAKING
-THAN HITHERTO. I BELIEVE THE ATTITUDE OF THE
GOVERNMENT TO THE ALWEST BAUXITE MINING PROPOSAL
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA DEMONSTRATES THE STRENGTH
OF OUR RESOLVE ON THIS ISSUE. 
14
I COME NOW TO OUR GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR
EXPANDING AUSTRALIA'S ROLE AS A GREAT MINERAL
PRODUCING NATION, THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS
AUTHORITY WILL BE ESTABLISHED TO EXPLORE
AND DEVELOP OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERAL RESOURCES
AND TO HELP IMPLEMENT THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY OF
MAXIMUM AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR
NATURAL RESOURCES, THE LEGISLATION IS NOW BEFORE
THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR THE THIRD TIME,
No AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS EVER HAD A CLEARER
MANDATE FOR ITS LEGISLATION,
APART FROM EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT,
THERE IS A DISTINCT NEED FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
TO HELP SMALLER AUSTRALIAN MINING VENTURES DEVELOP
THEIR DISCOVERIES WITHOUT SACRIFICING CONTROL OR.
OWNERSHIP TO OVERSEAS INTERESTS, WE HAVE A FURTHER
OBLIGATION TO EXAMINE AND DEVELOP ALL SOURCES OF
ENERGYI INCLUDING SOLAR ENERGYI WHICH COULD CONTRIBUTE
TO OUR NEEDS WHEN MORE CONVENTIONAL SOURCES ARE
NO LONGER AVAILABLE, THE FUNDS OF THE NEW AUTHORITY
WILL PROMOTE THE SEARCH FOR PETROLEUM AND HELP TO
ENSURE THAT FUTURE ON-SHORE MINING DEVELOPMENT IS
AT LEAST PREDOMINANTLY AUSTRALIAN-OWNED AND CONTROLLED,
WE WILL CONSIDER ASSISTANCE TO THE MANY SMALL
COMPANIES AND SYNDICATES WHICH HAVE USED UP THEIR
CAPITAL ON EXPLORATION, AND WHOSE DISCOVERIES COULD
FALL INTO THE HANDS OF FOREIGN COMPANIES BEFORE THEY
CAN BE DEVELOPED AS AUSTRALIAN CONCERNS, 
15
I COME NOW TO OUR GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR EXPANDING
AUSTRALIA'S ROLE AS A GREAT MINERAL PRODUCING NATION.
THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY WILL BE ESTABLISHED
TO EXPLORE AND DEVELOP OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERAL
RESOURCES AND TO HELP IMPLEMENT THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY
OF MAXIMUM AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR
NATURAL RESOURCES,. THE LEGISLATION IS NOW BEFORE THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR THE THIRD TIME, ! O AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS EVER HAD A CLEARER MANDATE FOR ITS
LEGISLATION. APART FROM EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT, THERE IS
A DISTINCT NEED FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO HELP
SMALLER AUSTRALIAN MINING VENTURES DEVELOP THEIR
DISCOVERIES WITHOUT SACRIFICING CONTROL OR OWNERSHIP
TO OVERSEAS INTERESTS, WE HAVE A FURTHER OBLIGATION TO
EXAMINE AND DEVELOP ALL SOURCES OF ENERGY, INCLUDING
SOLAR ENERGY, WHICH COULD CONTRIBUTE TO OUR NEEDS WHEN
MORE CONVENTIONAL SOURCES ARE NO LONGER AVAILABLE,
THE FUNDS OF THE NEW AUTHORITY WILL PROMOTE THE SEARCH
FOR PETROLEUM AND HELP TO ENSURE THAT FUTURE ON-SHORE
MINING DEVELOPMENT IS AT LEAST PREDOMINANTLY AUSTRALIAN-OWNED
AND CONTROLLED, WE WILL CONSIDER ASSISTANCE TO THE MANY
SMALL COMPANIES AND SYNDICATES WHICH HAVE USED UP THEIR
CAPITAL ON EXPLORATION, AND WHOSE DISCOVERIES COULD ONLY
BE DEVELOPED BY SELLING THEIR EQUITY. THE QUESTION IS
NOT WHETHER WE PERMIT OVERSEAS CAPITAL TO DO LESS THE
QUESTION IS WHETHER WE CAN ENSURE THAT AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
DOES MORE, OUR OBJECTIVE SHOULD BE TO MOBILISE THE
RESOURCES OF OUR PEOPLE, HUMAN AND CAPITAL, AND THE
POWERS OF OUR GOVERNMENTS, BOTH STATE AND FEDERAL, 
16
WE ARE THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
IDENTIFY THE REAL NATURE OF THE MINERALS AND ENEt* r'
SITUATION IN THIS COUNTRY, VE ARE THE FIRST TO
INSIST THAT OUR RESOURCES MUST BE KEPT IN AUSTRALIAN
HANDS, WE ARE THE FIRST TO INSIST THAT THEIR SALES
MUST BRING US FAIR RETURNS. WE ARE THE FIRST TO INSIST
ON A NATIONAL PROGRAM OF EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO MEET OUR FUTURE NEEDS, WE ARE THE FIRST TO RECOGNISE
THAT THIS IS A NATIONAL TASK, AND THEREFORE A TASK IN
WHICH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST ACCEPT ITS FULL
RESPONSIBILITY AND PLAY A LEADING PART IN CO-OPERATION
WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISE, NOT EVEN THE WORLD'S
GREATEST MAJOR OIL COMPANY COULD ADEQUATELY EXPLORE,
WITH THE REQUIRED INTENSITY OF DRILLING, THE VAST
AREA OF THE NORTH WEST SHELF, WHAT CAN POSSIBLY BE
THE OBJECTION TO AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT STAKE IN
THE BUSINESS OF EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION OF
AUSTRALIA'S OWN RESOURCES? THE UNITED KINGDOM
GOVERNMENT HAS SUCH A STAKE, So DO THE GOVERNMENTS
OF FRANCE, ITALY, NORWAY, CANADA, RAZIL, ARGENTINA,
MEXICO, SOUTH AFRICA, IRAN, IRAQ, INDIA, JAPAN, INDONESIA,
NEW ZEALAND AND THE PHILIPPINES, IT IS TIME TO END FUTILE
BICKERING BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS AND-THE PETTY OBSTRUCTIONISM
OF THE STATES, THE REALITIES OFTHE WORLD RESOURCES CRISIS
AND THE IMPORTANCE OF AUSTRALIA AS A MINERAL PRODUCER
ARE TOO URGENT TO IGNORE, 
17
I PUT IT TO YOU THAT THE NATIONAL POLICIES WE
HAVE INTRODUCED ARE ESSENTIAL; MORE THAN THAT, THEY
HAVE ALREADY BEEN PROVED SUCCESSFUL. THERE CAN BE
NO TURNING BACK NOW TO THE FREE-WHEELING, HAPHAZARD
POLICIES OF THE PAST, NO ONE DISPUTES THE FACT THAT IN
A SHORT TIME THE INDUSTRY YOU REPRESENT HAS HELPED
TRANSFORM OUR NATION, k IS DUE IN LARGE MEASURE TO
THE VISION AND ENTERPRISE OF THE MEN IN THIS ROOM
TONIGHT, WE SALUTE YOU FOR THAT; WITH YOUR HELP
WE WANT TO MOVE FORWARD TO GREATER PROGRESS AND
ACHIEVEMENT. IN THAT AMBITION I LOOK CONFIDENTLY
TO THE CO-OPERATION AND SUPPORT OF THIS GREAT
INSTITUTE, WHOSE TOAST I NOW PROPOSE. 



EMBARGO: 9,30 P,.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, AT
THE OFFICIAL OPENIN4G OF THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS OF
THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR COUNCIL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, ADELAIDE TOWN
HALL, SATURDAY, 13 JULY 1974
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS AGO UNDER AN EARLIER LABOR GOVERNMENT
THE GOOD 1NEIGHBOUR MOVEMENT IN AUSTRALIA WAS INAUGURATED.
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL WAS THE FIRST TO COME INTO FULL
OPERATION AND WAS FOLLOWED IN CLOSE SUCCESSION BY COUNCILS
IN OTHER STATES. THE MOVEMENT'S INAUGURATION CAME AT A TIME
OF PROFOUND IMPORTANCE IN AUSTRALIA' S HISTORY. WE HAD NOT
LONG EMBARKED ON THE GREATEST MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE INTO OUR
COUNTRY THAT WE HAVE EVER SEEN. * AT THE SAME TIME, WE WERE JUST
CREATING THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS. FOR IT IS A FACT
OFTEN OVERLOOKED THAT THERE WERE No AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS UINTIL
] 3L~ 9, THE ACT WIHICH ESTABLISHED AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP FOR
THE FIRST TIME WAS INTRODUCED ON 30 SEPTEMBER 1948 INTO THE
HOUSE op REPRESENTATIVES BY THE FIRST MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,
MIR. ARTHUR CALWELL. IT BECAME OPERATIVE IN 1949 AND THE FIRST
MAN IN HISTORY TO BE AN AUSTRALIAN CITIZEN BY LAW WAS THE THEN
PRIME MINISTER, MR. BEN CHIFLEY, WHO RECEIVED AUSTRALIAN
CITIZENSHIP CERTIFICATE No. 1. 
-2-
THE COMBINATION OFIHESE TWO DEVELOPMENTS THE CREATION
OF AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP AND THE POST-WAR MIGRATION PROGRAM
MAKE THE LATE 1940s A MAJOR WATERSHED IN OUR HISTORY, THEY EVEN
INVOLVED A CERTAIN IRONY, THE FIRST DEVELOPMENT INVOLVED A FORMAL
RECOGNITION THAT WE HAD ACHIEVED A SENSE OF OUR OWN IDENTITY,
THE SECOND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTED US TO A COURSE THAT WOULD
PROFOUNDLY INFLUENCE AND, IN MANY WAYS, CHANGE THAT IDENTITY, IN
ONE OF HIS RARE PUBLIC APPEARANCES, PATRICK WHITE EARLIER THIS
YEAR PRAISED THE HISTORIAN PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK, FOR SHOWING
AUSTRALIANS THAT " WHAT WE WERE IS WHAT WE ARE", I WOULD SUGGEST
THAT POST-WAR MIGRATION HAS MEANT THAT WHAT WE ARE AS A NATION
IS INCREASINGLY BEING DETERMINED BY lWHERE WE AUSTRALIANS HAVE
COME FROM, IN A QUITE LITERAL SENSE,
SINCE THE FOUNDATION OF THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR MOVEMENT, WE
HAVE INDEED BECOME A DIFFERENT NATION AND A DIFFERENT PEOPLE,
THE INFLUX OF MORE THAN 3 MILLION PEOPLE IN THE POST-WAR PERIOD
HAS MEANT THAT 20 PER CENT OF OUR PRESENT POPULATION WAS BORN
OVERSEAS, TWENTY-FIVE PER CENT OF THE 6 MILLION CHILDREN BORN
HERE SINCE WORLD WAR II BELONG TO FAMILIES IN WHICH ONE OR BOTH
PARENTS WERE OVERSEAS-BORN, THE FORMER MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,
MR, AL GRASSBY, HAS GONE SO FAR AS TO SUGGEST THAT ONE-THIRD
OF AUSTRALIA'S TOTAL POPULATION IS LINKED EITHER DIRECTLY BY
BIRTH OR LESS DIRECTLY BY FAMILY OR MARRIAGE TO THE HISTORY,
LANGUAGE, CULTURE AND TRADITIONS OF AN OVERSEAS COUNTRY, 
-3-
THE EFFECT OF MIGRATION ON AUSTRALIA'S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY DRAMATIC, THE 1971 CENSUS FIGURES, THE
LATEST AVAILABLE, SHOW THAT 26 PER CENT OF OUR TOTAL WORK FORCE
WAS BORN OVERSEAS, IN MANY KEY INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS THE
MIGRANT ROLE HAS BEEN CRUCIAL, THE BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
INDUSTRIES WHERE MIGRANTS HAVE PROVIDED ONE-THIRD OF THE WORK
FORCE AND THE BUILDING MATERIALS INDUSTRIES FOR SOME OF
WHICH THEY HAVE PROVIDED UP TO HALF THE WORK FORCE ARE GOOD
EXAMPLES, THEIR IMPORTANCE HAS EXTENDED INTO THE MOST SKILLED
AND PROFESSIONAL AREAS, THE 1971 CENSUS SHOWED, FOR EXAMPLE,
THAT 30,5 PER CENT OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS AND DENTISTS IN
AUSTRALIA AND 36,1 PER CENT OF CHEMISTS, PHYSICISTS, GEOLOGISTS
AND OTHER PHYSICAL SCIENTISTS WERE OVERSEAS BORN,
NOT THAT THE CONTRIBUTION OF NEWCOMERS HAS BEEN LIMITED
TO THEIR LABOUR, ONE HAS ONLY TO LOOK AROUND AT THE CHANGING
FACE OF AUSTRALIA TO SEE THE IMMENSE DIFFERENCE THEY HAVE MADE
CULTURALLY, SOCIALLY AND POLITICALLY,
IT IS, HOWEVER, AN UNPLEASANT TRUTH THAT MANY " OLD" AUSTRALIANS,
WHILE REAPING THE BENEFITS OF THE NEW DIVERSITY OF OUR SOCIETY,
HAVE TENDED TO LOOK ON MIGRANTS PRIMARILY AS A SOURCE OF LABOUR,
AS A MEANS OF ECONOMIC EXPANSION, THE USE OF THE TERM " CANNON
FODDER FOR OUR FACTORIES" HAS TOO OFTEN BEEN APPROPRIATE. IT IS
NOT TRUE OF COURSE TO SUGGEST THAT AUSTRALIAN ATTITUDES HAVE BEEN
DOMINATED BY UNRELIEVED RAPACITY, THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR MOVEMENT
ALONE HAS SYMBOLISED A DIFFERENT, HEALTHIER ATTITUDE, 
YOUR OWN COUNCIL IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS, I AM TOLD, THROUGH
ITS 2,000 OR MORE VOLUNTARY CONTACT WORKERS REACHED WITH A
PERSONAL WELCOME 90 PER CENT OF ALL MIGRANTS TAKING UP
INITIAL RESIDENCE IN THIS STATE, WITH THE ACTIVE AFFILIATION
OF SOME 130 COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS IT HAS HELPED MANY PEOPLE
TO SETTLE IN THEIR NEW ENVIRONMENT,
NEVERTHELESS, IT REMAINS TRUE THAT THERE HAVE BEEN
SIGNIFICANT FAILURES IN OUR HANDLING OF THE PROBLEMS AND
NEEDS OF OUR NEW SETTLERS, TAKE TIEIR EDUCATIONAL NEEDS,
FOR EXAMPLE, A SURVEY OF SIXTY-THREE SCHOOLS OF HIGH MIGRANT
DENSITY IN MELBOURNE LATE IN 1972 REVEALED SERIOUS INADEQUACIES
IN BOTH ACCOMMODATION AND SUPPLY OF TEACHERS, THE REPORT SHOWED
THAT ONLY ONE-THIRD OF MIGRANT CIHILDREN IN THE SIXTY-THREE
SCHOOLS SURVEYED WHO WERE HAVING DIFFICULTY WITH ENGLISH WERE
ACTUALL RECEIVING ASSISTANCE AND, OF THIS ONE-THIRD, 40 PER
CENT WERE NOT RECEIVING SUFFICIENT SPECIALISED TUITION, THE
EFFECT OF THESE SHORTCOMINGS WILL BE TO SEVERELY LIMIT THE
EDUCATIONAL AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO THESE CHILDREN,
A SIMILAR PATTERN OF DISADVANTAGE EMERGESIF WE LOOK AT ANOTHER
AREA, HEALTH INSURANCE, A SURVEY RELEASED IN JANUARY BY THE
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS SHO.! ED THAT ONLY 83., 3 PER CENT
OF PEOPLE BORN OUTSIDE AUSTRALIA WERE COVERED BY HOSPITAL AND
MEDICAL EXPENDITURE ASSISTANCE SCHEMES, COMPARED WITH 87,6 PER CENT
OF THOSE BORN IN AUSTRALIA, OF PEOPLE WHO ARRIVED IN AUSTRALIA
BETWEEN JANUARY 1971 AND AUGUST 1972, WHEN THE'SURVEY WAS
CONDUCTED, ONLY 68 PER CENT WERE COVERED, MORE THAN 53,000
GREEK MIGRANTS OR 37,5 PER CENT WERE UNPROTECTED; ABOUT
52,000 ITALIAN MIGRANTS-OR 19,1 PER CENT WERE WITHOUT COVERAGE, 
THIS KIND OF UNDERPRIVILEGE CAN BE FOUND IN MANY OTHER AREAS
OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE,
IT IS NO WONDER THEN THAT SO MANY MIGRANTS HAVE LEFT
AUSTRALIA, IN 1972, FOR EXAMPLE, AUSTRALIA RECEIVED 112,468
SETTLERS BUT IN THE SAME YEAR 33,172 FORMER SETTLERS LEFT
THE COUNTRY, THIS SORT OF WASTAGE CLEARLY INDICATES THAT SOMETHING
HAS BEEN DRASTICALLY WRONG WITH BOTH OUR RECRUITMENT OF MIGRANTS
AND OUR TREATMENT OF THEM ONCE THEY ARE HERE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR INTRODUCED A NEW
SYSTEM OF OVERCOMING THE RECRUITMENT PROBLEMS, WE HAVE
ASSUMED THAT THE PEOPLE MOST LIKELY TO SETTLE HAPPILY AND
PERMANENTLY IN AUSTRALIA ARE THOSE WHO ALREADY HAVE FRIENDS
OR RELATIVES HERE OR WHO HAVE JOBS AWAITING THEM, FOR THIS
REASON WE NOW GIVE OUR FIRST PRIORITY TO THE REUNITING OF FAMILIES -TO
SPOUSES, DEPENDENT CHILDREN, AGED OR OTHERWISE DEPENDENT PARENTS
AND FIANCEES, SPONSORED BY AUSTRALIAN RESIDENTS, OUR OTHER
PRIORITIES HAVE BEEN FOR THE ADMISSION OF CLOSE NON-DEPENDENT
BLOOD RELATIVES; MORE DISTANT RELATIVES AND FRIENDS; AND
PEOPLE WITH OCCUPATIONS REQUIRED TO MEET SPECIFIC NATIONAL
NEEDS, 
-6-
AT THE SAME TIME IN THE LAST 19, MONTHS WE HAVE INTRODUCED
A NUMBER OF MEASURES TO MEET THE NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS OF PEOPLE
WHO HAVE ALREADY SETTLED IN AUSTRALIA, WE HAVE INTRODUCED
PORTABILITY OF PENSION RIGHTS TO ENABLE ANY1ONE TO RECEIVE AGED,
INVALID, WIDOWS'I OR WIVES PENSIONS IN ANY COUNTRY IN WHICH THEY
CHOOSE TO LIVE. WE ARE ESTABLISHING A TELEPHONE INTERPRETER
SERVICE IN OUR CAPITAL CITIES TO DEAL WITH REQUESTS FOR HELP
AND GUIDANCE FROM MIGRANTS. WE ARE OPENING MIGRANT EDUCATION
CENTRES IN OUR CAPITAL CITIES. WE HAVE APPOINTED 48 MIGRANT
WELFARE OFFICERS TO WORK IN THE COMMUNITY AND IN SCHOOLS.
WE HAVE INTRODUCED THE HOME TUTOR SCHEME WHICH IS AIMED AT
REACHING MIGRANT WOMEN AT HOME, USING VOLUNTARY LANGUAGE TUTORS.
IN 1973/ 74 WE ALLOCATED $ 8.2 MILLION FOR SPECIAL INSTRUCTION
FOR MIGRANT CHILDREN IN STATE AND INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS, COMPARED
WITH $ 5 MILLION IN THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR. IAE HAVE
INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO ENABLE ANYONE TO GAIN AUSTRALIAN
CITIZENSHIP AFTER THREE YEARS RESIDENCE, IRRESPECTIVE OF
NATIONAL ORIGINS. WE HAVE BANNED THE DEPORTATION OR THE
CANCELLATION OF CITIZENSHIP OF ANY AUSTRALIAN CITIZEN. VIE
HAVE ESTABLISHED TASK FORCES IN ALL-STATE CAPITALS TO IDENTIFY
THE MOST URGENT SETTLEMENT PROBLEMS CONFRONTING MIGRANTS,
WE HAVE RECEIVED A REPORT FROM A COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMITTEE
OF THE MIGRATION ADVISORY COUNCIL WHICH WE SET UP TO INQUIRE
INTO DISCRIMINATION AGAINST MIGRANTS, EXPLOITATION OF MIGRANTS AND
THEIR USE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES. THESE AND OTHER MEASURES HAVE
BEEN PART OF THE PATTERN OF SEEKING TO ENSURE THAT MIGRANTS ENJOY
FULL AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES. 
-7-
MUCH REMAINS TO BE DONE IF WE ARE TO MEET OUR OBJECTIVES.
WE ALSO NEED TO ENSURE THAT AS A GOVERNMENT OUR ORGANISATIONAL
STRUCTURE IS THE MOST APPROPRIATE ONE. TO ENSURE JUST THAT
WE HAVE IN FACT MOVED IN THE LAST MONTH TO MAKE SOME IMPORTANT
ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES IN RELATION TO MIGRANTS AND MIGRATION,
ON 11 JUNE I ANNOUNCED THE CREATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR
AND IMMIGRATION. I ANNOUNCED THAT CERTAIN FUNCTIONS W1OULD BE
TRANSFERRED FROM THE FORMER DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION TO OTHER
DEPARTMENTS, SUCH As EDUCATION, SOCIAL SECURITY AND FOREIGN
AFFAIRS. I KNOW THAT THERE HAVE BEEN A NUMBER OF CRITICISMS OF THIS
DECISION. MY GOOD FRIEND, MR. EVASIO COSTANZO, WROTE IN LA FIAMMA
THAT LABOR HAD " KILLED IMMIGRATION" WITH THIS ACTION. THE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR COU'NCIL OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA HAS ALSO WRITTEN TO ME TO OPPOSE THE MOVE, SO I WOULD
LIKE TO EXPLAIN OUR REASONS FOR MAKING THE CHANGE AND TO TELL
YOU WHY I BELIEVE IT WILL HELP MIGRANTS.
THE CRITICISMS THAT HAVE BEEN MADE INVOLVE A NUMBER OF
POINTS. ONE IS THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR A CENTRAL DEPARTMENT
TO MEET THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF MIGRANTS. IT IS ARGUED THAT ANY
FRAGMENTATION OF FUNCTIONS WILL LEAD TO INEFFICIENCY AND
DE-HUMANISATION1 THE NEED FOR MIGRANTS TO HAVE A SINIGLE POINT
OF CONTACT HAS BEEN STRESSED. FEARS HAVE BEEN EXPRESSED ABOUT
THE LOSS OF EXPERTISE AND MORALE AMONG MIGRATION OFFICERS THAT
MIGHT FLOW FROM THE DECISION. THERE HAVE BEEN STATEMENTS OF
CONCERN FOR THE FUTURE OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN ACTIVITIES
RELATED TO MIGRANTS, 
-8-
SOME OF THE 48 MIGRANT WELFARE OFFICERS APPOINTED LAST YEAR
HAVE WRITTEN TO ME TO SAY THAT THEY DO NOT BELIEVE THAT
THEY WILL BE ABLE TO CARRY OUT THEIR FUNCTIONS ADEQUATELY
AS A RESULT OF THE REORGANISATION, AN ARGUMENT HAS BEEN
ADVANCED THAT, BY MERGING A LARGE PART OF THE OLD DEPARTMENT
OF IMMIGRATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR, WE HAVE
INDICATED THAT WE SEE MIGRATION MERELY AS A MATTER OF MANPOWER,
THAT WE ARE GUILTY OF A KIND OF UP-DATED VERSION OF THE OLD
" INDUSTRIAL CANNON FODDER" ATTITUDE, FINALLY, RUNNING THROUGH
ALL OF THESE CRITICISMS IS AN ASSUMPTION THAT WE HAVE CEASED
TO RECOGNISE THE SPECIAL NEEDS AND PROBLEMS OF OUR MIGRANT
COMMUNITY, I CAN ASSERT THAT ALL OF THESE FEARS ARE UNFOUNDED,
MORE THAN THAT, I ASSERT THAT MIGRANTS NILL BENEFIT FROM THE
CHANGES AND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE BETTER
EQUIPPED TO MEET THEIR NEEDS, 
-9-
LET ME DEAL WITH THE FIRST GROUP OF CRITICISMS THAT HAVE
BEEN LEVELLED AGAINST THE REORGANISATION, CONTRARY TO THE
ARGUMENT THAT WE NEEDED TO RETAIN THE OLD DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION
AS A CENTRALISED BODY, I WOULD SUGGEST THAT ITS CONTINUED
EXISTENCE IN ITS PREVIOUS FORM WAS RESULTING IN OVER-CENTRALISATION,
MR, GRASSBY POINTED OUT IN A REPORT TABLED IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ON 11 OCTOBER LAST YEAR THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF
IMMIGRATION HAD A TOTAL STAFF OF JUST OVER TWO THOUSAND TO DEAL
WITH THE PROBLEMS OF MIGRANTS AS WELL AS HAVING THE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTROL OF SOME 2,2 MILLION ARRIVALS
IN AND DEPARTURES FROM AUSTRALIA ANNUALLY, THAT IS TWO
THOUSAND PEOPLE OUT OF A TOTAL OF 257,00 COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC
SERVANTS, IT WAS BECOMING IMPOSSIBLE FOR SUCH A RELATIVELY
SMALL NUMBER OF MEN AND WOMEN TO DEAL WITH SUCH DIVERSE'MATTERS
AS IMMIGRATION, EMIGRATION, SETTLEMENT, WELFARE, EDUCATION,
CITIZENSHIP AND POPULATION, IN SAYING THIS I DO NOT MEAN
TO CRITICISE THE OFFICIALS OF THE DEPARTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT
SIMPLY DID NOT HAVE THE PHYSICAL OR FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO DEAL
WITH ALL THESE MATTERS, IT ALSO NECESSARILY LACKED THE POWER
TO PERFORM MANY OF THESE FUNCTIONS ADEQUATELY; SOCIAL SECURITY
BENEFITS FOR MIGRANTS OR THE IN-SCHOOL EDUCATION OF MIGRANT
CHILDREN WERE ESSENTIALLY FUNCTIONS OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS,
YET MIGRANTS WERE ENCOURAGED-TO SEE THE DEPARTMENT AS THE
DISPENSER OF GOVERNMENT BENEFITS,
L 
-gAAT
THE SAME TIME, ALTHOUGH THEY HAD AT LEAST SOME
OF THE RESPONSIBILITY, OTHER DEPARTMENTS DID NOT PAY SUFFICIENT
ATTENTION TO DEVELOPING PROGRAMS FOR MIGRANTS, IT WAS
TOO EASY TO FOB OFF MIGRANT QUESTIONS AS MATTERS FOR THE
IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT, THIS APPLIED TO BOTH STATE AND
FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS,
THIS CONFUSION OF ROLES BECAME EVEN MORE INAPPROPRIATE
WITH THE ADVENT OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, ONE OF THE GREAT
CHANGES TO WHICH WE HAVE BEEN COMMITTED SINCE COMING TO
OFFICE 19 MONTHS AGO HAS BEEN TO INVOLVE THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN NEWl AREAS OF GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN AUSTRALIA, 
PREVIOUSLY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD ADOPTED A VERY LIMITED
ROLE IN SUCH AREAS AS EDUCATION AND URBAN AFFAIRS, IN THE FIELD
OF SOCIAL SECURITY, IT ACTED LARGELY AS A MEANS OF GIVING
PENSIONS AND OTHER WELFARE BENEFITS, IN ALL OF THESE AREAS
ITS ROLE HAS NOW CHANGED RADICALLY, IN EDUCATION WE ARE
SEEKING TO ELIMINATE AREAS OF DISADVANTAGE TO PROVIDE EQUAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN, NOT JUST TO HAND OUT
ARBITRARY PER CAPITA PAYMENTS, IN SOCIAL SECURITY, THROUGH THE
SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION AND THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN, WE
ARE TRYING TO ESTABLISH COMMUNITY WELFARE FACILITIES FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS, IN SHORT WE HAVE MOVED INTO THE ROLE OF AN
I U
INITIATOR, AN ACTIVIST IN THESE FIELDS IN A WAY \ WHICH NO PREVIOUS
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD DONE,
IT IS ONLY LOGICAL THAT, IN LINE WITH THIS EXPANDED
ROLE, THAT MIGRANT AFFAIRS SHOULD BE ACCEPTED AS COMING WITHIN
THE PURVIEW OF THE RELEVANT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS,
IF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IS TO TACKLE GENUINELY THE PROBLEMS OF
THE DISADVANTAGED IN OUR SCHOOLS IT CANNOT IGNORE MIGRANT EDUCATION,
IF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE SOCIAL WELFARE
COMMISSION ARE TO RESTRUCTURE OUR WELFARE SYSTEM EFFECTIVELY
THEY CANNOT IGNORE THE WELFARE NEEDS OF MIGRANTS, THE SOONER
WE SEE MIGRANT NEEDS AS PART OF THE OVERALL NEEDS OF THE WHOLE
COMMUNITY, THE SOONER THOSE NEEDS WILL BE MET BY THE BODIES WITHi
THE APPROPRIATE STAFF, FACILITIES, FINANCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES, 
-11-
THIS IS NOT FRAGMENTATION, IT IS SPECIALISATION,
THIS IS NOT INEFFICIENCY, THIS IS THE MOST EFFICIENT WAY
IN WHICH TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS,
THE EXPERTISE OF IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS WILL NOT BE LOST
TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE OR, FOR THAT MATTER, TO MIGRANTS, THERE
WILL REMAIN A SIGNIFICANT IMMIGRATION UNIT WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT
OF LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION, THIS WILL STILL SERVE AS AN ESTABLISHED
CENTREOF CONTACT FOR MIGRANTS, THUS IF A MIGRANT IS UNSURE OF
WHICH DEPARTMENT TO APPROACH WITH A PROBLEM HE WILL STILL BE ABLE
TO USE THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION AS A FIRST POINT
OF CONTACT, IF HIS PROBLEM IS A SPECIALISED ONE, THE OFFICERS
OF THE DEPARTMENT WILL BE ABLE TO ENSURE THAT HE IS REFERRED TO
THE RIGHT PERSON IN THE RIGHT SPECIALIST DEPARTMENT,
A NUMBER OF OFFICERS OF THE OLD DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION
WILL OF COURSE BE TRANSFERRED TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS, THE MIGRANT
WELFARE OFFICERS, FOR EXAMPLE, WILL GO TO THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
SECURITY, THIS CERTAINLY DOES NOT MEAN THAT THEY WILL BE
SUBMERGED AND LOST WITHIN A BUREAUCRATIC MONOLITH, RATHER THEY
WILL BE ABLE TO DRAW ON THE EXPERTISE AND MORE COMPREHENSIVE
RESOURCES OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY DEPARTMENT INDEED THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, MR, BILL HAYDEN, HAS ALREADY SAID THAT
MIGRANT WELFARE SERVICES WILL BE GREATLY ENLARGED AND IMPROVED
AS A RESULT OF THE REORGANISATION. 
-12-
WE WILL ENSURE THAT THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF MIGRANTS WILL
NOT BE LOST SIGHT OF IN THE SPECIALIST DEPARTMENTS, AS AN
EARNEST OF OUR INTENTIONS, I CAN ANNOUNCE TONIGHT ONE RESULT
OF DISCUSSIONS I HAVE HELD WITH THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY,
HE HAS AGREED THAT A PERSON INVOLVED IN MIGRANT WELFARE WILL BE
APPOINTED TO THE SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION, THE APPOINTEE WILL
PROVIDE A VITAL INFLUENCE ON POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES OF THE
COMMISSION, IN KEEPING WITH THIS ANNOUNCEMENT, I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT
THERE WILL BE NO LESSENING OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN THE GOVERNMENT'S
ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF MIGRATION, IF WE ARE TO SUCCEED
IN OUR OBJECTIVE OF ENABLING PEOPLE TO SETTLE HAPPILY AND
PERMANENTLY IN AUSTRALIA WE MUST HAVE THE SUPPORT OF COMMUNITY
ORGANISATIONS, WE COULD NOT CONTINUE SUCH ENTERPRISES AS THE
HOME TUTOR SCHEME WITHOUT THE AID OF VOLUNTEER WORKERS DRAWN
FROM THE COMMUNITY,
I TURN NOW TO THE CRITICISM THAT WE HAVE " KILLED IMMIGRATION"
OR THAT WE NOW SEE IT MERELY AS A MATTER OF MANPOWER, OUR CRITICS
ARE WRONG ON BOTH COUNTS, IF THIS WERE NOT SO WE WOULD HAVE
ABANDONED OUR NEW SYSTEM OF FAMILY REUNION AT THE TIME OF
REORGANISATION, WE HAVE NOT ABANDONED IT, AUSTRALIA WILL
CONTINUE TO WELCOME MIGRANTS WHO -SATISFY THE HUMANE CRITERIA
WHICH WE LAID DOWN LAST YEAR, WE BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT IT
IS POINTLESS, INDEED DAMAGING, TO BRING LARGE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE
TO AUSTRALIA UNLESS THERE ARE JOBS FOR THEM, 
-13-
THE NEW DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION WILL HAVE THE
EXPERTISE TO ENSURE THAT MIGRANTS CAN GAIN EMPLOYMENT,
THE DAYS OF " CANNON FODDER" ARE PAST,
MIGRANTS WILL ALSO BENEFIT FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR
AND IMMIGRATION'S NEW NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SYSTEM,
NEA, T, AS MR, CAMERON HAS CALLED IT WILL ENSURE THAT
MIGRANTS, ALONG WITH OTHER AUSTRALIANS, WHO LOSE THEIR JOBS
THROUGH TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES OR OTHER
FACTORS CAN BE RETRAINED FOR OTHER SATISFYING JOBS,
FINALLY I WANT TO ASSURE YOU OF THE GOVERNMENT'S CONTINUING
COMMITMENT TO TWO VITAL GOALS: THE ABOLITION OF ALL FORMS OF
DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF RACE, COLOUR OR CREED IN
AUSTRALIA AND THE PROGRAM TO ENABLE THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY
TO BENEFIT FROM THE RICH CULTURAL ANT) LINGUISTIC HERITAGE WE
HAVE, THE MAN WHO BROUGHT THOSE COMMITMENTS TO LIFE WAS MR,
AL GRASSBY, LAST SUNDAY I ANNOUNCED A NEW APPOINTMENT FOR
HIM SO THAT HE COULD CONTINUE TO PURSUE THOSE GOALS,
AS A SPECIAL CONSULTANT TO THE GOVERNMENT ON COMMUNITY RELATIONS
MR, GRASSBY WILL CONTINUE TO BE KEENLY INVOLVED IN THE NEEDS
AND ASPIRATIONS OF MIGRANTS, HIS INVOLVEMENT WILL BE FURTHER
ENHANCED IF THE GOVERNMENT CAN SUCCEED WITH LEGISLATION TO
ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION, HE WOULD BE APPOINTED AS COMMISSIONER
FOR COMMUNITY RELATIONS UNDER THAT LEGISLATION, 
4 -14-
HIS ROLE IN HELPING TO PRESERVE THE CULTURAL AND
LINGUISTIC HERITAGE OF ALL AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS WILL BE
PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT. WE DO NIOT WANT MIGRANTS TO FEEL
THAT THEY HAVE TO ERASE THEIR OWN CHARACTERISTICS AND IMITATE
AND ADOPT COMPLETELY T14E BEHAVIOUR OF EXISTING AUSTRALIAN
SOCIETY. WE WANT TO SEE THAT SOCIETY ENRICHED BY THE CROSS
FERTILISATION THAT WILL RESULT FROM MIGRANTS RETAINING THEIR
OWN HERITAGE. THE OLD APPROACH OF INDIVIDUAL ASSIMILATION
IS NO LONGER GOVERNMENT POLICY. WE ARE CONCERNED WITH THE
INTEGRATION OF ETHNIC COMMUNITIES INTO THE BROADER
AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY. By STRENGTHENING THOSE COMMUNITIES WE
STRENGTHEN THE WHOLE SOCIETY.
IHOPE THAT MY REMARKS TONIGHT WILL LAY TO REST FEARS
WHICH HAVE BEEN AROUSED BY OUR RECENT ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES.
INDEED I HOPE THAT MIGRANTS AND OTHER AUSTRALIANS WILL SEE
THE ADVANTAGES THAT WILL FLOW FRGM THE REORGANISATION.
IN THE FIELDS OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL WELFARE, H EALTH SERVICES,
HOUSING AND ALL OTHER AREAS OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE WE ARE FIRMLY
COMMITTED TO THE PRINCIPLES OF JUSTICE AND EQUALITY FOR
MIGRANTS, WE SEE THIS AS A JOB NOT JUST FOR ONE DEPARTMENT
BUT FOR THE WHOLE GOVERNMENT AND, IN FACT, THE WHOLE COMMUNITY. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 16 JULY 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, I have no particular
announcements to make to you. Many of you, however, have asked
me directly or through my staff about the prospects of a joint
sitting and what procedure will be applied upon it, where it
will be held, at what hour, on what day, under what rules and
with whom in the Chair. I can only repeat what I have said to
you earlier that I am inclined to assume that a joint sitting
will be necessary to secure the passage of the six bills, or
any of the six bills, which were the grounds upon which
Governor-General Hasluck granted the double dissolution on
11 April last. I am not taking it for granted that the new
Senate will continue the pattern of obstruction of the old
Senate. I have taken the view that commonsense, good Constitutional
practice and the decision of the people would prevail. Statements
by members of the Opposition indicate, however, that my faith may
be misplaced. These statements imply that the people did not express their
will about the six bills, or that the grounds on which the
former Governor-General granted the dissolution were trivial or
irrelevant or at best, merely formal.
This attitude pays scant credit to Sir Paul Hasluck's grasp
of his constitutional responsibilities.
Sir Paul's decision involved serious consideration of both
the causes behind my request and the consequences of granting
it. There is no necessity for joint sittings, interesting as the
prospect may be to all of us as students, recorders or practitioners
of politics. The smooth running of the business of Parliament and
government suffered sufficient disruption through the events of
April. The people's decision of May ended the need for further
disruption in July.
We have been without a Parliament for three months. There is
an accumulation of legislation. Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Why does Australia still maintain a ban on new sales
contracts for uranium, and how long will this ban continue?
PRIME MINISTER: The whole question of the uranium sales, exploitation,
processing, is still under consideration. As you know the principal
ministers concerned and Imyself, toured the uranium province about
three weekends ago. There are many aspects, some environmental,
some Aboriginal land rights, some foreign ownership, the opportunities
of processing the uranium, all of which have to be resolved. / 2 
-2-
QUESTION: I understand the Leader of the Liberal Movement has
written to you asking for extra staff and there is a precedent
for this. Have you given consideration to it and will you grant
it?
PRIME MINISTER: I've given provisional consideration to it. I
told Senator Steele Hall that in addition to the secretary which
every non-office bearer in the Parliament has, he would be enti * tled
to have a Private Secretary, and that Private Secretary would have
the right to travel between Adelaide and Canberra and the right to
allowances in Canberra. I haven't concluded consideration of the
matter. There are two matters involved. The Senate has recognised
Senator Steele Hall as the Leader of the Liberal Movement.
The Senate Hansard so records it. Accordingly, he is entitled, I
believe, to a Private Secretary. It is particularly important that
he should have assistance of his choice in considering the backlog
of legislation. I do, however, hesitate to say that we should have
staff to conduct his activities as Leader of the Liberal Movement
outside, apart, from his isolated work in this Parliament. There is
no other member of his party in this Parliament so therefore a very
great burden falls upon him. He ought to have assistance in
discharging that burden. But clearly the Australian Government should
hesitate in paying for organisational assistance apart from
Senator Steele Hall's duties in the Parliament.
QUESTION: What proposals regarding economic powers did Mr Dunstan
make to yourself and Mr Crean on behalf of the State Premiers; are
they acceptable to the Federal Government and, if not, what sort of
proposals would be acceptable?
PRIME MINISTER: You had, I think, a conference with Mr Dunstan and
also Sir Charles Cutler, who was still acting as Premier of N. S. W..
also made a statement. Now the State officials and our officials
are considering what matters could be the subject of arrangements
between the seven governments. They haven't concluded their discussions.
They were holding them I think, yesterday. They might also have
been holding them today.
QUESTION: Will there be a Premiers' Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is very likely.
QUESTION: Mr Uren said in the House this afternoon that he and you
had not yet heard from Sir Robert Askin on the subject of accepting
the Commonwealth money for lands and the Lands Commission or Council
or Board. However, Sir Robert said at his press conference yesterday
that by delaying accepting this $ 28 million for a year he had won
significant concessions from the Government. Can you tell us what
these concessions are?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not aware of any proposals that the N. S. W.
Government is receiving in this matter which the other five
governments have not also received. Reading the papers I gather
that this matter was to become before the N. S. W. Cabinet this
morning. Sir Robert Askin might have sent me a message, I haven't
received it, since that meeting.
QUESTION: The arrangements between the Australian Government and
the N. S. W. Government, assuming the N. S. W. Government accepts it,
now would be exactly the same as between the Australian Government
and the South Australian Government? / 3 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Can you tell us when we can expect a decision by the
Governme nt on the IAC report on the motor industry?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't put a date on it. I would think it
might easily be a couple of months or even longer. We have made
the report available as promptly as it was physically possible.*
QUESTION: What is the latest information your Government has
received on the situation in Cyprus and what is your Government's
attitude towards recent events there?
PRIME MINISTER: We have no official information about the situation
in Cyprus except from our police who are there. They are reporting
it through their own situation but they are not in the capital,
so we are no better informed than anybody following the media.
It appears that the President may still be alive. We have shown
ourselves anxious to co-operate with the U. N. Peace-keeping force
in Cyprus. We have been there now for many years and we are grateful
for five of the State Governments for maintaining their contributions
to the police from Australia in Cyprus.
QUESTION: Could you give us your attitude to the very heavy buying
of wool by the Wool Corporation in the last two days?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Could I ask whether the Government will consider the
question? PRIME MINISTER: Yes, if there is a submission on it.
QUESTION: Assuming that Sir Robert Askin and his Government accepts
the money for the Loan Council, when is the earliest they can
receive it, now or wait until the September Budget?
PRIME MINISTER: Isn't it on the Notice Paper now. It's about to
come in. Isn't it on today's Notice Paper? At any rate, that
will depend on the terms of their agreement.
QUESTION: You had some fairly harsh criticism of multi-national
corporations during the election campaign and you foreshadowed
amendments to the foreign takeovers legislation. You also intend
to act on the Federal Conference resolution of last year calling
for an official inquiry into multi-national corporations, their impact
on the economy and the employment situation.
PRIME MINISTER: We have for many months past had Sir Ronald Walker
representing us in the United Nations and also in the OECD on the
inquiries which they have been conducting into this very matter.
You will remember that Sir Ronald Walker was Ambassador in Paris and
then in Bonn and was a Professor of Economics before that, so he was
ideally qualified to conduct such inquiries and to contribute to
inquiries in those international bodies I have mentioned.
QUESTION: Was the Overseas Trading Corporation considered by Cabinet
today and was any decision reached on it? / 4 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: We didn't consider many submissions in Cabinet
today. The most of this morning's deliberations were in the
legislation committee, approving the form of bills which have been
introduced. As you notice there have been a very great number
introduced today so we were doing those and there will be some
further ones introduced tomorrow, so that is what we were mainly
doing today. There were only two matters which we concluded in
Cabinet today. I believe Mr Enderby, the Minister for Manufacturing
Industry, will be briefing you about one of those, the committee
to inquire into the workload for the Government Defence Act.
And the other matter was largely machinery concerning the election
of the first free elected Legislative Assembly of the Northern
Territory. We also put through at the Executive Council this morning
the ordinance for the Legislative Assembly, the first fully-elected
representative body in the Capital Territory.
QUESTION: Will this legislation include increases in personal
services
PRIME MINISTER: The Cabinet has never considered this matter.
It has had no submission before it.
QUESTION: How long will the Government allow the Senate to consider
the six bills, four days, six days, three days
PRIME MINISTER: That is up to the Senate.
QUESTION: The Government itself hasn't set a time, like say four days?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: When will the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly
be ready to How long will it take to set up the Assembly and how
many members will it have and what will it be? What can you tell
us about it?
PRIME MINISTER: You had better get the details from Dr Patterson,
I think it is 19 members. The distribution of electorates has
already been done, but it has to take effect in the context of a fully
elected Assembly. The electorates upon which it is suggested that
that election will take place are ready I belive for presentation.
QUESTION: One of the pieces of legislation introduced today concerns
the Prices Justification Tribunal. It does not contain any sections
relating to the making of decisions of the Tribunal mandatory as was
foreshadowed during the election campaign. Can you again explain
why this hasn't happened? Do you think there will be any further
changes in the near future in Prices Justification legislation
particularly any following the move which was made in the Caucus about
changing the criteria for justification inquiries. And, just a
separate question, will the Cabinet be considering the Vernon Report
on the Post Office before that report is made public within the
next fortnight?
PRIME MINISTER: The first one, not this sessional period. The second
one, no.
QUESTION: Do you believe that the Post Office should pay its own way
and that if necessary postal costs should be increased to make certain
that it does? 
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that all Government businesses should
pay their own way. That should be no surprise to you that that is
my view. I don't believe taxpayers should, without very good reason,
support Government enterprises or private enterprises. But, in
any case, I stated that at the Premiers' Conference. I commended
that attitude to the Premiers, I said we would apply it ourselves.
You mention the Post Office. There is, of course another way on which
the Post Office is I'm assured acting diligently and that is to
restrict the amount of public money going into its services. There
are certain governmental activities in Australia, roads and telephones
being among them, which we regard as having a lower priority than
some other form of government activity. The approach we are pursuing
is that the taxpayers should not provide more for P. M. G. services
in the forthcoming Budget than they did in the last.
QUESTION: Mr Dunstan, Sir Charles Cutler and the Victorian Acting
Premier, have all made conflicting statements over what powers
they believe the States could be ready to concede to the Commonwealth
or co-operate in the exercise with the Commonwealth, so that seems
to indicate that the States are not ready to agree, therefore why
have a Premiers' Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: You assert that they have made different statements.
Well they might have but I haven't checked all the reports which
said.... QUESTION: Well, you read Sir Charles' statement?
PRIME MINISTER: But he sent me a copy. Sir Charles sent me, by
telegram, a copy of his press statement. He also, I noticed, gave
a TV interview. He may easily have said some things in that
television interview which conflicted or appeared to conflict with
what Mr Dunstan said in the same medium or what he, himself, had
said in his press statement of which he sent me a copy by cable.
Now, I am not going to assume that you are just to them. You are
fair to them in saying that they have made conflicting statements
but this at least is clear: that we have all agreed to have our
officials discuss what methods we, as Heads of Government, can
discuss and when that package or program comes from the officials
I expect that the Heads of Government will get together and discuss
them. There was one instance which was given on the pattern of what
was done in the late 1940s under National Security Regulations.
It was the control of building materials. I was delighted that this
matter had been discussed between the Premiers and Acting Premiers.
It seems to me a matter in which they show a very natural interest
because just as our program for welfare housing has been limited by
the shortage of materials or rather the diversion of materials to say
skyscrapers so the State Government's programs for say schools and
hospitals have been similarly limited by a diversion of building
materials for skyscrapers. Now it well may be that State Governments
of all political complexions would think that priorities require
that there should be enough materials for those essential public
works. We would agree with them. It is a matter upon which they can
very clearly make laws, just as clearly as a matter upon which we
can' t.
QUESTION: Due to the importance of Indonesia in Australia's foreign
policy, are there any plans in the immediate future to re-conduct
the talks again between you and President Soeharto which was postponed
last May, and, if so, would you care to comment on the value of these
talks within the framework of Australian/ Indonesian relations? / 6 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: There are discussions going on at the moment between
Indonesia and Australia for me to visit the President. I was to visit
him, you remember, in the very weekend after the Parliament was
dissolved. I thought in that case it should be postponed. I hope
we will be able to arrange a visit by me to Central Java, I expect,
that was where the venue was previously suggested, maybe at the end
of August or early in September. Discussions are taking place.
I am actually anxious to accept the President's invitation as soon
as possible because we know each other well enough to transact a
very great deal of business, to exchange views on a great number
of subjects. The President likes this form of discussion with
people whom he knows fairly well. He has recently, of course, done
it with President Marcos and Prime Minister Tun Razak and I was
to be the first, well I will be the third now, so I am very anxious
to have this discussion.
QUESTION: Is the Government still committed to the Australian
Assistance Plan? Is this proposal under any sort of re-consideration
or recasting?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we are still committed to it naturally. The
form it takes is under constant review.
QUESTION: At the Premiers' Conference you warned of the stringent
attitude the Australian Government would be taking when framing
the coming Budget. If you can work out with the six State Premiers
a satisfactory package to fight inflation, would you see this as an
alternative or an addition to the Federal Government's stringent
attitude to the Budget and in the important discussions you have had
twice now with senior ministers at the Lodge, have you formed some
sort of attitude about whether that stringent stance would be as
tough as you thought at the time?
PRIME MINISTER: What the Premiers and the Treasurer and I would
discuss would be a supplement to what has already been announced.
There has been a very great gap in the fight against inflation in
Australia in that the States have not exercised their constitutional
powers in many respects. Very clearly they have the constitutional
power, the Australian Parliament doesn't have the constitutional power
to regulate land prices or the availability of building materials.
There is some hope now that the States will exercise their
constitutional responsibility in such respects.
QUESTION: Would you explain in brief the relations between Australia
and Cuba and Latin America?
PRIME MINISTER: Our Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee, has recently
visited several countries in Latin America. He is the first
Australian Foreign Minister, I believe, ever to have made an official
visit to any country in South America. I was the first Prime Minister
to ever visit a country in Latin America but I visited the northern
most one, Mexico. It is quite likely that I shall be visiting some
others in the steps of the Foreign Minister maybe or the Caribbean
countries before the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting which
may be held at the end of April in Kingston, Jamaica.
You ask me about our relations with Cuba. I haven't had the
opportunity to refresh my memory about this. At the time of liberation, 7 
-7-
in December 1972, there had been an application by the Cuban
Government to establish Consular relations with Australia. This was
far too difficult a problem for our predecessors to solve, it was
probably even too embarrassing for them to discuss. Nevertheless,
when I was in Tokyo last October where the approach had been made by
the Cuban Ambassador to the Australian Ambassador, I took the
opportunity to ask our Ambassador to convey to the Cuban Ambassador
our willingness to establish such relations. I am not sure that the
arrangements have yet been consummated but if you want the full
details then I can get them for you.
QUESTION: Could you tell us if you are completely in favour with
the amendments to the Prices Justification Tribunal Act along the
line of the amendment moved in Caucus last week by Mr Willis?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not at all adverse to it, but we could not
have drafted it in this sessional period. There is a further
difficulty. One of the criteria was related to productivity and
as you know Australian statistics on productivity are absent or
where there are any, they are deficient. Now it would be a colossal
task for any Parliamentary counsel to draft a criterian of productivity
in such a situation of statistical and economic derth in our country. 



ARTICLE FOR THE 10TH ANNIVERSARY ISSUE OF
" THE AUSTRALIAN" -JULY 1974.
WHAT FUTURE FOR AUSTRALIA?
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G.-WHITLAM, M. P.
In accepting The Australian's invitation to forecast the
political and social trends of the next ten years, I must begin
with a note of caution.' Special pleading and wishful thinking
make politicians notoriously unreliable prophets.-Who would
have predicted, when The Australian w~ as launched ten years ago.'
the chronic political instability that was to follow the
retirement of Sir Robert Menzies? Who would have foreseen the
continuing rise of the D. L. P. and, more recently, its even more
sudden and extraordinary demise? Who would have predicted,
only 18 months ago, that a democratically elected Government,
comfortably. installed with a working majority after 23 years
in opposition, would be driven to the pqlls again half-way
through its term, with important sections of its program
under challenge?
I do not wish to begin on too partisan a note. My point
is simply that of all human activities, politics is the least
predictable. Compared with the changes we have s'ten in Australia,
the changes on the world scale in the past ten years have been
incomparably more vast and far-reaching. Traditional forms of
democratic government'are under challenge. The growth of world
population, the depletion of the earth's natura. resources, man's
new awareness of environmental hazards, rising crime rates,
growing pollution,' greater civil and industrial unrest, worldwide
inflation, a rising tendency to alienation and job dissatisfaction 
-2-
in industrial societies, and a growing recourse to violence as a
political weapon all have compelled politicians to look afresh
at their methods and priorities.
Australia, however, is still happily insulated from many
of the evils and neuroses afflicting other nations. That may
seem an oddly complacent view to anyone who values internationalism;
nevertheless, I take some comfort from it. There is a steadiness,
an equanimity, a fundamental decency and good sense in our makeup
that enables Us to look ahead with some confidence in our judgement
and some faith in our power to do good. We are better placed than
most nations to withstand the effects of any general economic or
social hardship on a global scale. We are one of the few countries
whose material and agricultural resources would make us self-sufficient
in a global emergency. I do not for a moment suggest that
self-sufficiency should be an aim of Australian policy; and
it is true that our isolation has often deprived us of much that
is good. I am inclined to believe, however, that in a world
racked by uncertainty y3Lv iolence and mindless fanticism, the
S advantages of our limited isolation still tend to outweigh the
ills. For these reasons, therefore, I am an optimist -though a
rather anxious one. I retain the humanist's belief in progress,
in man's innate tendency to self-improvement. I retain the
democrat's belief that this tendency is best directed through
the forms of a free and open society. I retain the parliamentarian's
belief that free societies are best governed through a two-party
system, where the rights and procedures of open debate are reposed
in elected legislatures. 
-3
In short,,, I believe that, in the absence of nuclear war,
worldwide depression or a major environmental catastrophe,
Australia will rc amn one of the world's more fortunate nations.
I expect a steady rise in her standards of living and a more
equitable sharing of the material benefits and opportunities of
advanced civilisation. I see these conditions, not so much as
ends in themselves, but as the essential pre-requisites for a
fuller life. Real poverty is a poverty of the spirit; real
riches consist in the enjoyment of non-material rewards, in
the intellecttal, artistic and cultural opportunities available
to free minds cultivated by a rational system of education.
I believe) therefore, that party politics in the next ten
years will be increasingly concerned with improvements in
social and living standards. The debate will be not so much
about whether change is desirable, but abgut the rate of change.
This, indeed, is already happening. The traditional conservative
parties will'be driven increasingly to accept the legitimate
aspirations of free people for greater opportunities, greater
equality, greater material security and higher standards of
living. In other words, I see a steady shift to the left; and I
believe that such a shift has been the dominant feature of
democratic politics in the west since the end of World War II.
Such a shift, of course, is accelerated by the election of
radical) reformist. or left-of-centre governments. I have no doubt,
for example, that our opponents have adopted more enlightened
policies as a result of Labor's victories in 1972 and 1974.
I believe the greatest danger in left-wing governments is their
tendency to authoritarianism, and the greater danger in democratic
conservative governments is their tendency to complacency. 
4
I have no doubt that the main problem for the Australian
economy in the next 10 years will be the worldwide growth of
inflation. It seems to me that growing populations, diminishing
resources and ever-rising material expectations make a
measure of inflation inevitable. Provided we devise machinery
to protect the weaker members of society, and provided the burdens
of sacrifice are fairly shared, it may be that the world will learn
to live with inflation on a higher scale than it has known in the
past. This does not mean that strong measures will not be needed
to check inflation from time to time.
I expect the Australian economy to become increasingly
mixed; that is to say, the management of our resources will be
more equally divided between government and private enterprise.
Governments including local government, will be expected to provide
more and more services sometimes because, private enterprise finds
them unprofitable but more often because they have not in the past
been provided at all. I believe private corporations will be
submitted increasingly to public supervision in the interests
Sof the nation as a whole, and that many of the abuses of
unrestrained free enterprise will be checked. I have no doubt
that the benefits of an advanced welfare state are fully
compatible with those of an efficient and flourishing private
sector. To my mind, capitalism is the best means yet devised for
producing the material goods required by advanced societies;
I therefore believe in free enterprise. At the same time, there
can be no question that the injustices and inequalities of such
societies must be redressed by government intervention; and
for that reason I am a democratic socialist. 
5
I believe Australia will continue to live at peace with
her neighbours aijl the world for the foreseeable future. I accept
the advice of oui experts that no military threat is likely to
Australia in the next 15 years. The same advice was given to our
predecessors and accepted by them. I believe the next decade will
see Australian politics further liberated from their old,
stultifying preoccupation with ideological conflicts and cold war
attitudes. Such a prospect is wholly encouraging. Australia will
be better placed to play her natural role in Asia as a concerned,
generous and enlightened neighbour.
0 I do not envisage any dramatic increase in our, present
population, and indeed I would not wish to see one. On the
other hand, I expect to see a number of new cities well established
in provincial regions during the next ten years or at least
the confident beginnings of such cities. I expect vast improvements
in our roads and railways, new child care centres and health
centres, better hospitals and schools and improved standards of
public and private housing. I believe that in 10 years we will
O have fully accepted our responsibilities to the deprived and
weaker sections of the community, and that the Aboriginal people
of Australia will enjoy a new dignity and security.
These assessments rest on the assumption that the major
reforms undertaken by the present Government will be irreversible,
and that even if the conservative parties are returned to power,
there will be a continuing popular consencus in-favour of
progressive policies. 
-6
In a world of totalitarian regimes and minority governments,
such confidence may prove to be misplaced. I base it, however,
on my expressed faith in the maturity and intelligence of the
Australian electorate. I do not claim for the left a monopoly of
wisdom and virtue, but I see in the Australian people a degree
of sophistication and discernment that will lead them instinctively
to political solutions founded in fair play, in justice, in
moderation, and, I trust, in idealism.
I look ahead to a society whose democratic foundations,
nurtured in a political climate uniquely free of hysteria and
' dogmatism, will be strengthened and refined. I believe the next.
ten years will bring a fuller sense of national pride and purpose,
a determination to preserve the national estate and maintain
Australian control of our industries and resources. I believe
we will cultivate a more mature and distinctive Australian identity,
a m6re vigorous climate in the arts, and a generation of young
Australians determined to reject all that is shoddy and spurious,
second-rate and second-hand, whether at home or abroad. It may well
be that these hopes for a sound democracy, for a proud peop le
equipped to lead their lives to the full in security and peace,
will1 not be realised in my lifetime. I cannot believe, however,
that such a goal is beyond our means or beyond our abilities, or
that the creation of a model society, an example to the world,
is too lofty a vision for a strong and united people.
4 0 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 237
le July 1974
GREEN PAPER ON MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, today announced that the
Government had established a committee to advise it on appropriate
policies for the development of manufacturing industry. The committee's
report will be published as a Green Paper.
The Prime Minister said that the committee would be under the
chairmanship of Mr Gordon Jackson, General Manager and Director,
C. S. R. Limited. Other members would be:
Mr B. W. Brogan, Consultant, Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet
Mr R. H. Carnegie, Chairman and Chief Executive,
Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd
Mr N. S. Currie, Secretary, Department of
Manufacturing Industry
Mr R. J. L. Hawke, President, Australian Council of
Trade Unions
Mr G. A. Rattigan, Chairman, Industries
Assistance Commission and
Mr E. L. Wheelwright, DFC, Associate Professor,
Department of Economics, the University of Sydney.
Mr Whitlam said that the terms of reference of the committee
are: To advise on appropriate policies for the development
of manufacturing industry, including:
The machinery required for integrating such
policies with the Government's general economic,
social and regional policies;
The place of exports and imports in the development
of manufacturing industry; and
The role of firms of overseas origin in manufacturing;
and to advise 6n communication between the Australian Government
and the private sector and the State governments with respect
to the development and implementation of such policies. 2
_ 4.11ST ALI( A 
The committee will be able to draw upon the resources of the
of the Australian Public Service in its work. The expected date by
which the Green Paper should be available will be announced as soon
as possible. The Prime Minister said that the establishment of the committee
was a clear indication of the Australian Government's wish that the
Government and industry work together for the national good. The terms
of reference were deliberately wide and he expected that interested
organisations and persons would take the opportunity to make submissions
to the committee. There would, of course, be further involvement of the
community in the determination of policies in this area once the
Green Paper was published.
Mr Whitlam said that this was the first time that a comprehensive
public examination of policies for manufacturing industry had been undertaken
in Australia. He expected that well founded policies would
result which would set the pattern of Government/ industry relations
for years to come.
The Australian Government welcomed the opportunity which the
Green Paper would provide for the community to assess the way in
which Australia would progress in the future in this most important
sector.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



' 7'
NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, MR, E, G. WHITLAM, M. P,,
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY UNION CENTENARY
DINNER, 19 JULY 1974
1, THIS IS THE FIRST UNION I EVER JOINED. I BECAME A STUDENT
MEMBER IN 1935 AND A LIFE MEMBER IN 1947. So I'VE BEEN A
UNIONIST FOR 39 YEARS LONGER THAN BOB HAWKE. AND I'VE NEVER
SEEN A MORE ELEGANT, DISTINGUISHED AND PROSPEROUS UNION MEETING
THAN THIS, IT'S A PITY YOU'RE NOT AFFILIATED WITH THE LABOR
PARTY. 2. I WISH CLYDE CAMERON WERE HERE THIS EVENING. THIS MUST
BE THE ONLY UNION THAT HAS NEVER BEEN ON STRIKE DURING THE
PAST 100 YEARS, YOU HAVEN'T EVEN HAD A WORK-TO-RULE.
3, THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY UNION IS AN AMALGAMATION OF THE
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY UNION AND THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY'WOMEN'S
UNION, THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN UNTIL 1972, 1972 WAS A GREAT
YEAR FOR ALL OF US INDEED THE YEAR OF LIBERATION, IT TOOK
23 YEARS FOR MY PARTY TO COME TO POWER, IT TOOK 98 YEARS
FOR YOUR UNION TO BE CONSUMMATED
4, IT WAS VERY UNSATISFACTORY FOR ME TO BE IN ONE UNION
AND MY WIFE IN ANOTHER, WE HAD CONSTANT DEMARCATION DISPUTES.
As YOU KNOW, THE GOVERNMENT HAS TRIED SEVERAL TIMES TO
PASS LEGISLATION FOR UNION AMALGAMATIONS. WE HAVE BEEN BLOCKED
BY THE SENATE, THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY SENATE IS A MUCH MORE
ENLIGHTENED BODY THAN THE SENATE IN CANBERRA, IT'S 120 YEARS
OLD. SOME OF OUR CANBERRA SENATORS WOULD FEEL VERY MUCH AT HOME THER 
-2-
6, YOUR CONSTITUTION SAYS: " THE OBJECTS OF THE UNION SHALL
BE TO PROVIDE A COMMON MEETING GROUND FOR MEMBERS,,,,; TO
PROVIDE DINING AND REFRESHMENT SERVICES; TO PROVIDE CONVENIENCES,
SERVICES AND AMENITIES FOR MEMBERS; TO PROVIDE SOCIAL, CULTURAL
AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES; TO PROMOTE THE INTELLECTUAL, CULTURAL
AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF ITS MEMBERS BY DEBATES AND ACTIVITIES,,,,
IT SOUNDS LIKE A VERY GOOD DESCRIPTION OF PARLIAMENT,
No WONDER I FIND THE UNION SO CONGENIAL,
7, ALTHOUGH THE UNION WAS FORMED IN 1874 ITS CONSTITUTION
WAS NOT ADOPTED UNTIL 1911, IT JUST GOES TO SHOW THAT WE
CAN GET ALONG WITHOUT A CONSTITUTION IF WE TRY,
8. I REGRET TO SAY THAT I WAS NOT A VERY GOOD UNIONIST IN
MY DAYS AT UNIVERSITY, MY PROLETARIAN INSTINCTS WERE NOT WELL
DEVELOPED, I TOOK NO PART IN UNION DEBATES, INTER-COLLEGIATE
DEBATES WERE MORE IN MY LINE, LOOKING BACK THROUGH THE OLD
UNION RECORDER, HOWEVER, I FIND THAT SEVERAL OF MY DISTINGUISHED
CONTEMPORARIES WERE PROMINENT IN DEBATES AND UNION AFFAIRS, 
-3-
THERE WAS TALBOT DUCKMANTON, WHOSE POLISHED ACCENTS
ASSURED HIM OF A GREAT CAREER IN RADIO. THERE WAS BRUCE
MILLER, WHO WAS A RADIO ANNOUNCER BEFORE ATTAINING HIS
PRESENT EMINENCE AT THE AAA. U THERE WAS HERMAN BLACK;
HE ALSO MADE HIS NAME ON RADIO. SIR HERMAN WAS A GENERATION
BEFORE HIS TIME. HE WOULD HAVE RIVALLED JOHN LAWS AND BOB
ROGERS ON TALK-BACK PROGRAMS$
THERE WAS DONALD HORNE, WHO WAS GATHERING NOTES FOR
A BOOK ON " THE EDUCATION OF YOUNG DONALD", J. H. WOOTTENO
NOW PROFESSOR OF LAW IN ANOTHER PLACEo AND JIM PLIMSOLL.
THE UNION WAS A HOT-BED OF RADICALISM IN THOSE DAYS.
MY POLITICS, OF COURSE, WERE WELL TO THE LEFT OF THEIRS.
IMUST HAVE BEEN INFLUENCED By ENOCH POWELL.
9. Two OF THE GREAT PERSONALITIES IN THE UNION'S HISTORY
WERE PROFESSOR E. R. HOLME ( WHOM WE KNEW AS ' SUNNY' HOLME)
AND PROFESSOR F. A. TODD. I HAD THE GOOD FORTUNE TO BE
TAUGHT. BY BOTH OF THEM. E. R. HOLME WAS my ENGLISH PROFESSOR
AND F. A. TODD GAVE ME SOME ACQUAINTANCE WITH LATIN.
THE UNIVERSITY WAS A DIFFERENT PLACE IN MY DAY.
IT WAS A MUCH STUFFIER AND MORE CONSERVATIVE INSTITUTION.
IT WAS QUIETER AND VERY MUCH SMALLER. WOMEN STUDENTS WERE
DECIDEDLY IN THE MINORITY. INOTICE THAT DESPITE YOUR
AMALGAMATION YOU HAVE YET TO ELECT A WOMAN AS PRESIDENT
OF THE UNION. 



J-j. t. US17()
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 288
19 July 1974
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
The Prime Minister announced today that the Australian
Government has decided that the Economic consultations between
Ministers and representatives of national organisations
will be held this year from 6 to 8 August inclusive at
Parliament House, Canberra.
The Prime Minister said that the consultations are
held in the context of the Government's pre-Budget preparations
and provide an opportunity for an exchange of views on the
economy generally and on matters of importance to particular
segments of the community.
Letters of invitation to attend the consultations
have been sent to the organisations listed in the attached
timetable. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
ECONOIC CC" SLTATIC:: S
6-8 AUGUST 1974
6 AUGUST Auntralien Council of Trade Unions
Manufacturin, Industrv Grouo
The Associated Chambers of i. anufactures
of Australia
The National Building and Construction
Council
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council 10.00 a. m.
2.30 p. m.
4.30 p. m.
7 AUGUST Trade Develonment Council
Australian !. iininf Industry Council
Commerce Groun
The Australian Chamber of Commerce
Australian Eankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers
Consumer Groun
The Australian Consumers' Association
National Council of '' omen of Australia
Consumer Action Movement
Canberra Consumers Inc.
Consumers' Association of Victoria
Steering Committee for the Australian
Federation of Consumer Organisations
8 AUGUST Primary Industry. Groun
Australian -arm: ers' . ederation
Australian . oolgrowers and Graziers'
Council
Australian Wool and I_? t-i-Pr 9.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
2.30 p. m.
4.30 p. m.
10.00 a. m.
YUI_ 



0j UT EMBARGO: SUNDAY
6.00 P. M.
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 289
21 July 1974
VISIT BY THE PRINCE CHARLES
The Prime Minister today referred to his announcement
last May that The Prince Charles would be making a visit to
Australia in October to inaugurate the Anglo-Australian
Telescope Board's telescope at Siding Spring in New South
Wales and carry out other engagements.
Mr. Whitlam went on to say that advice has now been
received from London that His Royal Highness has agreed to
visit the A. C. T. and Eastern States in accordance with the
following itinerary:
Saturday 12 October
to Tuesday 15 October
Tuesday 15 October
to Saturday 19 October
Saturday 19 October
to Wednesday 23 October
Wednesday 23 October
to Saturday26 October
Saturday 26 October
to Wednesday 30 October Canberra New South Wales
Queensland Tasmania
Victoria
Consultations will now take place to prepare a program
of engagements for the visit. These details will be publicly
announced when approved.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
EMBARGO; 6.00 P. M.
SUNDAY 0
' J,, AIST ALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 289
21 July 1974
VISIT BY THE PRINCE CHARLES
ADDITION TO ITINERARY
ARRANGEMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE FOR THE INAUGURATION CEREMONY
AT SIDING SPRING TO TAKE PLACE ON WEDNESDAY 16 OCTOBER. 0
a% 



LLIL
PRIME MINISTER July 1974
TEXT OF MESSAGE FROM PRIME MINISTER TO THE
PRIME MINISTER OF GREECE
" TO: HIS EXCELLENCY, MR. CONSTANTINE KARAMANLIS,
PRIME MINISTER OF THE HELLENIC REPUBLIC
I RECEIVED THE NEWS OF YOUR RESTORATION AS PRIME
MINISTER WITH DELIGHT AND HASTEN TO OFFER YOU MY CONGRATULATIONS.
THE RETURN OF DEMOCRACY TO ITS BIRTHPLACE HAS BEEN WARMLY
RECEIVED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE AND ESPECIALLY
BY THE LARGE AND GREATLY RESPECTED GREEK COMMUNITY IN AUSTRALIA.
I EXTEND TO YOU MY WARM GOOD WISHES AS YOU ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE AFFAIRS OF YOUR COUNTRY WITH WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS HAD
ENDURING AND INTIMATE ASSOCIATIONS IN WAR AND PEACE.
GOUGH WHITLAM
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA".
I _ at
,1,) QZAL1( A 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
AT THE-OPENING OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA HOUSE,
SYDNEY,-FRIDAY 26 JULY 1974
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT DAY IN THE HISTORY OF
BOTH OUR COUNTRIES IMPORTANT IN SUBSTANCE, IMPORTANT
IN SYMBOLISM. THE BUILDING ITSELF, ITS LOCATION
IN AUSTRALIA'S OLDEST, GREATEST CITY, EXPRESSES THE
CHANGING NATURE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA'S RELATIONS WITH
AUSTRALIA AND THE REGION IN WHICH WE ARE NEIGHBOURS
AND PARTNERS. Now PAPUA NEW GUINEA WILL HAVE
ITS OWN OFFICES IN AUSTRALIA'S INDUSTRIAL AND
COMMERCIAL HEART AS WELL AS THE COMMISSION IN THE
NATIONAL CAPITAL, PAPUA NEW GUINEA ALREADY IS
REPRESENTED IN INDONESIA AND IS SHOR~ TLY TO ESTABLISH
COMMISSIONS IN NEW ZEALAND AND FIJI. 
-2-
THESE MOVES ARE PART OF THE RAPID
ASSUMPTION OF INDEPENDENT STATUS BY A VIRTUALLY
INDEPENDENT NATION, BY THE BREAKING OF THIS SPEAR
AND BY MY ACCEPTANICE OF HALF OF IT WE SYMBOLISE THE
WAY IN WHICH THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AND AUSTRALIA IS CHANGING SWIFTLY YET DEVELOPING
IN A SPIRIT OF MUTUAL TRUST AND CLOSE FRIENDSHIP.
IN ACCEPTING HALF OF THIS SPEAR, I AGAIN REASSERT
AND REAFFIRM AUSTRALIA'S ABSOLUTE WILLINGNESS TO
CONTINUE TO CO-OPERATE CLOSELY WITH A UNITED
PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN THE FULFILMENT OF ITS HOPES
FOR A UNIT'D, PROUD AND FREE NATION,
THE BREAKING SYMBOLISES A BREAK FROM THE
OLD DEPENDENCE; MY ACCEPTANCE OF ONE OF ITS HALVES
ON BEHALF OF AUSTRALIA FROM THE CHIEF MINISTER ON
BEHALF OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA SYMBOLISES THE CONTINUITY
OF OUR CO-OPERATION, OUR TRUST AND GOODWILL BETWEEN
THE CHIEF MINISTER AND ME, BUT MORE IMPORTANT,
MORE ENDURING, BETWEEN PAPUA NEW GUINEA AND AUSTRALIA. 
TO THOSE OF US WHO HAVE CLOSELY WATCHED
THE UNFOLDING OF EVENTS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN THE
WHAT HAS OCCURRED, WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED,
SEEMS LITTLE SHORT OF MIRACULOUS. IT IS BARELY
THREE AND A HALF YEARS AGO SINCE I FORESHADOWED
IN PORT MORESBY THE POLICY FOR INDEPENDENCE
WHICH WOULD BE ADOPTED BY A LABOR GOVERNMENT IF
WE WERE RETURNED AT THE 1972 ELECTIONS.
WE ALL REMEMBER THE EXTRAORDINARY SHOCKWAVES
WHICH THAT ANNOUNCEMENT GENERATED,-BOTH IN PAPUA
NEW GUINEA AND AUSTRALIA, YET EVENTS HAVE MADE
MY SUGGESTED TIMETABLE APPEAR IN RETROSPECT,
MODEST AND MODERATE, INDEED, WE HAVE HAD A
CLASSIC ILLUSTRATION OF THE POWER OF AN IDEA WHOSE
TIME HAD COME. THE FORCES FOR INDEPENDENCE ALREADY
EXISTED; THEY NEEDED ONLY EXPRESSION TO SPRING
INTO VIGOROUS LIFE, 
I~
AT THAT TIME I WORKED FROM ONE BASIC
ASSUMPTION, IT WAS THIS: THAT PAPUA NEq GUINEA
WAS ALREADY PROVIDING, FROM HER OWN RESOURCES,
MORE SKILLED MEN AND WOMEN THAN AUSTRALIA WOULD
BE ABLE OR WILLING TO MAKE AVAILABLE FOR PAPUA
NEW GUINEA PURPOSES FROM HER RESOURCES,
SO IT HAS PROVED, IT IS THIS FACT WHICH PROVIDES
THE BASIS FOR PAPUA NEW GUINEA'S INDEPENDENCE,
WHAT COULD HARDLY HAVE BEEN FORESEEN IN 1970 WAS THE
SPEED WITH WHICH EFFECTIVE POLITICAL PARTIES WOULD
EMERGE IN THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY, THIS NEW FACT
HAS PROVIDED THE FIRM BASIS FOR THE AMAZINGLY
RAPID ASSUMPTION OF THE SUBSTANCE OF INDEPENDENCE,
IF NOT ALL THE FORMS, IN THE LAST THREE YEARS.
ABOVE ALL WE COULD NOT HAVE RECKONED ON
BEING SO FORTUNATE IN THE CHOICE AND STATURE OF
THE LEADERSHIP WHICH HAS EMERGED, AT A CRUCIAL TIME
IN HER HISTORY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA HAS FOUND LEADERSHIP
OF THE HIGHEST QUALITY AND INrEGRITY, A LEADERSHIP
WHICH HAS ALREADY WON RESPECT THROUGHOUT THE REGION, 
So SUCCESSFUL HAS THE TRANSITION BEEN THAT
NEITHER THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA NOR OF
AUSTRALIA NEED ANY LONGER FEEL UNDULY PREOCCUPIED
WITH THE FORMALITIES OF INDEPENDENCE, IN ALL BUT
FORMALITY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA IS INDEPENDENT,
LET ME REPEAT THE WORDS OF THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL IN
HIS SPEECH OPENING THE PARLIAMENT:
" MY GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED BY THE CLEAREST
PLEDGES TO CONTINUE SUBSTANTIAL AID TO A
UNITED PAPUA NEW GUINEA BEFORE AND AFTER
INDEPENDENCE, SINCE PAPUA NEW GUINEA
ACHIEVED SELF-GOVERNMENT IN DECEMBER 1973,
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENTS OF
AUSTRALIA AND OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA HAS BEEN
BASED ON THE PRINCIPLES OF EQUALITY, MUTUAL
RESPECT AND MUTUAL CO-OPERATION, PENDING
THE FINAL DECISION OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
TO DECLARE INDEPENDENCE FOR PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL CONDUCT ITS
RELATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AS A GOVERNMENT OF AN INDEPENDENT NATION TO
WHICH. AUSTRALIA HAS CERTAIN SPECIAL AND
INESCAPABLE OBLIGATIONS," 
-0-
IN OTHER WORDS, THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA WILL MAKE
ITS OWN DECISION AS TO THE ACTUAL DATE OF INDEPENDENCE
WHILE FOR ITS PARTI THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL DEAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AS THE GOVERNMENT OF AN ALREADY INDEPENDENT COUNTRY,
BEFORE INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER INDEPENDENCE,
ALL AUSTRALIAN AID WILL BE DIRECTED THROUGH THE
GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA, IT WILL BE DIRECTED
TOWARDS THE GOALS AND PRIORITIES SET BY THE GOVERNMENT
OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA, AUSTRALIAN AID WILL NOT
INVOLVE INTERFERENCE IN THE PREPARATION OF PAPUA
NEW GUINEA'S IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS AND ANNUAL BUDGETS,
THESE ARE AND WILL CONTINUE TO BE THE RESPONSIBILITY
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
THE PROGRESS BEING MADE BY PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
OF WHICH THIS BUILDING IS ONE OF THE EXTERNAL SIGNS,
GIVES GROUND FOR THE HIGHEST OPTIMISM, YEI WE SHOULD
NOT SEEK TO UNDERESTIMATE THE DIFFICULTIES IN THE
PATH ON WHICH WE HAVE ALL EMBARKED, THE EFFORT TO
BUILD A UNITED DEMOCRACY AT ANY TIME IS ONE OF THE
GREATEST CHALLENGES STATESMANSHIP CAN EVER FACE; AND
THESE ARE NOT ORDINARY TIMES: THEY ARE NOT EASY TIMES,
DEMOCRACY EVERYWHERE IS UNDERGOING GREAT STRESSES
AND GREAT CHALLENGES, 
-7-
EVEN THE VERY OLDEST AND GREATEST DEMOCRACIES
ARE NOT EXEMPT FROM TURMOIL AND TRAVAIL. PAPUA
NEW GUINEA IS DEVELOPING A CONSTITUTION FOR A
NEW AND INDEPENDENT NATION. IT WILL DEVELOP THAT
CONSTITUTION IN ITS OWN WAY, IN ITS OWN TIME.
IT WILL COMBINE FOREIGN PRECEDENTS WITH ITS OWN
TRADITIONS, THERE IS SOMETHING HOWEVER FAR MORE
IMPORTANT TO DEMOCRACY THAN THE LETTER OF A CONSTITUTION,
IT IS THE SPIRIT IN WHICH THAT CONSTITUTION IS
APPLIED BY THE ELECTED MEN AND WOMEN WHO HAVE THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF OPERATING IT. IT IS NOT ONLY
WRITTEN RULES WHICH MAKE A DEMOCRACY STRONG; THE
UNWRITTEN RULES ARE JUST AS IMPORTANT.
IT IS ALL TOO EASY TO SUBVERT DEMOCRACY BY PERFECTLY
LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL MEANS IF THE WILL TO ABIDE
BY THE UNWRITTEN RULES IS ABSENT. No NATION,*
NOT EVEN AUSTRALIA ITSELF, IS EXEMPT FROM THE DANGERS
WHICH FOLLOW A BREAK( DOWN IN THE ACCEPTANCE OF THlE
UNWRITTEN RULES. THIS IS A MEASURE OF THE CHALLENGE
FACING PAPUA NEW GUINEA. WE ALL RECOGNISE THE
DIFFICULTIES, YET AGAIN IT MUST BE SAID THAT THE
REMARKABLE PROGRESS OF THE LAST THREE YEARS GIVES
THE BEST GROUNDS FOR CONFIDENCE THAT THEY WILL BE
TRIUMPHANTLY OVERCOME.
MAY THIS BUILDING BE A SYMBOL OF THE
NEW MATURITY OF OUR PARTNERSHIP AS TWO FREE DEMOCRATIC
INDEPENDENT PARTNERS. 



Press Statement No.
26 July 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
REPORT ON PRICE INCREASES PROPOSED BY
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY INDUSTRY COUNCIL
I have received the attached report of the
Prices Justification Tribunal on certain price increases
proposed by the Australian Dairy Industry Council on
behalf of the Southern Queensland Dairy Company Limited
and others. The report is available to the public and may
be inspected at the offices of the Prices Justification
Tribunal 10 Queens Road, Melbourne or 100 William Street,
Sydney. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME M1INISTER,
T1IlE HON. E. G. WH ITLAM1 Q. C. M. P.
AT THE 1611l ANNIVERSARY OF THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE
LIVERPOOL DISTRICT [: oSPIIAL,
SYDNEY FRIDAY 296 JULY 1974i
TtHE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT HOSPITAL STANDS AS
SOMETHING OF AN OASIS IN A DESERT OF HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
IN THE IWESTERN SUBURBS OF SYDNEY. IT IS ONE OF ONLY
1' 4 PUBLIC AND 6 PRIVATE HOSPITALS IN ONE OF THE MOST POPULOUS
AND RAPIDLY GROWING AREAS OF AUSTRALIA. THE WESTERN
METROPOLITAN AREA OF SYDNEY, WHICH INCLUDES LIVERPOOL AS
~ NE OF ITS FOCAL POINTS, HAS A POPULATION OF NEARLY ONE
MILLION,. OR NEARLY ONE QUARTER OF THE POPULATION OF THE
STATE. IT IS EXPERIENCING A RAPID POPULATION GROWTH OF
MORE THAN 10 A YEAR AND YOUNG FAMILIES COMPRISE MOST OF
THIS INCREASE. DESPITE ITS SIZE AND RATE OF GROWTH, THE AREA IS
DEFICIENT IN MOST HEALTH SERVICES. THIS APPLILS PARTICULARLY
TO HOSPITAL SERVICES. THE AREA HAS ONLY 3.3 BEDS FOR EVERY
THOUSAND PEOPLE COMPARED WITH THE STATE'S AVERAGE OF 6.4# BEDS
PER THOUSAND. THE DEFICIENCY IS EVEN GREATER WHEN ONE CONSIDERS
THE SHORTAGE OF MATERNAL AND PAEDIATRIC SERVICES WHICH EXISTS
IN AN AREA WITH SO MANY YOU1NG FAMILIES. 
-2
THE PROVISION AND PLANN~ ING OF HEALTH CARL FACILITIES
IN AUSTRALIA FOR TOO LONG HAS BEEN CHARACTERISED BY SHORTCOMINGS
OF THIS KIND. INDEED IT IS A LACK OF PLANNING WHICH IS THE
FAULT. MY COLLEAGUE, THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY,
AM. BILL HAYDEN, HAS POINTED OUT TH-AT IN SYDNEY, FOR EXAMPLE,
THE CITY I5 7 TEACHING HOSPITALS ARE LOCATED WITHIN AN
EIGHT MILE RADIUS OF THE G. P. O. AND 5 OF THEM ARE WITHIN
A FOUR MILE RADIUS. YET THE GREAT MAJORITY OF SYDNEY'S
POPULATION LIVES A CONSIDERABLE DISTANCE OUTSIDE THESE
PARAMETERS, BEYOND HOSPITALS, THERE IS A MALDISTRIBUTION OF
DOCTORS AND OTHER SKILLED MEDICAL MANPOWER. THE RESULT IS
THAT PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN LONG-ESTABLISHED AND GENERALLY
AFFLUENT AREAS HAVE ACCESS TO THE FULL RANGE OF HIGH QUALITY
HEALTH CARE. IN CONTRAST, PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN NEWER AND
FREQUENTLY DISADVANTAGED AREAS DO NOT. HAVE SUCH ACCESS.
IT IS MONSTROUSLY INEQUITABLE THAT PARENTS ON A
LOW INCOME LIVING IN THE WESTERN SUBURBS SHOULD HAVE TO SPEND
HOURS TRAVELLING AT RELATIVELY GREAT COST 20 MILES OR MORE
BY TRAIN AND BUS TO VISIT A SICK CHILD IN A PAEDIATRIC HOSPITAL
WHILE AFFLUENT PARENTS LIVING IN, SAY, THE EASTERN SUBURBS
OF SYDNEY FACE ONLY A SHORT CAR TRIP TO VISIT THEIR CHILD.
IT IS EQUALLY INEQUITABLE THAT THE WESTERN SUBURBS FAMILY
SHOULD SUFFER A DEARTH OF DOCTORS TO TREAT THEIR ILLNESSES AND
INJURIES WHILE THE EASTERN SUBURBS FAMILY SHOULD LIVE IN AN AREA
WHICH ABOUNDS IN MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL SERVICES. IT IS NOT THAT
WE SHOULD DENY THE AFFLUENT ACCESS TO THE BEST HEALTH CARE;
BUT WE MUST ENSURE THAT EVERYONE IN THE COMMIUNITY RECEIVES THE
BEST POSSIBLE TREATMENT, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR FINANCIAL MEANS
AND THEIR PHYSICAL LOCATION. s. m1/ 3 
IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT SAW THE NEED FOR AN URGENT AND THOROUGH EXAMINATION
OF THE DELIVERY OF HEALTH SERVICES THROUGHOUT 4USTRALIA.
A HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES INTERIM COMMITTEE, WHICH
LATER BECAME BY STATUTE THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES
COMMISSION, WAS APPOINTED LAST YEAR TO INVESTIGATE,
REPORT ON AND RECOMMEND NECESSARY ACTION TO OVERCOME BOTH
IMMEDIATE AND LONG-TERM PROBLEMS. THE OBJECTIVE OF THE
COMMISSION IS " THE PROVISION OF HIGH QUALITY, READILY
ACCESSIBLE, REASONABLE COMPREHENSIVE, CO-ORDINATED AND
EFFICIENT HEALTH AND RELATED WELFARE SERVICES AT LOCAL,
REGIONAL, STATE AND NATIONAL LEVELS." fN THE COMMISSION'S
RECOMMENDATIONS WE ALLOCATED $ 4t. 5 MILLION IN 1) 131/ 4
TO MEET URGENT NEEDS FOR ADDITIONAL HOSPITALS IN SYDNEY,
MIELBOURNE AND BRISBANE. OF THAT AMOUNT, 14 MILLION WAS TO
BE PROVIDED TOWARDS THE COST OF PLANNING AND COMMENC. ING
THE HOSPIT AL PROPOSED FOR WESTMEAD SINCE 1968. TO DATE
ONLY $ 577,000 HAS BEEN USED FOR THE WESTMEAD PROJECT. THIS
MEANT THAT THE GOVERNMENT WAS ABLE TO ALLOCATE FROM THE UNUSED
PFUNDS $ 500,000 TOWARDS THE COST OF A NEW WARD BLOCK AT
THE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT HOSPITAL. INEARLY $ 112,0J00 OF THIS HAD
BEEN SPENT BY THE END OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR. ms i 
THIS IS ONLY THE BEGINNING OF A MAJOR OVERHAUL
OF HOSPITAL SERVICES ENVISAGED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
ON 10 APRIL THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH, DR EVERINGHAM, TABLED
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES A " REPORT ON HOSPITALS IN
AUSTRALIA" PREPARED BY THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES
COMMISSION. THE REPORT PROPOSES THAT OVER A FIVE YEAR
PERIOD BEGINNING ON 1 JULY 1974 A PROGRAM BE IMPLEMENTED
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION OF HOSPITALS, MENTAL
HEALTH FACILITIES, PUBLIC NURSING HOMES AND HEALTH HOSTELS
AT A TOTAL COST OF $ 1,160 MILLION. THE REPORT HAS YET TO
BE CONSIDERED BY CABINET, SO IT IS TOO EARLY FOR ME TO
DEFINE THE EXACT EXTENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
INVOLVEMENT IN SUCH A PROGRAM. HOWEVER, IT IS QUITE CLEAR
THAT, IF VIE ARE TO HAVE ADEQUATE HOSPITALS, THE 1USTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO BECOME MORE INVOLVED IN THEIR PLANNING
AND FINANCING THAN IT HAS BEEN IN THE PAST, THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS SIMPLY DO NOT HAVE THlE RESOURCES TO OVERCOME THE
DEFICIENCIES THAT EXIST AT PRESENT. U\ AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INVOLVEMENT IS ESPECIALLY NECESSARY IF WE ARE TO SOLVE THE
PRESENT GROSS MALDISTRIBUTION OF FACILITIES. SINCE THE 1946
REFERENDUM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS POSSESSED, BUT
HITHERTO HAS NOT EXERCISED, THE CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
TO PROVIDE HOSPITAL BENEFITS AND MEDICAL SERVICES; IN OTHER
WORDS, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN ITSELF BUILD, FINANCE
AND MANAGE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH CENTRES. 1611 
THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IN THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS MUST EXTEND BEYOND
CAPITAL COSTS. THE RUNNING COSTS OF HOSPITALS REPRESENT
A EVER-INCREASING PROBLEM. THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION REPORT IN APRIL POINTED OUT THAT,
AS TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND THE COMPLEXITY OF INSTITUTIONS
INCREASE, SO THE HOSPITAL SYSTEM BECOMES MORE LABOUR INTENSIVE.
" THIS TREND MAY BE PECULIAR TO HOSPITALS AND IS UNLIKELY TO
BE REVERSED," I THE REPORT SAID. THIS PROBLEM EXTENDS INTO
OTHLR HEALTH SERVICES AS WELL AS HOSPITALS. AT PRESENT
HEALTH SERVICES COST OUR NATION MORE THAN $ 2,000 MILLION A
YEAR, OR ABOUT 5.3Z' OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT. THEIR COST
IS INCREASING SO DRAMATICALLY THAT IT HAS BEEN ESTIMATED THAT
OUR EXPENDITURE ON HEALTH SERVICES COULD BE MORE THAN 12% OF
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT BY THE YEAR 2-000. THE RESULT OF THIS
INCREASE HAS BEEN ESPECIALLY REFLECTED IN HOSPITALS.
HIGHER CHARGES AND GROWING DEFICITS HAVE BECOME A FEATURE
OF OUR HOSPITAL SYSTEM IN RECENT YEARS.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL IN FACT ASSUME A MUCH
GREATER ROLE IN THE MEETING OF RUNNING COSTS UNDER ITS PROPOSED
HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM. UNDER THE PRESENT SYSTEM IT PAYS A
SUBSIDY OF ONLY $ 2 A DAY FOR HOSPITAL PATIENTS, ALTHOUGH THERE
ARE INEVITABLY OTHER BENEFITS WHICH DERIVE FROM TAXATION
CONCESSIONS. IT IS ESTIMATED THAT IN 1974/ 75 THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO PAY ONLY $ 165 MILLION TOWARDS THE
OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS. THIS COMPARES WITH AN
ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE OF $ 5410 MILLION BY STATE GOVERNMENTS AND
$ 2' 40 MILLION BY INSURED AND UNINSURED PATIENTS. 16 
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM INVOLVES A GREAT
AND CONTINUING IMPROVEMENT IN THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS, UNDER BILATERAL AGREEMENTS WITH EACH STATE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD BE PREPARED TO MEET 50 PER CENT
OR,' fHE NET OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS, THE
AUSIRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAID BENEFITS APPROACHING 50 PER CENT
OF OPERATING COSTS FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF THE HOSPITAL
BENEFIT ACT IN 1945 UNTIL THE ACT'S REPLACEMENT BY THE
LIBERAL/ COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT IN 1952, HOSPITALS IN
ALL STATES WILL BENEFIT FROM THE NEW ARRANGEMENT, THE TOTAL
GAIN TO STATE GOVERNMENTS IN 1974/ 75, IF THE PROGRAM HAD
BEEN INTRODUCED IN TIME, WOULD HAVE BEEN $ 80 MILLION, IN
NEW SOUTH WALES THE GAIN WOULD HAVE BEEN $ 15 MILLION,
THE IMPROVEMENT IN THE FINANCIAL SITUATION OF
THE STATE-PUBLIC HOSPITALS SYSTEMS WILL NOT OF COURSE BE
THE ONLY BENEFIT FROM THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM, THE
PROGRAM WILL OVERCOME THE INEQUITIES AND LACK OF COVERAGE
WHICH EXIST AT PRESENT UNDER THE PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE
SYSTEM, FOR A START, THE PROGRAM WILL AUTOMATICALLY COVER
ALL RESIDENTS OF AUSTRALIA, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR MEANS OF
THEIR BACKGROUNDS, IT WILL BE FINANCED IN THE MOST EQUITABLE
MANNER AS THE PAYMENTS TO BE MET BY INDIVIDUALS* WILL BE
BASED ON THEIR CAPACITY TO PAY, THE PROPOSED LEVY OF
1,35 PER CENT ON TAXABLE INCOME WILL PROVE CHEAPER THAN THE
PRESENT HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME FOR THE GREAT MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS, 117 
-7-
FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS, AUSTRALIANS WILL RECEIVE
A COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENT,
IF A DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL DIRECT TO THE PROPOSED HEALTH
INSURANCE COMMISSION, HIS PATIENT WILL NOT HAVE TO PAY ANYTHING
FOR MEDICAL TREATMENT, EVEN IF THE DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL
TO HIS PATIENT, THE COMMISSION WILL PAY AT LEAST 85 PER CENT
OF THE SCHEDULED FEE, AND IN NO CASE, WHERE THE SCHEDULED FEE
IS CHARGED, WOULD THE PATIENT HAVE TO PAY MORE THAN $ 5 FOR ANY
MEDICAL SERVICES, TO DISMISS IMMEDIATELY ONE PHONY ISSUE
THAT HAS BEEN RAISED BY OUR OPPONENTS, THESE ARRANGEMENTS
WILL APPLY TO SERVICES PROVIDED BY ANY DOCTOR THAT ANY PATIENT
CHOOSES TO CONSULT, FOR HOSPITAL TREATMENT, EVERYONE WILL BE
ENTITLED TO FREE STANDARD WARD TREATMENT: ADMISSION TO THESE
WARDS WILL NOT BE RESTRICTED TO PEOPLE WHO SATISFY THE
SAVAGE MEANS TESTS WHICH APPLY IN SOME STATES AT PRESENT,
THE PROGRAM WILL ACHIEVE. THIS GOAL WITHOUT DESTROYING THE
VIABILITY AND INDEPENDENCE OF RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE AND
COMMUNITY HOSPITALS, PATIENTS IN PRIVATE WARDS OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS OR IN PRIVATE HOSPITALS WILL ATTRACT A BED SUBSIDY
OF $ 16 PER DAY FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. A CONSIDERABLE
IMPROVEMENT ON THE $ 2 A DAY WHICH IS CURRENTLY PAID, THE
GOVERNMENT AIMS TO ENSURE THAT PRIVATE INSURANCE IS AVAILABLE
AT REASONABLE COST TO COVER ANY EXTRA CHARGES FACED BY
PRIVATE PATIENTS, 1, ,/ 8 
-8-
THE FAIRNESS, THE UNIVERSAL COVERAGE AND THE
OTHER BENEFITS OF THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM HAVE
COMPELLED US TO PERSEVERE WITH ITS IMPLEMENTATION IN
THE FACE OF SOME BITTER OPPOSITION, THIS IS NOT A BLIND
DOCTRINAIRE PERSEVERANCE, THE GOVERNMENT HAS WON TWO
ELECTIONS IN WHICH THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN AN ESSENTIAL PART
OF OUR PLATFORM, IN FACT PROBABLY NO CURRENT ISSUE IN
AUSTRALIAN POLITICS HAS RECEIVED A MORE THOROUGH AIRING,
WE BELIEVE THAT, IN ELECTING US TO GOVERNMENT, THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE INDICATED A DESIRE FOR THE SORT OF
CHANGE TO WHICH WE ARE COMMITTED,
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM IS COVERED BY TWO
OF THE SIX BILLS WHICH WILL BE PUT TO A JOINT SITTING OF
BOTH HOUSES OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT IN THE WEEK
AFTER NE*( T. BECAUSE OF THE RENEWED SUPPORT GIVEN TO IIS
BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ON 18 MAY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
HAVE A MAJORITY TO ENSURE THEIR PASSAGE AT THE JOINT
SITTING, DESPITE THIS RENEWED SUPPORT, OUR OPPONENTS PERSIST
IN TRYING TO PREVENT THE PROGRAM FROM COMING INTO OPERATION#
THEIR SPOKESMEN IN THE PARLIAMENT SAY THAT THEY WILL OPPOSE
ANY COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION, WE ARE EQUALLY DETERMINED
NOT TO BE THWARTED YET AGAIN BY THESE PROPONENTS OF A
MORIBUND AND UNJUST SYSTEM, IT REMAINS THE GOVERNMENT'S
FIRM INTENTION TO INTRODUCE THE PROGRAM, OBSTRUCTION IN
THE SENATE MAY HAVE DELAYED ITS INTRODUCTION, BUT WILL NOT
PREVENT IT, WE EXPECT THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM TO
BECOME A REALITY IN 1975, 
THE PROGRAM WILL NOT IN ITSELF OVERCOME ALL OF THE
FAILINGS OF HEALTH CARE IN AUSTRALIA., THE WORK OF THE
HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION MUST PLAY A MAJOR PART
IN THIS PROCESS0 I HAVE ALREADY DESCRIBED ITS ACTIVITIES IN
RELATION TO HOSPITALS. MUCH NEEDS TO BE DONE IN THE PROVISION
OF OTHER COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES. IT IS FOR THIS REASON
THAT IN 1973174 WE ALLOCATED $ 10 MILLION TO ASSIST THE STATES
AND ELIGIBLE ORGANISATIONS TO MEET THE CAPITAL AND OPERATING
COSTS OF REGIONAL ORGANISED COMMUNITY-BASED HEALTH SERVICES.
COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES, PROVIDED AT CENTRES AND THROUGH
DOMICILIARY SERVICES, OFFER A GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR COMBATING
THE UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF DOCTORS AND OTHER HEALTH WORKERS
IN OUR COMMUNITY. IN ADDITION, WE HAVE PROVIDED 7.5 MILLION
TO ASSIST THE STATES TO DEVELOP COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL HEALTH.-
ALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY SERVICES.
COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES WILL NOT ONLY BENEFIT
THE PUBLIC BUT WILL PROVIDE MORE EXCITING NEW POSSItlILITIES
FOR HEALTH WORKERS. ALL GOVERNMENTS ARE CURRENTLY UNDERGOING
A RETHINKING OF THEIR ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE IMPORTANCE OF
ANCILLARY MEDICAL STAFF. RECENT INCREASES GRANTED TO
NURSES IN NEW SOUTH WALES ARE ONE INDICATION OF THIS.
BUT THE RETHINKING MUST INVOLVE MORE THAN A QUESTION OF MONEY.
IT IS IN THIS CONTEXT THAT COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES PROVIDE
GREAT OPPORTUNITIES, THERE IS EVERY INDICATION THAT NURSES
AND OTHER ANCILLARY STAFF WILL FORM A NEW " IFRONT LINE" I OF
MEDICINE, OPERATING FROM HEALTH CENTRES THEY WILL PLAY A
VITAL ROLE IN THE IMPROVEMENT OF HOME CARE SERVICES. AT THE
CENTRES THEMSELVES THEY WILL BE ABLE TO PERFORM MANY FUNCTIONS
AS A VALUABLE SUPPLEMENT TO THE WORK OF DOCTORS. 
10
THE PROVISION OF A COMPREHENSIVE HIGH QUALITY SYSTEM
OF HEALTH CARE IN AUSTRALIA DOES NOT REPRESENT AN EASY TASK.
WE SUFFER FROM YEARS OF NEGLECT IN PLANNING AND FINANCE,
BUT THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT WITH THE TWIN WEAPONS
OF THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM AND THE HOSPITALS AND
HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION WE CAN MEET THE NEEDS OF ALL
AUSTRALIANS. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY 30 JULY 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Is it true as Senator Michael Townley alleged in the
Senate today that the Government is proposing to acquire two
Boeing 707' s from Qantas. Have you asked that these planes be
ready for your trip to Indonesia or for any trip anywhere for
that matter? Can these planes be sold by Qantas for $ 20 million,
could the cost of running these planes by $ 12 million a year?
Is one of these planes to be known as " Airforce One"?
PRIME MINISTER: We conduct an independent airforce, so it might
be that we would devise a name of our own. I have no doubt that
you would apply that name to it. There has been, for quite some
time, a suggestion that the Airforce should acquire some of the
surplus, the old model, 707s from Qantas. The Airforce needs
this capacity. Qantas no longer needs the aircraft. Any sale
by Qantas to the Airforce will be on commercial terms. I don't
believe any arrangements have been made yet. I have no doubt
they will be made in due course. There will be many months
required to convert any aircraft which the Airforce buys, not
only to convert the aircraft, but more importantly of course,
to train the air crew and the staff to service them.
QUESTION: Well they go into the VIP fleet soon?
PRIME MINISTER: I expect so but, like any of the VIP fleet they
can be used for troop transports, for I think, Cyprus, Butterworth.
I don't know what position any plans are in at the moment but it
would be very many months I am told before there can be any use
by the Airforce of any of these Qantas surplus aircraft.
QUESTION: But that is the intention?
PRIME MINISTER: I think in general terms; I don't know that a
decision has been made. I know it has been suggested for quite
some years. It was suggested before we came in. It is one matter
where we haven't made a very quick decision.
QUESTION: Following discussions I understand between ministers
over the past few days, has any decision been made about the
possibility of either increasing our police contingent in Cyprus
or sending Australian troops there as part of -the United Nations
Peace Keeping Force?
PRIME MINISTER: The Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee, has been
considering this matter. I haven't spoken to him in the past
hours about it so perhaps you should ask him what the present
position is. It is more likely that we would send troops if the
U. N. asked than to send police. The troops would be more readily
available. They are, of course, entirely within the jurisdiction
of the Australian Government. The police, however, would mainly / 2 
-2-
be in the jursdiction of the State Governments. The Commonwealth
Police Force and the two territory police forces would not be
responsible for more than a small fraction of the police in
Australia. We have had some difficulty in maintaining the police
contingent of about 35 in Cyprus. When the Government was elected
there was some pressure from the States, in fact, to discontinue
our participation. However, I persuaded all the Premiers, except
Queensland, to continue their contribution. I have seen the
police contingent in Cyprus on a couple of occasions and they
undoubtedly do a very effective job.
QUESTION: About how many troops would you consider?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. You should ask Senator Willesee
about this.
QUESTION: Can you tell us if there is a Prime ministerial or
ministerial statement on the reported explosion of the fifth test
by the French?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect that Senator Willesee will make
a statement when we have reason to believe that a fifth explosion
has taken place. We have done it after each of the other four.
I think I did, I was acting of course.
QUESTION: The one that occured yesterday morning?
PRIME MINISTER: There will be a statement when we have reason
to believe it.
QUESTION: In view of the fact that many of your ministers and
I name them: Dr Cairns, Dr Cass, Mr Cameron, Mr Bryant and, of
course, Mr Crean have been publicly denunciating economic policies
to the confusion of the people, will you yourself now say in
precise terms what is your Government's policy to combat inflation.
And do you appreciate and agree with the historical analogy that is
being drawn of a parallel between the economic problems of the
Scullin Government and that of your own Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Well this is a very enticing question. It is put
in very attractive terms and I hope you will forgive me if I don't
respond to all the invitations that you have put so civilly. I
think youi would have got a very good illustration in Question Time
today of the folly of making comments on reports of what ministers
say. The Leader of the Opposition, Mr Snedden, asked Mr Crean
a question obviously based on a story on the front page of the
" Australian", I think it was, that Dr Cairns has said that some
banks might crash. You heard Dr Cairns give a personal explanation
after Question Time that he never made any such statement. Now
I don't blame Mr Snedden because better men than he have fallen
for this trap. In fact the " Australian", right next to this story,
quoted Mr R. V. Cameron, the spokesman for the banks as a whole
I am not referring to Mr Prowse, the spokesman for the " Wales",
I am referring to Mr Cameron, the spokesman for all the banks saying
how irresponsible it was for a senior minister to make such a
statement and, of course, it would have been very irresponsible
for any senior minister or any minister or any member of Parliament
or any Leader of an Opposition to make such a statement. But, no
such statement was made. I discussed this with Dr Cairns; he
discussed it with me yesterday, and he told me how some of the 
journalists from other newspapers were called in by their editors
to explain how they missed such a scoop and they pointed out to
their editors that, in fact, Dr Cairns had not said it. He had,
in fact, discounted any such eventuality as regards the banks.
The banks in Australia are all guaranteed by the Reserve Bank
which is guaranteed by the Australian Government, so there will
be no bank crashes in Australia. This is fresh in our minds and
I think it is quite foolish I have always taken this attitude
as you know, t hat I don't comment on reports unless I have seen
the text or heard the speech. In this case there is a story
beaten up on something which was quite inaccurate, so I will not
respond, I regret, to your summary. Even your summary might not
be accurate. I mean you were not there, you didn't hear these
things, you haven't got the text.
QUESTION: A lot of other statements have been made though, Sir,
on economic policies?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, if you don't mind, I will only comment on
things which I know or can check myself.
QUESTION: Well, with respect, will you say what the Government's
economic policies are then?
PRIME MINISTER: It falls to me to enunciate these things, for
instance, at the Premiers' Conference on 7 June, I did so. There
will be a Premiers' Conference I expect as soon as this session
ends and I will express the Government's policy at that. The
Treasurer gave part of the program last Tuesday. He will be giving
a. very large part of the program on 17 September when he presents
the Budget.
QUESTION: What benefits do you see in wage indexation?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that it avoids the'too frequent and
too large wage and salary claims which are being made at the
moment. These claims are being made so frequently and so excessively
in anticipation of rising prices. Now, indexation will cope with
any increase in prices. It will eliminate the excess and reduce
the frequency of wage claims. I have expressed that view as you
know for some months now.
QUESTION: Is the Government about to announce or have you decided
to bring in new controls or restrictions on travel from Britain
and New Zealand to Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been some correspondence with other
Commonwealth Prime Ministers concerning the same requirements for all
people coming to Australia. At the moment there is discrimination
in travel documents between people of European origin and others.
This has been an unacceptable feature of our relations, for instance,
with Fiji. Accordingly, there has been some correspondence.
QUESTION: Does that mean in fact that you are going to bring in
the same sort of restrictions for British travellers to Australia
as there are for other travellers?
PRIME MINISTER: The difference has been between British subjects
of European origin and British subjects of other origins. For instance
in Fiji. / 4 
QUESTION: Can you outline for us any of the ground rules for
the joint sitting next Tuesday?
PRIME MINISTER: There will be a meeting between the Leader of
the House, the Minister in charge of Government business in
the Senate and their counterparts and the Clerks. There have
been some informal meetings up till now but of course it hasn't
been proper to publicise them because one shouldn't give the
impression of counting one's chickens . before they are hatched.
One has to see what the Governor-General's decision will be
and he, of course, only made that this morning so there will
be meetings for this purpose. There will have to be legislation
if privilege is to attach to the proceedings of the joint sitting
such as attaches to the sittings of the individual Houses. We
will have to amend the Parliamentary Broadcasting Act and the
Parliamentary Papers Act in order to give privilege to documents
and I think also the Evidence Act so as to enable proofs to
be given in the courts of the proceedings of a joint sitting
as distinct from the separate sittings which have always taken
place up until now.
QUESTION: In reply to the Rt. Hon. the Leader of the Opposition
in the House this morning, you said that either House can reject
or defer Public Service pay increases. In view of the Government's
call for restraint....
PRIME MINISTER: I think I said reject, or disallow, I don't
think I used the word defer.
QUESTION: Is it the Government's intention to act that way by
using its numbers in the House of Representatives?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, wait and let us see if there are any of
these determinations that come before it. I think the Rt. Hon.
the Leader of the Opposition to give him the title which he likes
to adopt in the Britishmould. I am satisfied to have a purely
Australian designation. Maybe I am the first Prime Minister since
Deakin to be content with that appellation. Nevertheless, I don't
want to disparage the Rt. Hon. gentleman. He referred to the
proposed $ 16 increase for clerical administrative staff and so on.
Now, that determination I am told was issued only yesterday. It
will be my job to table it. I haven't yet got it. Now, it will
then be open to anybody in the Parliament to move to disallow it.
Either House can disallow determinations, we saw that in respect
to proceedings under the Remuneration Tribunal Act last week. It
has always been possible under the Public Service Arbitration Act.
QUESTION: In reference to your answer to Ken Begg's question
about indexation, you said that it would avoid too frequent and
too large wage claims. How will it do this for salary earners
above the minimum who will find that in fact indexation under
the Cameron plan, if it comes about, will not compensate them
in percentage terms, percentage price rises, and how will it do
it for the crucial metal trades awards for which negotiations
are to take place, I think, immediately after the Moore Conference?
And with respect to the last matter, will the Government be taking
a more active stance in relation to these vital metal trades rounds
of negotiations? 
PRIME MINISTER: The Government's proposals for Mr Justice Moore's
Conference were given to you by Mr Cameron at a press conference
yesterday. I was asked in Question Time a couple of hours ago
about the metal trades matter. At this stage, it is purely
a ' Matter of negotiation. It is not before arbitration. If it
does come before arbitration, then the Government can consider
its attitude. But, frankly we are busy enough without considering
contingencies which might never come about. I was interested
to learn that the employers in the metal trades are now taking
the attitude that because of the Government's more stringent
attitude towards protection for industries, they can't automatically
absorb any wage increases, including those under sweetheart
agreements, and just pass them on to the public. The public
interest is being served in this case very clearly by the
Government's attitude on protection, on tariffs..
QUESTION: And what about the higher paid workers, the fact that
they wont....
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Cameron, I believe, discussed all this with
you yesterday. In our proposal there would be a flat rate increase
for all people above the level to which the Moore Conference
agrees there should be indexation. The Government rejected the
idea that there should be indexation across-the-board. The
Parliament's attitude was shown last week on this matter. For
instance, if there is a 15 per cent increase in the cost of living
it is obviously more necessary, more just, to increase by
per cent the award income of people at the bottom of the salary
scale. This is my argument with the Premier of Queensland,
Mr Bjelke Petersen. As I said at Question Time this morning,
since 1921 the Queensland Parliament has had an act which says
that if the minimum wage ir males in Queensland goes up by a
certain percentage in any financial year then every Member of
Parliament will have his salary increased by the same percentage
for the following year. The Queensland Parliament has adopted a
policy of wage indexation for the top people. The same percentage
as for the bottom people, the minimum people. The Cabinet
considered this yesterday and supported the idea that Mr Crean and
I should discuss this with the Premiers. It is quite futile for us
to have a moratorium between December last and July next for the
people at the top of the salary tree in the federal garden and to
have all the proliferation and luxuriants in the State gardens
because there are twice as many Public Servants emiployed by the
State Governments as by the Australian Government. There are three
times as many ministers, members, judges, in the State gardens
as in the federal garden. Now, if you are to have any economic
impact or even if you are to have any psychological impact it is not
achieved by just having a moratorium on the incomes for 187 members
of the Federal Parliament. You can have a very considerable
economic and psychological impact if you show a similar restraint,
if you have a moratorium for the top people in the States as
well as in the federal.
QUESTION: What is your reaction to the Senate blocking salary rises
for Parliamentarians?
PRIME MINISTER: Pleasure.
QUESTION: And the second one, what's your reaction to Mr Snedden's
announced intention that the Opposition plans to vote against the
postal rises in the Senate? / 6 
PRIME MINISTER: It would be grossly irresponsible. The Post
Office in this new financial year, if there is no increase in
its charges for postal and telegraphic services, will suffer a
deficit of $ 142 million. Last week the Opposition didn't oppose
it outright in the House of Representatives. Apparently events
of last week have gone to their heads as it did last April, they
have decided to oppose them in the Senate. Now, if they are
rejected in the Senate it will be two months before they can be
brought in in the Budget. That means that we will have subsidised
these -losses from taxes to an extent of about $ 25 million.
Now, the previous Government, when Sir Alan Hulme was Postmaster-
General, had a report from the Director-General of Posts and
Telegraphs, the same one who is there now, that there would have
to be these increases. He specified that the basic postal rate
would have to go up from 7 cents to 9 cents. He stated that, and
would later on have to go up to 10 cents and he made similar
projections for the telephone service. So, it was known before
we came into Government. Very soon after coming into Government
we asked Sir James Vernon and two other prominent businessmen,
accountants, to serve as a Royal Commission into the whole of the
operations of the Post Office. Their report came in in April,
it is quite a large one as you know, two volumes, we got it printed
and we tabled it last Tuesday and Sir James Vernon's Royal
Commission recommends these increases. Now, nobody has discounted
or reputed what he had to say on this. In fact, he has recommended
some economies which we have accepted. You remember for about
12 years under the Liberal Government there had been a charge on
users of the services to pay back the capital cost of the services.
Sir James Vernon recommended against that and we have accepted his
recommendation. It was a matter which Mr Crean had highlighted
throughout the 1960s. Now, it seems the grossest irresponsibility
from Opposition, which when it was in Government knew this would
have to be done, which has now had that knowledge reinforced by
Sir James Vernon's Royal Commission, now to say that it will reject
those charges. Now, on 7 June I said to the Premiers that we would
not heed their pleas to put up our taxes in order to pay for their
deficits on their business enterprises. The New South Wales railways
this year were expected to lose $ 170 million. The Victorian
railways were expected to lose this financial year $ 70 million and,
of course, the Post Office is expected to lose $ 142 million, that
I take it if there is no further increases in wages and salaries.
Now I said to the States they would have to make their business
enterprises pay. We were determined to make ours pay. If these
charges are rejected in the Senate the taxpayers as a whole will be
subsidising our enterprises. I suppose if that's the case we ought
to be consistent and subsidise the $ 170 million losses on the
New South Wales railways, the $ 70 million losses on the Victorian
railways. The total is about one-quarter of a billion this year,
losses on State Government enterprises. Now, it is quite inflationary
to subsidise the installation of telephones. No telephone costs
less than $ 2,000 to put on. If you are in an exchange with fewer
than 200 subscribers connected to it the cost is over $ 20,000.
Now if you were installing pieces of machinery or a whole battery of
colour television sets you wouldn't expect the Government to advance
you the capital required. This is the biggest business enterprise
in Australia and it was running down. We got top business people
to advise us and we have accepted their advice and the Opposition
composed, one would think, of people who claim to be businessmen
are rejecting the advice. That is, they are treating Vernon the
way Menzies treated Vernon. I believe the public will see how
irresponsible this is. Why should we put up taxes or keep taxes up
in order to subsidise business enterprises? 
QUESTION: Do you think it, is good business now to be purchasing
two 707s from Qantas for the VIP flight?
PRIME MINISTER: I am not sure that we are. I didn't give that
impression earlier. I don't know. I will find out if you like,
but I don't know. All'I can say is that the Airforce, for some
years, has said that they need better transport aircraft than
the BAC III. The BAC III hasn't got adequate range. The Cabinet
at the time was misled as to the range. You know that it can't
fly across Australia from east to west in one hop.
QUESTION: What assistance will you be seeking from the State
Premiers when you meet and if you don't get them, what action.
would you take to get them through other methods, other ways,
would you consider perhaps going to the people by way of
referendum? PRIME MINISTER: No, I think the Opposition would be irresponsible
again there. They would scare the people again. But after all,
the things on which we sought powers by referendum are all matters
which are in the powers of the State Parliaments as it is. Now
I have said for months, well over a year, I put it to the Premiers
at. the last inflation conference in May last year that they ought
to do something about their land prices. South Australia has
done so. The other Labor Governments tried to get it through
their Upper Houses but didn't succeed, but this is obviously
something which is within the powers of the State Governments.
They don't make any more land and it can't be carried across a
State border, they can regulate the increase in prices.
QUESTION: But that's not your exhaustive list I presume?
PRIME MINISTER: No, as I understand what they are prepared to
discuss is a concerted program among themselves of how they
would exercise these matters. I give you a specific instance of
something that they could do and they should have done and people
have suffered in the meantime because they haven't.
QUESTION: What's your view of the argument that a Cabinet of
27 ministers is too large a body to take decisive action on
economic policies. Would you favour adopting perhaps the Liberal/
Country Party Government's practice of having an inner and outer
Cabinet? PRIME MINISTER: I agree that 27 is too large a Cabinet to deal
with such matters. I believe that there ought not be more than
half that number of ministers. The United States gets by with
a Cabinet of about 8. But I am not saying that that is the universal
experience, I think Canada has a larger one than we. There is a
very great deal of loose talk goes on about how we conduct our
affairs. Our work is done at Cabinet committees and the largest
of those committees consists of 12 men and then the Cabinet considers
recommendations which each committee makes on the submissions that
the various ministers have made. Those committees are augmented by
the presence of any minister who does not belong to that committee
but who has a submission on the subject which comes before that
committee. Now this has been public knowledge, I would have thought,
for the last year and a half. The 27 do not consider things from
the outset, each committee considers such matters. There is the
Welfare Committee,' there is the Foreign Affairs and Defence
Committee, there is the Economic Committee, Legislation. 
-8-
QUESTION: How much say will the Caucus have in the framing of
the Budget and if they do have some say in it, what safeguards
will there be about leakage of information on which people could
profiteer? PRIME MINISTER: There were no leaks before the last Budget.
There was one reason why we brought in some of those extra
Customs and Excise matters last week because there would have
inevitably have been speculation if we had waited until the
17 September. We brought in legislation which will avoid it now
but by bringing it in earlier, a month earlier than it ordinarily
would have been, two months earlier than the Budget itself will come
in this time, we would have been able to avoid that speculation.
None of you brought up any whiske~ y last Tuesday.
QUESTION: Did Mr Crean's statements of last Tuesday night contain
all of the anti-inflationary matters that you would have like'to
have seen announced at that second stage of the Government's
program. PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Can you tell us what
PRIME MINISTER: No. Well, gentlemen, I hope you won't feel
that I am being perceptive or evasive if I do not answer any
fiscal questions. You would be rather amazed if I were to I am
too responsible to do that and all of you gentlemen would be too
responsible to give your readers, your viewers, any impression
that a Head of Government would be so irresponsible.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh wait a moment, there is a beauty. I was
hoping I would get a question from the Canberra Times and I was going
to put it to you. It is a matter of very great moment, it is on
behalf of Harry M. Miller well, I shouldn't have been so blatant.
Next year from 7 March to 16 March, Canberra will stage a major
festival devoted specifically to Australian creative arts and
sciences. It is intended to make this a biennial event. Next
year's festival will be called " Australia In keeping with
my Government's practical support for the arts we have made a grant
of $ 45,000 towards the cost of mounting this festival, although
it is being organised with the intention of being as close to
self-supporting as possible. The organisers hope to attract a public
happy to pay for the enjoyment of seeing and hearing some of our
exciting national achievements in the arts and sciences.
Mr Harry M. Miller has accepted an invitation by the Festival
Board to work as consultant to the festival organisation. He will
work in collaboration with the artistic director, Mr Stefan Haag,
and will be responsible for promotion and public relations areas.
Between 1967 and 1970 Mr Miller was a commercial consultant to
the Elizabethan Theatre Trust, and is well-known as producer of
his own theatre productions. He is Chairman of the Art Gallery
Society of New South Wales and a member of the Board of the
National Institute of Dramatic Art. He trained me for this elocution. 



I PRIME MINISTER July 1974
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 291
VISIT BY PRINCE HIRO
The Prime Minister. Mr Whitlam announced tonight
th; t flis Imperial Highness Prince Naruhito would visit Australia
to gain experience of life abroad and to widen his international
perspective. The Japanese Foreign Ministry announced
Prince Hiro's visit after a meeting of the Japanese Cabinet
early today. His Imperial Highness Prince Naruhito is in the
third year of Middle School. He is to leave Tokyo on 16 August
for a stay of 15 days in Australia. He will travel via Sydney
to Melbourne arriving there on 17 August. On 27 August and
28 August His Imperial Highness will visit Canberra. He will
leave Sydney to return to Tokyo on 30 August.
Mr Whitlam said that the visit by the fourteen-year
old eldest son of the Crown Prince of Japan and, after the
Crown Prince, heir to the Japanese throne would be private and
informal. He added that the visit was designed to allow
Prince Hiro to learn something of every day life in Australia.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



1) UAI A. I L
-PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 292
1 August 1974
REVISED AUSTRALIAN VISA POLICY
The Australian Government has informed the Governments
of the United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, New Zealand and Fiji
that it has decided to require all persons entering Australia
for settlement or temporary stay to obtain visas.
This will remove a long-standing discriminatory practice
from Australia's immigration policy. For over 70 years European
British subjects ( now Commonwealth citizens) and Irish citizens
have been able to enter Australia without visa formalities,
whereas non-European Commonwealth citizens from the same countries
have been required to undergo visa formalities.
This preferential treatment afforded European over
non-European Commonwealth citizens is wholly inconsistent with
the Australian Government's non-discriminatory immigration policy.
From 1 January 1975 therefore Commonwealth citizens of European
descent and Irish citizens coming to Australia for any period,
whether for a visit or settlement, will be required to obtain
visas just as non-European people and European aliens do.
As well as removing a discriminatory practice from
Australia's immigration policy, the visa requirement will provide
a distinct strengthening of Australia's control of travellers.
At present those exempted represent a significant proportion of
people entering each year and come here without any form of prior
checking as to health or character. It will also provide a manpower
planning control which has been absent in the past.
The only continuing exception to the visa requirement
will be travellers already covered by the reciprocal arrangemfents
existing between the New Zealand and Australian Governments. As
agreed between the two'Governments, there will be continuing
consultation between officers to review the operation of these
arrangements. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 3,00 P. M.
SATURDAY 3,8,74
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. EG. WHITLAM, M. P,,
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW LITHGOW CITY COUNCIL ADMINISTRATION BLOCK,
LITHGOW,
SATURDAY 3 AUGUST 1974
AUGUST 1974 WILL PROVE AN IMPORTANT
MONTH FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN LITHGOW AND
THROUGHOUT THE NATION, FOR LITHGOW, IT WILL
MEAN THE ACQUISITION OF MODERN OFFICES FROM
WHICH THE COUNCIL CAN ADMINISTER THE AFFAIRS OF
THE CITY. THIS HAS RESULTED ENTIRELY FROM
THE EFFORTS OF THE COUNCIL WHICH RAISED THE
$ 440,000 NECESSARY FOR THE COMPLETION OF WHAT
IT ENVISAGES AS THE FIRST OF THREE PARTS OF
A CIVIC CENTRE FOR LITHGOW, 
-2-
THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS MONTH FOR MUNICIPAL
AND SHIRE COUNCILS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY IS THAT IT
WILL SEE BROUGHT TO FRUITION ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
ADVANCES IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
IN THE NEXT WEEK OR SO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
RECEIVE THE FIRST REPORT OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION ON
APPLICATIONS BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES FOR
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
LATER IN THE MONTH THE CABINET WILL HAVE THIS REPORT
BY AN INDEPENDENT AND NON-POLITICAL BODY TO GUIDE IT
AS IT DRAFTS THE BUDGET, WHEN THE BUDGET ITSELF IS
BROUGHT DOWN NEXT MONTH IT WILL CONTAIN FOR THE FIRST
TIME GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DESIGNED TO OVERCOME
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT REGIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
THIS PROCESS REPRESENTS A MAJOR BREAKTHROUGH
FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT. IT RESULTS FROM LEGISLATION
INTRODUCED BY THE GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR TO EXPAND THE
FUNCTIONS OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION. THE COMMISSION
WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1933 TO PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
SPECIAL GRANTS TO BE PAID TO CLAIMANT STATES UNDER
SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION, AT VARIOUS TIMES IN
THE PAST 41 YEARS THESE STATES HAVE INCLUDED QUEENSLAND,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA.
THE BASIS OF MAKING SUCH GRANTS HAS BEEN THE RECOGNITION
THAT AT VARIOUS TIMES SOME STATES HAVE BEEN LESS ADVANTAGED
THAN OTHERS, BOTH IN TERMS OF FINANCE AND SERVICES,
THE COMMISSION HAS SERVED THE PURPOSE OF HELPING TO
REDUCE SUCH INEQUALITIES BETWEEN STATES, / 3 
3
WITH THE PASSAGE OF THE NEW GRANTS COMMISSION
ACT LAST YEAR, THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOW EMPOWERED THE
COMMISSION TO EXAMINE NOT JUST THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
THE STATES BUT ALSO THE INEQUALITIES THAT EXIST BETWEEN
REGIONS IN THE ONE STATE, THIS RECOGNISES THAT, WHILE
A PARTICULAR STATE OVERALL MAY BE IN A HEALTHY FINANCIAL
POSITION, THERE MAY BE AREAS WITHIN IT THAT LACK ADEQUATE
SERVICES AND FACILITIES, THE LOCAL COUNCILS IN SUCH
A REGION MAY LACK THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO OVERCOME
THOSE DEFICIENCIES AND EVEN THE STATE GOVERNMENT MAY
NOT BE ABLE TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE HELP, IN FACT IT IS
QUITE OBVIOUS THAT IF THE DISABILITIES OF SOME AREAS
OF AUSTRALIA ARE TO BE OVERCOME THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
MUST PROVIDE SPECIAL GRANTS, THAT WAS THE PRINCIPLE
GUIDING THE GRANTS COMMISSION WHEN. IT BEGAN HEARING
APPLICATIONS FOR SUPPORT FROM REGIONAL GROUPINGS OF
COUNCILS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA EARLY THIS YEAR,
SUCH ASSISTANCE IS LONG OVERDUE IN AUSTRALIA,
Too MUCH OF TIHE PROVISION OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES IN
THIS COUNTRY HAS BEEN LEFT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
NEITHER THE AUSTRALIAN NOR STATE GOVERNMENTS IN THE
PAST HAVE BEEN PREPARED TO HELP LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO
PROVIDE THOSE SERVICES, I. OCA I_ GOVIRNMENT HAS INDEED
BEEN NEGLECTED AND DOWNGRADED SINCE THE VERY BEGINNINGS
OF OUR FEDERATION, s, ,/ 4 
-4-
THE FRAMERS OF OUR CONSTITUTION DID NOT EVEN
BOTHER TO MENTION LOCAL GOVERNMENT AT ALLI As LATE
AS 1927, WHEN THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
COMMONWEALTH AND THE STATES WAS DRAWN UP, LOCAL
GOVERNMENT WAS STILL IGNORED, IT WAS NOT UNTIL
1936 THAT THE LOAN COUNCIL BEGAN DEALING WITH THE
BORROWINGS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. YET
IN ALL THAT TIME THE SCALE OF OPERATIONS OF LOCAL
AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES HAS GROWN MARKEDLY,
THE GROWTH HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY GREAT SINCE THE
WAR, THIS IS IMMEDIATELY OBVIOUS IF WE LOOK AT
THE FIGURES OF COMPARATIVE DEBTS, THE INDEBTEDNESS
OF THE COMMONWEALTH HAS NOT GROWN SINCE THE WAR,
BUT THE DEBTS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAVE MULTIPLIED MORE THAN 12 TIMES.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES ARE NOW BORROWING
MORE EACH YEAR THAN THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF THEIR
OUTSTANDING DEBT ONLY 20 YEARS OR SO AGO,
THE COSTS OF SERVICING THEIR BORROWINGS
BEAR HEAVILY ON THE BUDGETS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES, OVERALL INTEREST PAYMENTS BY THE
AUTHORITIES WOULD NOW BE EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 12%
OF THEIR REVENUES, INTEREST PAYMENTS PLUS CAPITAL
REPAYMENTS AMOUNTED TO $ 177,5 MILLION IN 1970/ 71,
EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 25% OF THEIR REVENUES, 
IF WE NEED FURTHER EVIDENCE OF THE FINANCIAL PLIGHT
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT WE NEED ONLY LOOK AT THE RECENT
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AREAS AND ADMINISTRATION IN NEW SOUTH
WALES, KNOWN AS THE BARNETT REPORT. THE COMMITTEE
POINTED OUT THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT'IS SHARE OF TOTAL
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES HAS BEEN SHRINKING STEADILY
IN AUSTRALIA, IN 1969/ 70 IT REPRESENTED 7.14% OF
TOTAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE IN AUSTRALIA, COMPARED
WITH 21.6% IN CANADA, 25.4% IN THE UNITED STATES
AND 34.6% IN GREAT BRITAIN ( WHERE, IT MUST BE
ADMITTED, THERE ARE NO STATE GOVERNMENTS).
YET, WHILE THE FINANCIAL PLIGHT OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT HAS WORSENED, WE LOOK TO IT INCREASINGLY
TO MEET SO MANY OF OUR COMMUNITY NEEDS. INDEED THERE
HAS BEEN A QUITE NATURAL AND PREDICTABLE ACCELERATION
IN THE DEMANDS MADE BY THE COMMUNITY' ON LOCAL
GOVERNMENT, WE LOOK TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE
ROADS, SEWERAGE, RECREATION FACILITIES), HEAL. TH SERVICES
AND PLANNING. IN MOR'E RECENT YEARS WE HAVE EXPECTED
IT TO EXPAND INTO SUCH AREAS) AS HEALTH SERVICES AND
CHILD CARE CENTRES, THE BARNETT REPORT POINTED OUT
THAT, IN THE VIEW OF MOST SHIRE COUNCILS IN NEW SOUTH
WALES, " THEIR AREAS COULD NOT SURVIVE WITHOUT A
CONTINUANCE OF LARGE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND,
WITHOUT EXCEPTION, COUNCILS B3ELIEVED THE AUSTRAL-IAN
GOVERNMENT'S INVOLVEMENT IN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WAS ESSENTIAL, I is 96 
THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENI SHARES lHAF BELIEF
ANrD HAS TRIED TO PUT IT INTO PRACTICE IN IHE LAST
MONTHS. OUR EXPANSION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF 1HL
GRANTS COMMISSION IS A MAJOR EXAMPLE OF THIS. WE
HAVE ALSO UPCRADED THE LEVEL. OF AUSTrRALIAN ( GOVLRNMENT
ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN SUCH AREAS AS
ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT, AGED PERSONS HOUSING,
SOCIAL. SERVICES, SEWERAGE AND RECREATION,
UNFORTUNATELY WE HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO ACHIEVE
ALL THAT WE WANTED, LAST YEAR I TWICE ASKED THE
STAT(" PREMIERS TO GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A VOICE AND
A VOTE ON THE LOAN COUNCIL. I FIRST MADE THE REQUEST
AT THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION IN SYDNEY IN SEPTEMBER.
I TOLD THE CONVENTION:
" I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE OVEtRRIDING
CONSIDERATION IN MANY MINDS HERE RELATES TO THE
FINANCIAL. RELATIONS BETWEEN TirE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE STATES. SOME OF YOU MAY PREFER TO BELILVE THAT
THE OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION IN MY MIND IS TO CONTINUE
AND EVEN COMPOUND THE PRESENT SITUATION BY WHICH THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT DOMINATES THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS
BETWEEN IT AND THE STATES. THAT'S NOT TRUE. MY
OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION AND CONCERN IN THIS CONTEXT IS
TO BALANCE THE FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO ENSURE
ADEQUATE SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENTS OF RESOURCES. / 7
6 
I WISH EACH LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT TO BE IN A POSITION TO
PERFORM BETTER ITS ASSIGNED FUNCTIONS, FOR THE BETTER WELFARE
OF ALL OUR CITIZENS, WHEREVER THEY LIVE,"
THE PREMIERS REJECTED MY PROPOSAL. IT WAS FOR THIS REASON
THAT THE GOVERNMENT TOOK THE QUESTION TO REFERENDUM IN MAY THIS
YEAR. WE SOUGHT THE APPROVAL OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FOR AN
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION TO ALLOW THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
TO MAKE GRANTS DIRECT TO LOCAL COUNCILS AND TO BORROW MONEY ON
THEIR BEHALF. NO GOVERNMENT HAS EVER FOUND IT EASY TO WIN A
REFERENDUM; NEVERTHELESS THIS REFERENDUM WAS CARRIED IN NEW
SOUTH WALES AND ALMOST CARRIED IN VICTORIA AND WAS SUPPORTED
BY 46,8 PER CENT OF THE ELECTORS IN ALL STATES.
THIS DEFEAT WILL MAKE IT HARDER FOR US TO PURSUE OUR
OBJECTIVES OF UPGRADING LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND IMPROVING ITS
FINANCIAL POSITION. WE WILL HAVE TO CONTINUE TO LIVE WITH
THE CUMBERSOME MACHINERY OF OLD. NEVERTHELESS OUR COMMITMENT
TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT REMAINS. WE WANT TO SEE IT TAKE ITS
PROPER PLACE IN OUR THREE-TIERED SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT,
WE WANT TO SEE THAT IT HAS THE FINANCIAL ABILITY TO MEET AS
MANY OF THE DEMANDS THAT ARE MADE UPON IT AS POSSIBLE. 



) J,, UST RA L
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 294
August 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL REPORT ON PROPOSED INCREASES
IN INTERSTATE FREIGHT RATES BY
MAYNE NICKLESS LIMITED
I have received the attached report dated 2 August
of the Prices Justification Tribunal on proposals by
Mayne Nickless Limited to increase interstate freight rates
by 18 per cent.
The Tribunal considers that an increase of only
12 per cent would be justified, operating no earlier than
August. In its submission, the company . relied principally on
increased costs arising from the Consent Award of $ 25.40
increase per week in the wages of drivers operative from
the beginning of the first pay period commencing on or
after 8 July. After close examination and reference to recent
contested awards, the Tribunal was not satisfied that increases
in wages beyond $ 16.00 per week could be regarded as a
justifiable reason for raising prices. I note, however,
that the Tribunal accepted cost increases resulting from the
wage increases awarded in the National Wage Case.
As foreshadowed by the Treasurer in his statement
in the House of Representatives on inflation on 23 July,
the Tribunal has been invited by the Government to scrutinise
with care price claims that are based on wage costs in excess
of awards. The Government is pleased that the Tribunal has
acted in accord with the spirit of the Government's invitation.
Those making " sweetheart" agreements have now been clearly
warned. I fully agree with the Tribunal that " this is a
burden which should properly be borne by those who agreed to
the increases in wages rather than by requiring the community
at large to carry the entire amount."
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



fUAj) 8 T R A L A PRESS STATEMEN T NO. 293
August 1974
PRICE NOTIFICATION BY
KELLOGG ( AUST) PTY. LTD.
I have been notified by Kellogg ( Aust.) Pty.
Ltd. that the company accepts the findings of the
Prices Justification Tribunal in its report dated
19 July 1974.
The company has provided a schedule of
prices effective from 1 August 1974 which is attached
to this statement.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. I Lk 
SCHEDULE OF PRICES EFFECTIVE AUGUST 1st 1974
PRICE PER CASE
CASE NO. CASE CONTENTS
Corn Flakes
Honey Smacks
Bran Buds
All-Bran
Frosties 36 24 32 50
200 8 oz
375 g
16 oz
Ind . packs
Ind . packs 8 8oz
-12 oz
-16 oz
Ind . packs
24 12 oz
50 Ind. packs
24 300 g
24 200 g
1S36
001424 UL32
001025 001020 5S36 5L3 6
5G24 005025 624 006025 008174 010174 011174 011264 011025 012174 013174
014174 014176 014025 015244 015025 24 200 g
24 375 g
24 375 g
36 375 g
50 Ind. packs
24 300 g
50 Ind. packs
0
PRODUCT 250 g
375 g
Ind . packs
Rice Bubbles
Bran Flakes
Sultana Bran
Corn Puffs
Coco Pops NSW Vic.
S. Old.
8.25
14.00 2.10 7.90 9.63
14.07 12.04 2.10 6.40 2.10 6.76
6.80 7.14
10.38 2.25 6.80 7.20
10. 17
2.10 N. Qld.
Tas. 8.55 9.06
14.54 2.20 8.25
10.08 14.67 12.54 2.20 6.80 2.20 7.18 7.40 7.46
10.82 2.40 7.40 7.54 7.00
10.50 2.20 14. A.
9.30 9.82
15.60 2.40
8.90
10.08 14.52 12.44 2.40 6.60 2.40 7.06 7.16 7.36
10.82 2.40 7.16
7.42
10.50 2.40 7.40 2.40 N. Terr. 9.45
10.04 15.60 2.40 8.90
10.53 15.42 13.24 2.40 7.00 7.38 7.76
8.24
12.04 2.40 7.76
7.86 7.34 2.40 7.80 2.40 S . A.
7.80
13.07 2.10 7.90 9.00
13.05 11.10 2.10 6.40 2.10 6.76 6.80 6.68 9.62 2.25 6.80 7.20
10.17 2.10 7.00
2.25
7.00 2.25 7.20 2.40
is 
2
SCHEDULE OF PRICES EFFECTIVE AUGUST 1st 1974
PRODUCT Special K
Froot Loops
Puffed Wheat
Strawberry Pops
Corn Chex
Rice Chex
Ricicles Muesli Jaffa Pops
Nutri-Grain
Variety Assorted Corn Flake Crumbs
Seasoned Corn Flake Crumbs CASE NO.
016174 016264 016424 016025 017174 017264 20L24
026172 031422 033422 3724
040092 040172 046174 4924 053024 055020 054020 070064 071062 S CASE CONTENTS
24 200 g
24 300 g
24 500 g
50 Ind. packs
24 200 g
24 300 g
24 8 oz
12 12 12
24 12 12
24 24 24
200 200 24 12 250 g
375 g
375 g
10 oz
500 g
1 kg
250 g
10 oz
200 g
Ind. packs
Ind. packs
250 g
250 g
0 NSW Vic.
S. Qld.
6.46 9.60
14.74 2.10 7.54
10.86 6.20 3.72
3.85 4.39 6.80 6.44
11.96 7.44
10.80 6.20 7.90 7.90 4.50 2.30 N. Old
Tas. 7.06
10.44 15.40 2.20 8.12
11.48 7.30 3.89 4.18 4.57 7.40 7.05 7.78
11.60 6.50 8.25 8.25 4.84 2.50 W. A.
6.82
10.12 15.40 2.40 7.90
11.48 7.30 4.05 4.18 4.57 7.60 7.05 8.10
11.30 6.50 8.90 8.90 4.84 2.45 N. Terr. 7.40
10.98 16.06 2.40 8.48
12.12 7.60 4.27 4.51 4.90 8.00 7.38 8.54
12.10 7.10 8.90 8.90 5.06 2.65 S. A.
6.06 8.96
13.70 2.10 7.32
10.54 6.20 3.72 3.85 4.39 6.80 6.44 7.44
10.80 6.20 7.90 7.90
4.50 2.30
0 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E, G. WHITLAM, M, P.,
TO THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE
BUILDING WORKERS' INDUSTRIAL UNION,
SYDNEY, MONDAY 5 AUGUST 1974
IT IS FITTING THAT THE FIRST PRIME MINISTER
TO OPEN AN ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF YOUR UNION SHOULD
BE A LABOR PRIME MINISTER. YOUR UNION AND YOUR
INDUSTRY ARE ESSENTIAL PARTNERS OF THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN BUILDING LITERALLY BUILDING
THE KIND OF SOCIETY WE SEEK FOR OURSELVES,
FOR THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN OF THIS COUNTRY,
FOR OUR FAMILIES AND OUR CHILDREN.
I DOUBT IF THERE HAS EVER BEEN A TIME WHEN
THE TRADITIONAL SOLIDARITY BETWEEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT
AND THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT WAS MORE IMPORTANT TO
BOTH OF US, MORE IN NEED OF EMPHASIS AND CONFIRMATION.
TODAY THE HOPES AND PLANS OF THE WHOLE LABOR MOVEMENT
ARE UNDER ATTACK FROM AN EMBITTERED AND UNSCRUPULOUS
OPPOSITION. WE MUST UNITE TO RESIST THAT ATTACK AND
DEFEAT IT, IF WE FAIL, ALL THE GOVERNMENT'S HOPES
AND AMBITIONS FOR THIS COUNTRY WILL FAIL, ALL OUR PLANS
FOR THE WELFARE AND SECURITY OF THE WORKER WILL FAIL. 
-2-
IT IS TIME FOR CO-OPERATION AND UNDERSTANDING,
WE ARE MINDFUL OF WHAT THE UNIONS HAVE DONE TO HELP
ELECT AND SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT, TODAY I ASK YOU
TO REFLECT ON WHAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS DONE AND CAN
DO FOR THE UNIONS, JUST AS WE ARE CONSCIOUS OF YOUR
PROBLEMS, I ASK YOU TO BE CONSCIOUS OF OURS.
IN THE LONG RUN OUR NEEDS AND INTERESTS
ARE THE SAME THE DEVELOPMENT OF A STABLE AND HEALTHY
SOCIETY, THE PRESERVATION OF A STRONG AND EXPANDING
ECONOMY, NO PEACETIME GOVERNMENT, I VENTURE TO
SUGGEST, HAS EVER FACED MORE COMPLEX AND TESTING
PROBLEMS IN ACHIEVING THIS, THE CHALLENGE IS A GLOBAL
ONE, A UNIVERSAL ONE, AT SUCH A TIME WE MUST LOOK TO
OUR TRADITIONAL ALLIES IN THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT
FOR LOYALTY AND SUPPORT. OUR ULTIMATE TASK IS TO
PRESERVE THE UNDERLYING STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY,
OUR IMMEDIATE TASK IS TO RESTRAIN ITS-PRESENT
INFLATIONARY TENDENCIES,
I DO NOT NEED TO REMIND YOU HOW DANGEROUS
AND DESTRUCTIVE INFLATION CAN BE FOR THE WORKER AND
HIS FAMILY, IT CAN DESTROY ALL YOUR EFFORTS AND OURS
TO IMPROVE LIVING STANDARDS AND PROMOTE SECURITY AND
SOCIAL JUSTICE, IT CAN ALSO, AS I SAY, DESTROY THE
GOVERNMENT, 
-3-
THAT IS WHY, FROM THE MOMENT THE GOVERNMENT
WAS ELECTED, IT HAS WORKED UNREMITTINGLY, CEASELESSLY,
TO ATTACK INFLATION AT ITS ROOTS NOT JUST THE
SYMPTOMS, BUT THE CAUSES, AND THAT IS A MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT BUSINESS TO ISOLATE AND ATTACK THE
CAUSES, THE DEEP-SEATED FORCES THAT CREATE WASTE
AND INEFFICIENCY AND HIGH COSTS IN THE ECONOMY,
I CANNOT PRETEND, LIKE MR. SNEDDEN, THAT WE HAVE FOUND
THE MAGIC SOLUTION; BUT WE HAVE TRIED, WE WILL GO ON
TRYING TILL WE WIN THE BATTLE, ALREADY WE HAVE MADE
FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURAL REFORMS IN OUR TARIFFS,
IN OUR METHODS OF ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY, IN OUR
APPROACH TO SUBSIDIES AND THE USE OF MANPOWER.
ALL THESE REFORMS ARE ESSENTIAL TO A LONG-TERM
ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICY, THE IMMEDIATE BATTLEI
HOWEVER, IS STILL FAR FROM WON, AND IN THAT BATTLE
EVERY SECTION OF THE COMMUNITY MUST PLAY A PART AND,
IF NECESSARY, ACCEPT SOME MEASURE OF SACRIFICE, 
THE TRADITIONAL CYCLE OF BOOM AND STAGNATION
IN THE ECONOMY, SO MUCH A FEATURE OF LIBERAL ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT, HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY MARKED IN YOUR OWN
INDUSTRY, IN THE PAST 13 YEARS THERE HAVE BEEN THREE
DISTINCT BOOMS AND THREE SEVERE DOWNTURNS IN THE
BUILDING TRADE. IN JUNE 1972, AT THE TIME OF THE LAST
RECESSION IN THE INDUSTRY, THERE WERE 230 UNEMPLOYED
FOR EVERY 100 REGISTERED VACANCIES IN THE SKILLED
BUILDING TRADES, THIS IS AN INTOLERABLE RECORD OF
WASTE, INSTABILITY AND HARDSHIP, OUR TASK AS A
GOVERNMENT IS TO TRY TO REDUCE THESE FLUCTUATIONS, TO
KEEP THE INDUSTRY AT FULL EMPLOYMENT LEVELS AND
MAINTAIN A RATE OF GROWTH THAT WILL ENABLE IT TO
SUPPLY US WITH THE HOUSES, OFFICES, SCHOOLS AND
HOSPITALS REQUIRED BY OUR GROWING POPULATION. I AM
CONFIDENT THAT WE CAN ACHIEVE THIS, BUT WE WILL
ACHIEVE IT ONLY WITH YOUR SUPPORT AND CO-OPERATION-
LET ME FIRST SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE PROBLEM
OF INFLATION AS IT BEARS ON YOUR OWN INDUSTRY, NO
GOVERNMENT CAN HOPE TO CONTROL INFLATION WHEN, IN A
FULLY-STRETCHED ECONOMY, BANKS AND OTHER FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS ARE SO FLUSH WITH FUNDS THAT THEY ARE
ABLE TO SUPPORT AN EXCESSIVE DEMAND FOR GOODS AND
SERVICES, THE OLD STORY TOO MUCH MONEY CHASING
TOO FEW GOODS APPLIES WITH UNIQUE FORCE TO THE
BUILDING INDUSTRY, THE PRESENT TIGHT'LIQUIDITY
AND HIGH INTEREST RATES ARE A RESULT OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S DETERMINATION TO CONTROL AND REDUCE
INFLATION, WE SHALL NOT CAPITULATE, WE SHALL NOT
WAVER FROM THIS POLICY TO ACHIEVE SOME SHORT-LIVED
POPULARITY, NOBODY LIKES A TIGHT MONETARY POLICY,
LEAST OF ALL A LABOR GOVERNMENT, BUT IT IS
NECESSARY FOR THE PRESENT TO KEEP MONEY TIGHT TO
RESTRAIN PRIVATE SECTOR SPENDING, AS I TOLD THE
PREMIERS ON 7 JUNE:
" VIE ARE FOLLOWING SUCH A MONETARY POLICY,
NOT BECAUSE WE LIKE ITS CONSEQUENCES IN
TERMS OF FINANCIAL STRINGENCY AND HIGHER
INTEREST RATES, BUT BECAUSE WE HAVE TO
IF THERE IS TO BE A CURB ON EXCESSIVE
PRIVATE SPENDING. I 
-6-
WITHIN THAT OVER-RIDING POLICY OBJECTIVE,
HOWEVER, THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THAT THE ESSENTIAL
NEEDS OF THE ECONOMY FOR FINANCE MUST BE MET. WE
WILL CERTAINLY NOT PERMIT ANY GENERAL DOWNTURN IN THE
BUILDING INDUSTRY, WE WANT TO SEE THAT MONEY AND
CREDIT ARE AVAILABLE TO FINANCE ORDERLY ECONOMIC
EXPANSION, WITH THAT IN MIND, WE HAVE, IN THE PAST
TWO MONTHS, RELEASED ADDITIONAL FUNDS TOTALLING
ALMOST $ 349 MILLION, IN ADDITION, FURTHER FUNDS
HAVE BEEN FREED TO HELP THE MAJOR TRADING BANKS
MAKE LOANS TO INDUSTRY, COMMERCE AND RURAL PRODUCERS,
FOR ALL THAT, I MUST SAY FRANKLY THAT A
GENERALLY RESTRICTIVE MONETARY POLICY WILL NEED TO
BE MAINTAINED FOR SOME TIME IF EXCESSIVE DEMAND
PRESSURES ARE TO BE CURBED AND INFLATION BROUGHT UNDER
CONTROL, IF MONETARY POLICY SOUGHT TO PREVENT A
RISE IN INTEREST RATES WHEN DEMANDS FOR CREDIT WERE
BOOMING, MONEY AND CREDIT WOULD EXPAND EXPLOSIVELY,
WITH DEVASTATING EFFECTS ON PRICES, IN THE END,
ANY SUCH POLICY WOULD PROVE FUTILE, OBVIOUSLY THERE
ARE SOME COSTS TO THE COMMUNITY INVOLVED IN OUR
PRESENT RESTRAINTS. BUT WOULD-BE HOME BUYERS, THOSE
ON FIXED INCOMES, EXPORTERS AND THE COMMUNITY
GENERALLY WOULD SUFFER MUCH MORE IF INFLATION WERE
ALLOWED TO RUN UNCHECKED, 
-7-
IT IS NOW CLEAR THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S MONETARY
POLICIES ARE BEGINNING TO STABILISE THE PRICE OF
HOUSES. AFTER INCREASING BY 20 PER CENT OR MORE DURING
THE PAST YEAR, THERE ARE NOW ALMOST DAILY REPORTS
THAT HOUSE PRICES ARE LEVELLING OUT AND, IN SOME CASES,
FALLING, OBVIOUSLY IT WOULD SERVE NO WORTHWHILE
PURPOSE TO INCREASE THE SUPPLY OF HOUSING FINANCE WHEN
THE HOUSING INDUSTRY IS OVER-STRETCHED, AS IT HAS
BEEN DURING THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS, ADDITIONAL
FINANCE DOES NOT BUILD MORE HOUSES: IT SIMPLY ADDS
TO INFLATIONARY PRESSURES, TO THE DISADVANTAGE OF ALL
POTENTIAL HOME-BUYERS, NOR DOES IT CREATE MORE JOBS
OR PROMOTE THE SECURITY OF THE BUILDING WORKER. YET
THE FACT IS THAT IN THE YEAR TO THE MARCH QUARTER
1971 THE LATEST PERIOD FOR WHICH STATISTICS ARE
AVAILABLE MORE DWELLINGS WERE APPROVED, COMMENCED
AND COMPLETED THAN EVER BEFORE. AT THE END OF
MARCH THERE WERE OVER 100,000 DWELLINGS ! INDER
CONSTRUCTION. THIS REPRESENTED AN INCREASE OF
PER CENT COMPARED W! TH A YEAR EARLIER AND
54 PER CENT COMPARED WITH 1972, 
-8-
THIS BACKLOG OF WORK REFLECTS MAINLY THE
ENORMOUS INCREASE OF 44 PER CENT IN THE NUMBER OF
HOUSING LOANS APPROVED IN 1972/ 73. IT HAS SERVED TO
MAINTAIN ACTIVITY IN THE INDUSTRY AT A VERY HIGH
LEVEL IN THE JUNE QUARTER. STATISTICAL DATA AND
INDUSTRY REPORTS SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT WHILE
LABOUR FOR FINISHING TRADES AND CERTAIN MATERIALS AND
APPLIANCES ARE STILL IN SHORT SUPPLY, PRESSURES
ON THE INDUSTRY HAVE BEGUN TO EASE,
THIS IS TO BE WELCOMED. THE BIG PROBLEM
IN THE PAST YEAR HAS BEEN ONE OF EXCESSIVE DEMAND
FOR RESOURCES. THE RESULTING STRAINS HAVE BEEN
A. LL TOO EVIDENT IN DELAYS, ESCALATING PRICES AND
A REDUCTION IN PUBLIC SECTOR WELFARE HOUSING,
OUR MEASURES HAVE BEEN DESIGNED TO MODERATE THESE
EXCESSIVE DEMAND PRESSURES IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR
AND TO PROVIDE SCOPE FOR AN EXPANSION OF PUBLIC
SECTOR HOUSING, THESE OBJECTIVES ARE NOW BEING
ACHIEVED, CONTRACTORS ARE AGAIN SHOWING AN INTEREST
IN TENDERING FOR PUBLIC HOUSING, AT THE SAME TIME WE
HAVE INCREASED OUR ALLOCATIONS TO THE STATES TO PREVENT
ANY UNDUE REDUCTION IN THE DWELLING CONSTRUCTION
INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE, ADVANCES TO THE STATES FOR
WELFARE HOUSING IN 1974-75 WILL TOTAL $ 235 MILLION
A RECORD FOR ANY GOVERNMENT, AND WE HAVE UNDERTAKEN
TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR WELFARE HOUSING IF
THE STATES CAN USE THEM PRODUCTIVELY 
-9-
I WANT TO DEAL TODAY WITH TWO SPECIFIC PROPOSALS
OF DIRECT IMPORTANCE TO YOUR MEMBERS, THE FIRST OF
THEM, WE BELIEVE, WILL SERVE A TRIPLE PURPOSE IN
RESTRAINING INFLATION, REDUCING INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES AND
PROMOTING THE WELL-BEING AND SECURITY OF WAGE AND SALARY
EARNERS, AS MY COLLEAGUE CLYDE CAMERON HAS ANNOUNCED,
THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE SUPPORTING A POLICY OF WAGE
INDEXATION AT NEXT WEEK'S CONFERENCE CALLED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION,
MR JUSTICE MOORE. OUR INTENTION IS TO RESTORE QUARTERLY
AUTOMATIC COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS TO WAGES,
I DO NOT SUGGEST FOR A MOMENT THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S
SOLE OBLIGATION TO THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT IS TO
COMPENSATE WAGE EARNERS FOR INCREASES IN THE COST OF
LIVING, OR THAT SUCH ADJUSTMENTS SHOULD BE THE LIMIT
OF THE WAGE-EARNER'S EXPECTATIONS. WE SEE INDEXATION
AS ONE OF A SERIES OF WAGE PROPOSALS, WE WOULD HOPE
THAT, IN RETURN FOR INDEXATION, UNIONS WOULD FORGO ANY
WAGE CLAIMS BASED SOLELY ON PRICE MOVEMENTS AND THAT
FURTHER WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES THOSE OF GENUINE
SUBSTANCE AND LONG-TERM VALUE WOULD BE BASED LARGELY
ON PRODUCTIVITY, OR CHANGES IN WORK VALUE OR CONDITIONS
THESE CHANGES WOULD BE MADE PRINCIPALLY THROUGHI
DETERMINATIONS OF THE COMMISSION. WE WANT TO RESTORE
THE AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSION WE WANT IT ONCE
AGAIN TO BE THE MAJOR INFLUENCE ON WAGE MOVEMENTS
IN THIS COUNTRY, 
I HAVE TO TELL YOU FRANKLY THAT REPEATED WAGE
RISES OF THE ORDER OF 15 OR 20 PER CENT OR MORE ARE
INSUPPORTABLE IN PRESENT ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES, WE ALL
KNOW, OF COURSE, WHY SUCH CLAIMS HAVE BEEN MADE AND,
IN MOST CASES, WHY THEY HAVE BEEN GRANTED. THEY HAVE
BEEN MADE, NOT MERELY TO COMPENSATE WORKERS FOR PRICE
RISES THAT HAVE ALREADY OCCURRED, BUT TO PROTECT THEM
AGAINST RISES WHICH THEY ANTICIPATE IN THE FUTURE. IT
IS OUR HOPE THAT INDEXATION WILL REMOVE THE NEED
AND THE INCENTIVE FOR SUCH CLAIMS. WHEN WORKERS KNOW
THAT THEY WILL BE AUTOMATICALLY COMPENSATED AS
THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO BE FOR INCREASES IN THE COST
OF LIVING, THEY WILL BE ABLE TO DIRECT THEIR WAGE
NEGOTIATIONS TO QUESTIONS OF REAL AND LASTING
IMPORTANCE TO THEIR WELFARE AND THEIR INDUSTRY.
SOME MODERATION IN THE SCALE OF WAGE CLAIMS WILL
HAVF SIGNIFICANT LONG-TERM ANTI-INFLATIONARY EFFECTS. 
-11-
WHAT A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OUR ATTITUDE AND
THAT OF OUR OPPONENTS, THE LAST TIME WORKERS NEEDED
THIS PROTECTION AGAINST PRICE INCREASES IN THE EARLY
1950S THE LIBERALS DEPRIVED THEM OF IT, THEY REMOVED
QUARTERLY ADJUSTMENTS WITHOUT SUBSTITUTING ANY
GUARANTEE AGAINST THE ERODING EFFECTS OF THE COST OF
LIVING, 11O WONDER THERE WAS A WAVE OF INDUSTRIAL
UNREST, WE HAVE STRONG HOPES THAT OUR PROPOSALS WILL
REDUCE THE INCIDENCE OF WORKING DAYS LOST THROUGH
STRIKES, IT IS NO ACCIDENT THAT THE FIGURES FOR
WORKING DAYS LOST THIS YEAR ARE THE HIGHEST FOR MANY
YEARS, YET 71.3 PER CENT OF THE STRIKES IN MAY
AND JUNE THIS YEAR WERE DUE TO DISPUTES OVER WAGES,
AND THE VAST MAJORITY OF THOSE WERE DUE TO WAGE DEMANDS
REVOLVING AROUND PRICE MOVEMENTS, SO,* IN OUR VIEW,
QUARTERLY ADJUSTMENTS ARE QUITE CRITICAL TO BOTH GOOD
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION,
WE HAVE CERTAINLY BEEN ENCOURAGED BY THE CO-OPERATION
AND GOODWILL SHOWN BY THE MAJOR UNIONS, 
-12-
ICOME NOW TO A SECOND PROPOSAL OF HISTORIC
IMPORTANCE TO THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT AND THE FUTURE
STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY ON 17 JULY MR. CAMERON
TABLED IN PARLIAMENT THE REPORT OF THE COCHRANE COMMITTEE
OF INQUIRY INTO LABOUR MARKET TRAINI* NG.' MR. CAMERON'
SUBMISSION TO CABINET ON RETRAINING -BASED ON THE
COCHRANE REPORT RECOMMENDED THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SYSTEM ( NEAT),
THIS PROPOSAL WAS APPROVED BY CABINET ON 8 JULY, I
PAY TRIBUTE TO YOUR UNION FOR ITS READINESS TO JOIN THE
SCHEME AND CO-OPERATE WITH THE GOVERNMENT IN MAKING IT
A SUCCESS. THE OPPORTUNITIES MADE AVAILABLE UNDER NEAT
WILL BE AVAILABLE EQUALLY TO WOMEN AND MEN. WE SEE
THE SCHEME AS PART OF A GENERAL MANPOWER POLICY TO
IMPROVE THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
OF ALL WORKERS, PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO FIND THAT THEIR
OPPORTUNITIES AND ASPIRATIONS ARE THWARTED BY AN
INADEQUATE EDUCATION.
IEMPHASISE THAT THE SCHEME IS NO MERE SHOR-r-TERM
PALLIATIVE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT. ITr WILL COVER A WIDE
RANGE OF SKILLS, AND WHILE IT WILL BE PpOMPT AND FLEXIBLE
IN RELIEVING SHORT-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT, ITS CHIEF AIM WILL
BE TO RESTRUCTURE THE WORK FORCE TO ENABLE CO-ORDINATION
BETWEEN THE SUPPLY OF ALL TYPES OF LABOUR. 
-13-
THE SCHEME WILL FULFIL THIS GOAL BY ASSISTING PEOPLE WHOSE
CAREERS HAVE BEEN EITHER CIRCUMSCRIBED OR CURTAILED BY
CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF THE LABOUR REQUIREMENTS OF
INDUSTRY, BY STRUCTURAL CHANGES WITHIN INDIVIDUAL
INDUSTRIES OR THROUGHOUT THE ECONOMY, BY CHANGES IN
DEMAND BY TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, BY GOVERNMENT POLICIES
OR CHANGES IN THE ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF CERTAIN
GEOGRAPHICAL AREAS, IT WILL HELP PEOPLE DEVELOP NEW
SKILLS RELEVANT TO THE NEEDS OF MODERN INDUSTRY,
IT WILL AIM AT IMPROVING THE LEVEL OF SKILLS WITHIN
THE WORKFORCE AND THE QUALITY OF LABOUR AVAILABLE
TO INDUSTRY, FURTHERMORE, IT WILL ENCOURAGE THE CONCEPT
OF CONTINUING TRAINING THROUGHOUT AN INDIVIDUAL'S
WORKING LIFE SO THAT HIS SKILLS WILL REMAIN RELEVANT
TO THE NEEDS OF SOCIETY,
NEAT AIMS PRIMARILY AT PROVIDING FOR THE
TRAINING NEEDS OF ADULTS, IT WILL GRANT TRAINING
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE FOLLOWING ORDER OF PRIORITIES: 
-14-
i1 ANY PERSONS RENDERED REDUNDANT
BY GOVERNMENT POLICIES,
2, PERSONS RENDERED REDUNDANT BY
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES,
3, PERSONS WHOSE EMPLOYMENT POTENTIAL
HAS BEEN AFFECTED BY HEALTHI
IMPRISONMENT OR INAPPROPRIATE
WORK SKILLS,
4, PERSONS WHOSE TRAINING WILL OFFSET
SHORTAGES OF SPECIFIC SKILLS,
PERSONS WISHING TO UPGRADE THEIR
TRAINING ON THEIR OWN INITIATIVE.
THE SCHEME WILL ENDEAVOUR TO PROVIDE A TRAINING
PROGRAM FOR EVERY APPLICANT IN LINE WITH HIS ASPIRATIONS
AND HIS ABILITY TO COMPLETE A COURSE OF TRAINING IN
NEEDED SKILLS, THE TRAINING ARRANGEMENTS WILL BE
SUFFICIENTLY FLEXIBLE TO GIVE WHATEVER PRELIMINARY
OR PREPARATORY TUITION IS NECESSARY TO ALLOW ENTRY
INTO STANDARD TRAINING PROGRAMS, THERE WILL BE
FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME TRAINING IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS, INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE, AND CORRESPONDENCE
TUITION WHERE APPROPRIATE, 
THE FULL-TIME TRAINING ALLOWANCES WILL BE EQUAL
TO THE AVERAGE ADULT MALE AWARD WAGE FOR ALL ADULT TRAINEES
AND FOR THOSE UNDER 21 WITH DEPENDENTS, WITH A SLIDING
SCALE OF ALLOWANCES FOR TRAINEES BELOW 21 DOWN TO
PER CENT OF THE RATE FOR THOSE UNDER 18, ALLOWANCES
WILL BE PROVIDED WHERE NECESSARY FOR FARES, TUITION AND
EXAMINATION FEES, BOOKS AND LIVING AWAY-FROM-HOME EXPENSES,
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE MEASURES WE HAVE BROUGHT
FORWARD TO BRING WAGE JUSTICE AND WIDER OPPORTUNITIES
TO TRADE UNION MEMBERS, THERE ARE OTHERS STILL IN
THEIR EARLY STAGES,
EVERY ONE OF OUR MEASURES WILL BENEFIT THE
WORKING MAN AND WOMAN, THE WAGE EARNER, THE UNIONIST,
WE ARE EXAMINING SCHEMES FOR NATIONAL COMPENSATION AND
REHABILITATION ON THE BASIS OF THE REPORT BY MR, JUSTICE
EA. WOODHOUSE, WE ARE COMMITTED TO A NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION
SCHEME FOR ALL EMPLOYEES, WE ARE PLEDGED TO ESTABLISH AN
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE, OUR RESTRUCTURING
OF THE TAX SCALES WILL TAKE ACCOUNT OF THE NEEDS OF
LOWER-PAID WORKERS, OUR PLANS FOR CHILD CARE YES$
CHILD CARE WILL GIVE A NEW DEAL TO THE WORKING MOTHER,
IT IS TRUE THAT THESE PLANS HAVE BEEN BRIEFLY DEFERRED
OUT OF ECONOMIC NECESSITY, THE FACT REMAINS THAT WE WILL
BE SPENDING MORE ON ESSENTIAL CHILD CARE SERVICES THAN
EVER BEFORE, IT WILL BE AN IMPROVED AND ENLARGED CHILD
CARE SCHEME, 
-1.6-
I REJECT UTTERLY THE CYNICAL OPPORTUNISM OF AN
OPPOSITION THAT ACCUSES US OF NEGLECTING MOTHERS AND
CHILDREN WHEN FOR YEARS THEIR OWN NIGGARDLY CHILD CARE
PLANS CONDEMNED THOUSANDS OF WORKING MOTHERS TO HARDSHIP.
THE DIFFERENCE IS SIMPLY THIS: THEY DID NEXT TO NOTHING
AND PROMISED NEXT TO NOTHING, WE ARE PLEDGED TO A MASSIVE
AND FUNDAMENTAL CHILD CARE PROGRAM.
I CANNOT CONCEAL FROM YOU I CANNOT EMPHASISE TOO
MUCH THAT THE SUCCESS OF ALL THESE PLANS DEPENDS ON
THE MAINTENANCE OF A STRONG, HEALTHY ECONOMY. THAT IS
WHY WE MUST CO-OPERATE IN THE BATTLE AGAINST INFLATION.
THAT IS WHY WE MUST STAND TOGETHER, WORK TOGETHER,
TO RESIST THE SABOTAGE AND OBSTRUCTION OF THE OPPOSITION.
LET ME GIVE YOU ONE EXAMPLE OF THIS PETTY AND VICIOUS
OBSTRUCTIONISM THAT CONCERNS THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT.
WE HAVE INTRODUCED A CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION BILL.
IT WILL, AMONG OTHER THINGS, FACILITATE THE MAKING OF
INDUSTRIAL AGREEMENTS. IT WAS PART OF OUR POLICY; IT
WAS APPROVED BY THE I'OPFLE; IT IS SUPPORTED BY THE UNIONS
AND THE EMPLOYERS. YET THE OPPOSITION WILL OPPOSE IT.
WHAT SORT OF DEMOCRACY IS THAT? YOU WANT IT; THE
EMPLOYERS WANT IT; THE PEOPLE WANT IT. BUT THE
OPPOSITION SAYS NO, 
-17-
You SHOULD HAVE NO ILLUSIONS ABOUT THE CHOICE
BEFORE YOU, IT IS SOMETIMES TEMPTING FOR PROFESSIONAL
UNIONLEADERS TO TAKE THE CYNICAL VIEW THAT ONE
GOVERNMENT IS AS GOOD AS ANOTHER, THE FACT IS THAT
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THE WELFARE
OF WORKING MEN AND WOMEN THAN ANY GOVERNMENT IN OUR
HISTORY, EVERY DECISION WE HAVE TAKEN, EVERY PRIORITY
WE HAVE ADOPTED, HAS BEEN DIRECTED TO THE BENEFIT OF
THOSE MOST IN NEED, TO THE CARE OF THE WEAK AND VULNERABLE
SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, AND TO THE CREATION OF WIDER
AND MORE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL OUR CITIZENS,
THE AUSTRALIAN WORKER TODAY IS BETTER OFF THAN
HE HAS EVER BEEN NOT JUST IN MATERIAL TERMS, IMPORTANT
AS THAT IS, BUT IN THE RANGE AND QUALITY OF SOCIAL
OPPORTUNITIES WE HAVE OPENED UP FOR HIM. REMEMBER
ALL WE HAVE DONE FOR EDUCATION EDUCATION AT EVERY
LEVEL; FOR SOCIAL SECURITY; FOR AUSTRALIA'S
REPUTATION IN THE WORLD, REMEMBER ALL WE HAVE DONE
FOR MIGRANTS, WHO ARE SUCH A SIGNIFICANT PROPORTION OF
YOUR MEMBERSHIP, 
-1 8c
WHERE WOULD WE BE TODAY IF THE LIBERALS HAD
STILL BEEN IN POWER SINCE 1972? WE WOULD BE REELING UNDER
THE WORST AND CRUDEST KINDS OF ANTI-INFLATIONARY ACTION:
MASSIVE UNEMPLOYMENT AN NUTILSANTO. OUR
YOUNG WORKERS WOULD STILL BE SUBJECT TO CONSCRIPTION.
OUR SCHOOLS WOULD STILL BE IMPOVERISHED AND DEVOID OF
HOPE. PRICES, UNCHECKED BY OUR TRIBUNAL, WOULD BE FAR
HIGHER THAN THEY ARE NOW, OUR DOLLAR WOULD STILL BE
UNDERVALUED. OUR INDUSTRIES AND RESOURC. ES WOULD STILL
BE VULNERABLE TO FOREIGN TAKEOVER AND CONTROL. THE WHOLE
SINISTER APPARATUS OF PENAL CLAUSES AND ANTI-UNION
PROPAGANDA WOULD BE IN FULL STRIDE, INTIMIDATING THE
WORKER AND THREATENING THE UNION4S WITH PENALTIES AND
RESTRAINTS. OUR OPPONENTS KNOW THIS, THEY BITTERLY RESENT WHAT
WE ARE DOING TO MODERNISE AND DEMOCRATISE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY,
How INCREDIBLE IT IS, HOW MONSTROUS, THAT LESS THAN THREE
MONTHS AFTER A GENERAL ELECTION THE TWO-TIME LOSERS SHOULD
STILL BE RESISTING THE UMPIRE'IS DECISION, STILL CLINGING
TO A PATHETIC BELIEF IN THEIR GOD-GIVEN RIGHT TO RULE,
IAPPEAL TO YOU TO STAND BESIDE THE GOVERNMENT YOU ELECTED.
IAPPEAL TO YOU TO CO-OPERATE WITH US IN ALL WE ARE DOING1
TO MOBILIZE THE POWER AND RESOURCES OF~ THE TRADE UNION
MOVEMENT IN RESISTING THE SABOTAGE OF THE OPPOSITION AND
EXPOSING THEIR HYPOCRISY AND DECEIT. LET ' THIS CONFERENCE,
WHICH I NOW HAVE PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN, BE THE FIRST
MOVE IN THI'S DRIVE TO CONFIRM G'JIR SOLIDARITY, TO RESTORE
OUR DETERMI'NATION AND RENEW OUR HOPES FOR THE FUTURE. 



JjjUS; ALIAy
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 296
6 August 1974
LAND TENURE
Cabinet this week supported a recommendation in the first
report of the Commission of Inquiry into Land Tenures uing that
any future capital profits arising from a change of land use
be retained by public authorities rather than by individuals.
The recommendation endorsed by Cabinet was made in the
report of the Commission under Mr. Justice Else-Mitchell tabled
in Parliament on 4 December last year.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said the Australian
Government shared the Commission ' s concern at the economic
and social consequences of the fact that capital profits
being made by individuals on changed land use were reflected
in the price of service land coming on to the market for the
first time.
Cabinet decided to urge the States to consider co-operation
with the Government's new approach on the question of changed
land use.
Mr. Whitlam said Cabinet also expressed regret that the
States so far had been unwilling to help the Commission in
its deliberations. The Australian Government considered there was no warrant
for substantial private profit-taking as a result of unearned
increases in land values occurring through community decisions.
Mr. Whitlam said that the new measures reflected initiatives
taken by the Minister for Urban and Regional Development, Mr.
Tom Uren, to reduce land speculation.
Mr. Whitlam said the Government would continue to study
the feasibility of the system of reservation of development
rights which the Commission in its first report had proposed. 
-2-
The Government would discuss the results of its study
with State Governments which would have to pass complementary
legislation if such a scheme were to be introduced.
Considering the Commission's report, Cabinet also agreed
with the recommendation that land for private urban business
use in growth areas and in Government territories should be
available only on some form of leasehold.
The Australian Government and the Governments of New
South Wales and Victoria had already agreed with this principle
in the growth area of Albury/ Wodonga.
Mr. Whitlam said the Australian Government would press
for the implementation of this principle in growth centres
and in all areas acquired under the Land Commission's program.
Cabinet decided that while statutory corporations were
an appropriate body for major urban development and redevelopment
projects, it did not accept the need for corporations to have
a continuing role in the case of existing stabilised urban areas.
CANBERRA, A, C. T. 



PPRREIM E MMNINISISTTEERR i
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 295
6 August 1974
I. A. C. REPORT ON GLOVES, MITTENS OR MITTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released the
Industries Assistance Commission Report on Gloves, Mittens
or Mitts. Mr. Whitlam said that the Government's decision on the
report will be announced at the earliest practicable date.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER 9.8.74
MESSAGE TO PRESIDENT GERALD FORD
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today sent
the following message to President Gerald Ford:
" I wish you every success as you assume
the great responsibilities of the
Presidency. You can be assured that my
Government, and Australians at large,
are confident of a continuation of the
good relations that exist between our two
countries. E. G. WHITLAM."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPFCI BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR F. G, WHIHLAP, M. P.,
TO THE ITALIAN CU0rrBER OF COMMERCE -SYDNEY, MONDAY, 12 AUGUST 1974i
THERE ARE FEW COUNtRIES WITH WHIcH AUSTRALIA HAS
HAD LONGER CONTACT THAT IT HAS HAT) WITNi ITALY,, THIS CONTACT.
PROBABLY EXTENDS AS FAR BACK AS CAPTAIN CoOK1'' S VOYAGE To AUSTRALIA
IN 1770, AB3OARUJ THE " ENDEAVOUIR" WAS ANTONIO PONTO, THOUGHT TO
HAVE BEEN A. VENETIArNi THERE WAS AN ITALIAN NAMED TU70 IN THE
FIRST FLEET, THOUGH WE ARE NOT SURE IN WHAT CAPACITY HE CAME
To AuSTRALIAI DURaNG-THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ITALIAN MIGRANTS.
ARRIVFED IN AUSTRALIA IN SMALL BUT GROWING NUMBERS, PARTICULARLY
AFTER THE IMPE7US PRQVfDED BY THE GOLD DISCOVERIES OF THE
2850' S. INDEED THE GOLD RUSH C: AUSED THE INVOLVEMENT OF ONE
ITALIAN IN ONE OF THE MIOST CRUCIAL INCIDENTS IN AnsTRALIAN
HISTORY, RAFFAELLO CARBONI WAS ONE OF THE MINERS' LEADER~ S
AT THE EUREKA STOCKADE IN 185i-
THE ITALIAN MEN AND WOMEN HHO CAME To AUSTRALIA
CONTRIBUTED GREATLYi TO OUR WAY OF LIF'E. WE OWE MUCH 10 THE
ITA. LIAN CANEGROWERS IN NORTH OUENSLAND, TO THE ITALIAN GOLD)
MIlNERS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE ITALIAN TOBACCO GROWERS IN
SOUTH-WEST OESTERN AUSTRALIA AnD V/ ICTORIA AND THE FRUIT AND
\ E(; ETABLE GROWERS IN THE IRRIG3ATION AREAS OF THE MURRAY AND
PURRUMBIDGEE RIVERS OF NEW SOUTH WAI-ES AND VICTORIA. 
2-
THE POST-WAR MIGRATION BOOM LED TO AN EVEN GREATER
INFLUX OF MIGRANTS FROM ITALY. THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY 13
NOW THE BIGGEST OF THE NONt-ENGLIqlH NATIONAL GROUPS IN AUSTRALIA.
FROM 1945 To DECEMBER 1973, 164,863 ITALIANS HAVE BECOME
AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS. THE 1971 CENSUS SHOWED THAT MORE THAN
289,000 AUSTRALIAN RESIDENTS WERE BORN IN ITALY AND IT IS
ESTIMATED THAT FROM 19' 46 TO 1972 MORE THAN 257, OOO of CHILDREN
BORN JN AUSTRALIA HAl) AT LEASI ONE PARENT WHO WAS BORN IN
o ITALY. THIS DRAMATIC INFUSION O'F ITALIANS HAS HAD A GREAT
IMPAC7 ONi AUF3TRALIAN SOCIETY. IT HAS SIGNIFICANTLY CHANGED
OUR WAY OF L114, ESPECIALLY IN OUR CITIES, SUCH PROJECTS AS
THE SNOWY MIOUNTAINS HYDRO-ELLCTR1C SCHEME WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN
rPosSIBI. IF WITHOUT ITALIAN RIGGERS AND ENGINEERS, INCLUDfNG
MIR JIM BA' 1UTTI. THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY HAS HAD A VERY REAL
INFLUENCE IN THE SMALL BUSINESS FIELD AS WELL AS [ N LARGER
ENTERPRISLS, SUCH As TRANSFIFHP CORPORATION, [ rHE BUSINES
CULTURAL AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES OF THE ONE MILLION AUSTRALIANS
OF ITALIAN BIRTIH, EXTRACTION OR DESCENT HAVE MADE THE ITALIAN
COMMUNITY KA' OST SUCCESSEFULLY I NTECRATED. NATI ONAL GROUP, ON4LY
THE 13f-TIS-K ISLES HAVE MADE A LA4GER CONTRIBUTION ' 10 THE
AUSTRALIAN NATION ANll SOC)[ 1Y, WE HAVE RECU4TLY' RECOGNISEL)
THIS WITH THE APPOINTMENT OF DR-, EVASJO) COSTANZO TO THE-AUSTRALIA
COUNCIL AND MR CLAUDE ALCORSO TO THE UINVERSITIES COMMtISSION.
ITALIANS ARE NOT SIMPLY CONCERNING THEMSELV'ES WITH MIGRANT
MATTERS, BUT 11ITH THE AFFAIRSId OF OUJR WHOLE SOCIETY. 
-3
TRADE BETWqEEN ITALY ANDr AuS7RAIA HAS ADDED
SIGNIFICANTLY TO THE CONTAC7 BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES,
ITALY WAS OUR NINTH LARGEST MARKET IN 1972/ 1973. AUSTRALIAN
EXPORTS TO ITALY AMOUNTED TO $ 133 MIlLLION ) N THAT YEAR,
THESE EXPORTS HAVE INCLUDED GREASY WOOL, SHEEP AND LAMB SKINS,
IRON OREo COAL AND PIG [ RON IN TURN AUSTRALIA HAS BENEFITTED
FROM THE IMPORT OF ITALIAN GOODS, PARTICULARLY MACHINERY,
IN THE AREA OF CONSUMER GOODs. AUSTRALIANS H4AVE BEEN ABLE
TO EXPERIEN4CL THE EXCELLENCE OF ITALIAN DESIGN, UNSURPASSED
THROUGHOUT THE WORLDI
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT REMAINS OPTIMISTIC ABOUT
FUTURE TRADE PROSPECTS WITH ITrALY. IAM AWARE, OF COURSE9,
THAT IN MAY THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED A NUMBER OF MEASURES
AIMED AT CORRECTING THE GROSS D[ SEQUIL13RlIUM 11N ' HE ITALIAN
0 ECONOMY. [ HESE MEASURES INCLUDED A PRIOR D) EPOSJTr SYSTEM FOR
IMPORTS WHICH BECAME OPERATIVE ON 7 MlAY AND PRIMARILY AFFECTED
PROCESSED OR MANUFACTURED ITEMS, FORTUNATELY FOR OUR TRADE,
M4ORE THAN TWO-THIRDS OF AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS TO ITALY ARE
EXEMPT FROM THE PRIO. R DEPOSIT SYSTEM, THIS APPLIES PARTICULARLY
TO COAL, RAW WOOL, METAL ORES AND PIG [ RON, AUSTRALIA HAS
MOVED TO ENSURE THAT THERE IS A CONTINUING AND HEALTHY TRADE
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES, Otq 3 MIAY THE M1INISTER FOR OVERSEAS
TRADE, DR CWkNS, ANNOUNCED THE FORMATION OF THE
ITALO-AuSTRALIAN ' fRADE AD~ viS. ORY COMMITTEE TO PROMOTE THE
DEVELOPMENTr OF COMMERCIAL RELATIONS BE'TWEEN AUSTRALIA AND ITALY,
lHE COMMITTEE WAS FORMED BY A GROUP OF ITALIAN AND AwmTALIAN
BUSINESSMEN ' TO PROMOTE CO-OPERATION AND STREAMLINE
BETWEEN THEC BIJSIIESS COMMUNITIES OF BOJH COUNTRIES, 1. 
THERE IS ONE AREA OF POSSIBLE TRADE WHICH I KNOW
IS OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO ITALY AN) ITALIANS, I REFER TO THE
SALE OF AUSTRALIAN URANIUM SUPPLIES, As MANY OF YOU WOULD
BE AWARE, THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT INSTRUMENTALITY, ENTE
NAZIONALE IDROCARBURI ( ENI) BEGAN NEGOT] ATIONS IN APRIL 1973
WITH PEKO MINES AND ELCCTROLYTIC ZINC FOR AN INTEREST IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE RANGER URANIUM DEPOSIT. ENI's AGREEMENT
WITH THE RANGER PARTNERS CONTEMPLATED A 10% INTEREST IN THE
0 PROPOSED VENTURE. CLEARLY SUCH AN INTEREST WOULD CREATE
DIFFICULTIES . N VIEN OF THE GOVERNMENTIS OBJECTIVE OF FULL
410 AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP IN URANIUM DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS, I
OUTLINED THE GOVERNMENT' S BROAD APPROACH TO THE SUBJECT WHEN
I SPOKE AT THE AUSTRALIA-JAPAN MIJNISTERIAL COMMITEE MEETING
IN TOKYO ON 29 OCTOBER LAST YEAR, I SAID THIS:
" THERE ARE CERTAIN ) NDUSTRIES WHERE WE REGARD
AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF PARlICULAR IMPORTANCE,
THESE RELATE ESPECIALLY TO SOURCES OF ENERGY WHERE GROWING
WORLD SHOR7AGES AND OTHER FACTORS MAKE THIS ESSENTIAL, URANIUM
IS ONE OF THESE ENERGY SOURCES AND WE HAVE AN OBJECTIVE OF
FULL AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS INVOLVING
URANIUM 1 1
." WE RECOGNISE, HOWEVER, THAT AUSTRALIA'S RESOURCES
OF CAPITAL AND TECHNOLOGY ARE RELATIVELY LIMITED, THAT THE SIZE
OF THE PROJECTS TO BE UNDERTAKEN IS OFTEN VERY GREAT AND THAT
WE SHALL NEED TO CALL UPON OVERSEAS EXPERTISE, TECHNOLOGY
AND CAPITAL TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE PROPER DEVELOPMENT OF THESE
VITAL ENERGY RESOURCES, [ THUS WHILE WE SEEK TO REQUIRE EQUITY
IN NEW PROJECTS INVOLVING THESE MINERALS TO BE IN
AUSTRALIAN HANDS WE DO LOOK FOR OVERSEAS PARTICI'ATION IN SOME
WAYS: THROUGH ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY, LOANS AND ESPECIALLY
m y o lA. d i
I 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS NOTED THAT ENI HAS
STATED THAT, IN CARRYING OUT ITS STATUTORY FUNCTION TO PROCURE
ENERGY RESOURCES FOR ITALY, IT SEEKS TO OPERATE IN A MANNER
CONSISIENT WITH THE POLICIES OF HOST NATIONS, IN TURN tHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE IMPORTANCE OF URANIUM
S TO A COUN1RY LIKE ITALY WHICH HAS BEEN SO PROFOUNDLY AFFECTED
BY THE ENERGY CRISIS, WHILL WE MUST SAFEGUARD OUR NATIONAL
INTERESTS WE ACKNOWLEDGE THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIIA AND ITALY AS
GOOD TRADING PARTINERS, IN KEEPING WITH THAT TRADITION, W/ E WILL
S. NSURE THAT ITALY WILL GET A PROPER PROPORTION OF ALL THE
URAdIUiM WE HAVE TO EXPORT. 
THE QUESTION OF THE EXPLOITATION C) F URANIUM RAISES
71H1 BROADER ISSUE OF FOREIGN ' INVESTMENT IN A\ USTRALIA,
I KNOW THERE IS A CONTINUING INTEREST AMONG MANY HERE TODAY
IN THE POSSIBILITY' OF '. JOINT. VENTURES BETWEEN ITALIAN
ENTERPRISES Aim) AuSTRALIAN COMPANIES, IT IS THEREFORE
APPROPIATE TO OUTLJ1NE THE BROAD PRINCIPLES 012CH GUIDE OUR
ATTITUDE TO FOREIGN INVESTMENT, YOU WOULD ALL BE AWARE THAT
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT NO LONGER HAS A WHOLLY UNCRITICAL
ATTITUIDC TO LNV'STMENT FROM OVERSEAS, WE HAVE ADOP-TED A MORE
SELECTIVEF APPROACH TO SUCH ) NVESTMENTrs, WE INTEND TO ENSURE
THAT FOREIGN CAPITAL INFLOWS ARF ASSOCIAIED WITH PRODUICTIVE
INVESTMENT WHICH ADDS TO / IU&amp; TRALIAN HEAL RESOURCES ANT) BRINGS'
US BENEFIT.-THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE HAVE NO WISH TO SEE
1* URTHE9YV RSEAS CAPITAL FLOW ) IqTO A\ USTRA. WIE THINK THAT
SUCH CAPITAL MU'. iT CONTINUE TO PLAY A SIGNIrICANT ROLE,
IN PARINERSHIP WITH hUSTRALIAN CAPITALI N OUR FUTURE ECONOMIC
GROWTH, FOREIGN INVES-TMENT, HOWEVER, MUST NOT CONFLICT WITH
OUR FIRM POLICY OF PROMOTING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF AU-S7RALIAN
RESOURNCES AND INDUJSTRIES, N WANT ' To ACHIE VE THE HIGHEST
POSS'IBLE LEV'EL or AUSTRALIAN OWNFRSHIP IN OUR RESOURCES ANT)
INDUSTRILS, BY' THIS WE MEAN WE WANT TO'ACHIEVEF THE HIGHEST
Au-STR ALIAN EQUITY i1HAT CAN-, B~ E ACHIEVED IN NEGOTIATIONS,
PROJFCTf BY PRO. JECT, THAT ARE. FAIR AND R: EASONABLE TO BOTH PARTIES
AND ARE WITHIN ' Il CAPACITY OF OUR OWN ISA\'( NG TO SUPPORI.
WtW-r.. ~ Ot hAA~ 17 46.4d 
FOR TOO LONG AUS5ITALIA WAS SEDUCED BY THE QUICK DEAL
AND FAILED TO RESIST THE TEMPTATION FOR EASY PROFIT AT THE
EXPENSE OF OUR LONGER TERM NATIONAL INTERESTS. UNDER OUR
PREDECESSORS 68% OF OUR FNERGY RESOURCES FELL INTO THE HANDS OF
FOREIGN COMPANIES, THis SHOU[ LD NOT HAVE HAPPENED AND, SO F-AR
AS MY GOVERWILNT IS CONCERNED, WILL NOT HAPPEN AGAIN.
14E HAVE SOUGHT TO EXTEND AND STRENGTHEN OUR FOREIGN TAKEOV/ ERS
LEGISLA-TION, THE SENATE., HOWEVER, HASS ODSTRUCTED-1 MUCH OF OUR
I-NDEAVOUR IN THIS FIELD, NEVERTHELESS I ANNOUNCED IN M~ AY THAT
THE GOVERNMENT PROPOSED THREE BASIC EXTENSfONS TO THE FOREIGN
TAKEOVERS LEGISLA
THE MO-ST SERIOUS OMISSION ) N THE PRLSENT ACT' IS THAT
IT APPLIL-s ONLY * TO THE PURCHASE OF SHARES. IT DOES NOT PREVENT
AN OVERSEAS COMPANY BUYING ALL Or PART OF THE ASSETS OF AN
AUSTRA~ IAN COMPANY AS DISTINCT FROM THE SHAREHOLDINGS. THIS
IS A MAJOR LOOPHOLE. THE EFFECT OF BUYING SHARES OR BUYING
ASSETS IS THE SAME. THE SECOND DEFICIENCY IN THE LEGISLATION
IS THAT. iT DOES NOT INCLUDE COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
FOR FOREIGN COMPANIES PROPOSING TO MAKE SUCH A TAKEOVER OF
ASSETS, WE WILL INCLUDE SUCH PROV'ISIONS, WF PROPOSE A THIRD
AMENDMENT. THE LEGISLATION DOES NOT EXTEND TO COMPANIES ALREADY
UN4DER FOREIGN CONTROL BUT IN % H) Cfl THERE IS A SIGN[ FICANT
11INOR IVl-AUISTRAIJAN I NTIRLsT. ' tHCPRE HAVE BEEiN A WUmBrER OF
OCCASIONS WHEN THE AuSTRALIAN EQUITY IN A VENTURE HAS BEEN
DIMINISHED BY A $ I( ARE ISGUE OR A SHARE SWAP, WE PROPOSE THAT,
ON CERTAIN C'. RiTF~ I\' A, ANY ATTIMI'T TO DIMINISH A SIGNIFICANT
(\ umTALI/' N N1TEREsTr. EVEN ) F IT IS A NON-CONTROLLING INTERESTi
SHOULD EE MADE EXAMINABLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROCEDURES
DJEVELOPED DY THE FOREiGNq TAKEOVERS COMMITTEE, 
CONTROL OF FOREIGN TAK( EOVERS IS ONE ASPECT OF POLICY
DESIGNED TO MAXIMISE AUSTRALIAN OWNFROHIP AND CONTROL, [ HE
GOVERNMENT IN ) TS ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS HAS ESTABL3SHED
. A BROADER SYSTEM OF SURVEJLLIANCE OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT PROPOSAL
NOT INVOLVING DIRECT ACQUISITION OF AIS" TRALIAN BUSIrNESSES,
IANNOUNCED IN MY POLICY SPEECH THAT WE WOULD rORMALISE THESE
ARRANGEMENTS. WE WOULD CSTABL3SH A BROAD gCNEENiNG PROCFSS
WH) CH WOULD COVER BOTH THE FOREIGN TAK~ EOVERS PROCEDURES, AS
* AMENDED, AND NEW DIRECT FOREIGN ) NVESTMENT ANY NEW FOREIGN
COMPANY PROPOSING TO SET UP iN AUS~ iTRALIA FOR THE FIRST TIMEP
OR ANY FOREIGN COMPANY PROPOSING TO EXTEND ITS INVESTMENT INTO
SNEW AREASt WOULD BE REQUIRED TO APPLY To THE TREASURY AND
THE DE'TA1LS OF THE PROPOSFD INVESTMENT WOULD BE REVIEWED,
THE ISCREENING PROCES( SW WILL-ENSURE THAT ANY PROPOSED
[: ORE IGN INVESTMENT WHICH ) S ALLOWED CONFORM$ WITH. AUSTRALIA'S
NATIONAL INTEREST, THE MATTERS WHICH WILL RECEIVE PARTICULAR
AT'IENTiON ARE EXPORT FRANCII{. SE"' l RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
EXPEND17TURE, LICCENSING OF TECHNOLOGY, PURCHM4,' NG POLICIES AND
TAX AVOIDANCE, OVER A PERIOD OF TIME GUIDELINES IN THESE AREAS
W1ILL BECOME MORE DEF1I4ITE AS OUR FXPERIENCE GROWS, FORLIGN
COMPANIES ALREADY OPLH\ A'rmNG iN AUSjTRALIA WILL BE EXPECTE-D TO
CONFORM WITH THESE GUIDELINES PROGRESSIVELY8 IN THIS WAY WE W! L'
EN4SURE THAT THE FOREIGN ) NVESTMENT THAT HAS ALREADY IBEE14
ALLOWED WILL CONFORM TO THE AuST-RALIAN NATIONAL INTEREST AS
WELL AS ANY NEW FOREIGN INVESTMENT THAT IS ALLOWED, 
IN KEEPING W1111 THE INTENTIONS I STATED IN flAYJ
THE GOV'ERNMENT IN JUNE ESTABLISHED A NEW 114TERDEPARIMENTAL R.'
COMMITTEE TO EXAMINE AND PROVIDE ADVICE ON FOREI%'' N INVESTMENT
PROPOSAL&amp; WHICH COME UNDER NCOTICE THROUGH THE EXCHANGE
CONTROL MiECHANISK AND DO NOT INVOLVE THE TAKEOVERS OF AUS TRALI
B U SINIs s cs THE NEW COMM1TL PARALLLLS AND COMPLEMENTS THE
EXISING COMMITTEE ON ' FORE'IGN TAKEOVERS, IT HAS ALSO BEEN
ASKED TO BRING FORWARDl, FOR-THE GOVERNMENT'tS COINSED ñ RATIONt
DJETAILED) PROPOSALS FOR THE SCREEN4ING OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT
ACTIVI1TIES WH) CH DO NOT INVOLVE EXCHANGE CONTA10L APPROVALSFOR
EXAMPLE, INVESTMENT PROP05ALS WH) CH'HOUl. I) BE FINANCED
BY FORLIGN INTERE. STS FROM FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THEM FROM
AUSTRALIAN SOURCES.
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT LOOKENG AT FOREIGN INVESTMENT
IN A PURELY NFGATI\' E WAY; IT IS NOT SIMPLY IMPOSING RESTRICTIO
As 1 SAID IN A SPEECH IN PERTH ( IN THE SECOND OF MAY: " THE
0QUESTION IS NOT VIHFTHER'VE PERMIT OVERSEAS CAPITAL TO DO LESS4
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER VIE CAN ENSURE THAT AUSTRALIAN DOES
MORE" IT IS WITH llitS IN MIND T14AT WE HAVE SOUGHT TO EXTEND
7H[ ACTIVITIES OF. THE AUSTRAI1AN ltqDUSTRY DEV'ELOPMENT CORPORATI
IT is FOR THIS REASON T14AT WE HAVE PERSEVFRED WITH ESTABLISHIN
TrHE PETROLEUM ANT) MINERALS AUTHORITfY. IT IS THROUGH THESE
AGINC[ US THAT WE CAN MOBILISE AUSTRAlIA ' S HUMAN AND CAPITAL
RESOURCES TO ENABLE US TO DEVELOP OUR OWN RESOURCES AND
I NDUSTRiLS. SUCH GREAT ITALIAN FlNTERPRISES A\ S ENT&amp; AND THE
IS11TUTO PER LA RhCOISTRUZJ) NE INDUSTRIALE ( I1U) HAVE INDICATELD
HOW CORPORATIONS CAN PLAY A VITAL ROLE IN MODERATE SIZED COUNTT~
WITH LIMITED RESOURCE CAPITAL, 
V u
HAVING OUTLINED OUR INTENTIONS IN THIS FIELD,
IREPEAT THAT THE GOVERNMENT 5THll. SEES A PLACE FOR FOREIG6N
INVESTMENT IN AUSTRA~ I-A, WE ARE APPt-YING OUR POLIC'Y IN A
PRAGMATIC WAY AND WE ARE EXAMINIIJING ALL CASES ON THEIR
INDIVIDUAL MLR1TS. WE AIM TO MAKE OUR JUDGEMENTS ' FAKING INTO
ACCOUNT THE FULL CIRCUMSTANCES OF EACH NEW PROJFCT, INCLUDfNG
SUCH FACTORS AS THE SIZE AND LOCATION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT,
' fH1 USE MADE OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY, MARKETING ARR~ ANGEMENTS,
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS, LABOUR RELATIONS AND) ABORIGINAL INTERESTS
THIS W1LL NOT DENY PRODUCTIVE INVESTMENT, IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
(\ U&amp; iTRALIANi CAPITAL, WHICIH1 ADDS TO OUR REAL RESOUR~ CES,
[ IHERE IS THEREFORE EVERY 0, P PORTUN ITY FOR FRUITFUL
ITALIAN 11NVESTMENT 1N AUSTRALIA. WHILE RECOGNISIN4G OUR NEED
TO PROTECT OUR NATIONAL INTCRESTSI ITALIAN ) NVESTORS CAN
BENEFIT FROM AUSTRALIA'S RESOURCES AND INDUSTRIAL OPPORTUNI. T! ES,
A\ USTRALIA IN TURN CAN BENEFIT FROI-ITALIAN TECHNOLOGY AND
CAP I AL. 



Press Statement No. 298
13 Aug~ ust 1974
PEMIERIS' CONFERENCE -13 AUGUST 1974
The Premiers' Conference decided today on the
establishment of working parties * to--examifte _ areas where
joint action by the Australian Government and the State
Governments might be taken in order to restrain
inflationary pressures.
The working parties will examine questions in thle
areas of: Tendering procedures for Government contracts
0 Measures to reduce the multiplicity of wage
fixing tribunals
Joint action before wage fixing -tribunals to
limit wage increases
aState legislation to support the jurisdiction
of the Prices Justification Tribunal
0 The possibility of introducing taxation
penalties on excessive wage incroases.
Government Teiidering Procedures
A working party of officials from the Australian
Department of Housing and Construction and their equivalents
in each State will report on the practicality of drawing up
firm rules on the maximum increases in costs acceptable under
Government tenders, including limits on the movements in
wages under rise and fall clauses in continuing con-tracts.
Industrial Tribunals A working party of officials from the Australian
Department of Labor and Immigration and State Departments of
Labour will draw up proposals on practical steps to reduce the
0/ 2 
-2-
multiplicity of wage fixing tribunals and the problems in
respect of the fixation of wages and working conditions
that this gives rise to.
Action to Limit Wage Increases
A working party of officials from the Australian
Department of Labor and Immigration and State-Departments
of Labour will examine, in the light of the proceedings
which have been taking place in the Moore Conference last
week, the practicability of the seven Governments making a
joint application to the Australian Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission, -to limit wage increases to an
indexed amount related to cost of living increases, with some
provision to deal with anomalies. The working party will
also examine the practicality of legislation by the Australian
Government and -the States to ensure that this principle is
observed by State wage and salary fixing tribunals.
Prices Justification Tribunal
A working party of Australian and State Government
officials will explore the practicality of legislation by the
States to extend the jurisdiction of the Prices Justification
Tribunal. A purpose of this legislation would be to allow
the Tribunal to disregard, as a justificatior4 for price
increases, increases in wage costs in excess of wage
movements resulting from indexation and the correction of
anomalies. The working party will also consider the-possibility
of legislation to regulate fees for professional and other
services.
Taxation A working party of Australian and State Government
Taxation officials will examine the practicality of measures
to impose penalties, through company and payroll taxes, on
companies which grant excessive wage increases..
The Premiers referred to the budget difficulties
all States are facing in 1974-75, and sought additional
general revenue assistance from the Australian Government.
The Prime Minister recognised that since -the June 1974
Premiers' Conference the States had taken actio'n to improve * 3 
3
their budget situations by way of an increase in the rate
of payroll tax and increases in other taxes and charges.
The Australian Government put the view that the
remaining budgetary " gaps" must be closed by the States
themselves, in ways they individually think best and that
the present financial assistance grants arrangements should
be allowed to run their course. However, the Prime Minister
undertook to look at the problems of the States within the
context of the examination next week of the Australian
Government's overall budgetary situation.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 297
13 August 1974
I. A. C. REPORT ON TRACTORS, STEAM GAS AND WATER
FITTINGS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released
two reports of the Industries Assistance Commission on
Industrial Tractors, and Steam Gas and Water Fittings.
Mr. Whitlam said that the Government's decisions
on the reports will be announced at the earliest practicable
date.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



1, AUS TRALIA(
PRIME MINISTER Press Stateent No._ A ~ I
August 1974
PRIC ES J US TIFI CAT ION TR IBUNAL
REPORT ON PRICE INCREASES PROPOSED
BY BRICK_-AM)_ PIPE INDUSTRIESLIMITED
I have received the attached report of the
Prices Justification Tribunal on certain price
increases notified by Brick and Pipe Industries
Limited. The report is available to the public and
may be inspected at the offices of the Prices
Justification Tribunal, 10 Queens Road, Melb~ ourne-or
100 William Street, Sydney.
Canberra. 



IfBAPJG0: 2,30 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON.' WHITLAM4 Mop#$
AT THE OPENING OF THE K. H. BOYKETT BUILDING OF THE CAULFIELD
ILNSTITUT-E OF TECL GY MELBOURNE, FRIDAY, 16 AUGUST 1974
FEW OCCASIONS ARE MORE CONGENIAL TO THE LEADER OF
A GOVERNMENT THAN THE OPENING OF A BUILDING WHOSE PURPOSES
REFLECT AND SYMBOLISE MANY OF THE GOVERNMENT'S CENTRAL
POLICIES AND AMBITIONS. SO IT IS WITH THIS BUILDING AND
THIS INSTITUTE. K. H. BOYKETT'S LONG AND DISTINGUISHED CAREER
AS AN EDUCATOR, AS A BUSINESSMAN, AS AN ADVOCATE, AS A MEMBER
OF THE COUNCIL OF THIS INSTITUTE FOR 16 YEARS, SAW CHANGES OF
GREAT AND LASTING SIGNIFICANCE IN THE-PATTERN OF EDUCATION IN
THIS STATE. HE WAS PRESIDENT OF YOUR COUNCIL WHEN THE
CAULFIELD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY BECAME AN AUTONOMOUS BODY
AND HE DIED WHILE STILL A SERVING MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL$
HE PARTICIPATED IN A PROCESS OF EVOLUTION AND REFORM WHICH
CULMINATED IN THE ASSUMPTION LAST YEAR BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OF FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TERTIARY
EDUCATION. THIS IS THE FIRST SIGNIFICANT EXTENSION TO A
TERTIARY INSTITUTION TO BE COMPLETED SINCE THAT CHANGE WAS MADE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, I AM PROUD TO SAY, HAS CONTRIBUTED
MORE THAN $ 2 MILLION FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THIS BUILDING IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA. I AM DELIGHTED
THAT IT SHOULD BEAR THE NAME OF SO DISTINGUISHED A SERVANT OF
EDUCATION IN THIS STATES 
IL
IT IS EASY FOR THE COMMUNITY TO FORGET THE ESSENTIAL
PART PLAYED BY COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND INSTITUTES
SUCH AS YOURS IN THE TOTAL EDUCATIONAL PROCESS. YOUR INSTITUTE,
NOW MORE THAN HALF A CENTURY OLD, HAS A PARTICULARLY LONG
AND IMPRESSIVE HISTORY. INDEED, THE LEADING COLLEGES AND
INSTITUTES IN THIS COUNTRY HAVE A LONGER HISTORY THAN ALL BUT
SIX OF THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES. YOU HAVE A KEY ROLE IN
TRAINING YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN IN TECHNICAL SKILLS AND DISCIPLINES,
IN THE APPLIED SCIENCES AND INDEED IN THE HUMANITIES, IN A
MANNER ESSENTIAL TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN ADVANCED AND
PROSPEROUS SOCIETY SUCH AS OURS.
IN ITS APPROACH TO EDUCATION, THE GOVERNMENT'S PURPOSE
HAS BEEN TO STRESS THE CONTINUITY AND INTERDEPENDENCE OF ALL ITS
ASPECTS. MANY PEOPLE HAVE THE IMPRESSION THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S
GREAT AND LASTING REFORMS IN EDUCATION HAVE BEEN CONFINED TO
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ALONE. THAT IS NOT SO. IT IS
TRUE THAT OUR FIRST PRIORITY WAS IN THESE AREAS BECAUSE THESE
WERE THE AREAS OF GREATEST NEED, OUR PLANS, HOWEVER, ARE
DIRECTED ACROSS THE WHOLE SPECTRUM OF EDUCATION. WE REGARD
ALL LEVELS AND SEGMENTS OF EDUCATION AS RELATED PARTS OF A CONTINI
AND ALL-EMBRACING PROCESS OF INSTRUCTION AND ENGLIGHTENMENT. 
-3-
THE GREAT FAILURE OF OUR PREDECESSORS IF I MAY
SAY SO WAS TO TREAT EDUCATION ON A PIECEMEAL BASIS, PATCHING
UP DEFICIENCIES HERE AND THERE. WE LOST SIGHT OF THE NEEDS
AND PURPOSES OF EDUCATION AS A WHOLE. WE PRODUCED MORE
INEQUALITIES AND ANOMALIES THAN WE REMOVED. ONLY NOW ARE WE
BEGINNING TO SEE THE NEEDS OF EDUCATION AS A WHOLE, AND TO
RECOGNISE THAT THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF INSTITUTES SUCH AS
THIS ARE EVERY BIT AS IMPORTANT TO THE TOTAL CONCEPT AS SECONDARY
SCHOOLS OR UNIVERSITIES.
THIS HAS MEANT A CONSIDERABLE CHANGE IN MANY OF OUR
ATTITUDES, AND NOT TO PUT TOO FINE A POINT ON IT, IN MANY OF
OUR PREJUDICES. IT HAS ENABLED US, FOR EXAMPLE, TO FREE THE
WHOLE DEBATE ON PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION FROM ITS FORMER
SECTARIAN PREOCCUPATIONS. I BELIEVE THE COMMUNITY NOW ACCEPTS
AS AN UNALTERABLE PROPOSITION THAT THE QUALITY AND EXTENT OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY TO OUR CHILDREN'S EDUCATION
HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THEIR RELIGION. IT HAS ENABLED US TO
APPROACH THE WHOLE QUESTION OF PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION ON THE
BASIS THAT PRE-SCHOOLING IS A RIGHT OF EVERY CHILD AND AN
ESSENTIAL PART OF THE TOTAL EDUCATIONAL PROCESS. IT HAS ENABLED
US TO INAUGURATE A NEW DEAL FOR TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION,
FREEING THIS AREA FROM ARTIFICIAL NOTIONS OF SNOBBERY AND
CLASS DISTINCTION. IT HAS ENABLED US TO TREAT INSTITUTES OF
TECHNOLOGY AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION IN A NEW AND MORE
ENLIGHTENED WAY RECOGNISING THEIR UNIQUE AND INDISPENSABLE
PLACE IN THE EDUCATIONAL CONTINUUM, AND DISPELLING FOREVER
THE IGNORANT AND DESTRUCTIVE IMPRESSION THAT THEY WERE POOR
RELATIONS OF UNIVERSITIES. 
I BELIEVE THE ESSENTIAL QUALITY OF A DYNAMIC AND
DEMOCRATIC EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM IS DIVERSITY BUT A DIVERSITY
OF EQUAL AND RELATED PARTS. EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE THE RIGHT
TO PARTICIPATE TO THE FULL IN THE TYPE OF EDUCATION THAT SUITS
HIM BEST, EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN EDUCATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT
EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE THE SAME EDUCATION OR, JUST AS IMPORTANT,
THAT EVERYONE SHOULD WANI THE SAME EDUCATION. ONE OF OUR
MISTAKES HAS BEEN TO PLACE TOO HIGH A SOCIAL PREMIUM ON CERTAIN
KINDS OF EDUCATION AT THE EXPENSE OF THE COMMUNITY'S NEEDS.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY MEANS THAT THE SAME STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE,
OF DEDICATION, OF MATERIAL ENDOWMENT, OF TEACHING SKILLS
SHOULD APPLY IN WHATEVER INSTITUTION AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSES.
OF COURSE PEOPLE SHOULD BE FREE TO CHOOSE THE KIND OF
EDUCATION THEY WANT, BUT THIS CHOICE MUST BE ONE BETWEEN
SYSTEMS AND COURSES; NOT BETWEEN STANDARDS, NOT BETWEEN A
GOOD EDUCATION AND A BAD ONE, AN EXPENSIVE EDUCATION OR A
POOR ONE, A SOCIALLY ESTEEMED EDUCATION OR ONE THAT IS SOCIALLY
DOWNGRADED. THE PURPOSE OF MY GOVERNMENT'S REFORMS HAS BEEN
TO ENTRENCH THIS GENUINE PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, NOT
IN A NARROW FINANCIAL SENSE, BUT AS A BROAD PHILOSOPHICAL
PRINCIPLE BINDING ON US AND ON ALL FUTURE GOVERNMENTS. 
YOUR INSTITUTE REFLECTS THE GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN
THAT EDUCATION SHOULD SERVE, OR AT LEAST RECOGNISE, THE
OVERALL NEEDS OF SOCIETY FOR TRAINING AND SKILLS. NOT ONLY
DO WE REGARD THE DIFFERENT LEVELS AND SEGMENTS OF EDUCATION
AS. PART OF A SINGLE PROCESSS: MORE THAN ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT*
WE ARE ANXIOUS THAT EDUCATION ITSELF SHOULD BE INTEGRAL TO A
TOTAL CONCEPT OF SOCIAL GOALS AND PRIORITIES, As YOUR FIRST
ANNUAL REPORT STATED:
" CI. T. IS DESIGNING ITS FUTURE TO MEET THE DEMANDS
OF A FAST CHANGING TECHNOLOGY, PROVIDING STUDENTS
WITH THE PERSONAL REQUIREMENTS AND THE NECESSARY
SKILLS TO MEET THE NEEDS OF EMPLOYERS, AND KEEPING
CLOSE CONTACT WITH INDUSTRY THROUGH FULL-TIME, PARTTIME
AND SHORT COURSES,"
THAT IS ONLY ONE OF YOUR FUNCTIONS, BUT IT EXEMPLIFIES THE
SENSE OF SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY WHICH MUST GOVERN THE CHOICE
OF COURSES AND PROGRAMS IN INSTITUTES OF THIS. KIND,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TODAY IS MORE DEEPLY INVOLVED
IN TERTIARY EDUCATION THAN ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, FROM THE
BEGINNING OF THIS YEAR WE HAVE ASSUMED TOTAL FUNDING
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, TUITION AND RELATED
FEES IN COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS
OF TERTIARY AND POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION HAVE BEEN ABOLISHED, 
-6-
APART FROM FUNDING, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CO-ORDINATION AND BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
OF ADVANCED EDUCATION FACILITIES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA,
To THIS END IT LOOKS FOR ADVICE TO THE COMMISSION ON ADVANCED
EDUCATION, THE COMMISSION IS NOW CONSIDERING SUBMISSIONS
FROM ALL COLLEGES FOR DEVELOPMENT AND FUNDING DURING THE
1976-78 TRIENNIUM, AS A RESULT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S ACCEPTANCE
OF THE COMMISSION'S REPORT ON TEACHER EDUCATION, FORMER STATE
TEACHERSI COLLEGES AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERSI COLLEGES ARE NOW
ALSO BEING FUNDED UNDER ADVANCED EDUCATION ARRANGEMENTS,
THE GOVERNMENT'S TOTAL FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO ADVANCED
EDUCATION IN THE 1973-75 TRIENNIUM IS MORE THAN $ 600 MILLION,
THIS IS A LARGE SUM BUT IT IS ONLY PART OF OUR
COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION AS A WHOLE. SOME INDICATION OF THE
SCALE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO EDUCATION
GENERALLY CAN BE OBTAINED FROM THE COMPARATIVE ANNUAL FIGURES
FOR EXPENDITURE. IN 1972-73 THE TOTAL* AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
OUTLAY ON EDUCATION AT ALL LEVELS WAS $ 439 MILLION. IN 1973-74
( THE FIRST FULL FINANCIAL YEAR OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT) WE
SPENT NEARLY TWICE THAT AMOUNT OVER $ 800 MILLION DESPITE
THE FACT THAT OUR MAJOR NEW PROGRAMS OF FINANCE FOR EDUCATION
WERE NOT OPERATING FOR MORE THAN THE FINAL SIX MONTHS OF THAT
YEAR, NOT UNTIL NEXT YEAR 1974-75 WILL WE SEE ANYTHING
LIKE THE FULL IMPACT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS, ( EVEN SO
IT WILL NOT REFLECT THE FULL IMPACT OF NEW PROGRAMS IN THE
PRE-SCHOOLS AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION AREAS), WHILE THE PRECISE
FIGURE OF EXPENDITURE FOR 1974/ 75 IS NOT AS YET KNOWN, IT IS
CLEAR THAT IT WILL BE MORE THAN THREE TIMES THE TOTAL LEVEL OF
EXPENDITURE IN 1972-73, 
THE MAJOR ELEMENTS IN THESE MASSIVE INCREASES IN
OUR COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION HAVE OF COURSE BEEN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE KARMEL REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
SCHOOLS AND OUR ASSUMPTION OF FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCING
TERTIARY EDUCATION. THE EXPENDITURE FIGURES, HOWEVER IMPRESSIVE
AS THEY ARE DO NOT SHOW THE FULL PICTURE. WE ARE CONCERNED
NOT JUST WITH QUANTITY BUT WITH QUALITY. So OUR NEW PROGRAMS
HAVE REFLECTED CONCERN FOR THE NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL
PARTICULARLY THE HANDICAPPED AND OTHER DISADVANTAGED STUDENTS,
AND WITH-THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF INNOVATION.
THIS EMPHASIS ON INNOVATION WILL BE PARTICULARLY MARKED
IN THE AREA OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, THE REPORT OF
THE AUSTRALIAN COMMITTEE ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION
THE KANGAN REPORT WAS TABLED BY THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION IN
APRIL. IT RECOMMENDED CAPITAL AND RECURRENT GRANTS TO THIS AREA
OF MORE THAN $ 104 MILLION, THE GOVERNMENT PROMPTLY ACCEPTED THE
VALIDITY OF ITS BROAD PROPOSALS, AND BUT FOR THE DOUBLE
DISSOLUTION, THESE PROGRAMS WOULD NOW BE WELL UNDER WAY, 
-8-
I HAVE STRESSED THE IMPORTANCE WHICH MY GOVERNMENT
PLACES ON LINKING TOGETHER OUR VARIOUS INITIATIVES IN A
CO-ORDINATED AND INTEGRATED FASHION. WHAT THE KANGAN REPORT
SAYS ABOUT THE CONCEPT OF RECURRENT EDUCATION AND OPENING UP
THE ACCESS GENERALLY OF ADULTS TO EDUCATION IS REFLECTED
ALSO IN THE PROPOSALS RECENTLY PUT FORWARD INTHE DRAFT
REPORT ON OPEN TERTIARY EDUCATION, WHICH HAS BEEN PRODUCED
BY A COMMITTEE OF THE UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION.
SIMILARLY, THERE IS A CLOSE LINK BETWEEN THE KANGAN'REPORT
ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION AND THE COCHRANE REPORT
ON LABOR MARKET TRAINING WHICH WE RECEIVED LAST MONTH, THE
COCHRANE REPORT OUTLINES PROPOSALS FOR A NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT
AND TRAINING SCHEME WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED IN
PRINCIPLE TO ADOPT, IT CAN BE EXPECTED TO HAVE AN IMPACT
UPON THE FACILITIES REQUIRED IN TECHNICAL COLLEGES THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY, AND THE KANGAN REPORT IS OF OBVIOUS IMPORTANCE
IN RECOMMENDING ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THOSE COLLEGES,
THE TWO GO TOGETHER, ONCE AGAIN WE SEE THE IMPORTANCE OF A
CO-ORDINATED AND PLANNED APPROACH TO EDUCATION AS A WHOLE, 
-9-
WE SEE. OUR NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SCHEME
AS A MAJOR COMPONENT OF A MANPOWER POLICY AIMED AT IMPROVING
THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES OF ALL
MEMBERS OF THE WORKFORCE. IT WILL BE NO MERE SHORT-TERM
PALEIATIVE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT. IT WILL BE COMPREHENSIVE AND
FLEXIBLE; IT WILL COVER A WIDE RANGE OF SKILLS; IT WILL
RESPOND TO CHANGES IN TECHNOLOGY AND THE NEEDS OF MODERN
INDUSTRY. CLEARLY ITS SUCCESS WILL DEPEND ON CO-OPERATION
WITH IMPORTANT COLLEGES AND INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY SUCH AS
YOURS, LET ME QUOTE SOME REMARKS MY COLLEAGUE MR. BEAZLEY
MADE LAST YEAR TO THE FIRST MEETING OF THE KANGAN COMMITTEE,
THEY INDICATE OUR BROAD APPROACH TO EDUCATION AND ARE RELEVANT
TO THE WIDER PURPOSES OF THIS INSTITUTE MR. BEAZLEY SAID:
" WE ARE NOW IMPLEMENTING A POLICY INVOLVING EXPERT
COMMISSIONS CHARGED WITH THE TASK OF EXAMINING THE
NEEDS OF ALL AUSTRALIAN STUDENTS, THE PRE-SCHOOLS
COMMITTEE IS INVESTIGATING THE DEMAND FOR KINDERGARTENS,
THEIR PLACEMENT AND REQUIREMENTS, WITH THE AIM OF
PROVIDING FACILITIES OF CANBERRA STANDARD TO ALL
AUSTRALIAN PRE-SCHOOLS WITHIN SIX YEARS; THE INTERIM
SCHOOLS COMMITTEE IS WORKING TO DESTROY THE INEQUALITIES
WHICH HAVE PLAGUED AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION FOR TOO LONG
BY ENSURING THAT FEDERAL MONEY GOES FIRST TO THE AREAS
WHERE IT IS NEEDED MOST,,, 
" I HOPE THAT YOU WILL DEVELOP FOR AUSTRALIA NOT MERELY
A STRATEGY OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, REACTING
TO THE STATES' NEEDS, YOUR GREATEST SERVICE MAY WELL
BE PREVENTING WASTE OF SKILL, WASTE OF MANPOWER, WASTE
OF EFFORT AND FRUSTRATION, BY DEVELOPING A PHILOSOPHY
OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, THIS WILL EMBRACE'
PROPER RESPECT FOR CRAFTSMANSHIP, A HAPPY USE OF LEISURE,
AND EFFECTIVE LIVING FOR MANY PEOPLE,"
IT GIVES ME THE GREATEST SATISFACTION THAT VICTORIA'S
INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGYI LONG REGARDED AS THE POOR RELATIONS
OF THE TERTIARY SECTOR, ARE NOW EMBARKED ON A COURSE OF-STEADY
GROWTH AND EHANCED PRESTIGE, I BELIEVE YOUR PROPER AND
RIGHTFUL PLACE IN THE HIERARCHY OF THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM HAS
AT LAST BEEN RECOGNISED BY ALL BY GOVERNMENTS AND BY THE
COMMUNITY. A BRIGHT FUTURE LIES BEFORE YOU. 
-11-
THIS IS A TIME, AS YOU KNOW, WHEN HEAVY AND
COMPETING CLAIMS ARE MADE ON THE GOVERNMENT'S RESOURCES,
FOR MANY OF US FOR ALL OF US IT IS A TIME OF NECESSARY
FINANCIAL STRINGENCY, I GIVE YOUMY ASSURANCE, HOWEVER,
THAT THE PRIORITY WE ACCORD TO EDUCATION WILL REMAIN AS
HIGH AS BEFORE, FROM THE BEGINNING WE HAVE RECOGNISED
EDUCATION AS A PARAMOUNT RESPONSIBILITY OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT AND WE WILL CONTINUE TO DO SO, THERE WILL BE
NO RETREAT FROM THAT GOAL, THERE WILL BE NO SLACKENING
IN OUR EFFORTS TO REBUILD OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM AND GIVE
THE BEST AND THE BRIGHTEST EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY TO EVERY
AUSTRALIAN CHILD AND TO EVERY AUSTRALIAN STUDENT WHATEVER
HIS MEANS, WHEREVER HE LIVES OR WHATEVER HIS GOAL IN LIFE, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, MR, E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE HENTY ELECTORATE OFFICE OF MRS, JOAN
CHILD, OAKLEIGH, MELBOURNE, VIC.
FRIDAY, 16 AUGUST 1974
1. THE PEOPLE OF HENTY MADE HISTORY THIS YEAR BY ELECTING
MRS, JOAN CHILD AS THE FIRST WOMEN TO REPRESENT THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME HENTY HAD ELECTED A WOMEN TO THE
PARLIAMENT. THE 1968 RE-DISTRIBUTION CHANGED THE ELECTORATE
IN A WAY WHICH STRENGTHENED THE LIBERAL PARTY'S PROSPECTS
OF HOLDING THE SEAT, BUT AT HER SECOND ATTEMPT, MRS. CHILD
WON IT. IT IS SOMETHING OF A LABOR OASIS IN A LIBERAL DESERT.
AS IT IS SURROUNDED BY FIVE LIBERAL SEATS HOTHAM, BRUCE,
CHISiHOLM, BALACLAVA AND HIGGINS.
2. MRS, CHILD DELIVERED HER MAIDEN SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ON 16 JULY, SHE DEVOTED MOST OF HER SPEECH
TO ARGUING THE NEED FOR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO DO MORE
FOR HANDICAPPED PEOPLE. THIS IS AN AREA IN WHICH THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MUCH. IN THE LAST 20 MONTHS.
WE ARE DETERMINED TO ENSURE ADEQUATE HELP FOR THE HANDICAPPED,
BOTH YOUNG AND OLD. IN LAST '' EAR'S BUDGET THE HANDICAPPED
CHILDRENS BENEFIT WAS DOUBLED FROM $ 1.50 A DAY TO $ 3,00 A DAY,
THIS BENEFIT, WHICH IS PAID UNDER THE NATIONAL HEALTH ACT,
WAS INTRODUCED IN 1969. IT HAS TWO PURPOSES: 
-2-
TO ASSIST PARENTS OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN AND TO HELP
ORGANISATIONS MEET THE RUNNING COSTS OF HOMES. THE BUDGET
CONTAINED FOUR SPECIFIC BENEFITS FOR THE REHABILITATION OF
HANDICAPPED PEOPLE. IT REMOVED THE THREE-YEAR LIMIT FOR
ASSISTANCE THROUGH THE WELFARE REHABILITATION SERVICE.
PREVIOUSLY PEOPLE WERE ACCEPTED FOR REHABILITATION ONLY
IF THEY WERE CONSIDERED TO HAVE REASONABLE PROSPECTS OF BEING
ENGAGED IN A SUITABLE VOCATION WITHIN THREE YEARS. THE
TRAINING ALLOWANCE FOR PEOPLE UNDERGOING FULL-TIME VOCATIONAL
TRAINING THROUGH THE WELFARE REHABILITATION SERVICE WAS
INCREASED FROM $ 4,00 A WEEK TO $ 8.00 A WEEK, THE LIVINGAWAY-
FROM-HOME ALLOWANCE WAS DOUBLED AND SET AT $ 10.00 A WEEK
FOR UNMARRIED TRAINEES UNDERGOING FULL-TIME TRAINING THROUGH
THE REHABILITATION TRAINING SCHEME AND AT $ 16.00 A WEEK FOR
MARRIED TRAINEES. THESE ALLOWANCES ARE DESIGNED TO ASSIST
HANDICAPPED PEOPLE WHO MUST LIVE AWAY FROM THEIR USUAL PLACE
OF RESIDENCE IN ORDER TO UNDERGO VOCATIONAL TRAINING. IN
ADDITION THE BUDGET PROVIDED A $ 2 FOR $ 1 GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY
ON MONEY BORROWED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES FOR PROJECTS
UNDER THE SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT ( ASSISTANCE) ACT AND THE
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN ( ASSISTANCE) ACT. THIS MEASURE IS
AIMED AT ENCOURAGING LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES TO SPONSOR
SHELTERED WORKSHOPS, TRAINING CENTRES AND HOSTELS FOR HANDICAPPED.
ADULTS AND CHILDREN. PREVIOUSLY, LEGISLATION HAD PREVENTED
THESE FUNDS FROM ATTRACTING A SUBSIDY. 
7. M, 151 ApsWA AD A 1 uRA
70 A330029~ UAMMOA39 BJVAH OT G3015 DA9 09:
L3T1AMY 39P5HT MI HTTW H1OITA) O\' ,&amp; ATM " 0H1 ' Dtj
74TA) 07 MIT-JJUR ONI W. 3. J U9I039 20o1 RKvv.
2AW ST/ E V0I TAT1ISAH39I 3WAW 3MT VVIOS @ iW
AWIvv MnT J) 33W~~ A 00~. 8~ 1O T 3iW A 00.9 MW ~ MA W
AI33W A GOO4C' TA 133 W~ A GaJusuc aA M~ vAMA; K
H~' O9HT TUIMIAS1 3MIT-IU9 WA/ iMCUtU 233W! Ak* cAq
P0 A33WA 03af TA Wll BHN M'APIAT IAOPAT&gt; lWAv
T23I8A OT1 MAIN~ MIA 230H'AWOJJA 3UHT sumn
3309J jARJJ MAI~ T M02V1 YAWA 3VJJ N3UM OH1W 30039~ Glq';,
Al &amp; WWlvIAST JAVWQJTA00V 00HOWii~ C) T P7VCHt 01 PVW] Qj :. V
T/ it, VI. v . A v; vA j't/ tmAW n3m
A3Y RA 7A( WAYWA . IT j 
-3-
3. DRAMATIC ADVANCES HAVE ALSO BEEN MADE BY OTHER AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS CONCERNED WITH HANDICAPPED PEOPLE,
SUCH AS THE DEPARTMENTS OF EDUCATION AND HEALTH, FOLLOWING
THE REPORT OF THE INTERIM COMMITTEE FOR THE AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS
COMMISSION, THE GOVERNMENT IS MOUNTING A MAJOR ATTACK ON THE
PRESENT DEFICIENCIES IN THE EDUCATION OF MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, IN 1974 AND 1975 THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL PROVIDE THE STATES WITH A GRANT OF $ 435 MILLION FOR SPECIAL
AND REMEDIAL EDUCATION. THIS WILL ENABLE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
A PROGRAM CONSISTING OF CONSTRUCTION OF NEW SCHOOLS AND THE
REPLACEMENT AND UPGRADING OF EXISTING SUB-STANDARD ONES, THE
PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL MATERIALS, AN INCREASE IN SUPPORT AND
SPECIALIST STAFF AND A REDUCTION IN CLASS SIZES, IN THE SAME
PERIOD WE WILL PROVIDE A TOTAL OF $ 3,63 MILLION FOR THE TRAINING
OF TEACHERS OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, THEFUNDS WE ARE PROVIDING
WILL REPRESENT THE FIRST SUBSTANTIAL RECOGNITION BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OF THE NEED OF STATE EDUCATION AUTHORITIES
FOR SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE EDUCATION OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN,
PROVISION HAS ALSO BEEN MADE FOR HANDICAPPED PEOPLE IN OUR
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM, WHICH HAS BEEN INITIATED BY THE
AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR HEALTH, DR. EVERINGHAM, AND THE NEWLY
ESTABLISHED HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION, 
4, THE GOVERNMENT'S OVERALL AIM IS TO REPLACE THE PREVIOUS
AD HOC APPROACH TO WELFARE WITH A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH WHICH
TAKES INTO ACCOUNT THE NEEDS OF PHYSICALLY, MENTALLY AND
FINANCIALLY DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE ACROSS THE NATION, WE WANT
TO SEE THE NATION'S WELFARE RESOURCES CO-ORDINATED FOR THE
FIRST TIME, THE MAJOR EFFORT DIRECTED TO THIS END IS IN THE
HANDS OF THE SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION, IT WAS ESTABLISHED
BY THE GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON COMMUNITY
NEEDS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF WELFARE PROGRAMS, TO DETERMINE
PRIORITIES AND EVALUATE PROGRAMS, TO ESTIMATE COSTS AND TO
ENCOURAGE THE CO-ORDINATTON AND INTEGRATION OF ALL WELFARE
SERVICES, THE COMMISSION HAS THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR INITIATING
THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN AS THE VEHICLE FOR CO-ORDINATING
AND INTEGRATING ALL WELFARE RESOURCES IN'A WAY THAT WILL BEST
MEET THE NEEDS OF AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITIES, THE ASSISTANCE PLAN
HAS AS ITS MAIN PURPOSE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTONOMOUS COMMUNITYBASED
SOCIAL PLANNING UNITS, THEIR JOB IS TO INCREASE LOCAL
INVOLVEMENT IN SOCIAL WELFARE ACTIVITY, ALTHOUGH THE PLAN HAS
BEEN IN OPERATION FOR ONLY A FEW MONTHS, THE FIRST OF THESE
PLANNING UNITS KNOWN AS REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
ARE TAKING SHAPE,
I 
IN HER MAIDEN SPEECH JOAN CHILD SAID:
" A NATION'S WEALTH IS MEASURED BY THE CARE AND COMPASSION
IT IS PREPARED TO EXTEND TO THE OLD AND LONELY, THE DEPENDENT,
THE DISABLED AND THE YOUNG WHO ARE IN THE SCHOOLS."
THAT VERY PRINCIPLE HAS GUIDED MUCH OF OUR ENDEAVOURS IN THE
LAST 20 MONTHS. I HAVE ALREADY OUTLINED WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR
THE DISABLED AND FOR OTHERS IN NEED OF WELFARE SERVICES.
IN THE CASE OF THE OLD, WE HAVE RECENTLY ANNOUNCED THE BIGGEST
PENSION INCREASE EVER GIVEN TO PENSIONERS. WE HAVE
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE FOR A WIDE RANGE
OF SERVICES FOR THE AGFn. ' ICH AS AGFn PERSONS HOUSING A
DOMICILIARY CARE AND SENIOR CITIZENS CENTRES. FOR THE YOUNG
WE HAVE. INTRODUCED A NEW CHARTER FOR THEIR EDUCATION. WE HAVE
ALMOST DOUBLED COMMONWEALTH EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION; WE HAVE
ESTABLISHED A PERMANENT SCHOOLS COMMISSION TO GIVE AID TO ALL
SCHOOLS, WITHOUT DISTINCTION, ON A ' NEEDS' BASIS; WE HAVE
ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOk IERTIARY EDUCATION,
AND HAVE ABOLISHED FEES; FOR THE FIRST TIME WE ARE GIVING
ASSISTANCE TO TEACHERS' COLLEGES AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERS'
COLLEGES ON THE SAME BASIS AS UNIVERSITIES AND COLLFGES OF
ADVANCED EDUCATION; WE ARE GIVING MUCH MOF GiF'ROUS AI. OWANCES
TO STUDENTS AND HAVE MORE THAN TREBLED THE NUM1BER OF TEA-HINC,
SCHOLARSHIPS. 
-6-
6. THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THAT MORE NEEDS TO BE DONE TO
HELP THE DISADVANTAGED, THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, IN HIS SPEECH
AT THE OPENING OF THE PARLIAMENT ON 9 JULY, SAID THE
GOVERNMENT WOULD PROVIDE " FOR INCREASED ASSISTANCE FOR THE
HANDICAPPED AND DISABLED, FURTHER ASSISTANCE FOR ORGANISATIONS
CONDUCTING AGED PERSONS' HOMES AND NURSING HOMES AND HELP FOR
THE HOMELESS,"
O 



( H~
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 300
19 August 1974
PRICE NOTIFICATION BY BUTTER AND CHEESE PRODUCERS
I have been notified by the following companies
of their acceptance of the findings of the Prices Justification
Tribunal in its report dated 23 July 1974.
* Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co. Limited
* Watsons Foods Holdings Pty. Ltd.
Cleland and Sons Pty. Ltd.
Cleland and Sons ( Clayton) Pty. Ltd.
Industries Ltd.
* Southern Farmers Co-operative Limited
* Girgarre Cheese Co. Pty. Ltd.
Particulars of prices now being charged by the above
companies are arailable at the offices of the Prices Justification
Tribunal, 10 Queens Road, Melbourne or 100 William Street, Sydney.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. I 



1,, USTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 301
August 1974
PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT FOR AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS AND
PUBLI SHERS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced the
appointment of the Australian Authors' Fund Committee which will
implement the Public Lending Right for Australian authors and
publishers. Mr. Whitlam said that the appointment of the Committee
followed the acceptance by the Government in principle of the
report of the Committee of Inquiry into Public Lending Rights
established by the Literature Board of the Australian Council for
the Arts. The Public Lending Right was a long overdue recognition
of the service rendered to the community by authors and publishers.
The Scandinavian countries had pioneered the public lending right
and Australia and New Zealand were the first two English-speaking
countries to implement it.
Mr. Whitlam said the Public Lending Right was an
important part of the Government's program of assistance to the
arts. It would provide a valuable income supplement for writers,
many of whose incomes were subject to extreme fluctuations, and
an encouragement to publishers.
The Chairman of the A. A. F. Committee will be Richard Hall,
a member of the Literature Board, who had served on the Committee
of Inquiry. Mr. Hall is an adviser to the Minister for Manufacturing
Industry, Mr. Enderby. The position is part-time. / 2 
-2-
Other members of the Committee are:-
Mr. David Martin
Mr. Colin Simpson
Mr. Frank Thompson
Mr. Barrett Reid Novelist, of Beechworth, Victoria.
Nominee of the Literature Board.
Author, of Gordon, New South Wales.
Representing the interests of
writers.
Manager of Queensland University
Press, Brisbane, Qld.
Representing the interests of
publishers.
State Library of Victoria, of St.
Andrews, Victoria.
Representing the interests of
librarians.
Representatives from the Attorney-General's Department and
Treasury will be appointed to the Committee.
Funds have been appropriated to provide for retrospective
payments from 1 April this year. For the first 15 months
of the scheme payments would be made on the basis of a pilot
sample of municipal and subscription libraries throughout
Australia. Mr. Whitlam said he wished to pay particular tribute to the
work of Professor Geoffrey Blainey who had chaired the
Committee of Inquiry.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT No. 303
August 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL F. T. INDUSTRIES LIMITED
F. T. Industries Limited have notified me in the
following terms of their acceptance of the recent findings
of the Prices Justification Tribunal:
" Pursuant to Section 18 of the Prices
Justification Act 1973 and in accordance with the
opinions contained in the Report of the Prices
Justification Tribunal dated 31 July 1974, we
wish to advise that we propose to increase the
weighted average selling price of the goods subject
to the Report by 10.92 per cent operative from 14
August 1974."
When received, particulars of prices will be
available for inspection at the offices of the Prices
Justification Tribunal, 10 Queens Road, Melbourne, or 100
William Street, Sydney.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



AUSTRALIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 302
August 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL REPORT ON PRICE INCREASES
PROPOSED BY ALCOA OF AUSTRALIA
LIMITED
I have received the attached report of the Prices
Justification Tribunal on certain price increases proposed
by Alcoa of Australia Limited.
The report is available to the public and may be
inspected at the offices of the Prices Justification Tribunal,
Queens Road, Melbourne or 100 William Street, Sydney.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



-~ AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 304
21 August 1974
Prices Justification Tribunal
Myne iciless Limited
Mayne Nickless Limited have notified their
acceptance of the recent findings of the Prices
Justification Tribunal in the following terms:
" With respect to the report by The Prices
Justification Tribunal on the proposed
increase of 18% in Interstate Freight Rates
in the Matter No. N74/ 2532, it is advised
that this Company proposes to increase the
rate schedules referred to in the Company's
notification to the Tribunal dated
13 June, 19.74 by 12% on or after 15 August, 1974."
When received, the revised rates schedules
will be available for inspection at the offices of the
Prices Justification Tribunal 10 Queens Road, Melbourne
or 100 William Street, Sydney.
Canberra A. C. T. 



Jp_ AUSTRAIIjA
PRIME MOME PRESS STATEMENT NO. 305
21 August 1974
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE INTELLIG~ ENCE AND SECUR~ ITY SERVICES
OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
that His Excellency the Governor-General had, on the advice
of the Executive Council, appointed Mr. Justice Hope of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales as a Royal Commissioner to
inquire into Australia's intelligence and security services.
A copy of the terms of reference for the inquiry
is attached. The Prime Minister recalled that in his policy speech
on 29 April he had given an undertaking that the Government would,
if returned, appoint a judicial inquiry into the structure of the
Australian security services and into methods of reviewing
decisions adversely affecting citizens or migrants.
The Commission to Mr. Justice Hope will fulfil both
parts of the election promise.
The inquiry will cover the whole range of Australia's
intelligence and security services and so will provide the first
comprehensive review that has been undertaken of these services
since the inception of the varicus organisations during the
1940s. The Commissioner will be asked to review the history
of the services and, having regard to the security of Australia
as a nation, the rights and responsibilities of individual persons
and future as well as present needs, to make recommendations on
the services the people and Government of Australia should have
available to them.
Paragraph 3 of the terms of reference will ensure that
the inquiry covers fully the important aspects of the civil rights
of individuals as they can be affected by administrative decisions
based on or influenced by security reports. The Commissioner is
asked to suggest ways in which administrative decisions of this
kind can be reviewed. His inquiries will extend to the protection
which should * be afforded not only to citizens but also t9 migrants
and visitors. 
The inquiry will also cover the important matter of
ensuring that there is full responsibility at Ministerial and
official level for the intelligence and security organisations
and actions undertaken by them.
The Prime Minister said he expected that, because of
its nature, a large part of the proceedings of the Commission
would have to be conducted in closed session. He recalled that
the Royal Commission into the Canadian security services had been
directed to hold all its proceedings incamera. The Commissioner
would advise the Government as to which parts, if any, of the
report might be made public.
The appointment of a Judge with qualifications as
eminent as those of Mr. Justice Hope guaranteed that the inquiry
would be well conducted, comprehensive and responsible and at
the same time would reassure those countries and organisations
with which Australia has connections in the security field.
Mr. Justice Hope was appointed to the Supreme Court
of New South Wales in 1969. He became a member of the Court
of Appeal in 1972. He was President of the Australian Council
for Civil Liberties between 1967 and 1969.
Mr. Whitlam said he wished to express his own thanks,
and those of the Government, to the Premier, Chief Justice
and Attorney-General of New South Wales for their courtesy; and
co-operation in agreeing that Mr. Justice Hope should be available
to undertake this important inquiry.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
INQUIRY INTO INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY
SERVICES OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
Terms of Reference
make the following inquiries, reports and recommendations,
including inquiries and reports on all matters relevant to the
making of those recommendations:-
1. To inquire into and report upon the history of the
intelligence and security services of the Australian
Government, with particular reference to
purpose, functions, administration and staffing
( including recruiting) of each organization;
the general co-ordination, control and direction
of the services taken as a whole;
the use made by the Australian Government and
its agencies of the information provided by the
organizations.
2. In the light of past experience, and having regard to the
security of Australia as a nation, the rights and
responsibilities of individual persons and future as well
as present needs, to make recommendations on the
intelligence and security services which the nation
should have available to it and on the way in which the
relevant organizations can most efficiently and
effectively serve the interests of the Australian
people and Government, with particular reference tothe
scale of operationsthe
number of separate organizations to be
involved, and their purpose, functions,
staffing ( including recruiting and terms and
conditions of service) and administrative
arrangements; the nature and scope of the intelligence which
the relevant organizations should seek to
acquire from Australian sources or from sources
outside Australia, including the intelligence
services of other countries;
arrangements for co-ordinating and evaluating
the available intelligence;.
the distribution and use of the intelligence
material available-,
the relationship between the intelligence
organizations, between those organizations and
the Australian and State law enforcement
agencies and between those organizations and
Departments and authorities of the Australian
Government; / 2 
2.
the degree of secrecy which should attach to
the organizations and their work; and
the proper safeguarding of intelligence material
and sources and the channel through which advice
on such matters should be provided.
3. To make recommendations as to the procedures which should
be introduced to permit review of administrative decisions
affecting citizens, migrants and visitors which were or
may have been based on, or influenced by, reports or
information of an adverse kind furnished by the security
intelligence services of the Australian Government.
4. To review the machinery for Ministerial and official
control, direction and co-ordination of the
activities of the intelligence and security services
and make recommendations on any changes desirable, in
particular to ensure that there are clear lines of
responsibility and proper arrangements for
accountability for funds.
To make recommendations on any other matters in
relation to intelligence and security services to
which the attention of the Commission is directed
by the Prime Minister in the course of the inquiry." 



4i AUSI K A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 306
21 August 1974
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced
the appointment of the Royal Commission into Human Relationships.
The establishment of this Commission follows a
resolution of the House of Representatives in September 1973
that an inquiry of this nature should be undertaken.
The Chairman of the Commission is the Hon. Elizabeth
Evatt, a Deputy President of the Australian Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission, and the other members are the Most
Rev. Felix Arnott, Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane and
Metropolitan of the Province of Queensland, and Anne Deveson,
a prominent Sydney journalist.
The Commission will commence its task immediately.
However, it is not expected that Justice Evatt's commitment
to the Chairmanship will be full-time until early next year.
Mr. Whitlam said that the Commission's task is to
look into and report upon the external pressures existing in
our society which place a stress upon relationships between
people. The terms of reference include such matters as sex
education and family planning, related medical training and
services and the position of women in relation to these subjects.
." These matters are relevant to the every day life of
Australians and the Government considers that the establishment
of the Commission will allow all interested parties to put their
views freely and frankly. The interim reports to be presented
by this Commission will enable us to identify those stresses
which society places on individuals and relationships and the
ultimate recommendations of the Commission will offer ways and
means for the people of this country to be better able to meet
the greater pressures arising from technological and social
change which we find in the world around us."' 
-2-
" The three Commissioners are well suited to consider
the matters under reference and I am confident that considerable
benefit will derive from their inquiries."
A copy of the terms of reference is attached.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
Royal Commission into Human Relationships
Terms of Reference
To inquire into and report upon the family, social,
educational, legal and sexual aspects of raale and female
relationships, so far as those matters are relevant to the
powers and functions of the Australian Parliament and
Government, including powers and functions in relation to
the Territories: To g-ive particular emphasis to the concept of
. responsible parenthood, to have regard to experience in other
countries and to include in your inquiry the following aspects
of the said matters:-
the extent of relevant existing education programs,
including sex education programs, and their
effectiveness in promoting responsible sexual
behaviour and providing a sound basis in the
fundamentals of male and female relationships in
the Australian social environment;
the extent of relevant existing programs in medical
schools and their adequacy to provide comprehensive
medical training in contraceptive techniques, in the
physical, psychological and sexual problems
experienced by women in adapting to marriage and
before, during and after menstruation, and in matters
relating to pregnancy, fertility control, spontaneous
and induced! nbortions nnd childbirth and to encourage
acceptance by the medical profession of its 
responsibilities in the field of contraceptive
counselling;
the provision, pdequacy and effectiveness of existing
family planning facilities, educational and
activational. informa~ tion on family planning,,, and
methods of evaluation of all family planning techniques;
the social., economic, psychological and medical
pressures on women in determining whether to proceed
with unplanned or unwanted pregnancies, h-aving regard.
to: Ci) the rdnquacy of hou3ing, child-minding
centres, pre-school centres, domestic
azcsis tance for families and working mothers,
ansi. stance to single parent families, other
form. s of assistnnce'for mothers employed in
industry, and adoption procedures;
( ii) the disabilities of families with handicapped
children; and
( iii) the social status of women in the community;
the social, psychological and medical results
of terination of, or and failure to terminate
such pregnancies;
the adequacy Rnd offectivenes of existing medicolegal
determinations in relation to termination of
pregniancy, Lhe incid] ence of such terminations, the
factors influencin' thei~ r occurrence, the adequacy
of medical. training i~ n and evaluation of methods of 
terminition, consultative rights of the family or
other persons concerned and the adequacy and
effectiveness of pregnancy support services; and
any other matters in relation to the family, social,
educational, legal and sexual aspects of male and
female relationships to which the attention of the
Commission is directed by the Prime Minister in the
course of the inquiry.
To make recommendations as to measures that are desirable
with respect to the foregoing matters under existing or future
laws of the Australian Parliament or of the Territories ( including
laws providing for grants to the States) and to indicate whether
these measures should be implemer ted through existing bodies or
through government instrumentalities to be created.
The Comrission may present interim reports on any aspect
of its terms of reference. 



,0 1
EMBARGO: 11.30 a. m.
S 1* 4 ' A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 307
23 August 1974
GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
The Australian Government has approved the first grants
ever to be made toleduce inequalities between local government
areas throughout Australia. For the first time since its
creation in 1933, the Grants Commission has reconmended grants
for local government areas.
The Government, which last year empowered the Commission
to recommend aid for local government areas in addition to
claimant States, has a} proved the body's proposals.
It will grant a total of $ 56,345,000 to local government
organisations throughout Australia in 1974/ 75.
The allocations for Councils in each State are:
New South Wales:
Victoria: Queensland: South Australia:
Western Australia:
Tasmania: $ 21,359,000
$ 14,630,000
$ 8,954,000
$ 4,774,000
$ 4,959,000
$ 1,669,000
The grants will be paid to Councils through State Governments.
The Australian Government has accepted the Commission's
reconendation that no conditions be attached to the way in
which local government bodies spend their allocations in 1974/ 75.
The acceptance of the proposals of the Commission, an independent
and non-political body, reprzecnts one of the most important
advances in the history of Australian local government. This
major breakthrough results fromi legislation introduced by the
Government last year to expand the Commission's functions. 
-2-
The Commission w; c. st,.! bishe-, d in 17133 to to provide
recommendations for special grants to be paid to claimant
States under Section 96 of the Constitution.
At various times in the past 41 years these States have
included Queensland, South Australia, Western Auctralia and
Tasmania. The basis of making such grants has been the recognition
that at various times some State! 7 have been le-ss advantaged
than others, both in terms of finance and services.
The Commission has served the purpose of helping to
reduce such inequalities between States.
The Grants Commission Act 1973 empowered the Commission
to examine not just inequalities betwc~ en States but also the
inequalities that exist between rcgi ons in the one State.
This recognises that while a single State may be in a
strong financial position overall, some areas within it may lack
adequate services and facilities.
Local Councils in such areas may not have the financial
resources to overcome those deficiencies and even the relevant
State Government may not be able to provide adequate assistance.
It has become quite obvious that if the disabilities
of some areas of Australia are to be overcome the national
Government must provide special grants.
That is the principle whi hh has guided the Grants
Commission and the Government in their deliberations.
National Government assistance for Councils is long
overdue in Australia. Neither the Australiannor State Governments
in the past have been prepared to provide adequate assistance
to enable local government to provide the many essential services
which the community now demands of it.
Local Government has indeed been neglected and downgraded
since the very beginnings of our federation.
The extension of the Grants Commission's powers and
the Government's acceptance of its recommendations will mean
that local government, for the first time, will be given the
kind of assistance that it so desperately needs.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



.),, AUSTHALIA
PRIME MINISTER 23 August 1974
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 309
APPOINTMENTS APPROVED BY THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
The Prime Minister announced today the appointment
of Sir John Bunting, at present the Secretary to the Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, as High Commissioner for
Australia in the United Kingdom as from 1 February 1975. The
two-year term of the present High Commissioner, the Hon.
J. I. Armstrong, which expires on 14 December 1974, has been
extended to 31 January 1975.
Mr Whitlam announced that Mr J. L. Menadue, who
is at present a senior executive of the News Limited group of
companies, will succeed Sir John Bunting as Permanent Head of
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet on
1 February 1975. The Prime Minister said that Sir John Bunting
will be the first non-political High Commissioner to the
United Kingdom. His association and standing with the
Queen's Household, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the British
Civil Service make his appointment especially suitable and
significant. In addition, his long experience as a Departmental
Head and as Secretary to Cabinet will be important qualities
in the office of High Commissioner and the administration of
Australia House. Australia House had been administered by
the Prime Minister' 3 Department until last year, when it was
transferred to the Department of Foreign Affairs. In 1959 the
previous Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department,
Sir Allen Brown, was appointed by Sir Robert Menzies as
Deputy High Commissioner in London.
The Prime Minister said that Sir John was appointed
Head of the Prime Minister's Department in 1959 when he was
years of age and that he is one of the most distinguished
public servants Australia has known. His loyalty, integrity
diligence and dedication have made him a leader and example
among all public servants. He said that his Government was
indebted to Sir John for his untiring assistance at the time of
the change of government in 1972 and in many of the initiatives
subsequently taken by the Government. 
-2-
The Prime Minister paid a tribute to
Mr John Armstrong's service as High Commissioner in London.
It has crowned a long and distinguished public career. He
has represented Australia with much success and personal credit.
The Prime Minister said it was also a decision
of the Government that the consequential vacancy in the position
of Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
would, on this occasion, be filled by a senior executive from
the private sector. Mr Menadue is now 39 years old. After
graduating from the University of Adelaide, he joined the
Bureau of Statistics in 1957 and transferred to the Treasury
in 1959. He became Mr Whitlam's Private Secretary in 1960.
He left Mr Whitlam's staff in 1967 to join the Murdoch
organisation. He has been a member of the Australian Council
for the Arts since its inception last year.
In order to facilitate a smooth transition in
the Department, the Public Service Board had agreed with the
Government that a position of Secretary Designate should be
created and filled by Mr Menadue, and the Governor-General
had approved the Board's recommendation. Mr Whitlam said that
Mr Menadue will take up his position on 23 September, 1974.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER CANBER'A
23 August 1974
PRIME MINISTER APPROVES GRANTS OF $ 410,397 FOR TIE ARTS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today approved grants for
the arts totalling $ 410,397.
The grants were recommended by the Australian Council for
the Arts and four of its Boards.
Aboriginal Arts, Crafts, Theatre and Visual Arts are
represented in the total. The International and
Entrepreneur-ial Programme and the Community Arts Fund
of the Council also recommended grants.
They cover artists and their activities in all States.
Council Grants ( Community Arts Fund and
Programme) 52,730 Internaional
Aboriginal Arts 120,606
Crafts
Theatre Visual Arts 5,620
19,910
214,151
Details of the previously announced Music Board grants
totalling $ 98,828, which include a special award to
Peter Sculthorpe of $ 36,000, are listed below as are
details of the above grants announced today.
A full list follows: 



JjAUSTRALIA ( k,
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 308
23 August 1974
GRANTS TO SOUTH WESTERN SYDNEY COUNCILS
Four Councils in the south western region of Sydney
will receive special grants totalling $ 837,000 under a historic
Australian Government scheme.
They will benefit from the Government's decision to
approve the first grants ever to be made to reduce inequalities
between local government areas throughout Australia. For the
first time since its creation in 1933, the Grants Commission
has recommended grants for local government areas.
The Government, which last year empowered the
Commission to recommend aid for local government areas in
addition to claimant States, has approved the body's proposals.
The Commission, an independent and non-political
body, recommended that $ 837,000 be allocated to the Sydney
south western region in 1974/ 75.
The four Councils in the region to benefit from the
grants are:
Camden municipal Council $ 79,000
Campbelltown City Council $ 235,000
Liverpool City Council $ 445,000
Wollondilly Shire Council $ 78,000
The grants will be paid to the Councils through the
New South Wales Government. The Australian Government has
accepted the Grants Commission recommendation that no conditions
be attached to the way in which the councils spend their allocations
in 1974/ 75. 
-2-
The grants to the Sydney south western region are
part of a total of $ 56,345,000 to be made available to local
government organisations throughout Australia in 1974/ 75.
Councils in New South Wales will receive $ 21,359,000
of this amount. This is the first time that New South Wales has
received any funds as a result of Grants Commission recommendations.
The Commission was established in 1933 to provide
recommendations for special grants to be paid to claimant States
under Section 96 of the Constitution.
At various times in the past 41 years these States
have included Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia
and Tasmania. The basis of making such grants has been the
recognition that at various times some States have been less
advantaged than others, both in terms of finance and services.
Because of its strong overall financial position
compared to other States, New South Wales has never qualified
for Grants Commission allocations.
It will now benefit as a result of the Grants
Commission Act which was introduced by the Australian Government
last year. This empowered the Commission to examine not just
inequalities between States but also inequalities that exist
between regions in the one State.
This recognises that while a single State may be in
a strong financial position overall, some areas within it may lack
adequate services and facilities.
Local Councils in such areas may not have the financial
resources to overcome those deficiencies and even the relevant
State Government may not be able to provide adequate assistance.
It has become quite obvious that if the disabilities
of some areas of Australia are to be overcome the national
Government must provide special grants.
That is the principle which has guided the Grants
Commission and the Government in their deliberations.
National Government assistance for Councils is long
overdue in Australia. Neither the Australian nor State Governments
in the past have been prepared to provide adequate assistance
to enable local government to provide the many essential services
which the community now demands of it. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE N. S. W. AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY COUNCIL, SYDNEY, SUNDAY
AUGUST 1974
Just three months ago the people of Australia returned a
Labor Government for a further three years. We achieved success
very largely because the people of New South Wales refused to be
moved by the fear tactics of our opponents and the smear tactics
of Sir Robert Askin. They gave us a resounding vote in the
Senate and carried all four of our referendums. And a month agoin
Coogee and in Goulburn they took the opportunity to reply
direct to Sir Robert Askin and his administration. With the win
in Coogee we have taken another step towards a Labor Government in
New South Wales, a Labor Government under Neville Wran.
I take this first opportunity to congratulate the New South
Wales Branch, to congratulate Neville Wran, to congratulate and to
thank all of you, my colleagues in the national Parliament, the
officers and above all the rank and file members for your work,
your support and your achievements over the past three years and
particularly the past three months.
Now, three months after our work together led to'the
reaffirmation by the people of New South Wales and the people of
Australia of Labor's right to govern, it is fitting that here,
at the State Council of the Party, I should repeat what I said
to the nation shortly after those elections. I said:
" There should be no uncertainty in any
quarter about our ability and determination
to carry out our program and to provide
strong effective government for the full
term for which you have once again elected us."
Now just three months after the people delivered their
verdict, delivered it in our favour for a second time in 18 months,
our adversaries inside Parliament and beyond it seek every means
to set that verdict aside. To them it is nothing that the people
have twice returned a verdict in our favour. To them it is nothing
that the people have declared themselves, as firmly as our electoral
system allows, on issue after issue issues of tremendous importance
like the people's health, like Australian ownership of Australian
resources, like restrictive trade practices, like electoral reform.
To them it is nothing that their own nominal leaders have committed
themselves to support our proposals as Mr. Snedden and Mr. Anthony
emphatically did in the case of our amended legislation for the
Australian Industry Development Corporation, and as Mr. Snedden
did on the proposal to establish an Australian Superior Court more
than seven years ago when he himself was Attorney-General. They
rejected our universal Health Scheme put to the people at the
elections of 1969, 1972 and 1974. Now that the joint sitting has
passed the Health Bills, they propose to reject the co]. latere. J
legislation needed to give effect to the scheme. / 2 
7
-2-
The extraordinary thing, the intolerable thing, is that the
opposition Senators have become more obstructive, not less, more
bloody-minded, more irrational since the elections which they
themselves precipitated. In the session just completed they have
held up by outright rejection or postponement or by dragging out
debate, more than half of our Bills 30 out of 56.
This happens in a Senate in which our own strength was
increased from 26 to 29, a Senate happily devoid of DLP
representation. And more often than not, our legislation has been
rejected not by a majority but simply by rounding up just half the
Senate to negative a proposal. If the vote is 30-all, then the
proposal is lost.
So we have this situation: a mere 30 Senators can set aside
the clear decision of the majority of the House of Representativesthe
people's House, the House which determines who shall govern;
they can set those proposals aside even when they plainly express
decisions made not just by the elected government but by the,
people themselves, at two successive elections. This is a travesty
of the Parliamentary system and it is a travesty of democracy.
It is a travesty and it is a tragedy for Parliamentary democracy,
because this system is everywhere under challenge, in Europe,
in North America, even in Britain itself, the home of parliamentary
democracy. And the system is not so strong that it can sustain onslaught
after onslaught, unremitting war on its basic foundations.. That is
what is being done in the Australian Senate. This is not just a
matter of declaring war on the Labor Government. It is a declaration
of war on the system itself.
Mr. Snedden defends he certainly does not command the
conduct of his followers in the Senate by pleading that it is all
perfectly legal and constitutional. In recent history, the
irresponsibility of minorities and chance combinations of
Parliamentarians in France, in Italy, in Greece have repeatedly
undermined parliamentary democracy. That, too, was all perfectly
legal and constitutional but absolutely destructive of the
system. The question is not just one of the effect this obstruction,
this falsification of democracy, has on the ability of duly elected
governments to govern effectively and to carry through its program
and to plan effectively. Even more important is the question of
the people's faith in the system.
If democracy is to survive, if the parliamentary system is to
survive, the people must be able to believe that the system can
procide change through peaceful methods. The strength of parliamentary
democracy is that it combines the opportunity for social change
with political stability. Our opponents are striving for the
minimum of change with the maximum of political instability.
In their efforts to thwart our program for change the program
twice endorsed by the electors, they are attempting to strip
democracy of its true meaning, to deprive it of its real strength.
It is a thoroughly mischievous and highly dangerous exercise. 
-3
And never more mischievous, never more dangerous than in
the times through which we are now passing, at a time when
governments around the world are confronting the enormous challenge
of inflation. The really damaging thing about inflation is that if
long continued it eats away at the very fabric of society. It
undermines the things which unite us and magnifies the things
which divide us. To add to this problem a new dimension of political
divisiveness is to put a double pressure on a system already under
tremendous stress. The supreme irony is that this sabotage comes
from a party claiming to be the champion of tradition and the
guardian of the constitution.
Throughout the last 14 years as Leader and Deputy Leader of
our Party I have asserted the primacy of Parliament, particularly
the national Parliament, as the instrument for the fulfillment of
our policies. A little more than seven years ago at the annual
conference of this Branch I said to you:
" The test of a political party such as ours is
its ability to win power through Parliament,
to secure throughout Australia a majority of
votes of our fellow citizens. The people who
vote for us and a vast majority of those who
don't increasingly look to the initiative
which the national Parliament could take and
to plans the national Government could make for
a solution of their problems and the
consummation of their aspirations."
I asserted, and the Party accepted, that if we were to secure
a majority of the votes of our fellow citizens, we ourselves as a
party had to be broadly representative of at least half the people.
This belief was behind the reorganisation and reconstruction of
the party at the national level and in New South Wales and Victoria.
The people responded to our efforts. We did make ourselves more
representative and more responsive and more responsible. The result
has been that twice within 18 months a majority of the people of
Australia have given us a majority in the House of Representatives.
Twice they have chosen our men and our measures. Twice they have
expressed clear support for our policies and for a Labor Government.
How many elections must be fought and won before our opponents
accept the people's verdict, before they abandon their belief in their
divine right to rule? We allow ourselves no such delusion. We
believe our right to govern rests upon the consent of the governed,
a consent and a confirmation twice given. We shall exercise that
right. We shall exercise the right to govern given us by a majority
in the House of Representatives, the people's House, a consent
confirmed a mere three months ago, a consent for us to continue to
implement our program for the next three years. We shall continue.
I shall continue continue to fight to implement our Labor program,
continue to fight against inflation, continue to fight to preserve
parliamentary democracy in this country. / 4 
-4
We are faced with an irresponsible, a discredited Opposition,
a discarded opposition, the most irresponsible and irrational
Opposition in the history of Federation. in these circumstances
we have a double responsibility all of us who form the
Government, all of us in the whole Labor movement who have worked
so hard, so long to create our Government and to give our fellow
citizens the opportunities which our programs offer. When, as has
happened, an opposition defects from the system and sets out
deliberately to sabotage the system, it becomes double important
for us to stand firm and to stand together in defence of our program.
When an opposition deliberately sets out to create a climate of
hysteria, it becomes doubly important that we should not lose
our nerve. When an opposition deliberately sets out to sow the seeds of
panic and division in the community it becomes doubly important that
we should stand strong and united. Thi's is a responsibility that
no section of the movement can avoid. We are in this together.
It is not just the Whitlam Government; it is a Labor government
and it is the people's elected Government.
And it has to be said that there are some sections of the
movement whose co-operation is now most needed. We are not in
the business of union-bashing. We cannot and will not compete with
our opponents in that game. Nor are we going to allow employees to
be made the scapegoats for Australia's present economic problems.
We are not going to ask employees to bear the whole brunt of our
attack upon these problems.
In other words we are not going to follow the policies of our
opponents, which they used in government time and time again and which
they would again use if they had the chance. But employees and their
associations do have to make a choice. We have to recognise that'
actions by unions and employees' associations can have a more damaging
effect upon a Labor Government than all the obstruction and
irresponsibility of our opponents. We can handle our opponents
but we need the co-operation of our supporters and those who claim
to support us.
It is thoroughly shortsighted if individual unions use their
muscle in certain key sectors of industry to win short-term
advantages at the expense of their fellow workers. In-the very
short term these may appear superficially attractive but no union,
still less small sections of any industrial union, can live in
isolation from the rest of the community. What happens to individual
unions ultimately affects the whole of the community, and equally
what happens to the whole community ultimately affects every
unionisnd his family.
Nor can employees ignore the threat which excessive wage claims
or unjustified strikes can make on their industry and their own
employment prospects. As Jim Cairns put it to the State Council
of the Victorian Branch of the Party last month: " In a year like
1974 the economy cannot possibly pay general wage increases of
and more without most of them going quickly into prices, and this
means more inflation." 
It can also mean and we must face the fact more
unemployment, especially in industries competing with imported
goods. What all of us in the Labor movement must remember is that
wage claims affect the ability of certain industries to compete with
imports. I know there are some unions and some industries where
wage claims can be dealt with in apparent isolation, where there
is no import competition and added cost of wages can be passed on
to the consumer. There are other industries, however, that are not
so fortunate. In those industries the cost of sudden and immoderate
wage increases cannot be passed on so easily. If they are passed on,
in higher prices, there is a real danger that the industries
will no longer be competitive. They will go to the wall, and jobs
will go with them.
So it is in the interests of all unions indeed, it is the
duty of all unions to ensure that wage claims in our present
economic climate are kept within reasonable and responsible limits..
And this is just as much the duty of unions in non-competitive
industries as it is in industries that are vulnerable to competition.
In fact it is the stronger and more fortunate unions that have the
higher duty the duty to set an example. For we know how tempting,
how human, how natural it is for anyone to seek to catch up with
other employees in other industries who receive a substantial
wage rise. And while I am not for a moment suggesting that no wage
claims are justified, that no one deserves any increase at all,
it is vitally important that wage claims are not made at the expense
of fellow-workers' jobs.
We look to the union movement, and particularly supporters of
the Government, to ensure that wage claims and industrial actions
are responsible. Disputes which affect other workers should be
promptly referred to central union bodies the Labor Councils and
the ACTU. In the interests of other unionists and in the public
interest disputes should be restricted to their proper role as a
last resort, not as the first shot in a process of negotiation.
With respect to wage claims we ask unionists to recognise that a
system of indexation will now be introduced, so that claims should
not now be made and do not need to be made in anticipation of
future price increases.
The only people who can effectively persuade unions to keep
their wages within safe and moderate limits are unionists themselves.
So I urge every man on the job and in the factory to exercise
caution, to remember above all his own and his fellow-workers,
livelihood. For that is precisely what is at stake.
Employees who want to keep a Labor Government should measure
the possible consequences of their actions, not only upon the fortunes
of the Government, but upon their fellow-unionists. And unionists who
want to keep a Labor Government should scrutinise the consequences
of some of their officials who are not Labor, who don't particularly
want a Labor Government, some of whom, indeed, correctly view a
Labor Government as the greatest force for democratic change and
social reform within the Parliamentary system. They reject the
system and therefore they reject our role in it. / 6 
-6
The question employees are certainly entitled to ask is why
they should support and co-operate with a Labor Government. It can
be answered at many levels from the narrowest point of view of
an employee's immediate self-interest to the widest considerations
of the national interest and the national good. We all know from
experience what the alternative is. We all know from experience
what methods a non-Labor Government would use by preference and
calculated design to combat inflation. It is the deliberate
creation of massive unemployment. We are not going to take you
down that road.
Look at the general attitude of our opponents to industrial
affairs over a generation. Never once in 23 years, whether there
was inflation or recession, did their Government fail to lend its
support to the employers in the national wage case. For 20 years
unions had been arguing for the re-introduction of wage indexation.
Only now have we a Government taking a positive attitude to the
question. We have made positive and constructive intervention
before the Arbitration Commission. Within hours of taking office
we re-opened the wage case to secure equal pay for women. Against
bitter opposition we have supported the ACTU policy on abolition of
the penal clauses and the amalgamation of unions. We have taken new
initiatives to protect employees by training and retraining programs
and structural adjustment assistance.
Two things are clearly implicit in our opponents' economic
proposals the creation of massive unemployment and the slashing
of basic public expenditure on schools, welfare, health and cities.
On both counts, employees and their families would be the first to
suffer. For most employees, community spending on these matters
the matters which are basic to the quality of their lives and the
lives of the members of their families'-is every bit as important
as their pay packets.
I want to emphasise as strongly as I can that the current
problem of inflation in no way downgrades the importance of our
Government's total program the program I announced in 1972, the
program I repeated in May 1974, the program once again endorsed
by the people in 1974.
On the contrary, the program is crucial to all our efforts
to protect all sections of the Australian community from the
buffets of economic chancgnd circumstance. The fight against
inflation and the implementation of our program will go on together.
They are not contradictory, they are complementary.
Economic management cannot be put into a compartment. It is
part of the whole process of building a stronger economy and
fairer society.
I have said repeatedly that the attack on inflation is a task
for the whole community. That is no mere slogan. We have had
distressing evidence of the failure of some State governments to
play their full part in an anti-inflationary program. it is certainly
not my intention to shuffle off any part of the Australian Government's
responsibility. I acknowledge that the primary responsibility is ours.
There are many things, however, that we simply cannot do on our own. / 7 
-7
One of them is the stabilisation of land prices. This objective
has been part of our policy from the beginning. It has been
discussed specifically and in detail with the Premiers on at
least six occasions. We put forward proposals at our meetings on
the Albury-Wodonga project at the beginning of last year. we
discussed it again at the special Premiers Conference in May
last year; again at the Constitutional Convention in Sydney in
September last year; again during the referendum campaign in
November and December last year; again at the Premiers Conference
in June of this year. In addition we have made individual approaches
to particular States. Remember that the escalating cost of land is
the greatest single component in the inflationary spiral. The States
have the power to deal with it: yet only one State, South Australia,
has made a serious attempt to co-operate with us. And their
efforts have already shown remarkably successful results. Let me
say in passing that I look forward to co-operating with a N. S. W.
Labor Government on this very issue. There is much that we will
achieve together, and there are many other areas -law reform,
the environment, civil liberties, to name a few -where a State
Labor Government is uniquely placed to legislate for essential reforms.
The real protection which individuals, not least employees,
have against economic mischance lies in the quality and equality of
the services and amenities which the community as a whole provides.
Wages and salaries are becoming less and less relevant in determining
a person's or a family's real welfare. No longer is a person's
income the sole measure of the quality of his life or his family's
life. The quality of his life is determined increasingly by the
things which the community acting as a whole provides for its
individual members, and what the community alone can adequately
provide. Increasingly, a person's standard of living is
determined not by his income but by where he lives and by the
community services provided by the community in which he lives.
His health, his children's education, his opportunities and his
leisure, his sense of security and his real security increasingly
depend on the community's ability or will to provide for them
to provide for the needs of individuals by collective decision
and action and to promote opportunities for individuals by
collective decision and action.
The Labor program the program of your Government is to
ensure that those facilities and opportunities are provided by
the community through its elected representatives more
abundantly and mo! 5e equally, for all Australians wherever they
live, wherever they choose to live or wherever they are obliged
to live. The nearer we approach our goal the further recedes the
threat of individual disaster through economic misfortune.
That is why we shall press on with our program. To abandon that
program is to abandon the hopes of those who have twice supported
us and twice elected us. We are not going to do it.
The fight against inflation will go on. it will be hard.
It will be won. The fight to implement our program, our elected
program, will go on. It will be hard. rt will be won. 
8-
From the very beginning of our term of office we have contended
with the problem of inflation. Let it never be forgotton that the
roots of our present inflation were present from the start the
result of a gross undervaluation of the dollar and a flood of foreign
money which our predecessors tolerated and encouraged. We have
worked ceaselessly, resourcefully, on many fronts, to contain
inflationary tendencies. For the past six days I have presided at
meetings of the Cabinet to determine every detail of our Budgetary
strategy. We reject all panic talk of crisis and doom. Average weekly
earnings today, despite inflation, are 3% higher than when we came
to office. There are 270,000 more people in the workforce 270,000
more jobs than there were a year ago. We reject the view that
the deliberate creation of unemployment is an acceptable remedy
for inflation or even a feasible remedy. We reject the view
that the Government's program of reform must be put aside while
the battle against inflation goes on.
We reject the view that the battle against inflation will be
wholly painless or, for that matter, intolerably harsh. It is
no more helpful or realistic to exaggerate the hardship entailed
by successful remedies than it is to ignore the hardship. And there
are those who exaggerate the hardship. There are companies who
belieave we must shelter them from the effects of competition, or
the consequences of their own mismanagement, to prevent people
buying goods more cheaply. We do not believe that everybody in
the community should be forced to pay more for textiles, or cars
or color TV sets than these goods are worth. Still less should
the unionist, the working man and his family, be required to pay
through the nose.
Above all, as realists, we must reject the view that some simple
magic solution, some single " package" of solutions call it what
You Will is the answer to our needs. The Government has acted and
will continue to act on many fronts, in many different ways.
Our program to fight inflation is a flexible one, not a set of
measures that make headlines for a day. It has included our monetary
policy to restrain excess liquidity. it has included revaluation of
the Australian dollar and tariff cuts. It has included attempts to
get clear and unequivocal constitutional authority over prices and
incomes. Remember that very little " fine tuning" is possible in
economic management. Governments can never be surd that their
policies will not have an impact on the economy beyond the level
they intended. when that happens and there are signs that it it
happening now we stand ready to adjust and rectify our calculations.
That is what responsible economic management means a capacity for
prompt and flexible response to changing circumstances. That is
why hard and fast rules and packages are irrelevant to our needs,
and indeed meaningless in any rational discussion of the problem.
Let me give two exampleof our successful response to particular
difficulties. You will remember the recent headlines when Leylands
sacked 1,000 workers. Yet within two weeks all but 50 of those
workers were placed in other jobs. That fact just as important
as the original sackings received almost no attention from the
media. Again, when the recent consumer price index for the June
quarter was issued it quite properly received wide coverage in
the press. I do not quibble with that. 
9-
I would have hoped however, that the same wide coverage might have
been given to the subsequent news of a fall in the food price index
the first since we came to power. That was largely accounted for by
a drop in meat prices. It was a result of a concerted and consistent
attack on meat prices by the Government over the past year. Our
actions were successful, but successful policies are unfortunately
less newsworthy than difficulties or problems.
The battle against inflation continues but it is not the only
battle. The Government's measures-to retard inflation will continue,
but they are not our only measures. Our opponents and some sections
of the press seem to suggest that every sphere of government activity
must come to a halt, that our every effort towards building a better
and stronger Australia should be set aside until Australia and all
comparable countries have solved this one problem of inflation.
This is self-defeating nonsense. Just as Australia's problem of
inflation cannot be taken out of the context of the world economic
situation so our efforts to combat inflation must be seen in the
context of our total effort, social as well as economic. The
business of government goes on and that business cannot be
confined to a single economic problem.
The deliberations of Cabinet last week must be seen in that
perspective the perspective of implementing our whole program.
Decisions of the highest importante are being made all the time.
In a single week just last week we have made decisions and
announcements of the greatest importance in addition to deciding
the framework for the Budget.
We approved the first grants ever to be made to reduce
inequalities between local government-areas in Australia. For the
first time since its creation in 1933, the Grants Commission has
recommended grants for local government areas. Our government,
which last year empowered the Commission to-recommend aid for local
government as it has always done for States, approved the granting
of more than $ 56M.
At the special sitting of the House of Representatives on
Friday we at last secured the passage of restrictive trade practices
legislation to prevent collusive price fixing. Because of the stalling
and obstruction of the Opposition, this law has been before the
Parliament for 11 months almost a year. It has been debated four
times in the Senate. But for the Opposition, it could already be
working effectively to reduce prices.
Again on Friday we were at last able to pass the law to provide
the basis for a national highway system and to involve the national
Government in planning for and paying for roads in our cities.
These are all decisions which, quite apart from their intrinsic
value, have a close bearing on the economic situation. They are all
part of our program to build a fairer and stronger Australian economy.
And this is our goal; this is the direction towards which we are
leading Australia towards building a fairer, stronger Australia,
an Australia providing greater equality of opportunities for all its
people and a greater abundance of these opportunities. We are not
going to be deterred from those goals, the goals set in the policy
speeches of 1972 and 1974, the goals adopted by the people of
Australia in 1972 and 1974. We are not going to be stampeded.
We are not going to be panicked. We have to recognise that there are
groups and interests who have a vested interest in spreading panic,~ 
10
suspicion and division. Rumour-mongering and scare-mongering is
their stock in trade. We saw appalling examples of it last week.
The hysteria of our opponents who cannot accept their double
defeat must not be allowed to infect the Australian community.
We are certainly not going to allow it to infect the Australian
Labor Government. We do have serious problems. We share these
problems with all comparable countries. We are better placed than
most comparable countries to overcome these problems. We are going
to do so. It won't be done by grand-standing. it won'It be done
by panic, it won't be done by hysteria. It will be done by a cool,
steady, confident government given the co-operation of an
intelligent, responsible community. It will be done by this
Government, this Labor Government which you all have worked for over
so many years and which, given your help and co-operation, wvill lcng
corti. nue to vrork for the true advancement of all the Austral ian
peop 0.. In December 1972 the Labor Party and the entire Labor
movement won a great victory a deserved and long-awaited victory.
Just over three months ago the result was conf~ irmed by the Australian
people in the election of 18 May.
Let us remember why we worked for those victories, and why
the people gave us their support.
I ask you to remember the kind of society we rejected.. in
December 1972 the attitudes and habits we put behind us*.
We rejected complacency. W-e rejected inequality. We rejected
poverty, injustice and fear. We rejected the chronic stagnation
and ' impoverishment of our schools, an unjust and inefficient health
service, miserly pension schemes and social service handouts
that condemned thousands of Australians to hardship and indignity.
We rejected dikapidated cities, antiquated public transport, and
the pollution and destruction of the natural environment. We rejected
Vietnam and conscription. We rejected unemployment as a deliberate
weapon of economic policy. We rejected penal clauses and the whole
apparatus of union intimidation. We rejected the long history of
neglect of the weak and deprived the pensioners, Aboriginals,
migrants and working women. We rejected the takeover of our industries
and resources by foreign interests. We rejected a foreign
policy that stifled our national independence and bound us to
military entanglements and cold-war ideologies.
Such were the attitudes and philosophies we put behind us.
For the millions of Australians who supported us, the election of
December 1972 was indeed a vote for change, for new directions, for
new policies. For those of us in the Party, however, it was more
than that. It was the fulfilment of long-cherished hopes and
dreams, the culmination of years of work and planning by devoted
men and women who were determined on a better and brighter future
for Australia. We must keep those goals before us. By working together
and only by working together we will achieve them. 



EiL,,. RGO: 7.30 P. M.
4JJ,) AUSTRALIA J1 26 August 1974
NATIONAL BROADCAST
You will be aware that throughout last week the Cabinet met
in Canberra to discuss the basic framework of this year's Budget.
There is one unusual circumstance about the Budget this year.
It is being introduced five weeks later than usual mid-September
instead of mid-August. There's only one reason for the delay
the unexpected onset of the May elections and the interruption
of the normal business of Government and Parliament which resulted.
So because of this delay I thought I should report to you
tonight. I cannot of course give you a Budget preview that would
not be the proper course. And, I want to emphasise that-the Budget
is not intended to be some grand design for solving all the nation's
problems. It isn't in itself a blueprint for the future. It's
only part of our ongoing program and it's only part of our ongoing
fight against inflation.
We are framing a Budget well in tune with the needs of the
Australian economy and the needs of the Australian people. And
let me emphasise that we see those needs not only in the context
of inflation. It is not enough just to beat inflation. We have
to plan for the future, for the future of all Australians for
our schools, our hospitals, our cities, our transport, our trade,
our great resources. And this is what we are doing, laying the
foundations for an even stronger fairer Australia.
Our deeply considered view is that one battle, a major battle
in our war on inflation, is being won. When we came into office
in December 1972 we inherited the problem known as demand
inflation that is, too much money chasing too few goods. Levels
of spending were being fed by a flood of money from overseas and
by the unjustified deficit in the 1972 Budget.
My Government acted firmly to increase supplies by restoring
full employment and by increasing the flow of imports. We also
applied restraints to the flow of funds from abroad and to spending
financed by borrowing. These measures have had steadily increasing
effect and it can now be said that they are fully achieving their
purpose. We are now closer to a balance between spending and the
goods and services becoming available. 
-2-
It is therefore no longer necessary for the Budget to be
actively restraining expenditure. We must of course be careful
not to re-establish the conditions it has taken us so long to
bring under control.
The Government has therefore reviewed its plans for new
expenditure with great care.
SWe intend to proceed soberly but steadily with the programs
which you have twice endorsed. We shall, for instance, go ahead
with a greatly expanded program for the care and education of preschool
children. We shall also begin a major restructuring of
the taxation system to reduce the burdens on lower income earners
and on single income families.
In the fight against inflation, we shall not be using the
weapon of mass unemployment in the way that previous governments
have sometimes chosen to do.
The spectre of masses and masses of workless should be
laid to rest. We have in reserve a wide and flexible program
to cope with such unemployment as will occur. On this point you
can plan ahead for yourselves and your families with confidence.
You will say: fine, but what about the rising prices we
see around us. There are many elements in this, many causes.
You know that all the major industrial countries share this
problem with us some far worse. I have to be quite frank with
you: inflation will not be wholly beaten until there is a worldwide
solution. There is no complete national answer to this
international problem least of all, in a democracy like Australia.
For Australia there is the further complication of the Federal
system, and the national government does not have the constitutional
power to act directly on prices and incomes.
The most serious element in Australia's inflation is that
very large wage and salary increases, sometimes thoroughly excessive,
are pushing up costs and therefore pushing up prices. Quite bluntly,
the Australian economy in 1974 just cannot absorb wage and salary
increases of 20 per cent and 30 per cent without large increases in
prices. Now this is a matter involving all of us. It cannot be
shrugged off as a problem for the Government alone. We cannot
solve this problem single-handed. We cannot solve it without
co-operation and commonsense.
The national Government can do much. We are doing much.
We've strengthened the Prices Justification Tribunal. Only last
Friday we at last secured the passage of the Trade Practices Act
which will protect the customer and prevent price fixing agreements
by companies. This legislation could have been passed a year ago
except for continued and repeated obstruction in the Senate. We
are carefully studying proposals for tax penalties on companies
which grant excessive wage demands. 
-3-
But the really important thing is for all Australian
employers and employees to grasp the ultimate futility of
grossly excessive demands which are just eaten up by inflation.
It is not only a matter of the effect it has on yourselves and
your families, but the consequences to fellow Australians, not least
fellow working Australians. The simple fact is that if certain
industries are priced out of existence then men and women will be
thrust out of work.
Further, it is quite unacceptable that the strike should come
to be regarded as the court of first appeal. It is quite
unacceptable that unions or companies should use their muscle
power in key industry to gain short term advantage at the expense
of their fellow Australians. These are not particularly palatable
things for me to say, but we have to face the facts.
I know the pressures, I know the temptations and they are
certainly not diminished by scare tactics and rumour-mongering
of the sort we have had recently. But it is a time for care and.
responsibility by all of us for our own sakes as well as our
fellows' and our families'-sakes.
The national Government fully accepts its responsibilities.
The State governments too have their responsibilities. And there
are things that we can all do. For instance it is important that
customers should resist unfair price rises whenever possible.
As long as sellers of goods believe they can pass on to buyers
whatever costs they agree to accept or whatever profit margin they
care to impose, prices will continue to rise. Every time you forgo
a purchase because the price is too high, you strike a blow against
inflation. Let me sum up: the Budget, like our whole program is based
on certain principles. There are four very important ones.
As I have already said, we are not going to resort to mass
unemployment. Secondly, we will protect the weaker sections of the community.
Last month's $ 5 increase in the pension, the largest single increase,
by any measure, in Australia's history, is an earnest of our
determination. Thirdly, the most help will be given to those most in need.
Fourthly, where we seek restraint we shall seek it from the
strongest, from those best able to share the load.
When you returned my Government just three months ago,
I told you that together we would face some difficult times and
difficult decisions. We Australians have faced infinitely more
difficult times together in the past. Difficult decisions are
an inevitable part of the task of any government worth its salt.
My Government, the government you confirmed in office a mere three
months ago, will neither flinch from difficulty nor exaggerate the
difficulty. And if I know anything of the character of the
Australi an people, neither will you. 
In particular, don't let yourselves be used by people
or groups who have a vested interest in creating panic,
division or confusion.
The fact remains that despite inflation, the vast majority
of Australians have a higher standard of living than they did
twelve months ago. Even average weekly earnings have risen 3
per cent more than the cost of living. Of course we can do
better than that and we shall all of us. The important thing
is that we are a skilled, intelligent people living in a country
with great basic resources.
It is a time for care, yes; but certainly it is not a
time for despair. Given the commonsense and steadiness which
I believe are part of the Australian character, given reasonable
time for the Australian Government's whole program of renewal
and reform to take full effect, we can be assured of a bright,
confident future together.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



. AU6 ALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATE14ENT NO. 310
29 August 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT ON PASSENGER MOTOR
VEHICLES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced
the release of the printed report of the Industries Assistance
Commission on Passenger Motor Vehicles.
Copies of the reocrt are now available from the
Australian Government Publishing Service.
Mr. Whitlam also released copies of the Commission's
answers to questions raised by the Standing Interdepartmental
Committee on Assistance to Industries regarding certain aspects
of the report.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 2600 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 311
August 1974
RELEASE OF INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released
the Industries Assistance Commission report on Food
Processing Machinery, etc.
Mr. Whitlam. said that the Government's decision
on the report will be announced at the earliest practicable
date. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



ILU
US r KA I AC
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 312
31 August 1974
DEATH OF NEW ZEALAND PRIME MINISTER
Norman Kirk's death is a deeply tragic loss for New
Zealand, Australia and the Pacific region.
New Zealand has lost a great leader. Australia has
lost a firm friend. The Pacific and South East Asian region
has lost a forceful and creative spokesman. The cause of
democratic socialism throughout the world has lost one of its
pillars of strength and sources of inspiration.
I have lost a dear and most highly valued friend.
We share a common ground of political experience in good times
and bad and an identity of basis beliefs which gave a closeness
and value to our personal relationship quite beyond the ordinary.
We became Prime Ministers of the two Pacific partners
within a week of one another and since that time have maintained
the closest communications including our five meetings in Wellington,
Apia, Ottawa, Canberra and Christchurch.
Under his Prime Ministership relations between New
Zealand and Australia reached an even higher level of co-operation
and understanding. We co-operated particularly closely in our
opposition to nuclear tests in the Pacific.
He achieved for New Zealand a position of genuine
leadership in the south west Pacific. He did this not only by
the nobility of his vision for his nation and the region but by
the personal qualities of integrity, compassion and sturdy
commonsense which earned him the confidence and affection of all
who had the privilege of working with him.
On behalf of all Australians I extend to our New
Zealand partners our deepest sympathy in the grievous loss we
have all suffered. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME INISTER,
THE 0E. G. HITLA],
TO THE ITALIANCOMIITTEE OF COORDINATION
FOR THE LAUNCHING OF ITALIAN WEEK 1975
' ELBOURNE, SATURDAY, 31 AUGUST 197'!.
IT IS A RARE PLEASURE IN 1974 TO BE LAUNCHING ITALIAN
WEEK 1975. I WISH WE COULD PLAN POLITICAL EVENTS WITH THE.
SAME CERTAINTY. THIS IS THE FIRST IMPORTANT FUNCTION OF THE
ITALIAN COMMUNITY I HAVE ATTENDED IN lIELBOURNE SINCE BECOMING
PRIME MINISTER, IT WILL CERTAINLY NOT BE THE LAST.
AUSTRALIANS NEED NO REMINDER OF THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE
ITALIAN COMMUNITY TO OUR SOCIETY. ACKNOWLEDGE IT. WE ARE
GRATEFUL FOR IT, IT IS IMPORTANT, HOWEVER, TO PROVIDE THE
FULLEST OPPORTUNITY FOR CONTACTS BETWEEN OLD AUSTRALIANS AND
THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY AND BETWEEN ITALY AND AUSTRALIA THEMSELVES
IN THE FIELDS OF ART, CULTURE, EDUCATION AND COMMERCE. ITALIAN
!' IEEK THEREFORE HAS A VALUABLE FUNCTION. THERE IS NO OTHER
COMPARABLE NATIONAL CELEBRATION IN THIS COUNTRY. IT IS
FITTING THAT WE SHOULD HONOUR THE LARGEST AND THE OLDEST OF THE
EUROPEAN MIGRANT COMMUNITIES IN AUSTRALIA. ' ITH THE EXCEPTION
OF THE BRITISH, NO MIGRANT IS MORE ACCEPTED, MORE RESPECTED OR
MORE ADMIRED THAN THE ITALIAN. 
-2-
AUSTRALIA'S LINKS WITH ITALY GO BACK TO THE BEGINNINGS
OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION ON THIS CONTINENT. THE FIRST ITALIANS
TO SET FOOT ON AUSTRALIAN SOIL MAY WELL HAVE BEEN ANTONIO PONTO
AND JAMES MARIO MlATRA, BOTH OF WHOM SAILED IN CAPTAIN COOK'S
' ENDEAVOUR;". IN 1793 THE TUSCAN MlARQUIS ALESSANDRO M'ALASPINA
LED AN EXPEDITION WHICH ENTERED BOTANY BAY, IN 1.352
GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI, THE GREAT ITALIAN PATRIOT AND FIGHTER
FOR THE UNIFICATION OF ITALY, IN COMMAND OF THE BRIG CARMEN'.
WEIGHED ANCHOR OFF TASMANIA. HE LATER WROTE NOSTALGICALLY
OF THE HAVEN OF PEACE AND BEAUTY HE FOUND THERE FAR FROM THE
TURMOIL OF EUROPE,
THE FIRST ITALIAN EMIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA WERE ATTRACTED
BY THE GOLD DISCOVERIES OF THE 1350s, THROUGHOUT THE 1050S
AND 1360S A STEADY STREAM OF ITALIANS ARRIVED IN SOUTH EASTERN
AUSTRALIA, AND IN 1370 THE ITALIAN CONSUL IN " IELBOURNE ESTIMATED
THEIR NUMBER AT AROUND 1,0' 01. MOST WERE NORTHERN ITALIANS
FROM SONDRIO AND NEARBY PROVINCES OF LOMBARDY; SOME WERE FROM
PIEDMONT AND GENOA; A VERY FEW WERE FROM SOUTHERN ITALY AND
SICILY. MOST OF THE LOMBARDS WENT TO THE GOLD FIELDS AND SOME
K MADE THEIR FORTUNES IN WALHALLA AND HEPBURN. OTHERS LEFT THE
DIGGINGS TO BECOME FARMERS, OTHERS MOSTLY FROM GENOA, * iAPLES
AND SICILY, WORKED AS SAILORS AND STEVEDORES IN THE COASTAL
SHIPPING TRADE, OR AS FISHERMEN. 914 / 3 
-3
AMONG THE VERY EARLY ARRIVALS WERE THE CHALK-FIGURINE
MAKERS FROM LUCCA AND THE VIGGIANESE STREET-MUSICIANS. THE
HISTORIAN F, LANCASTER JONES HAS POINTED OUT THAT TODAY THERE ARE
THREE GREAT CENTRES OF VIGGIANESE CULTURE VIGGIANO, IEW YORK
AND fIELBOURNE. HE HAS WRITTEN: " INTERESTINGLY ENOUGHT IT WAS
PROBABLY THESE MUSICIANS WHO PLAYED A PROGRAM OF ITALIAN MUSIC
AT THE INAUGURATION OF MELBOURNE'S DANTE ALIGHIERI SOCIETY IN
AUGUST 139E, A SHORT SEVEN YEARS AFTER THE FOUNDATION OF THE
PARENT SOCIETY IN ITALY, FOR IELBOURNE WAS THEN THE CULTURAL
CENTRE OF AUSTRALIA, AND ITALY THE CULTURAL CENTRE OF THE WORLD,
BY THE TURN OF THE CENTURY THERE WERE 6,09 ITALIANS IN
AUSTRALIA, BETWEEN THE CENSUSES OF 1921 AND 1933 THE NUMBER OF
ITALIAN-BORN IN AUSTRALIA INCREASED THREE-FOLD TO MORE THAN
2C, 000. SINCE 1945, AS A RESULT OF LARGE-SCALE ITALIAN
IMMIGRATION, 165,000 ITALIANS HAVE BECOME AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS
AND THERE ARE TODAY WELL OVER A QUARTER OF A MILLION
ITALIAN--BORN PEOPLE IN AUSTRALIA.
AUSTRALIAN CITIES ABOUND IN EVIDENCE OF ITALIAN WORK AND
INFLUENCE. MUSIC WAS NURSED BY ITALIAN TEACHERS OF COMPOSITION,
INSTRUMENTS AND BEL CANTO; PERFORMERS, SINGERS, MAESTRI. FOUNDERS
OF SCHOOLS, AND OF CHAMBER AND SYMPHONIC ORCHESTRAS. ALBERTO
ZELMAN FOUNDED THE VICTORIAN SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA, PIETRO CECCHI
TAUGHT DAME NELLIE ! MELBA; VITELLI FOUNDED ALAN'S HOUSE OF ' IUSIC.
COUNT CARANDINI MADE A FAMOUS PRIMADONNA OF HIS TASMANIAN--BORN WIFI
MARY BURGESS, A RELATIVE OF SHELLEY. CLAUDIO ALCORSO, TILL RECENTI
CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN OPERA COMPANY, AND NOW A MEMBER OF THE
UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION, WAS KNIGHTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
ITALIAN REPUBLIC. ,/ 4 
4
A LONG LINE OF ARTISTS EXTENDS FROM BRAMBILLA, A VERY
EARLY SETTLER, TO ANTONIO DATTILO-RUBBO, WHO FOR MANY YEARS
CONDUCTED ONE OF THE LEADING ART SCHOOLS IN SYDNEY AND WHO
TAUGHT, INFLUENCED AND ENCOURAGED A GENERATION OF PAINTERS.
MONTEFIERE WAS ONE OF THE FOUNDERS OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES ACADEMY
OF ART IN 1371. WELL-KNOWN CONTEMPORARY ARTISTS INCLUDE
ERNESTO MURGO, A VICTORIAN SCULPTOR WITH HIS OWN ART GALLERY,
WHO LECTURES IN SCULPTURE AT THE MELBOURNE TECHNICAL COLLEGE.
FRANCO BELGIORNO-NJETTIS, AN ENGINEER WHO CAME TO AUSTRALIA
9 IN 1951, IS ALSO AN ARTIST AND SCULPTOR. THE TRANSFIELD
ENGINEERING GROUP, OF WHICH HE IS ONE OF THE PRINCIPALS, IS
O NOTED NOT ONLY FOR HEAVY STEEL CONSTRUCTION BUT FOR ITS PATRONAGE
OF THE ARTS. THE TRANSFIELD PRIZE HAS BEEN FOR MANY YEARS ONE
OF THE BEST-ENDOWED ART AWARDS IN AUSTRALIA. IN 1973 TRANSFIELD
SURPASSED ITS PREVIOUS CONTRIBUTIONS WITH THE ORGANISATION OF THE
FIRST SYDNEY BIENNALE, HELD IN THE OPERA HlOUSE.
o CARLO CATANI CAME TO AUSTRALIA IN THE 1379s AND
AS CHIEF ENGINEER FOR THE VICTORIAN PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, WAS
O RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CREATION OF THE ALEXANDRA GARDENS AND ST.
KILDA ROAD. THE CATANI TOWER OF ST. KILDA AND LAKE CATANI, ON
MOUNT BUFFALO, WERE NAMED AFTER HIM. ETTORE CHECCHI, A
CONTEMPORARY OF CATANI'S AND ALSO AN ENGINEER FOR THE VICTORIAN
GOVERNMENT, IS NOTED FOR HIS EXPLORATION OF THE UPPER NIURRAY AS
WELL AS FOR HIS CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PLANNING OF THE IUME
RESERVOIR. THERE HAVE BEEN FAMOUS PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS LIKE
FIASCHI; SCIENTISTS LIKE THE ASTRONOMER BARACCHI; GREAT FAMILIES
SUCH AS THE CILENTOS. RAFFAELLE CARBONI, AN HISTORIAN AND EX-SCHO
TEACHER, WENT DOWN IN HISTOPY AS ONE OF THE MINERS' LEADERS AT THE
EUREKA STOCKADE IN 1854. 
lORE RECENTLY, IN ADDITION TO THE SKILLS OF ITALIAN
IMMIGRANTS, WE HAVE HAD THE EXAMPLE OF TWO GREAT ITALIAN
ENTERPRISES WHOSE ACTIVITIES HAVE BEEN A MODEL AND IN MANY
WAYS AN INSPIRATION FOR THE POLICIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. I REFER TO ENTE NAZIONALE IDROCARBURI ( ElII) AND
THE INSTITUTO PER PA RICOSTRUZIONE INDUSTRIALE ( IRI).
WITH THEIR WORK AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN MIND WE HAVE SOUGHT TO
EXTEND THE ACTIVITIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION AND ESTABLISHED THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY,
ALL OF US KNOW WHAT ITALIAN MIGRANTS HAVE DONE FOR
AUSTRALIA THE BENEFITS AND SKILLS, THE VITALITY AND ENERGY
THEY HAVE BROUGHT TO OUR WAY OF LIFE. ONLY RECENTLY, HOWEVER,
HAVE AUSTRALIANS FULLY ACCEPTED THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES TO
MIGRANTS AND RECOGNISED A DEEP AND CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO
THEM. RECENTLY THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED THAT THERE SHOULD NO
LONGER BE A SEPARATE DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION, FAR FROM
DOWNGRADING THE VALUE WE PLACE ON MIGRANTS OR IMMIGRATION,
THAT DECISION RECOGNISED THAT MIGRANTS MUST BE TREATED IN
EVERY WAY AS FULL AND EQUAL CITIZENS. IT HAS BEEN TOO EASY
IN THE PAST TO PUT MIGRANTS IN SEPARATE COMPARTMENTS, IN
SPECIAL CATEGORIES, AND SHUFFLE OFF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM
TO THE STATES OR TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS. [ NOW AT LAST WE HAVE
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT MIGRANT CITIZENS ARE AUSTRALIANS IN EVERY WAY,
AND THEIR RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES, THEIR DUTIES, THEIR PROBLEMS
AND THEIR NEEDS ARE NO DIFFERENT IN PRINCIPLE FROM THOSE OF
ANYONE ELSE. 
THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE HAVE ABANDONED OUR CONCERN
FOR MIGRANTS. IT DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE NO LONGER FEEL A SPECIAL
OBLIGATION TO THEM. No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THEIR
HAPPINESS, THEIR SECURITY OR THEIR FUTURE THAN WE HAVE.
UNDER THE OLD ARRANGEMENTS IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE FOR A
RELATIVELY SMALL DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION TO DEAL ADEQUATELY WITH
SUCH DIVERSE MATTERS AS SETTLEMENT, WELFARE, EDUCATION, CITIZENSHIP
AND POPULATION. THE DEPARTMENT SIMPLY DID NOT HAVE THE PHYSICAL
OR FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO HANDLE THESE MATTERS. IT LACKED THE
POWER TO PERFORM MANY OF THESE FUNCTIONS ADEQUATELY. SOCIAL
SECURITY BENEFITS FOR MIGRANTS OR THE IN-SCHOOL EDUCATION OF
MIGRANT CHILDREN WERE ESSENTIALLY FUNCTIONS OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
REMEMBER THAT BEFORE LABOR CAME TO POWER THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT ADOPTED A VERY LIMITED ROLE IN SUCH AREAS AS EDUCATION
AND URBAN AFFAIRS. IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL SECURITY, ITS MAIN
TASK WAS TO GIVE OUT PENSIONS AND OTHER WELFARE BENEFITS.
IN ALL THESE AREAS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S ROLE HAS NOW
CHANGED RADICALLY. IN EDUCATION WE ARE SEEKING TO ELIMINATE
AREAS OF DISADVANTAGE, . TO PROVIDE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN, NOT JUST TO HAND OUT ARBITRARY PER CAPITA
PAYMENTS. IN SOCIAL SECURITY, THROUGH THE SOCIAL WVELFARE
COMMISSION AND THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE P LAN, WE ARE TRYING TO
ESTABLISH COMMUNITY WELFARE FACILITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS. IN
SHORT WE HAVE BECOME AN INITIATOR, AN ACTIVIST IN THESE FIELDS
IN A WAY THAT NO PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD ATTEMPTED.
s i i 
5B
IT IS ONLY LOGICAL THAT, IN LINE WITH THIS EXPANDED
ROLE, MIGRANT AFFAIRS SHOULD COME WITHIN THE PURVIEW OF THE
RELEVANT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, IF THE DEPARTMENT
OF EDUCATION IS TO TACKLE GENUINELY THE PROBLEMS OF THE
DISADVANTAGED IN OUR SCHOOLS IT CANNOT IGNORE MIGRANT
EDUCATION, IF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE
SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION ARE TO RESTRUCTURE OUR WELFARE
SYSTEM EFFECTIVELY THEY CANNOT IGNORE THE WELFARE NEEDS OF
MIGRANTS, THE SOONER WE SEE MIGRANT NEEDS AS PART OF THE
OVERALL NEEDS OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY, THE SOONER THOSE
NEEDS WILL BE MET BY THE BODIES WITH THE APPROPRIATE STAFF,
FACILITIES, FINANCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES,
THE GOVERNMENT'S EMPHASIS IS NOT ON MERE NUMBERS OF
MIGRANTS BUT ON THE WELFARE OF MIGRANTS. WE BELIEVE M'IGRANTS MUST
HAVE THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES AS ALL OTHER AUSTRALIANS TO LEAD A
FULL AND HAPPY LIFE AS FULL AND EQUAL CITIZENS, IN PARTICULAR
WE BELIEVE THE EMPHASIS IN AN IMMIGRATION PROGRAM SHOULD BE
ON THE REUNION OF FAMILIES, S/ 
THE MOST DRAMATIC RESULT OF OUR POLICIES HAS
BEEN TO CHECK THE FLOW OF' DISILLUSIONED AND DISAPPOINTED
MIGRANTS LEAVING AUSTRALIA, PLACING FAMILY REUNION FOR MIGRANTS
ABOVE MERE RECRUITING,, WE HAVE STOPPED THE MIGRANT DRIFT.
THE NUMBER OF MIGRANTS WHO BECAME AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS IN 1973
INCREASED By 485 PER CENT OVER 1972, p AND THE NUMBER RETURNING
TO THEIR COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN DECLINED FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN NINE YEARS. THESE FIGURES ARE DEEPLY GRATIFYING TO THE GOVERNMENT.
THEY SHOW THAT WE ARE MAKING MIGRANTS HAPPIER AND MORE CONTENTED
CITIZENS, WITH WIDER OPPORTUNITIES TO SHARE IN THE BENEFITS OF
AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY. IN EFFECT, WE ARE SAYING IT IS NOT THE
GOVERNMENT THAT SHOULD DECIDE WHO WILL COME To AUSTRALIA AS
MIGRANTS, BUT MIGRANTS THEMSELVES. IA NEW CITIZEN WHO HAS SETTLED
HAPPILY IN AUSTRALIA IS THE BEST PERSON TO RECOMMEND OTHERS TO
JOIN HIM. VIE ARE BRINGING FAMILIES TOGETHER, AND WE ARE
BUILDING UP OUR MIGRANT POPULATION ON THE ONLY PROPER BASIS
A BASIS OF HUMANITY AND COMPASSION.
THE AIM OF OUR'POLICIES IS TO PROMOTE THE SECURITY OF
MIGRANTS AND'REMOVE THE CAUSES OF NEEDLESS FEAR, FOR EVERY NEW
CITIZEN IN A NEW LAND THERE ARE NATURAL SOURCES OF ANXIETY.
THERE ARE LANGUAGE PROBLEMS, PROBLEMS OF LONELINESS, HOMESICKNESS
AND ISOLATION.. THERE ARE WORRIES ABOUT EMPLOYMENT AND HOUSING.
THERE ARE UNFAMILIAR LAWS. THERE IS, PERHAPS, A FEAR OF
DEPORTATION. THERE IS A FEAR THAT HE MAY NEVER BE ABLE TO RETURN
TO THE LAND OF HIS BIRTH OR REJOIN HIS LOVED ONES IN OLD AGE.
THERE IS A FEAR THAT, IF HE DOES LEAVE AuSTRALIA, HE WILL BE
PENALISED FOR DOING SO THROUGH THE LOSS OF SOCIAL SERVICE ENTITLEMENT s. e t17 
-7
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS WORKED VIGOROUSLY TO
REMOVE THESE CAUSES OF FEAR. ', 1E HAVE M1ADE GREAT PROGRESS. ONE
OF OUR GREAT REFORMS HAS BEEN TO INTRODUCE THE PRINCIPLE OF
PORTABLE PENSION RIGHTS. UNDER LEGISLATION PASSED BY THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT, PEOPLE IN AUSTRALIA RECEIVING AGE AND INVALID PENSIONS,
INCLUDING WIVES'I OR WIDOWS I PENSIONS, ARE ABLE TO RECEIVE THOSE
IN ANY COUNTRY WHERE THEY CHOOSE TO LIVE. THE NEW LEGISLATION
IS BENEFITING AGED, INVALID AND WIDOWED MIGRANTS WHO WISH TO
RETURN TO THEIR FORMER HOMELANDS. IT APPLIES EQUALLY TO ALL
RECIPIENTS OF PENSIONS, INCLUDING THOSE BORN IN AUSTRALIA,
WHO WISH TO LIVE ABROAD.
IN MY POLICY SPEECH FOR THE LAST ELECTION I PROMISED
ANOTHER VERY IMPORTANT REFORM FOR MIGRANTS. THE PRESENT
INCOME TAX LAW ALLOWS CONCESSIONAL DEDUCTIONS FOR DEPENDANTS
To AUSTRALIAN RESIDENT TAXPAYERS ONLY WHERE THE DEPENDANTS
ARE THEMSELVES RE SIDENT IN AUSTRALIA, IN THE CASE OF A MIGRANT
WHO COMES To AUSTRALIA INTENDING TO BRING HIS WIFE AND CHILDREN
OUT TO THIS COUNTRY AS SOON AS HE HAS MADE A HOME FOR THEM, A
PERIOD OF FIVE YEARS IS REGARDED AS A REASONABLE TIME FOR THE
WIFE AND CHILDREN TO JO'IN THE MIGRANT IN AUSTRALIA. IF HE
MAINTAINS THE FAMILY DURING THIS PERIOD INCOME TAX DEDUCTIONS FOR THE
DEPENDANTS ARE ALLOWABLE TO HIM. 
HOWEVER, MIGRANTS WHO ARE MAINTAINING DEPENDENT
RELATIVES OVERSEAS WITH NO VIEW TO BRINGING THEM TO AUSTRALIA,
OR WHO MAY BE PREVENTED FROM BRINGING THEM To AUSTRALIA BY
RESTRICTIVE EMIGRATION POLICIES IN FORCE IN SOME COUNTRIES, ARE
UNABLE TO QUALIFY FOR A TAX DEDUCTION FOR DEPENDANTS. THE
GOVERNMENT WILL EXTEND THE PROVISIONS OF THE INCOME TAX LAWS
GOVERNING DEPENDANTS'I DEDUCTIONS TO ENTITLE PEOPLE IN THESE
SITUATIONS TO THE TAXATION ADVANTAGES AVAILABLE ALREADY TO
ALL OF US MAINTAINING DEPENDENT RELATIVES WHO RESIDE IN
AUSTRALIA. LABOR'S CONCERN. FOR MIGRANTS IS A CONTINUING CONCERN.
IT FLOWS FROM OUR WHOLE SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY, IT IS NOT SOMETHING
DISCOVERED ONLY AT ELECTION TIME.
W'E HAVE STANDARDISED THE REQUIREMENTS FOR CITIZ7ENSHIP
SO THAT EVERY MIGRANT SEEKING AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP CAN DO SO
IRRESPECTIVE OF NATIONAL ORIGINS AND UNDER CONDITIONS APPLYING
EQUALLY TO ALL. THE PERIOD OF RESIDENCE IS NOW THREE YEARS
FOR EVERYONE. WE HAVE AMENDED THE CRIMES ACT SO THAT IT IS NO LONGER
POSSIBLE FOR AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS INCLUDING, OF COURSE,
NATURALIZED MIGRANTS TO BE DEPORTED, TASK FORCES HAVE BEEN
ESTABLISHED IN ALL STATE CAPITALS TO IDENTIFY THE MOST URGENT
SETTLEMENT PROBLEMS CONFRONTING MIGRANTS. EACH IS CHAIRED BY A
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT AND INCLUDES PEOPLE IN DAY-TO-DAY CONTACT
WITH MIGRANTS AND THEIR NEEDS, 
9-
THE GOVERNMENT HAS SET UP A COMMUNITY ' RELAT IONS
COMMITTEE OF THE IMMIGRATION ADVISORY COUNCIL TO INQUIRE INTO
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST MIGRANTS, EXPLOITATION OF MIGRANTS AND
THEIR USE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES.
AUSTRALIA'S FIRST TELEPHONE SERVICE IN 20 LANGUAGES
HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED IN THE CAPITAL CITIES TO ANSWER EMERGENCY
PLEAS FOR HELP FROM MIGRANTS.
MiIGRANT EDUCATION CENTRES HAVE BEEN OPENED IN PERTH.,
BRISBANE, MELBOURNEj SYDNEY AND ADELAIDE.
BJY MEANS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN, THE
GOVERNMENT IS SEEKING TO INVOLVE LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN PLANNING
THEIR WELFARE SERVICES. THE PLAN HAS SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE FOR
ITALIAN MIGRANTS BECAUSE IT PROVIDES THEM WITH AN OPPORTUNITY TO
PARTICIPATE WITH OTHER AUSTRALIANS IN ESTABLISHING WELFARE
PRIORITIES AND LOCAL COMMUNITY NEEDS. TO HELP EXPLAIN THE PLAN
TO MIGRANTS, THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY IS PREPARING AN
EXPLANATORY LEAFLET FO. R ITALIAN PEOPLE AND OTHER MIGRANT GROUPS.
HERE IS ONE SMALL BENEFIT THAT I KNOW WILL PLEASE MANY
OF YOU. YESTERDAY THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL ANNOUNCED THAT, FROM
TOMORROW, THE MINIMUM CHARGE FOR A 3-MINUTE TELEPHONE CALL
FROM AUSTRALIA TO ITALY WILL BE REDUCED FROM $ 1-~ TO $-D 
6 p 10
I BELIEVE AUSTRALIA'S PRESENT IMMIGRATION POLICIES
ARE A RETURN TO THE HUMANITARIAN IDEALS THAT INSPIRED THE
MIGRATION PROGRAM NEARLY 30 YEARS AGO, lE ARE DETERMINED THAT
MEN AND WOMEN FROM OTHER NATIONS WHO HAVE SHOWN THEIR FAITH
IN AUSTRALIA WILL HAVE THAT FAITH REWARDED AND RESTORED,
MIGRANTS WILL BENEFIT AS MUCH AS OTHER AUSTRALIANS I REMIND
YOU THAT MIGRANTS WILL BENEFIT LIKE EVERYONE ELSE FROM THE
GOVERNMENT'S REFORMS IN HEALTHj HOUSINGi THE ENVIRONMENTj
THE CITIES AND EDUCATION ESPECIALLY EDUCATION, IT WILL
NO LONGER BE NECESSARY FOR SCHOOL PRINCIPALS TO RESIGN IN
PROTEST BECAUSE OF THE POOR CONDITIONS FOR MIGRANT EDUCATION
IN AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS,
I AM GRATEFUL FOR THE OUTSTANDING CONTRIBUTION
MIGRANTS AND ESPECIALLY ITALIANS HAVE MADE TO AUSTRALIA'S
PROGRESS, I LOOK TO THEM TO HELP US BUILD A GREATER AUSTRALIA
FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE A MORE HUMANEj TOLERANT, JUST AND
BOUNTIFUL SOCIETY, WE ARE DETERMINED THAT MIGRANTS WILL
SHARE FULLY IN THE PRESENT PROSPERITY AND FUTURE PROMISE OF
THE NATION THEY HAVE DONE SO MUCH TO DEVELOP AND ENRICH, 



EMBARGO: 3.00 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE MAROONDAH SOCIAL HEALTH CENTRE, RINGWOOD,
MELBOURNE, SUNDAY 1 SEPTEMBER 1974
One of the greatest areas of inequality which exists
in Australia is in the field of health care. Too many areas
lack adequate hospitals and too many people don't have ready
access to the services of doctors and other skilled medical
workers. The provision of medical services has simply not kept
pace with the changes in our society. This applies particularly
in our cities. Hospitals, doctors and other services are spread
unevenly and unfairly. They tend to be clustered in long-established
and generally affluent areas. In contrast, people in newer and
frequently disadvantaged areas have not had-proper access to the
amount of high-quality care on which all Australians should be
able to depend. It is quite wrong that people in some areas of our
cities should only have to travel a few miles to receive treatment
at a major hospital, while other people in the same metropolis
are faced with journeys of 20 miles or more to get this treatment.
It is equally wrong that people in some areas should have available
a more than sufficient number of doctors to provide medical
treatment while people in other areas suffer a shortage of doctors.
It has been clear for some years that not enough
would be done to overcome-these inequalities until the Australian
Government, the national government, assumed a greater responsibility
for the provision of hospital and medical services throughout the
nation. It is for this reason that the present Government last
year initiated an urgent and thorough examination of the nation's
health services. A Hospitals and Health Services Interim
Committee, which later became by statute the Hospitals and Health
Services Commission, was appointed to investigate, report on,
and recommend necessary action to overcome both immediate and longterm
problems. The objective of the Commission is:
" The provision of high-quality, readily accessible,
reasonably comprehensive, co-ordinated and efficient
health and related welfare services at local, regional,
State and national levels."
Acting on the recommendations of the Commission the
Government has already started moving towards the satisfaction
of this objective. In the last financial year, for example,
we allocated $ 4.5 million to meet urgent needs for additional
hospitals in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane. 
Perhaps the most exciting initiatives have been taken in
the field of community health services. In 1973 the Government
adopted as a statement of policy and principle the recommendations
contained in the report entitled " A Community Health Program for
Australia", prepared by the Hospitals and Health Services
Interim Committee. In addition to the community health program
based on that report, it introduced the Mental Health and Related
Services Assistance Act last year to provide the basis for its
separate, but closely associated, community mental health,
alcoholism and drug dependency program. Both programs were
introduced by the Government to foster the development of a high
standard of community-based health care services. They were in
accordance with the Government's announced health policy of
providing regionally organised, community-based services with
greater emphasis on health education, prevention and rehabilitation,
and as a real alternative to hospital and other high-cost health
resources. A total of $ 17.5 million was allocated under these programs
in 1973/ 74. This consisted of $ 10 million under the community
health program and $ 7.5 million under the community mental health,
alcoholism and drug dependency program. A further $ 7.5 million is
available under the latter program in 1974/ 75, after which it will
be encompassed in the more broadly based community health program.
The majority of projects approved under both programs in 1973/ 74
will be operated by State health authorities. However, a
significant number of volunteer and community organisations have
also received Australian Government financial assistance.
The Maroondah Social Health Centre is a good example of a
community-based service which has received the Government's assistance.
The centre had its origins in the St. Stephen's ( Methodist-Presbyterian)
Social Health Board and was formed as a voluntary benevolent organisatio
at a public meeting at Ringwood on 5 November 1973. Its aim is to
help overcome the deficiency in services dealing with emotional and
psychiatric problems in this area of suburban Melbourne. The
Australian Government first became involved in assisting the project
in April when the Minister for Health, Dr. Everingham, approved a
grant of $ 10,500 to cover salaries and wages at the centre unti).
the end of the 1973/ 74 financial year. A further grant of $ 9,000
was approved in July for the first quarter of the new financial year.
Since that allocation was made the Government has been
considering further assistance. In its deliberations it has benefited
from the representations made by the member for the federal electorate
of Casey, Mr. Race Mathews, on behalf of the Centre. As a result I
am able to announce that the Government has allocated $ 27,908 towards
the project for the last three quarters of 1974/ 75. This includes
$ 23,640 for salaries and $ 1,462 for the rent of the premises from
which the service operates.
This assistance forms part of an integrated network of
community services being developed by the Government in the eastern
suburbs of Melbourne. In the last month the Minister for Health has
approved another substantial allocation to help in the development
of these services. He approved the allocation of $ 600,000 to the
Victorian Hospitals and Charities Commission to buy a private hospital
in Ringwood which is being converted to a day hospital, rehabilitation
centre and short-term hostel for physically handicapped people the
first such facility to be provided in the eastern suburbs. 
-3-
I believe that an important lesson can be drawn from these
allocations. They demonstrate the Government's continuing commitment
to major reform in the provision of health and other services.
In view of the current economic difficulties facing Australia,
some people may have begun to doubt that continuing commitment.
They may have begun to think that inflation and related economic
problems would cripple our program of reform. Some may have begun
to think that the effect of our current economic problems might be
to prevent the present Government from making any significant
difference to our society.
I want to affirm now that our program of reform will continue.
I want to affirm now that we will continue to work towards the
eradication of the kind of inequalities that I have described in
relation to health services. If anyone doubts that a sufficiently
determined Government can make a difference in these areas, they
should ask the people of Deer Park in Melbourne of the benefits they
have received from their new community health centre. If anyone
doubts the difference that can be made, they should ask the people of
Caufield of the extra services that have been made possible by our
assistance to the Caufield Community Care Centre. Equally they could
check on the benefits that have flowed from the establishment of
health centres at Ingle Farm and Clovelly Park in Adelaide. They
could also seek the opinion of the thousands of people who are
receiving new ancillary health services in the Illawarra region
south of Sydney or in the western metropolitan region of Sydney itself.
The Government has demonstrated that it can make a difference
in the provision of health services in these and many other areas.
Despite any economic problems we might face, we will continue to
demonstrate that difference. Our commitment to reform does not,
of course, apply only to health services. We have already transformed
the funding of education at all levels. That transformation will
continue. We have already begun in Albury/ Wodonga the first major
program of decentralisation in this country. That program will continue.
We have already begun to inject large sums of national finance into
our ailing urban transport system. That injection will continue.
In the last fortnight we have announced the provision of $ 56 million
to councils to help reduce inequalities between local government
regions. That drive against inequality will continue. And we have
made it quite clear that we will go ahead with the greatly expanded
program for the care and education of pre-school children.
The present Government believes that major reforms cannot be
achieved in any of these: areas without its involvement, without
national involvement. The States by themselves simply don't have the
trwidis to oii' about the chancres that are ncn. dec. The national Government
does have these funds and any. current economic problems will not prevent
it from bringing about improvements in essential services. Our
dedication remains to the creation of the best community services
that the country can afford.
There are those who are quick to criticise government spending.
There are those who would argue that at a time of economic difficulty
we should cut back on all our programs. Nothing could be more short
sighted. Indeed, if we accept that wage and salary increases are part
of the inflationary problem, we should see these programs as helping
to counter that problem. / 4 
-4-
For, if we can provide a range of community services
to satisfy the reasonable needs of all citizens and to create
reasonable opportunities for all citizens, we will have taken
a step towards reducing what might be termed the incomes mentality that
is so prevalent in our society. Our aim here is to enable people
not to have to look to their individual earning power to satisfy
so many of their basic needs.
The meeting of these needs by providing adequate
services must depend on Government action. An increased wage
alone is not going to ensure that a worker's children will receive
a proper education. An increased wage will not guarantee access
by that worker's family to high-quality medical and hospital care
at a reasonable cost. An increased wage will not grant him adequate
transport, roads, child care facilities, recreation outlets and
the like, In turn, if that worker can look to the Government to
provide these facilities and services, he will not be so dependent
on seeking ever-increasing wages.
Thus, our program of reform can fulfil two purposes.
It can help reduce inequality in our society. At the same time
it can help produce economic stability. The current economic
climate will not stop the Government from pursuing and achieving
these twin goals. 



IPRESS STATEMENT NO. 314
2 September 1974
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY ACQUISITIONS COMMITTEE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced
that the activities of the Australian National Gallery
Acquisitions Committee would wind down shortly with the
appointment of an Interim Council to take over all Gallery
affairs. The Acquisitions Committee has comprised:
Mr. James Gleeson ( Sydney), Chairman
Mr. Leonard French ( Melbourne)
Mr. Clifford Last ( Melbourne)
Mr. James Mollison ( Canberra)
Mr. Fred Williams ( Melbourne)
Over the last 18 months the Committee has been
responsible for all recommendations on acquisitions for the
National Gallery, including Jackson Pollock's " Blue Poles"
and many other important works of art.
The Committee initiated a new era in the history
of public collecting in Australia, particularly of world-wide
modern and contemporary art.
The Australian Government is appreciative of the
individual and collective contributions. of members of the
Committee which it believes constitute an important step
towards the creation of what it is hoped may become one of
the great collections of the twentieth century.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


Press Statement No. 313
2 September 1974
The Prime Minister announced today that he had forwarded references to the Industries Assistance Commission on what assistance should be accorded the production in Australia of cellulose acetate flake and agricultural tractors.
Both bounties have been in force for a number of years and were regularly reviewed by the Tariff Board. In the case of agricultural tractors the bounty has been in existence in one form or another since 1922.
The Commission is being asked whether assistance which could include bounty should be given to the production of these goods after the bounties expire in 1976.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.


3 September 1974
I felt some apprehension when the Mayor arrived in a Roman chariot this morning. It occurred to me that a right-wing extremist might come up on a white charger to beat me to the ribbon.
This is a splendid new shopping centre with its arcades and concourses it bears a remarkable similarity to the ancient Roman forums. of course, the modern shopping centre is not just a collection of shops it includes-offices and places of leisure, recreation and enjoyment. It even has a children's playground. Sir Theo Kelly pioneered'child care facilities before governments. He doesn't have the problems of a federal system or the Treasury.
Stores have set a lead for Government and urban planners bytaking their services to the people. They have followed the trends of population. Many districts lack adequate schools, hospitals, sporting and -cultural facilities. Few districts lack adequate shopping facilities.
In my own electorate of Werriwa, including the two new stores in Phoenix Plaza, there are 11 Woolworths-stores.
With a constituency like that it's no wonder I've got a safe seat. The biggest problem in the next redistribution will be to give every electorate the-same number of Woolworths, Flemings and Safeways. If we can do that,. even the Country Party would be happy with the boundaries.
There are no fewer than 17 Woolworths establishments in the suburbs now covered by my electorate or falling within its previous boundaries. Unfortunately I wasn't invited to open any of them till I became Prime Minister.
In the '50s, before I became Deputy Leader, Woolworths was one of my regular clients, as Laurie Oakes records. Every Prime Minister needs a great store behind him. The vaunted association between Menzies and the Lloyd Jones gave respectability to each.
Woolworths have shown how an efficient private enterprise, attuned&nbsp;to the needs of its customers and to local communities, can-provide the highest standards of service and reduce retail charges to a minimum. Public enterprise must be organised on the same basis of efficiency.What we need in the battle against inflation are-more "special offers" on the railways, more " discount prices" on the buses.
Woolworths are an all-Australian company 98% of the stock is held by Australians and New Zealanders. It gives first preference to Australian industry - &nbsp;93% of its goods are bought in Australia. It employs more than 30,000 Australians and gives indirect employment to thousands more in primary and secondary industry. It has aided national development by establishing stories in remote and unprofitable regions&nbsp; - The Snowy Mountains, Gove,Kambalda. It has brought the benefits of big-city&nbsp;shopping to Darwin, Mount Isa, Alice Springs, Broken Hill and Esperance.
Woolworths came to Liverpool 16 years ago and was burnt down 2 years ago. The Phoenix Plaza has risen from its ashes; Woolworths has risen from the Coles. I now declare that Woolworths Family Centre in Liverpool is open again.



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 317
September 1974
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO ALLEGATIONS CONCERNING SOME
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME UNIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr, in Executive Council, has
appointed a Royal Commission to inquire into allegations of
demands and payments affecting certain Australian Maritime unions.
Mr Whitlam said the Honourable John Bernard Sweeney,
Judge of the Australian Industrial Court, had been appointed the
Royal Commissioner and would be assisted by counsel.
The Prime Minister said the decision by the Australian
Government to request the appointment of a Royal Commission was
taken early this week after consultations between myself and
the ministers responsible, Mr C. K. Jones and Mr C. R. Cameron.
These consultations began as soon as information that such
demands were being made became available to me.
After consideration by the ministers, the information
was investigated by the relevant departments the Department of
Transport and the Department of Labor and Immigration, in
consultation with the Attorney-General's Department. It was
decided that the circumstances fully warranted the appointment
of a member of the Australian judiciary as a Royal commission to
investigate the matters.
The Australian Government agrees with the declared
policy of the Australian Council of Trade Unions in condemning the
demands and payments allegedly made. The Government is gravely
concerned by the public declaration by an official of one of the
unions alleged to be involved that the A. C. T. U. decision would be
defied. The Royal Commission will have wide powers to summon
witnesses and documents.
The terms of reference for the Royal Commission are:
/ 2 
-2-
i. To enquire into and report on:
whether any payments ( other than those of a normal
commercial nature or made pursuant to any law or
industrial award or agreement) have in recent times
been or are being made or demanded in respect of the
use of ships in voyages to or from Australia, or
within the Australian coasting trade under permit or
licence under the Navigation Act 1912.
the circumstances under which and the persons
( including corporate bodies) by whom and to whom
any such payments or demands have been made.
the reasons for and the purpose of. any such payments
or demands.
the subsequent or proposed use of or disposal of any
such payments.
the legality of any such payments and demands and
their propriety having regard in particular to
Australian trade union principles and ethics.
2. To recommend in the light of the Commission's findings:
what action, if any, should be taken in respect of
such payments.
what legislative or administrative changes are
necessary or desirable in relation to these matters.
It is expected that the first hearings of the
Commission will be held at an early date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



A U&gt; S T K A L I( A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 316
September 1974
ASSISTANCE TO NEW SOUTH WALES TO ALLEVIATE FLOOD DAMAGE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
that he had informed the Premier of New South Wales that the
Australian Government would join with the New South Wales
Government in the normal manner in assistance for the relief
of personal hardship and distress arising from the widespread
flooding now affecting a number of areas in New South Wales.
Mr. Whitlam said that the Australian Government
was deeply concerned about the distress and damage being
suffered by people affected by the flooding.
Mr. Whitlam indicated that the expenditure covered
by his Government's offer included the provision of food,
clothing, shelter and repairs to homes to make them habitable
and secure. The Prime Minister went on to say that he had
assured the Premier that the Australian Government would
look quickly and sympathetically at proposals for assistance
for other purposes.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



_, AUSTRALI,.~ Press Statement No. 315
September 1974
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY. INTERIM COUNCIL
The Prime Minister announced today that the Government
had appointed an Interim Council for the Australian National
Gallery. The interim Council will be responsible for all
Gallery affairs until it is established as a statutory
authority. It is expected that members of the Interim Council
will become members of Council of the Gallery once there is
a statute, and then serve normal initial terms of up to
3 years. Members of the Interim Council are:-.
Mr. Richard Crebbin ( Sydney) Chairman
Miss Pamela Bell ( Boonah, Queensland)
Mr. Geoffrey Cohen ( Perth)
Miss Janet Dawson ( Binalong, N. S. W.)
Mr. Leonard French ( Melbourne)
Prof. Patrick McCaughey ( Melbourne)
Mr. Colin Madigan ( Sydney)
Mr. Lenton Parr ( Melbourne)
Mr. David Wynn ( Adelaide)
Mr. James Mollison, Director of the Gallery under
contract, and a senior officer of the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet will also be members of the Interim Council.
It is expected that legislation for the Gallery
will be introduced in the Budget session of the Australian
Parliament this year.
A building for the Australian National Gallery, designed
by the Sydney architects Edwards, Madigan and Torzillo is under
construction on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra.
It is expected that the Gallery will be open to the public in
1978.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



, AU STRHAl IA( Pressj Stitement No. 319
6 September 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
BRICK AND PIPE INDUSTRIES LIMITED
Brick and Pipe Industries Limited have notified
their acceptance of the findings of the Prices
Justification Tribunal in its report of 5 August 1974
in relation to certain higher prices proposed by the
company. When received, the revised price list will be
available for inspection at the offices of the Prices
Justification Tribunal 10 Queens Road* Melbourne or
100 William Street, Sydney.
Canberra, A. C. T. 



A RALIA, Press Release No. 318
6 September 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
ALCOA OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
Alcoa of Australia Limited has notified its
acceptance of the racent findings of the Prices
Justification Tribunal in the following terms:
" In accordance with the opinion of the Prices
Justification Tribunal dated 16 August 1974, Alcoa
of Australia Limited will limit its published price
increases in regard to the above matters to the
following weighted average amounts:
Primary Aluminium Ingot .5.30 per kg.
Primary Foundry Ingot 9.90 " t 1
Rolled Products ( Sheet, Plate 9.70
and Foil etc.)
Extruded Products 11.6g
The above price incre ases will be applied to
our current published price lists, which are dated as
follows: All Ingot Price Lists dated 1/ 1/ 1974
Sheet and Plate Price Lists dated 1/ 1/ 1974
Foil Price Lists dated 1/ 1/ 1974,
1/ 4/ 1974 and 1/ 5/ 1974
Extruded Products Price Lists dated 1/ 3/ 1974
The new prices will be effective on all
domestic shipments made on and after 1 Soptember 1974.
As soon as they are printed, we will forward to
the Tribunal duplicate copies of our new price lists
and an explanation of how the weighted average price
increases were implemented by fine product."
When received, new price lists will. be avai ' lable
for inspection at the offices of the Prices Justification
Tribunal 10 Queens Road, Melbourne or 100 William Street,
Sydney. Canberra, A. C. T. 


Press Statement No 320
I know I speak for all Australians in expressing my profound sense of sorrow at the death of Lady Kerr.
Australia has lost a woman of great vitality and charm, a strong and vigorous personality of high ideals and high attainment who will be sorely missed by all who knew her. Sir John Kerr has lost a loyal and devoted wife, a woman richly equipped to share with him the burdens of his high and arduous office, an office he assumed with a ready spirit of service and a full consciousness of the responsibility it imposed.
In the circumstances I can think of few bereavements more poignant and untimely. It is a cruel blow that within months of assuming the post of Governor-General an office he has already graced with wisdom and distinction Sir John should lose the support and companionship of Lady Kerr. The full measure of public and private grief will go out to him at this time, sustaining him in his bitter personal loss and in the onerous public duties he has undertaken for Australia and her people. I have every confidence that the memory and example of Lady Kerr will strengthen Sir John in the years ahead.
On behalf of the Government I express my deepest sympathy to him and his family.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.9 September 1974


10 September 1974
No one in public life can judge a fellow politician - let alone a fellow-leader &nbsp;- with absolute detachment, the man is inseparable from the principles he espouses and the causes he works for; as such he is judged and remembered. My own view of Norman Kirk must therefore be coloured by the remarkable kinship of our political ideas, by the identity of our aims and purposes, and even by the extraordinary accident of history that brought us both to the leadership of our parties after the elections of 1966 and to office as prime ministers within a week of each other in the elections in 1972, in the circumstances we were inevitably colleagues. That in itself would not have made us friends; but friends we were indeed,
So I&nbsp;speak today with a true sense of personal grief, i share the sorrow we feel for the passing of a man; a man i knew well, a man i admired without reserve, a man whose human qualities matched the breadth and nobility of his public life, in no country save his own has his death been felt more keenly than here in Australia, he spoke not only for New Zealand but for his region, he spoke with a unique clarity and commitment for the emerging community of pacific nations, he spoke for small and middle powers everywhere. He worked at home, and his voice was heard abroad, in defence of the rights of small nations and for the welfare and dignity of the common man,
He fought for those causes with a rare vigour and passion, with attitudes shaped by the nature of his country and by the character of his early life, as the leader of a small power, he understood the anxieties and aspirations of small, independent nations, and with his background he understood and clearly felt the needs and feelings of ordinary people. &nbsp;Few men i have known believed more deeply in the essential goodness of the ordinary man. That belief was intuitive, not learned; instinctive, not reasoned; it sprang from his own essential goodness, from an openness of mind and a largeness of heart, from an innate dignity and a personal experience of hardship that brought him close to his people and identified him, in rare fashion, with the universal struggle of humanity.
He had the great good fortune to lead one of the few secure parliamentary governments in the western world, indeed, as a unitary state with a unicameral legislature, a strong two-party system and an equal franchise, New Zealand is perhaps the model of a parliamentary democracy. Norman Kirk staunchly defended those institutions, and in these testing and uncertain times for democracy, the world can ill afford to lose a man of his stature, a leader who spoke with such confidence and authority for his country and all it represented, and for the causes of humanity and peace,
Not since the death of Harold Holt have Australians felt more keenly and personally the passing of a political leader, not since the death of President Kennedy have we sensed more acutely the tragedy of a career cut short. One could say justly of Kennedy that he had too little time to prove what he could do, that cannot be said of Norman Kirk, certainly he had too little time; but in the 21 months that he led his country he gave ample proof of his achievements. &nbsp;Those achievements, i believe, will prove to be great and enduring,
When I first went to New Zealand to meet him at the beginning of last year he had been in office for barely two months, he had begun the great task of framing a new and independent foreign policy for his country and strengthening the welfare and social security of a people already renowned for their traditions of justice and equality. His beliefs were characteristically simple and uncompromising. He had a singular abhorrence of any form of racial discrimination. He loathed militarism. He loved justice. He loved his country. He wanted New Zealand's foreign policy to express her national ideals as well as to reflect her national interests, he withdrew New Zealand's forces from Vietnam, he recognised China, he realigned his country's voice behind the United Nations in matters of race and anti-colonialism, indeed so many of his early actions and decisions had their parallels in Australia that i fear i may be misconstrued if i recount them now. I simply say that in everything he did he had Australia's full support and my own unstinting admiration.
His approach to foreign policy was based on a principle which he proclaimed in these words soon after his government was elected: " we believe in the individual human worth and dignity of every man, woman and child, regardless of race or colour... Every action a people takes in international affairs is an announcement of the kind of people they really are, we know that in their daily lives New Zealanders are decent, humane people, my aim will be to ensure that New Zealand's actions abroad are in character."
His own actions, his whole personality, were equally in character. And nowhere was that personality blunt, forthright, courageous, humane displayed more strikingly than in his opposition to nuclear tests in the Pacific. His opposition to those tests was an example to the world and an inspiration to all who supported him. It made him the natural and respected spokesman for the pacific island states, all of them small, some of them former dependancies of New Zealand. In April last year we were both in Western Samoa for a meeting of the Pacific Forum. He enjoyed immense and deserved stature among the pacific leaders. &nbsp;At times during breaks in the proceedings I talked with him on the breach at APIA, and was never more conscious of the kinship he felt with the pacific itself, with that vast and beautiful environment he sought to protect, and with the aspirations of the people who inhabit its shores and lovely islands,
We met on three other occasions during his term of office in Christchurch, in Ottawa, in Canberra. He lasted visited this country in November to open the chancery of the New Zealand High Commission, which ranks among the most elegant new buildings in this city. On each occasion I sensed a deepening and strengthening of the relations between our countries, a greater awareness of our shared purpose and understanding. It is a commonplace &nbsp;- but no less true for being so - that no two nations in the world have a relationship of such trust and intimacy as Australia and New Zealand. Our names are linked in treaties and agreements. Our histories and origins have much in common. There has often been a striking synchronisation in the political character of our governments. Those of us who believe in democratic socialism, who have worked and fought for it, and who rejoiced at Norman Kirk's victory in 1972, saw in the events of that year the beginnings of an even deeper and more lasting partnership. It was, after all and i hope i will be forgiven a note of partisanship under Labor governments in both our countries that the Australian-New Zealand agreement - the ANZAC Pact &nbsp;- was signed in 1944. Norman Kirk worked tirelessly to promote the spirit of that agreement. He saw in it an opportunity to develop in peace a relationship born and tested in war.
For all his attainments he was a man singularly without conceit, without pretence, above all without bitterness or recrimination. A shrewd judge, certainly; an able and gifted politician with the essential toughness required of him: yet in his true self a man of vision, guided by genuine ideals and a yearning for a better world. I never knew him to be petty or cynical, he had a clarity of mind, a singleness of purpose, and behind his bluff and candid demeanour, a natural warmth and charm He served his party for 25 years and despite indifferent health and the lack of a formal education succeeded in transforming and modernising its electoral appeal. I have no doubt that his total dedication to the tasks in hand and his relentless capacity for work helped shorten his lif. He died in the service of his people; and their sympathy and that of his friends will go out to his family, as their goodwill will flow to his successor, he leaves a country richer and prouder for his leadership,
Politicians are not the best judges of their own achievements. A man of Norman Kirk's essential humility was not one to dwell at inordinate length on the importance of his work or his place in his country's history. He left us, however, in no doubt about his aims or philosophy, they were expressed with unmistakable clarity and consistency in his speeches and writings, I leave you with two examples, "the Welfare State", he once wrote, " is the thousands of young people in our high schools, the young men and women in technical institutes and universities…for the family it has meant better homes, better health, better and more secure jobs, greater security. For those who, due to frailty, age, illness or disability, are no longer able to work, it should mean adequate provision and freedom from anxiety” And again, in a speech he gave soon after his party's victory in 1972, he said: "New Zealanders have built up a society and a way of life that is unsurpassed for decency and humanity. It could be even better, and we hope to secure co-operation in policies that will make it so, on such a basis we are justified in standing up in the world for what we believe, without excessive pride or undue modesty”.
Norman Kirk had neither excessive pride nor undue modesty. He stood up for what he believed. He spoke his mind. He never flinched from his principles or from the self-imposed standards which bound him to a public life of rigorous honour and exemplary service. He was a great leader. He was a good man.


The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released two reports of the Industries Assistance Commission on Polyamide and Polyester Yarns, and Tyre Cord and Tyre Cord Fabrics.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government's decisions on the reports will be announced at the earliest practicable date.
CANBERRA10 September 1974
&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON.* E. G. WHITLAM,
AT PENRITH CIVIC RECEPTION*.-
11 SEPTEMBER 1974
THE PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
HAVE NATIONAL IMPLICATIONS QUITE DISTINCT FROM THE-IR
RELEVANCE TO PARTICULAR LOCALITIES. WHEN THE
INSTITUTE OF MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION WAS ESTABLISHED
' IN 1952 ON A FEDERAL BASIS IT REALISED THAT " WHILE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS LOCAL AND, IN FACT, DERIVES ITS
FUNCTIONS'FROM EACH RESPECTIVE STATE, THE DEVELOPMENT
, AND STRENGTH OF-IT IS A MATTER OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE
AND OF NATIONAL CONCERN. 1
IT WAS TWENTY YEARS BEFORE A NATIONAL
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS PREPARED TO TAKE A SIMILAR
ATTITUDE. ONLY SINCE LABOR WAS ELECTED IN DECEMBER 1972
HAS ANY ATTEMPT BEEN MADE TO GIVE PRACTICAL HELP TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN MEETING THE INCREASING DEMANDS
MADE UPON IT. ./ 2 
-2-
Nr KNOWS BETTER THAN THOSE INVOLVED IN
LOCAL GOVER'. MENT THE LONG YEARS OF NEGLECT AND
INDIFFERENCE FROM WHICH IT HAS SUFFERED AND THE
ATMOSPHERE OF PERPETUAL FINANCIAL CRISIS THAT
SURROUNDS IT FOR GENERATIONS. I HAVE OFTEN MARVELLED
AT THE DEDICATION AND FORTITUDE OF MEN AND WOMEN WHO
HAVE CONTINUED TO SERVE LOCAL'GOVERNMENT IN THE FACE
OF SUCH ODDS. NOW THE PROSPECTS ARE CHANGING.
THE RECENT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS ALL OVER
AUSTRALIA'-WITH THE LION'S SHARE COMING TO NEW SOUTH
WALES ARE THE BEGINNING OF THE END OF THE INEQUALITY
BETWEEN ' COUNCILS AND BETWEEN REGIONS THAT HAS BEDEVILLED
' THE GROWTH OF RESPONSIBLE AND RESPONSIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
IN AUSTRALIA. ALL MY GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES HAVE BEEN DIRECTED
TO ELEVATING THE STATUS AND IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WITHIN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM, AND ESPECIALLY HAVE THEY BEEN
DIRECTED TO GIVING LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES
TO DO ITS JOB. WE SHOULD NEVER FORGET THE DISGRACEFUL
WAY LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN NEGLECTED AND DOWNGRADED SINCE
THE VERY BEGINNINGS OF OUR FEDERATION, .1/ 3 
THE ø' ZBTS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAVE MULTIPLIED MORE THAN TWELVE TIMES SINCE
THE WAR, STATE DEBTS SIX TIMES, UP TO LAST YEAR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES WERE BORROWING MORE EACH YEAR THAN
THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF THEIR OUTSTANDING DEBT OVER 20 YEARS
OR SO AGO, AT THE SAME TIME THERE HAVE BEEN ACCELERATING
DEMANDS QUITE NATURAL AND PREDICTABLE DEMANDS ON
LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES, YET NOTHING WAS DONE TO
REDRESS THESE DEFICIENCIES; NOTHING WAS DONE TO CORRECT
A SYSTEM THAT ALLOWED THEM TO WORSEN YEAR BY YEAR.
THERE WAS NO SHORTAGE OF EVIDENCE ABOUT THE NEEDS OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, THE BARNETT REPORT ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT
" AREAS AND ADMINISTRATION IN NEW SOUTH WALES REPORTED LAST
YEAR THAT IN THE VIEW OF MOST SHIRE COUNCILS IN NEW SOUTH
WALES " THEIR AREAS COULD NOT SURVIVE WITHOUT A CONTINUANCE
, OF LARGE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND, WITHOUT EXCEPTION,
COUNCILS BELIEVED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S INVOLVEMENT
IN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS ESSENTIAL."
THE RECENT GRANTS COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS REFLECT
MY GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENT TO SUCH NECESSARY ASSISTANCE TO
THAT PART OF GOVERNMENT WHICH IS CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE,
LET ME REMIND YOU OF HOW THOSE GRANTS CAME ABOUT, ,/ 4 
WYf"! N SIX MONTHS OF LABOR'S ELECTION TO
GOVERNMENT ri DECEMBER 19721 THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT
PASSED A NEW GRANTS COMMISSION ACT AUTHORISING THAT
BODY TO INQUIRE INTO APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE BY
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. ANY
ASSISTANCE RECOMMENDED BY THE COMMISSION AND APPROVED
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS TO BE PAID TO THE STATES
UNDER SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON CONDITION THAT
IT BE PASSED ON TO THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS CONCERNED$
ADDITIONAL MEMBERS WERE APPOINTED TO THE COMMISSION AND
ITS STAFF WAS EXPANDED TO ENABLE IT TO DEAL WITH THIS
LARGE NEW RESPONSIBILITY. FROM NOW ON, THE COMMIS. SION
IS TO PLAY THE SAME ROLE IN REDUCING INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
REGIONS AS IT HAS BETWEEN THE STATES SINCE 19331
LAST MONTH MY GOVERNMENT APPROVED ALLOCATIONS. OF
$ 56,345,000 TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA. OF THISI $ 21,359,1000 CAME TO* NEW SOUTH WALES.
WE ACCEPTED THE GRANTS COMMISSION'S RECOMMENDATION THAT NO
CONDITIONS BE ATTACHED TO THE WAY IN WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES SPEND THESE, THEIR FIRST ALLOCATIONS UNDER THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT'S NEW SCHEME TO HELP REDUCE
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. THE
SYDNEY WESTERN REGION WILL RECEIVE A TOTAL OF $ 3,380,0004,
OF WHICH PENRITH CITY COUNCIL IS TO GET $ 330,000.' 111/ 5 
A .0ON AS THE GRANTS COMMISSION REPORT WAS
TABLED IN ' E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, I SENT
TELEGRAMS TO ALL COUNCILS INFORMING THEM CF THEIR
INDIVIDUAL GRANTS, I TRUST THAT THE MAJORITY OF
COUNCILS DERIVED AS MUCH PLEASURE FROM RECEIVING THEM
AS I HAD IN SENDING THEM, IT IS ALWAYS EXHILARATING TO
BE ABLE TO DELIVER THE GOODS, I TRUST YOU WILL ENJOY
THE PROCESS OF TYING UP THE PACKAGE AS YOUR COUNCIL
DELIBERATIONS DICTATE, SINCE WE ATTACHED NO STRINGS
TO OUR LONG-AWAITED PRESENT,
OUR SECOND GREAT INITIATIVE LAST YEARWAS TO SEEK
A VOICE AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LoAN COUNCIL,
OUR PURPOSE WAS, AND STILL IS, TO ADMIT REPRESENTATIVES OF
ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS FROM EACH STATE AND ENABLE THE
., COMMONWEALTH, ON REQUEST, TO RAISE APPROVED LOANS RAISED
BY THE COMMONWEALTH ON BEHALF OF THE STATES, I NEED HARDLY
REMIND YOU OF THE RESULTS OF* THAT SPECIAL PREMIERS CONFERENCE
IN OCTOBER LAST YEAR WHICH TURNED OUR PROPOSALS DOWN,
WHEN THE PREMIERS REJECTED THESE PROPOSALS TO BALANCE THE
FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES OF THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT
TO ENSURE ADEQUATE SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES,
WE HAD NO ALTERNATIVE BUT TO PROCEED WITH A REFERENDUM, 
-6-
THAT REFERENDUM WAS CARRIED IN NEW SOUTH WALES,
LARGELY BEC'JASE SO MANY LOCAL GOVERNMENT PEOPLE SUPPORTED
IT IN THE FACE OF STRONG OPPOSITION FROM THE STATE
PREMIER AND THE FEDERAL OPPOSITION PARTIES WHO TRIED TO
SCARE THE PEOPLE AWAY FROM IT. I BELIEVE THAT YOU
SUPPORTED THAT REFERENDUM BECAUSE YOU REALISED WHERE
YOUR HOPE FOR SURVIVAL LAY, THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH WALES
SUPPORTED IT BECAUSE RESPONSIBLE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES
ENCOURAGED THEM TO DO SO.
WHAT OF THE FEAR OF A FEDERAL TAKEOVER OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT? IT IS A GHOST WHICH MUST BE LAID TO REST.
FOR MY PART I HAVE NO WISH TO SEE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BECOME
AN APPENDAGE OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ANY MORE THAN I
WANT IT TO REMAIN AN APPENDAGE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS.
BUT I DO WANT IT TO HAVE ADEQUATE AND REASONABLE ACCESS
TO THE NATION'S FINANCIAL RESOURCES. IT MUST BE ELEVATED TO
ITS PROPER PLACE IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY AND GIVEN THE MEANS
TO CARRY OUT ITS WORK FOR THE LASTING BENEFITS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS
SHOWN THE WAY. 


11 September 1974
Mr Russett, Consuls General for Britain and Japan, my colleagues the Mayor of Penrith, Mr. Luchetti MP, &nbsp;Mr. Mulock, &nbsp;MLA Mr. Makino, &nbsp;Mr. Montgomery, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It gives me very great pleasure indeed to he in this " studio", and I know that not only those on the platform but everybody in the audience will be on their very best behaviour because we are all in LIVING COLOUR, glorious technicolour, on the best and latest television sets available in the world.
It gives me very great pleasure indeed to be at this function with you. One of the first things I did after becoming Prime Minister was, early in the piece, when I was Prime Minister and minister for 12 other departments as well, was to ask the Tariff Board to put into force the p conditions under which colour television sets should be made in Australia was an early and striking opportunity to demonstrate that my government wanted to open up the processes by which decisions of this character were made.
&nbsp;I'm delighted now to see the product, to see it being produced so well and so early. There is no doubt that but for that early, intensive, rapid enquiry by the Tariff Board ( now the Industries Assistance Commission), we D mightn't have had such good colour television sets in Australia as are now being made at Penrith, and it is certain that the public wouldn't have got such cheap ones.
The infusion of more colour in production and marketing has been a " god-send'" for the Australian electronic industry. The industry was over-protected and arrangements were in hand to see that the existing companies would have the whole field for themselves. Here today, we can see that two of the greatest, most experienced enterprises in the world have combined to produce, in Australia, good sets. They will be available in good time for the introduction of colour television in Australia, and we can be &nbsp;certainly assured that companies that have had sane greater part to play in Britain, in Japan will produce good sets, and the heads of these enterprises assure me that the products of this factory will be as good as the products of any factory in which they participate anywhere in the world there couldn't be any greater assurance of quality than that.
I am very glad indeed that one of the first steps I took as Prime Minister was to see that we would get as good sets as we are now getting and as cheap sets as we will now be getting.
I also welcome the opportunity to say in the company of this great gathering of people who are involved in all aspects of the electronic industry: design, production, marketing, servicing and of course those who make the programmes too, that I welcome the opportunity to refute some of the alarmist talk that sometimes goes on, including in the electronics industry, because I regret to say that some-hitherto overprotected industries sometimes monopolised by overseas companies, very often too in collusion with trade unions, have raised the alarm of unemployment in this industry. It is absolute nonsense. There will b-e no reduction of employment in the electronics industry in Australia. one very simple reason is that it takes two. or three times as many men and women to produce colour television sets as it does to produce an equivalent number of black-and-white television sets.
So we ' re getting the good product here as we can see in Penrith today. So the industry in a more contemporary, competitive form is going to be prosperous. There will be a very great number of people employed in making and in designing and servicing these sets and producing these programmes who will benefit.
But above all, the public will benefit. And that's why all of us in each of our callings is able to provide because the public is satisfied with it.
There is one other matter which I should mention a feature of government policy in this field, and that is that earlier this year we had to face the fact that the patent rights controlling the PAL - these initials are always &nbsp;very confusing I - f I talk about National, of course people in the National Alliance may think I'm raising some political issue; if I say PAL sane people may think this is sae mutation of ALP. I assure you if I use Words like National or PAL I am doing so in a completely dispassionate bi-partisan, multi-partisan sense.
Well, earlier this year, we found that these patent rights were held by AEG Telefunken and under the arrangements then pertaining, imports from Japan of sets under 1.8" couldn't cone to Australia before March, 1977 another 3 years before could get them that is colour T. V. would be here for 2 years before 18" screens would he available from the best source. Now this would have unreasonably restricted the consumer's choic6. As a result of negotiations with AEG Telefunken and with AWA my government has ensured that sufficient small sets will be available in Australia to meet the estimated demand from the outset of colour T. V.
I sometimes have misgivings about the small sets, I usually find that I require a broad screen and some people say that my wife and I both require a broad screen. It's a great medium for the family, television, but particularly for our family.
And I also of course, on this occasion in this week couldn't forbear to pay tribute to the insight or rather the farsightedness of the most progressive commercial station in N. S. W. for seeing that the whole team regularly appeared! The only difficulty in our family is that w have to see that the programmes in which we appear don't compete, so we have to appear at different times on Channel 2 and Channel 10. we have to keep our Channels right in T. V. And in our family we keep a good public balance in this respect. Just as I have to give equal time to Bill Snedden whenever I speak, my wife has to give equal time to me.
I always watch the polls. I never know whether they're referring to my government's stocks or my wife's ratings but I watch the polls in these respects.
&nbsp;But to come back to the subject here, we are determined, as a government to see that people in Australia will have the best T. V. possible. The programmes, the reception, the servicing, the consumer, the producer, the performer albeit rain or hail or " Frost", T. V. will be first-rate in Australia. Now, we will be seeing ourselves, I don't know what channels will be showing it later on, but in a few months, on the products of this factory, people in a very great area of Australia, will be able to see colour T. V. as most &nbsp;comparable countries have been able to see colour T. V. for some time~ past. And we can be sure, that the wait has been worthwhile, because we-will now, in Australia, from~ a combination of Australia's greatest overseas customers, Japan and Britain, with the co-operation they've shown in this case, with the opportunities they've given to men and women in this country, we will now be able to see colour television in Australia on sets which will be as good as those to be found anywhere in the world. I have very great pleasure in declaring the Rank-NEC factory open.
&nbsp;


PRESS STATEMENT NO. 322&nbsp;&nbsp;11 September 1974
The Prime Minister today announced the membership of&nbsp;&nbsp; the Australian National Advisory Committee for International&nbsp;&nbsp; Women's Year.
The Prime Minister said that the Government had&nbsp;&nbsp; been, fortunate in being able to obtain in the people selected&nbsp;&nbsp; a blend and balance of expertise and experience.&nbsp;&nbsp; Ms Elizabeth Reid, adviser on matters relating to women, will&nbsp;&nbsp; be the convener of this Committee; its other members are:

Ms Shirley Castley child welfare officer in Tasmania
Mr Barry Egan Trade unionist
Ms Irene Greenwood lifetime fighter for women's rights in Western Australia
Ms Ruby Hammond -member of various South Australian aboriginal committees
Ms Jeanette Hungerford -Queensland occupational therapist
Ms Caroline Jones extensive media experience
Mr J. H. M. Oswin Secretary, Department of the Media
Ms Maria Pozos active amongst migrant women in Melbourne
Ms Ruth Ross physiotherapist, active in many voluntary and women's organisations in the Wollongong area.
Ms Diana Waite -experience in problems of women in remote areas, particularly the North West of Australia
Mrs Margaret Whitlam journalist and former social worker

&nbsp;&nbsp; It will be the responsibility of this Committee to&nbsp; advise the Government in the development of themes for-the Year and in the formulation of a national program. The Committee will provide a continuing link between the Australian Government,&nbsp;&nbsp; women's organisations and the community as a whole.
The Prime Minister said that his government was determined&nbsp;&nbsp; that International Women's Year would be a year of real&nbsp;&nbsp; significance and one during which substantial achievements are&nbsp;&nbsp; made in furthering the opportunities for women in our society.&nbsp;&nbsp; His government had already introduced a great number of legislative&nbsp;&nbsp; reforms aimed at removing discrimination against women. Nevertheless,&nbsp;&nbsp; without a concerted effort towards reducing entrenched prejudices&nbsp;&nbsp; and attitudes, the benefits of many of these reforms may not be&nbsp;&nbsp; fully realised.
The National Advisory Committee is in a unique position&nbsp;&nbsp; to provide a point of national co-ordination for the diverse&nbsp;&nbsp; activities already taking place within the community in areas&nbsp;&nbsp; concerned with women. In addition through the National Advisory&nbsp;&nbsp; Committee a national program focussing on women, drawing attention&nbsp;&nbsp; to both the disabilities they encountered as well as the great&nbsp;&nbsp; contribution they make to Australian society, will mean that 1975&nbsp;&nbsp; will be a year of significance in the history of social change&nbsp;&nbsp; within Australia.
The Prime Minister added that it is the wish of the&nbsp;&nbsp; Government that the expert advice of the Australian National&nbsp;&nbsp; Advisory Committee will help to create conditions in which&nbsp;&nbsp; women can fully express their sense of self-respect, dignity&nbsp;&nbsp; and freedom and can properly make their great contribution to&nbsp;&nbsp; Australian society. In this way both men and women, adults and&nbsp;&nbsp; children, will be helped towards a richer life.&nbsp;&nbsp;
CANBERRA. A. C. T
&nbsp;



11 SEPTEMBER 1974
SPEECH BY-THE PRIME MINISTER
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
INAUGURAL MEETING OF THE NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE, CANBERRA
ONE OF THE REGULAR AND OFTEN UNNOTICED
ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS IS ITS DESIGNATION
OF INTERNATIONAL YEARS FOR THE PURPOSE OF DRAWING
ATTENTION TO MATTERS OF HUMAN SIGNIFICANCE. ' FOR
INSTANCE IN THE PAST DECADE THERE HAVE BEEN
PROCLAIMED SUCH YEARS AS
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION YEAR ( 1965)
INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR HUMAN RIGHTS ( 1968)
INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION YEAR ( 1970)
INTERNATIONAL YEAR TO COMBAT RACISM AND
RAC. IAL DISCRIMINATI. ON ( 1971)
WORLD POPULATION YEAR ( 1973)
* IN THE PAST, IN AUSTRALIA, THESE YEARS HAVE
BEEN CELEBRATED WITHIN THE COMMUNITY THROUGH THE ACTIVITIES
OF VARIOUS ORGANISATIONS, BUT RARELY HAVE GOVERNMENTS
TAKEN THESE YEARS SERIOUSLY ENOUG-H TO PLAN FAR-REACHING
AND IMAGINATIVE PROGRAMS AIMED AT ACHIEVING THE OBJECTIVES
OF THE YEAR. My GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED THAT THERt IS
MUCH MORE THAT CAN BE DONE, AT A NATIONAL LEVEL, TO
ASSIST AND CO-ORDINATE THE CELEBRATION OF THESE
YEARS$ / 2 
-2-
THE STRUGGLE FOR UNIVERSAL HUAN RIGHTS
IS A PROTRACTED AND PERHAPS AN UNENDING STRUGGLE.
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR IS CONSIDERED TO BE
ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT IN THAT THE GOVERNMENT. IS
DETERMINED THAT ITS ACTIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES
ADOPTED IN THE INTERNATIONAL FORUM BE MATCHED WITH
THOSE PURSUED AT HOME. IN THE UNITED NATIONS,
AUSTRALIA IS BECOMING KNOWN AS AN OUTSPOKEN CONTENDER
FOR BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS. WE ACKNOWLEDGE THAT WE HAVE
A CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO DO ALL IN OUR POWER TO
-PROMOTE RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
To MY MIND, THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF
HUMAN RIGHTS IS ONE OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT AND
ENLIGHTENED ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS, AND
IT IS FROM THIS FUNDAMENTAL COMMITMENT TO THE DIGNITY
OF PEOPLE THAT 1975 WAS UNANIMOUSLY PROCLAIMED ON
18 DECEMBER 1972 BY THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
TO BE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR,
IT IS WORTH CONSIDERING THE FACT THAT IT
WAS THOUGHT NECESSARY TO NOMINATE A YEAR FOR ALL
NATIONS TO MAKE A CONCENTRATED EFFORT TOWARDS ENSURING
THAT WOMEN ENJOY THE DIGNITY OF BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS, / 3 
-3-
THAT THEY AKt INTEGRATED INTO SOCIETY AND THAT
THERE IS A RECOGNITION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THEIR
CONTRIBUTION TO SOCIETY,
IT IS WORTH CONSIDERING THIS FACT BECAUSE
IT IS A SOBERING THOUGHT THAT WOMEN THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD HAVE TO BE GRANTED AN OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD.
THE FORMATION OF A NATIONAL ADVISORY
COMMITTEE, AND THIS ITS INAUGURAL MEETING, IS'AN
INSURANCE THAT AUSTRALIA WILL FACE THE RESPONSIBILITY
* THAT THIS YEAR PLACES UPON US.
IT IS MY HOPE THAT YOU WILL BE ABLE TO
MARSHALL, CO-ORDINATE AND ENCOURAGE THE DEDICATION,
ENERGY AND ENTHUSIASM OF ORGANISATIONS AND WOMEN
WITHIN THE COMMUNITY, AND THAT IN ADDITION YOU WILL
PROVIDE A NATIONAL DIRECTION TO THIS ACTIVITY SO THAT
1975 IS NOT ONLY A YEAR OF SIGNIFICANCE IN ITSELF
BUT THAT IT WILL HAVE MADE A LASTING CONTRIBUTION
TOWARDS REDUCING THE PREJUDICES AND LACK OF OPPORTUNITY
FROM WHICH WOMEN SUFFER. IT IS ALSO MY HOPE THAT THIS
YEAR WILL ENSURE A LASTING RECOGNITION OF THE GREAT
CONTRIBUTION THAT WOMEN HAVE MADE, AND CONTINUE TO
MAKE, TO AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY, S./ 14 
GOVERNMENT LEGISLATION CAN ONLY ACHIEVE SO
MUCH AND I SHALL NOT PRETEND TO YOU THAT ANY GOVERNMENT
CAN ACHIEVE IMMEDIATELY FOR AUSTRALIAN WOMEN THE REVOLUTION
REQUIRED TO ALLOW THEM TO DEVELOP FULLY AS INDIVIDUALS,
FOR INSTANCE IT MUST BE SAID THAT, EVEN IF
WE WERE TO REMOVE ALL THE INEQUALITIES OF OPPORTUNITY
AND OF STATUS, IT STILL WOULD NOT BE ENOUGH, WE HAVE
TO ATTACK THE SOCIAL INEQUALITIES, THE HIDDEN AND
USUALLY UNARTICULATED ASSUMPTIONS WHICH AFFECT WOMEN
NOT ONLY IN EMPLOYMENT BUT IN THE WHOLE RANGE OF THEIR
OPPORTUNITIES IN LIFE,
THIS IS NOT JUST A MATTER FOR GOVERNMENTS
AND FOR ACTION BY GOVERNMENTS IT IS A MATTER OF
CHANGING COMMUNITY ATTITUDES AND UPROOTING COMMUNITY
PREJUDICES, AND INSOFAR AS THIS REQUIRES A RE-EDUCATION
OF THE COMMUNITY THEN CLEARLY GOVERNMENTS ALONE CANNOT
BE EXPECTED TO DO THE WHOLE JOB, YOU ARE PROBABLY AWARE
OF WHAT WE HAVE DONE, ONE OF THE PURPOSES OF THE
HUMAN RIGHTS BILL WAS TO PERMIT AUSTRALIA TO RATIFY
THE CONVENTION ON THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN, WHICH
WAS ADOPTED BY THE UNITED NATIONS IN 1952 AND CAME
INTO FORCE IN JULY 1954, AUSTRALIA IS NOT A PARTY TO
THE CONVENTION ON THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN AS
THERE IS STILL LEGISLATION IN TWO STATES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA 
AND TASMANIA, THAT DOES NOT YET FULLY CONFORM WITH
THE REQUIREMENTS OF THAT CONVENTION, THIS CONVENTION
PROVIDES THAT WOMEN SHALL BE ENTITLED TO HOLD PUBLIC
OFFICE AT AUSTRALIAN AND STATE LEVEL ON EQUAL TERMS
WITH MEN, WITHOUT ANY DISCRIMINATION, ACTION HAS
ALREADY BEEN TAKEN TO AMEND AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION
RELATING TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE TO REMOVE PROVISIONS
THAT OFFEND AGAINST THIS CONVENTION, -IT ISEXPECTED
THAT AUSTRALIA WILL RATIFY OR ACCEDE TO THAT CONVENTION
AFTER THESE DEFECTS HAVE BEEN OVERCOME, EITHER AS A
RESULT OF THE PROPOSED HUMAN RIGHTS ACT OR BY THE
ENACTMENT OF SPECIFIC LEGISLATION ON THE SUBJECT,
MY GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADYfESTABLISHED
A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION, OTHER ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
IN THE AREA OF WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT INCLUDE:
SUCCESSFUL INTERVENTION IN DECEMBER 1972
IN PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE AUSTRALIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION
TO HAVE ESTABLISHED THE. PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL
PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE, CONSULTATIONS
WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE LED TO MOST
STATES AGREEING TO THIS PRINCIPLE, 
-6-
THE PROVISION OF TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR
WOMEN WISHING TO ENTER OR RE-ENTER THE
LABOUR FORCE AFTER A PERIOD OF DOMESTIC
RESPONSIBILITY,
THIS COMING YEAR WILL ALSO SEE THE BEGINNING
OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOVERNMENT'S NEW PROGRAM
FOR THE CARE AND EDUCATION OF YOUNG CHILDREN, IN NO
OTHER COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS SUCH AN AMBITIOUS PROGRAM
BEEN ATTEMPTED, THIS PROGRAM RECOGNISES THE NEED FOR
EDUCATIONAL, HEALTH AND WELFARE COMPONENTS IN CHILD
CARE; IT RECOGNISES THE NEED FOR THESE SAME SERVICES
FOR CHILDREN WHETHER THEY BE LOOKED AFTER AT HOME OR
ELSEWHERE, IT WILL BREAK DOWN THE TRADITIONAL
DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN OCCASIONAL CARE AND REGULAR CARE,
BETWEEN PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION AND CHILD MINDING, ALL
CHILDREN WHETHER THEY BE LOOKED AFTER AT HOME OR
ELSEWHERE WILL HAVE ACCESS TO LOCAL CENTRES DESIGNED
TO TAKE CARE OF THEIR EDUCATIONAL, HEALTH, PSYCHOLOGICAL
AND OTHER NEEDS, THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS PROGRAM
WILL PLACE AUSTRALIA AMONGST THOSE COUNTRIES MOST
GENUINELY CONCERNED WITH WELFARE OF THE YOUNG.
FURTHERMORE, THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION HAS
ESTABLISHED A COMMITTEE TO LOOK INTO THE RELATION
BETWEEN SOCIAL CHANGE AND THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN
AND GIRLS, RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THIS COMMITTEE .17 
-7-
' WILL BE INCLUDED IN THE REPORT TO BE PRESENTED TO
PARLIAMENT IN THE COURSE OF NEXT YEAR, IT3 TERMS OF
REFERENCE ARE FAR-REACHING AND ITS TASK A DIFFICULT ONE,
FOR NOT ONLY MUST IT PINPOINT THOSE AREAS OF EDUCATION
WITHIN WHICH WOMEN ARE DISADVANTAGED, BUT IT MUST ALSO
MAKE SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE ACTION,
MANY OTHER GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS HAVE
PROGRAMS PLANNED FOR THE COMING YEAR,
IN THE FIELD OF WOMEN'S HEALTH, THE FIRST,
AND BASIC, INIATIVE TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LEICHHARDT WOMEN'S COMMUNITY
HEALTH CENTRE IN SYDNEY, THE AIM OF THI. S CENTRE IS TO
S MEET A NEED EXPRESSED BY WOMEN FOR A HEALTH SERVICE
STAFFED BY WOMEN DIRECTED SOLELY TOWARDS THE SPECIAL
HEALTH NEEDS OF WOMEN, THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT INIATIVE
OF A COMPLETELY NEW DIMENSION DERIVING DIRECTLY FROM
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S BROAD POLICY PERSPECTIVES
AND THE COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM WILL BE ACTIVELY
DEVELOPED TO GIVE IT PRIORITY,
GREATER PARTICIPATION BY, WOMEN AT ALL LEVELS
OF HEALTH CARE PLANNING, DELIVERY AND ADMINISTRATION
IS BEING ACTIVELY PROMOTED AND THIS POLICY IS PROVIDING
WOMEN WITH INCREASING OPPORTUNITIES OF INFLUENCING THE
DIRECTION WHICH HEALTH CARE IS TAKING IN THE COMMUNITY, / 8 
-8-
IN THE FIELD OF ABORIGINAL HEALTH, ABORIGINAL
WOMEN ARE BEING INVOLVED TO AN INCREASING DEGREE IN THE
DELIVERY OF HEALTH CARE TO THEIR OWN PEOPLE.
THE INITIATIVE OF MY GOVERNMENT WHICH MAY
HAVE THE MOST FAR-REACHING CONSEQUENCES IS THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A ROYAL COMMISSION INTO HUMAN
RELATIONSHIPS. IT IS THE TASK OF THIS COMMISSION TO
INVESTIGATE THE STRESSES THAT SOCIETY PLACES UPON
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PEOPLE, IN WHAT WAYS INADEQUATE
HOUSING, INSUFFICIENT MONEY, TOO MANY OR TOO FEW
CHILDREN, THE AVAILABILITY OR OTHERWISE OF CONTRACEPTIVE
COUNSELLING AND THE ADEQUACY OF MEDICAL CARE AFFECT
PEOPLE AND THEIR RELATIONSHIPS. THIS COMMISSION HAS
BEEN ASKED TO PRESENT REGULAR INTERIM REPORTS AND HENCE
WILL ALSO CONTRIBUTE TO THE SUCCESS OF THE COMING YEAR.
WE MUST HOWEVER ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE INEQUALITY
OF WOMEN'S POSITION IN SOCIETY IS DEEPLY EMBEDDED NOT
JUST IN THE INSTITUTIONS BUT ALSO IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
THE SOCIETY. IN THIS RESPECT THOSE WOMEN'S ORGANISATIONS
ARE CORRECT WHICH SAY THAT THE FIRST AND FUNDAMENTAL STEP
TOWARDS FREEDOM IS AWARENESS BY WOMEN THEMSELVES OF THEIR
REAL INEQUALITY, OF THE EXTENT OF THEIR SOCIAL, POLITICAL,
ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL DISCRIMINATION AND DEPRIVATION. ,/ 9
i-
-9-
I HAVE MENTIONED THE GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY
THAT THE NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE HAS FOR DEVELOPING
THEMES AND PROGRAMS FOR THE YEAR WHICH WILL BE OF BENEFIT
TO ALL WOMEN IN AUSTRALIA, WHATEVER THEIR EDUCATION, THEIR
CULTURAL BACKGROUND, THEIR ECONOMIC STATUS, THEIR
OCCUPATION, THEIR BELIEFS OR THEIR WAY OF LIFE. IN SO
DOING YOU ALSO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO TACKLE THIS
BASIC PROBLEM OF EMBEDDED ATTITUDES NOT ONLY BY
ENCOURAGING THE GROWTH OF COMMUNITY ACTIVITY IN AREAS
AFFECTING WOMEN BUT ALSO BY GIVING A SIGNIFICANT BOOST
' TO THE LEVEL OF AWARENESS AMONGST WOMEN AND MEN OF THE
EXTENT OF THESE PROBLEMS.
IT IS FOR THIS REASON AND BECA'USE OF OUR
COMMITMENT TO CHANGE IN THIS AREA THAT MY GOVERNMENT
IS DETERMINED THAT SUFFICIENT TIME AND FUNDS BE
AVAILABLE TO ACHIEVE THESE ENDS AND IT IS ALSO FOR
THIS REASON THAT MUCH TIME AND THOUGHT WENT INTO THE
MEMBERSHIP OF THE NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE. WE
WANTED, AND WE HAVE, A GROUP OF PEOPLE WHOSE UNIQUE
EXPERTISE AND EXPERIENCE IS DEEPLY GROUNDED IN THEIR
UNDERSTANDING OF AND DEMONSTRATED COMMITMENT TO?. AUSTRALIAN
WOMEN, THEIR PRESENT AND THEIR FUTURE. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 323
11 September 1974
REFERENCE TO THE TEXTILES AUTHORITY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that he had sent a reference to the Textiles Authority within
the Industrie-s Assistance Commission covering yarns, knitted
fabrics and towelling. Mr Whitlam said that this action was
being taken as a result of high and rising levels of imports
and an apparent total availability of such goods on the
Australian market substantially in excess of previous levels'.
The goods covered by the reference include acrylic
and wool yarns, warp and weft knit fabrics, and terry towelling
and towels. The reference seeks the advice of the Authority
on whether action should be taken in terms of the GATT Textiles
Arrangement to restrain imports into Australia. The Authority
has been asked to report as soon as possible but within a
maximum period of 60 days. Australia acceded to the GATT
Arrangement earlier this year and as a result of a previous
reference to the Textiles Authority, restraint negotiations have
recently been concluded with several countries on certain
articles of apparel. The Prime Minister emphasised that the question of
whether it would be necessary to have negotiations on the goods
in question with exporting countries would have to await
examination of the recommeldations of the Textiles Authority.
Recent press reports that the GoverE-mrcnt hmad already sought
negotiations with the Japanese Government were not correct.
However, the Japanese Government had been informed recently
that a reference to the Textiles Authority was under consideration.
This had been done in the spirit of the understandkng contained
in the Japan/ Australia Commerce Agreement that where Japan has
substantive trade in particular products Australia would inform
Japan in advance before action such as that now decided upon was taken.
Mr Whitlam said that, although it is not clear to the
Government at this stage that restraint action on all the goods
covered by this latest reference is necessary, he considered it
important that the Government be able to take the initiative in
having investigations undertaken so that action can be taken
promptly if found necessary.
The Prime Minister invited manufacturers and other
interested parties to start preparing submissions now to the Authority
which would announce arrangments for public hearings shortly. / 2 
-2-
The Prime Minister also pointed out that should
the need for restraint action emerge from the report of the
Textiles Authority, goods ordered overseas but not shipped would
be subject to the terms of any export restraints that may be
found necessary.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 


Prime Minister Press Statement No. 32411 September 1974
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced&nbsp;that he had sent a reference to the Temporary Assistance &nbsp;Authority on the question of temporary assistance for the&nbsp;Australian industry producing footwear and parts therefor.
Mr Whitlam said that imports of footwear were at high levels and the Government was concerned that the industry, which has been adjusting and restructuring over&nbsp;several years towards operation under a long term industry rate&nbsp;of duty, does not become unduly disrupted by greater import&nbsp;competition than originally intended. It is important,. he said, for the Government to be able to have investigations&nbsp;carried out so that appropriate action can be taken where&nbsp;necessary.
Mr Whitlam made the point that this was the second&nbsp;reference to the Temporary Assistance Authority under the&nbsp;Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973. Under the Act the Authority is required to report to the Government (no later&nbsp;than thirty days from the date of the reference) on whether it is necessary that urgent action be taken to protect the industry&nbsp;in relation to the importation of any goods. Where the Authority finds that urgent action is necessary he is asked to report&nbsp;&nbsp; whether this can appropriately be provided by a temporary duty, by the temporary prohibition or restriction of imports or by a&nbsp;combination of both a temporary duty and the temporary prohibition or restriction of imports.
The Prime Minister also pointed out that should&nbsp;&nbsp; the need for temporary assistance emerge from the report of the Temporary Assistance Authority, goods not entered for home consumption would be subject to any temporary measures taken by&nbsp;the Government in the light of the report.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.



J., A USTRA LI
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 327
12 September 1974
DEATH OF FRANK GREEN
Frank Green was one of the outstanding public
servants of our generation. For 22 years he was an observer and
recorder of some of the greatest events in the nation's history.
His devotion to the cause of democracy and parliamentarygovernment,
his lively involvement in the dramas and
personalities of the political scene and his deep concern for
the reputation of parliament and the rights of its members,
endeared him to all who worked with him in the service of the
Australian people. I feel a personal loss as I have been associated
with the Green family since I came to Canberra with my own
family in 1928. I have long valued his friendship and advice.
I believe I speak for all my parliamentary
colleagues in extending our deepest sympathy to his widow and
family.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUST , A o.
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 326
12 September 1974
Industries Assistance Commission Report Gloves,
Mittens or ' Mitts
The Primc Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced
today that the Government has accepted the recommendations of
the Industries Assistance Commission in its report on glovrs,
mittens or mitts. The report was released on 6 August 197'.
The Government's decision to implement the Commission's
recommendation will mean that a General rate of duty of 25% will
apply to gloves of the industrial type that are wholly or partly
coated or covered with artificial plastic material and to uncoated
knitted or crocheted gloves that are suitable for use in the
production of these industrial type gloves. Minimum rates of
duty will apply to all other goods under reference such as
dress gloves. Mr Whitlamn said that the assistance p) roposed by
the Commission and accepted by the Government was only an interim
measure pending the results of the iinquiry at present being
carried out by the Commission into the Clothing Industry.
Mr Whitlam also said that details of the customs
tariff changes arising from the Government's decision will be
announced when administrative arrangements to implement them
have been finalised.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUSTRALIA L PRESS STATEMENT NO.' 325
12 September 1974
REFERENCE TO INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMM\ ISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that he had forwarded a reference to the Industries Assistance
Commission on whether assistance should be accorded the
production in Australia of soaps and other detergents and
other related products.
This reference has been forwarded to the Commission
following the recommendation of the Joint Committee on Prices
in its recent report on the Prices of Household Soaps and
Detergents. The Committee recommended that as a further
measure to increase competition the. question of the level
of protection on household soaps and detergents be referred
to the Industries Assistance Commission.
The Committee stated that the insignificance of
imports and the level of profits earned in this industry
indicate that it is over-protected. It said that the removal
of import duties may not have an immediate effect on competition
in the domestic market because the major manufacturers are
corporations who have manufacturing plants in countries
such as New Zealand. However, the Committee considered that
the removal of duties increases the potential for import
competition from countries such as Japan and could have the
effect of restraining price increases on the domestic market.
The last comprehensive review of the level of
protection for the soaps and other detergents industry was
that by the Tariff Board in October 1963.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 328
13 September 1974
PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD WAGE DECISION
The Pr. Lme Minister, Mr. E. G. Whitlam said today
that he welcomed the decision of the Public Service Board
to grant no further increase to Public Servants in the
clerical, postal and keyboard areas beyond the $ 16 per
week increase which had been announced by the Board on
June 21. Mr. Whitlam said that the decision of the Public
Service Board was an important example for the rest of
the community of the restraint which his Government sought.
He added that the Government's total approach to the related
issues of increases in income, inflation and management of
the economy included positive support for the principle of
automatic quarterly cost of living adjustments ( wage indexation).
Mr. Whitlam recalled that following the Parliament's
decision to reject the determinations of the Remuneration
Tribunal which dealt with the salaries of Members of Parliament,
Departmental Heads and office holders, his Government had
decided not to implement the Tribunal's recommendations
concerning Judges and he had telegraphed each of the Premiers
urging that they take similar action. Mr. Whitlam went on to
say that as the Treasurer had stated on 23 July the
Government had invited the Prices Justification Tribunal
to scrutinize with care price increases based on wage costs
in excess of awards.
The Prime Minister said that these actions by his
Government were an earnest of the Government's intention to
ensure restraint in the growth of wages anid other forms of
income. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUSTRALIAN GOVFR-N?, PMP
ASSISTANCE TO MACK~ AY
AND ITS REGION
STATEMENT BY THE PPTMF' ' lINT STER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
ON HIS VISIT TO MP. CI( AY
14 SEPTEMPEP 1S74
Mlackay is typical of the regions benefiting from
Australian Government policies tc improve local government
services and promote equal opportunities for Australian
citizens wherever they nay live.
While Mackay is one of the richest regions of
Australia and of great importance to the national economy,
the Government has given special attention to its need~ s and
its future development.
one of the most important Labor Government initiatives
has been to empower the Grants Ccmmission to recomnmend
financial assistance to local government bodies. The Government's
objective is to reduce inequalities between regions and to ensure
that people everywhere enjoy the same opportunities and living
standards. Last month the Government accepted ixn full the first
series of grants recommended by the Commission. of the
Australian total of $ 56.3 million, Queensland will receive
$ 8,954,000. Grants to local government in the Mackay region
total $ 397,000, including a grant of $ 64,000 to Mackay City
Council. No strings were attached to these grants. They will
help local government bodies improve community services and
initiate important development projects.
By giving help where it is most needed after careful
and impartial investigation by the Grants Commission the
Government hopes to give people in country-cities and regions
the same standards and amenities as the capital cities. ./ 2 
-2-
RESOURCES Mackay is the centre of several important industries,
including sugar, coal and beef production. The region produces
more than one-quartar of Australia's sugar.
The Government acknowledges this vital contribution
to the national economy and is Oetermined to assist and
strengthen these industries in every possible way.
Australian exports of sugar are now worth more than
$ 300 million a year. The market remains buoyant. Through
the efforts of Dr Rex Patterson, the Minister for N7orthern
Development, firm overseas markets have been secured for sugar,
with substantial long-term contracts already signed with
Malaysia, ! ingapore, New Zealand and the Republic of Korea.
Negotiations are in progress wi. th China, the United Fingdom
and Japan. The Government is ma}: inq a $ 5 million grant for the
Kinchant Dam to help stabilise sugar-cane production in an
area subject to droughts.
Productivity in the beef industry has risen sharply.
To help meet problems due to world oversupply, the Australian
Government is sending a high-level trade delegation to Brussels
and Tokyo and is seeking consultations with the F. F. C. under
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The Government will spend $ 24 millio-on beef roads
in Queensland over the next three years.
To further develop the vast coal resources of the
region, the Australian Government has commissioned a report on
the industrial development prospects of the Bowen Coalfields
Basin with special reference to a possible steelworks.
FLOOD RELIEF The Australian Government is providing massive financial
assistance for restoration work following the recent disastrous
floods. Under the Queensland Flcod Relief Act 1974, provision
has been made for Australian Government Assistance of $ 66 million
over a three-year period. 9../ 3 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 329
September 1974
VISIT BY SHAH OF IRAN
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that Their -Imperial Majesties, the Shahanshah Aryamehr and
the Shahbanou of Iran, would pay a State Visit to Australia
at the invitation of the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr,
from 20-27 September 1974.
Mr Whitlam said that the visit would serve to
strengthen the friendly relations existing between
Australia and Iran. During their stay Their Majesties
would visit New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland,
as well as Canberra.
Mr Whitlam said that the Hon. Kep Enderby, M. P.,
would be Minister in Attendance upon His Imperial Majesty
during the visit.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUS IKA!. I
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 330
16 September 1974
SUBURBAN RAILWAY LINE EXTENSION EAST HILLS TO GLENFIELD
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today reassured
residents of East Hills in Sydncy that the Australian
Government would protect their interests in planning the
route of the suburban railway line extension from East Hills
to Glenfield. Mr. Whitlam was commenting on fears expressed by
residents that the railway extersion would result in the
wholesale resumption of private homes.
The Prime Minister added that the New South Wales
Government was seeking financial assistance for the ra-ilway
extension under the Urban Public Transport Agreement. Under
this agreement, the Australian Covernment contributes two-thirds
of the cost of urban transport improvement projects w'iich are
approved by the Australian Minister for Transport.
Mr. Whitlam confirmed ihat officials of the , ustralian
Department of Transport are cur ently assessing the potential
routes for the railway extensior in consultation with New South
Wales officials and other Austrzlian Government departments.
The Prime Minister concluded thz t he was confident a plan will
be achieved which will minimise the impact of the project on
all parties.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



STATEMENT FOR THE WERRIWA PRESS:
1 AUS RAIIA1
PRIME MINISTER
1974 BUDGET LIVERPOOL HOSPITAL
Campbelltown and Liverpool Hospitals should benefit
from the 1974 Budget allocation of $ 28 million for public
hospital facilities in the States.
The Prime Minister and Member for llerriwa,
Mr. Gough Whitlam said today that the Australian
Government had decided to go ahead with a five year program
of capital assistance for the provision, expansion and modernisation
of public hospital facilities.
" I anticipate that Campbelltown and Liverpool Hospitals
will be able to speed up their development programs throucgh
thleir share of the grant for 1974/ 75," he said.
Mr. Whitlam estimated that total fed. eral assistance
to public hospitals would exceed $ 650 million by 1978/ 79,
the end of the five year period.
The Budget allocation is a direct result of the
Australian Government's decision to implement the recommendations
of the Hospitals and Health Services Commission's " Report on
Hospitals in Australia". This was tabled in Parliament on
April 10 this year by the Minister for Health, Dr. Everingharn.
The Report made recommendations on the provision of
hospital facilities in Australia, and emphasised that health
services should be organised on a regional basis so that people
in each region would have access to comprehensive health care.
In the Report, hospital facilities were taken to incluide general
public hospitals, mental hospitals and other institutions
offering alternative accommodation for patients such as
nursing homes and hostels.
Mr. Whitlam said that the Hospitals and Health Services
Commission had as its objective " The provision of high-quality,
readily accessible, reasonably comprehensive co-ordinated and
efficient health and related welfare services at local, regional,
State and national levels." He said that it has been clear for
some years that not enough would be done to overcome deficiencies
in our health services until the national Government assumed
a greater responsibility for the provision of hospital and
medical services throughout the nation. / 2 



1j,, AUSTRKALIA, PRESS STATEMENT NO. 331
19 September 1974
PRIME MINISTER TO MEET PRESIDENT FORD
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said tonight that
he would be meeting President Ford during his forthcoming
visit to the United States.
Mr. Whitlam said that he would be visiting Washington
after addressing the United Nations General Assembly in New
York, and would call on the President on Friday, 4 October
at the White House.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. EM BA R GO: 1 AM, 19 September 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 332
19 September 1974
GOVERNMENT TO REASSESS ANL FREIGHT RATES TO AND FROM TASMANIA
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced tonight
that the Australian Government will make an immediate
reassessment of A. N. L. freight rates to and from Tasmania.
This follows strong representations by Tasmania's
federal Members and Senators who met this morning with the
Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the Minister for Transport,
Mr Jones. The Prime Minister has ordered that the reassessment
should be made without delay to see if any interim assistance
to Tasmania is appropriate. The Prime Minister emphasised
that this move did not seek to anticipate the report of the
Nimmo Royal Commission of Inquiry into Transport to and from
Tasmania. This Inquiry is being held to ascertain how Tasmania
is disadvantaged in terms of freight and associated costs
through being the only State which has to depend on a single
form of surface Transport for its links with other States.
Mr Nimmo is at present examining the methods by
which the Canadian Federal Government equalises the rates charged
by Canadian National Railways for its rail services across the
continent and its ferry services to Price Edward Island and
Newfoundland. Mr Whitlam said that in the interim before Mr Nimmo
reported, he considered it essential to ensure that ANL rates
should not go up by a greater percentage than had the charges
applying on similar goods moving by surface transport between
mainland capitals during 1973 and 1974.
Mr Whitlam said he hoped the undertaking he had given
would reassure Tasmanians that their Labor Senators and Members
of the House of Representatives were pursuing vigorously their
representation of Tasmania's interests in Canberra.
Mr Whitlam recalled that a $ 1 million subsidy was paid
in 1973, towards the operations of the ' Empress of Australia'.
The same amount is provided in the 1974/ 75 Budget announced on
Tuesday night.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



STATEMENT FOR WERRIWA PRESS: AU) S 1! AlI A_
PRIME MINISTER
1974 BUDGET LIVERPOOL RAIL PROJECTS
The Australian Government will providca two-thirds
of the $ 21.5 million cost of constructing a new double
track railway between East Hills and Glenfield. This
will duplicate the existing Riverwood-East Hills section,
and when completed, the new rail link will -provide greatly
improved services to Sydney for travellers from the
rapidly developing areas south of Liverpool.
" This is an example of the greatly increased
emphasis the Australian Government places on improving
the long-neglected urban areas of Australia, such as
Liverpool," the Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa,
Mr. Gough Whitlam, said today. Ile was
commenting on Budget allocations to urban public transport.
He pointed out that express services from Campbelltown
to Central using this route could save up to 17 minutes in
travelling time. Other services would also benefit because
delays on the Liverpool/ Central route would be avoided.
In addition, the new line should help, to ease traffic
congestion in the Liverpool area, since it would reduce
pressure and dependence on road transport.
Mr. Whitlam said that the new railway should be
seen as part of the Australian Government's practical commitment
to improving the quality of life in the cities.
" Combined with our other urban initiatives, such as
acquiring land for homes,. developing new growth centres like
the Holsworthy/ Campbelltown/ Camden/ Appin area, and overcoming
the backlog in sewerage programs, it represents a major
breakthrough for our cities and the people who must live
in them," Mr. Whitlam said.
19 September 1974 



EMBARGO : 4.00 PN
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE A. L. P. REGIONAL COUNCIL TOWNSVILLE
SATURDAY 21ST SEPTEMBER, 1974
I take this opportunity here in his home city and
among the people he represents of congratulating Percy Tucker
as Leader of the Labor Party in Queensland. I have orked with
him for many years as a colleague and known him even longer as
a friend. The Labor Party in Queensland has a fine leader, a
respected leader, a leader who will carry it to victory in this
State and work with the Australian Labor Government for the
achievement of our common goals.
Four days ago my colleague the Treasurer brought down
the second Labor Budget in a quarter of a century. This is
my first opportunity to speak to a gathering of the party since
the Budget was presented. I welcome the chance to be with you
because the Budget gave all of us something to celebrate. We
have heard the expected outcry from the Opposition, the predictable
condemnation from the wealthy, the privileged, the richest
private schools, the stockbrokers, the speculators, the vested
interests. What are the facts? The Budget on Tuesday was the
most democratic and most radical in our history, the most
comprehensive expression of the Government's ambitions and the
party's philosophy that we have yet seen. It was a fair Budget,
a humane Budget, a confident Budget. It was a great Labor Budgeta
landmark in the party's struggle for humanity and justice.
You'll remember that for weeks and months beforehand
we had a welter of advice and speculation about what the Budget
should contain. Economists, academics, union leaders, politicians,
leader-writers the whole community was engaged in a quite
unprecedented debate on the future of the economy. And I welcomed
that debate.. For there was a very clear lesson to beldrawn from
the abundance of conjecture and advice. It proved there was no
obvious or conventional solution to our economic difficulties.
Imagine what would have happened if there had been a Liberal-
Country Party Budget on Tuesday night. There would have been no
room for doubt or speculation then. We all know what their Budget
would have done. How easy, how simple how savage that Budget
would have been! Back to Dranconian measures and conventional
remedies massive unemployment, bankrupt businesses, idle factories,
indiscriminate monetary restrictions. And-an end to our plans
for a fairer society and a brighter future for Australians.
Well,. that wasn't our method. Of course we could have
chosen the Liberal remedies, and I dare say if we had the Tory
pundits and commentators would now be applauding our responsibility.
But we weren't going to take it out on the weak, on the poor, on
the disadvantaged, on the children, on the Aborigines, on the
migrants, on the workers of this country. I have long held the view
that the Budget is not just an economic document but a declaration
of the Government's view of the kind of society we want and the
kind of people we are. That is what our Budget was about. Nothing
we have done has so clearly demonstrated, so clearly symbolised,
this Government's philosophy and concerns, its priorities and
aspirations. The choice was between Liberal remedies, discredited
Liberal remedies, with the abandonment of our program, or a
continuation of that program with a balanced and selective attack
on inflation in which the burdens will fall on those best able to 
-2-
bear them. We have framed a Budget which will raise the living
standards of the great majority of our people. We have framed
a Budget that will let us carry on the fight against inflation
-through flexible, discriminating measures and on a . s sound
co-operation between government and unions, employeis ind
employees, and all sections of the community.
This wasn't one man's Budget or a victory for-one
set of ideas over everything else. The Budget was the product of
weeks of intensive discussion within Cabinet, with the Government's
economic advisers, with the representatives of employees and
industry. It represented the collective view of the Government,
the whole Labor team, and in a true sense the ideals and
aspirations of the whole party. Every Australian citizen is
assured of a fair deal, a fair share, a fair go from our Budget.
We have reduced taxation for employees on all but the highest
incomes. We have cut back on lurks and tax dodges. We have
made certain that those who live on rents and dividends and
capital gains contribute their fair share of taxation to the
revenue. We have made provision for those most in need the war
veterans, the families with handicapped children, the old, the
sick and the Aboriginals. And with all that, we have advanced
and augmented our great programs for hospitals, schools, roads
and new cities. It is the quality of these services that will
determine the true standa~ d of living of our people just as much
as the thickness of their pay packets.
In everything we have done we have kept faith with the
people, the people who twice elected. us to govern. We have laid
the foundation for true national co-operation in the fight against
inflation. That fight can now go forwat'with confidence. It
won't be a fight in which only the fittest survive. The fittest
will carry * the heaviest burden. So every employee, every trade
unionist, every producer knows that from now on the f-ight will
be waged by the whole community fairly and squarely. And I put
it to you that it is in the interests of employees and their
organisations to join that fight and safeguard the gains they
have won for themselves and their families. I am not going to
kid the workers of this country that the fight will be easy. I do
say that the fight will be fair. Our Budget has ensured that the
lowest paid worker will be especially protected from the consequences
of an anti-inflationary strategy. We have established the
essential conditions on which that strategy of restraint and
co-operation can work. I appeal to the whole Labor movement to give
it a chance to work. The rewards will be great. Employees and
workers have most to gain from eventual success.
One of the great aims of the Budget is to raise the
standard of essential community services not just the services
my Government provides, but those of the States. There has never
been a Government more generous to the States. Yet I don't suppose
there has been a Government more maligned and traduced by the
Premiers. Our increased grants to the States did not begin with
this Budget. They began with our first Budget last year and they
have been augmented in numerous offers of special assistance. Our
Budget on Tuesday provided massive increases-' in grants to the
States of all kinds. The States will receive the largest increase
in direct and special purpose grants ever made. They will receive
36 percent of the total outlays in this Budget. The Budget provide~ i
for a 32.4 percent increase in total expenditure and 39.5 percent
of that increase will be payments to the States. / 3 
-3-
That is the answer to the phony, neurotic accusations
of centralism we hear from the Premiers. Is it centralist for
our Budget to allow a greater increase in the outlay for the States
than for our outlays? Is it centralist to provide the States
. with record grants for roads, schools, hospitals, ii,,.-ities,
sewerage and the improvement of the cities? Is it cuerlralist
to approve grants of $ 56 million to the States for locdl government
bodies on the recommendation of the Grants Coinmissica? Of course
not. All we say is that when the taxpayers of the nation provide
money for the States on such a scale they should at least have
some say through their national government in how that money
is used. The whole centralist catchcry is threadbare and dishonest.
I suggest that for the people of Townsville the real centralism,
the really pernicious and arrogant centralism, is exercised
from Brisbane. Here you have a region rich in resources, a region
rich in potential, rich in confidence and pride. You are part
of a State equally rich and proud. My colleagues in the Australian
Government share your confidence; we share your aspirations.
We want this State and this region to develop and prosper. We
are determined you will do so. The tragedy is that the development
of Queensland and your region is being held back not by us,
but by the very State Government that professes most loudly its
faith in the future of your State and in need for development.
on issue after issue important plans for Queensland's
development have been blocked by Mr Bjelke-Petersen. Take our
plans for this city, for Townsville itself. One of the first
things I promised on behalf of a Labor Government promised in
my policy speech in 1972 was to make Townsville a regional
growth centre. Despite our representation8, despite our
* correspondence, despite our personal pleas these plans have been
stalled. By now the whole scheme for a greater, more prosperous
Townsville could be well advanced just as it is in Albury-Wodonga.
Instead it is a victim of Mr Bjelke-Petersen's prejudice and
suspicion. I don't ask him to like me or to like the Labor Party.
What he thinks of the Australian Government is his business.
What he does for Townsville is your business and Queensland's
business. The blunt truth is that Mr Bjelke-Petersen would rather
deny Townsville its limitless prospect for growth than swallow his
pride and work with a Labor Government. Yet here is a Premier, a
Country Party Premier, who professes his belief in rural development
and decentralisation. Where would Albury-Wodonga be today if the New South Wales
and Victorian GOVernnlents took the same short-sighted view? They
are not Labor Governments. There is little love lost between me
and Sir Robert Askin or Mr Hamer for that matte They are big
enough men to put the interests of their States before their
personal animosities. The result has been a genuine creative
partnership between the three Governments for the development of
Albury-Wodonga. Our Budget on Tuesday allocated $ 40 million for the
new city. A further $ 37.4 million has been provided for the
establishment of other growth centres at Monarto in South Australia,
Geelong in Victoria and Bathurst-orange in New South Wales. If it's
good enough for Sir Robert Askin and Mr Hamer,-why isn't it good
enough for Mr Bjelke-Petersen? 4 
Townsville cannot afford to see its progress hampered
by political rivalry. The north cannot afford it, Queensland cannot
afford it. Your city is firmly established as one of the great
regional capitals in Queensland and its future pr : e-ss is
unlimited. It has a major university, it is the centre of our
northern defence programs, the chosen site of a marine science
institute of international renown. With so much at stake, the
future of Townsville and its region, and indeed all northern
development, will depend on a healthy and productive
relationship between the State and national Governments. Townsville
has more to lose than any other city in Australia if politics is
allowed to cloud and disrupt the one aim we all want to achieve
the development of the north, with more industry, more job
opportunities, and improved facilities for present and future
generations of Australians.
If North Queenslanders have reason to complain about
government from the south they should direct their complaints to
Brisbane rather than Canberra. All our objectives for the State
and particularly for the north our plans to halt spiralling
land prices, to improve the quality of life, to make urban
development more equitable and efficient have been held up in
Brisbane. ' Our 1973/ 74 Budget allocated $ 2 million for land
acquisition and development works in Townsville, $ 1.2 million
for similar work in the Moreton region and $ 1.2 million for
Gladstone. It is incredible that none of these funds have been
spent simply because we cannot reach agreement with the
Queensland Premier.
So there is a real danger that Queensland's development
will fall behind. I instance our plans f6r Land Commissions.
* The Budget this year provides $ 24 million to South Australia for the
purchase of land. That land will be resold to home buyers at
fair and reasonable prices. The land price spiral in* South Australia
has been effectively brought under control. We are providing
$ 16 million to Victoria for a similar purpose. Even Sir Robert
Askin has agreed in principle to our Land Commission. Queensland
says NO. Or take our sewerage program. In 1973/ 74 Townsville
was eligible for assistance under the national sewerage scheme.
Mr Bjelke-Petersen wouldn't take the money. In 1574/ 75 we are
allocating $ 13 million to Queensland for sewerage works. Townsville's
share will be well over a quarter of a million.
The other States are getting on with the job. Why should
the people of Queensland put up with unsewered houses because of
Mr Bjelke-Petersen' s dislike of Canberra? This is an issue on which
the Premier must carry the can. And why should Queensland be
denied, an international airport at Townsville? Again I ask:
if it's good enough for the Liberal Premiers of New South Wales
and Victoria why isn't it good enough for the Country Party
Premier of Queensland?
The Premier clings to his obstinate ban on shipping
between Queensland ports. He prefers to hold back development and
decentralisation in the State rather than let an Australian
Government ship do the work. This is ideologidal prejudice of
the silliest, most self-defeating kind. Within 14 days of taking
office in December 1972 I offered the use of Australian National
Line ships for intra-State trade on the Queensland coast.
Mr Bjelke-Petersen said the matter would receive consideration.
I spoke to him about it in March last year. I wrote to him again
in April and June this year. My last letter brought no reply. 
Ineed hardly stress the importance of a regular
intra-State shipping service. It would provide an alternative means
of transport when the highways or railways are cut by floods.
It would provide a more rational and diversified transport system.
It would maximise the efficiency of the Townsville Harbour Board's
facilities for handling freight. There are some types of freight
that can only be carried by sea. We have seen the farcical
situation of foreign-owned ships engaged to carry bauxite from
Weipa to Gladstone because the Queensland Government refused to
let an Australian Government ship do the work. There are ships
plying between Queensland and the other States with space in their
holds for 1000 tons of intra-State cargo on every voyage. I am
afraid the Premier's intransigence finds little support from the
people of North Queensland. The North Queensland Chambers of
Commerce don'It agree with him. The Queensland Harbour Board
Association doesn't agree with him. The Townsville District
Development Bureau and the Townsville City Council don't agree
with him. Why should the people of Townsville agree with him?
We have put forward other measures to help Queensl and's
industrial development. For years I have been concerned at the
high cost of electricity in Queensland compared with other
eastern States. There are complex reasons for these higher costs
but the Australian Government wants to help reduce them. I wrote
to Mr Bjelke-Petersen on 5 June. I proposed that the Australian
Government, in conjunction with Queensland, undertake a study of
ways and means of increasing efficiency and reducing costs within
the Queensland power system. The Premier has not replied; his
department told us it was examining our offer.
I wrote to the Premier within weeks of the Government
assuming office and offered to assume responsibility for the
uneconomic ' State railway system. Railways impose a crippling
burden on State finances and distort their whole budget. We
waited a long time but eventually we got our answer. The
Queensland Government was not even prepared to discuss our proposal.
The fact is that no Government has treated Queensland
more generously, more openly, than mine. I read a remark by
Sir Gordon Chalk the other day that the Queensland Budget this
year would be " the best State Budget in Australia". I congratulate
the Treasurer of Queensland. I trust the people of Queensland
will remember that this * situation has been largely made possible
by the Australian Government' s grants. Let's hear no more about
us starving or strangling the States. It's claptrap! Total
revenue assistance to Queensland in 1970/ 71 to go back four
years was $ 223 million. The estimated total in the present
Budget is nearly double $ 434 million. Payments for general
purpose capital funds have increased in the same period from
$ 93 million to $ 145 million. Our assistance has increased over
a whole range of special purpose grants universities from
$ 7 million to $ 41 million; colleges of advanced education from
million to $ 24.5 million; Aboriginal advancement from
$ 216,000 to $ 2,085,000; community health from nothing to $ 2.9 million
/ 6 
How revealing to contrast the priorities of the
Queensland and Australian Labor Governments! What are! the issues
that occupy us, the matters that dominate our rftin(. I We could
be pardoned for thinking that nothing is more important to the
Queensland Premier than appointing a Queen of Queensland. Is that
really an issue in 1974? Do we want a Queen of New South Wales
and a Queen of Victoria as well? A Queen of Western Australia
and a Queen of Tasmania? Does Canada need a Queen of Ontario and
a Queen of Price Edward Island? Perhaps I am wrong. Perhaps
the most important issue in Mr Bjelke-Petersen's mind is the
Privy Council. He wants decisions made by judges appointed by
his own Government to be subject to veto by judges appointed by
the British Government. Is that a burning issue in 1974? We
know how much the Premier of Queensland relies on the courts. He
is still using the courts to fight our legislation, to challenge
the decisions of the joint sitting of the Australian Parliament,
to overturn the wishes of the Australian people who twice gave
their endorsement to the program of reform initiated by the
Australian Labor Party.
I have no personal animosity towards Mr Bjelke-Petersen. I just
wish he'd make up his mind what he wants for his State. We know
what he wants for the Country Party a mandate to govern with
percent of the vote, or preferably less. The fact is the
Queensland's electoral boundaries are flagrantly rigged in the
Country Party's favour. Its not just a little extra weighting
for the benefit of remote rural seats. It's a masterpiece of
malapportionment. In the 1972 State elections it took 12,849
votes to elect one Labor member. It to * ok 9,163 votes to elect
one Liberal member and 6,977 votes to elect one Country Party
member. Provincial cities like Townsville suffer as much as
Brisbane. ' The boundaries are blatantly designed to reduce
their representation. The average enrolment in a provincial
city electorate is 14,476. In the Western and Far Northern Zone
it is 8,153. In the Country Zone it is 10,779. Under any fair
system of boundaries the Townsville area would merit at least
one additional seat in the Queensland Parliament.
So apart from a gerrymander, what does Mr Bjelke-Petersen
want for Queensland? Does he want it to be part of Australia
or a private realm of his own? Does he want it to share in
the nation's progress or become a backwater? I wish he'd. shake
off his hangups and pettifogging obsessions about State rights
and centralism and the monarchy and the Privy Council and get
down to the business of government. I wish he'd forget his
persecution complex and realise that the Australian Government
is ready and willing to work with him for the good of Queensland.
I wish he'd spare us his tantrums and posturing and let us get
on with the job together. It is frankly not a pretty sight
to see a proud and important State held back by its own Government.
What we need is not a full-time Queen of Queensland but a fulltime
Premier of Queensland. Less vaudeville, less invective,
less vote-rigging more action, more enterprise, more co-operation.
/ 7 
-7-
In the 21 months since we came to office the
Australian Government has offered the States a new deal. We
have offered Queensland a new deal. The Budget we brought
down this week confirmed that offer. It opened the way to
a limitless future for this State and for all Australians
a future based on equity and justice. To achieve those goals
we ask nothing more, we need nothing more, than a reasonable
spirit of co-operation and goodwill. Let us get on with the
job of building a stronger and more prosperous Queensland
in a stronger and more prosperous nation. 



AAUSTHALIAL
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 333
23 September 1974
REFERENCE TO I. A. C. ON ROLLING STOCK PRODUCING INDUSTRY
The Prime Minister announced today that he had
forwarded a reference to the Industries Assistance
Commission on the rolling stock producing industry.
Mr. Whitlam said that the reference formed part of
the Commission's Tariff Review program which was commenced
by the Tariff Board in 1971.
The Commission had been asked to report within the
next 18 months on the assistance, if any, needed by the
industry. The Government would then have the benefit of the
Commission's advice when considering extension of the
two year purchase program for modern high performance
bogie wagons announced by the Treasurer in his Budget speech.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 24 SEPTEMBER 1974
. PRIME MINISTER: Have you any questions?
QUESTION: You have made some grave charges against some of your
colleagues of peddling lies. Do you propose to ask for or seek
their resignation from the Cabinet? If not, do you propose to
continue to lead a ministerial team among which are some
ministers against whom you have made such grave charges?
PRIME MINISTER: I have not made grave charges; I haven't made the
charges that you have just peddled. I was asked a question in
the House about this; I andwered it. Several of ; you were at
the dinner last night and recorded what I said. Play the whole
of it! Nobody at the dinner was under any misapprehension as
to what I meant.
QUESTION: Do you repudiate it?
PRIME MINISTER: I never made the charges.
QUESTION: ' If those charges were not made, certainly there have been
implications that they were. Could you tell us exactly what you
did say in relation to what has been said here today?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I invite you to play the tapn-that you took
of my whole speech. I do not respond here to invitations to pick
and select what I have said or to comment on interpretatiodn* I
don't recall on this or any other matter that any of my colleagues
in or outside the Cabinet have knowingly given false information.
I do believe that there are many people in public life including
the Parliament, as I have said; on both sides, in each House,
front benchears and backbenchers who too readily and-uncritically
accept information which is given to them. They ought to
scrutinise it before spreading it or publicising it. I believe
some of the people that have given the information know it to be
false. They are the people who make the lies. But people ought
to be scrupulous in giving currency to false information. They
ought to check the accuracy of the information.
QUESTION: Have any of your colleagues sought clarification today
of your statement last night?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There were several of them there,. You weren't
there. There were a great number of people invited. Who was
there from my side? There was Mr Connor, there was Sonator
Jim McClelland, there was Mr Anthony, there was SaEnator Cotton,
Mr Gorton.
QUESTION: Could I read an extract from your speech last night?
PRIME MINISTER: No, you won't. No. You have the whole of the text,
haven't you?
QUESTION: Yes, sir.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, play the lot of it. / 2 
-2-
QUESTION: Yes, but I
PRIME MINISTER: No, if you don't mind.
QUESTION: This is quoting from you in the House today', if that's
allowed. You indicated that you thought that this Gcvernment would
succumb, admittedly less readily, to the conspiracy br~ uween the
unions and the multinationals. Do you think that this Government....
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't use the word " conspiracy".
QUESTION: Oh well, to the arrangement.
PRIME MINISTER: " Collusion" was the term I used, wasn't it? Yes.
QUESTION: The collusion between the unions and the multinationals.
Do you think your colleagues are about to cave in on the motor
industry?
PRIME MINISTER: I think that some of them, after hearing some pleas
from some particular sections of the motor industry, are likely to
have misgivings about the recommendations of the Industries Assistance
Commission. Anybody who has read the IAC report will know that
there has been a rort at the expense of the Australian consumer in
many aspects of the motor industry. But the whole of the motor
industry is being consulted at this moment; I feel sure there will
be some changes in the proposals that the IAC made.
QUESTION: What arm of Government the AIDC or the Atomic Energy
Commission or what will be responsible for underwriting tlie
new share issue of Mary Kathleen uranium that the governm ent announced
it would do recently but didn't specify the agency? Was this
decision taken through Cabinet? And thirdly, what briefly was the
justification for saving the underwriting cost which was to be borne
by the predominantly foreign-owned CRA from underwriting a venture
which most ' financial commentators see as not very attractive at all?
PRIME MINISTER: The proper minister to ask about what agency will
provide the money would be Mr Connor or Dr Cairns. There are
companies operating in Australia which have obligations to supply
uranium overseas. The Australian Government is, of course,
conscious that such contracts must be honoured. The proposals
which have been made will help those contracts to be honoured. CRA
will be less overseas controlled as a result of the arrangements.
QUESTION: Last night you said, quote, " I have nothing but contempt
PRIME MINISTER: Now, Mr Kelly, I invite any of you to publish
the speech in full but, if you don't mind, I will not respond here
to questions based on some selected pieces of a speech which I am
told took over half an hour.
QUESTION: Can I ask....
PRIME MINISTER: No, not on this. 
* QUESTION: Do you retract anything you said last night, Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: No, of course not. After all, I have invited you to
play the whole of the speech, so I am scarcely retracting anything
I said.
QUESTION: If you know of any people who knowingly giv.-the Government
false information what action can you take or will you take against
these people?
PRIME MINISTER: One is wary of them in future. I would make the
point that people who give exaggerated or false information, that is
misinformation, to the Government are not only lowering themselves
in the eyes of the Government and spoiling their cases for assistance
but, of course, they are wanting the Government to help them take
the public down. All I want ip that the facts should be known.
QUESTION: What action will you take against your colleagues who
promote that false information?
PRIME MINISTER: I have taken it.
QUESTION: Could you tell us what it is?
PRIME MINISTER: The speech last night will make people, I am quite
certain, more careful in checking the sources of the information
they are given.
QUESTION: Can you give us any examples of this misleading information,
how widespread...
PRIME MINISTER: I quoted three last night. I am sorry you weren't
there. QUESTION: Well, for the radio and television audience now, Prime
Minister PRIME MINISTER: No, if you don't mind, you can play the tape.
QUESTION: But that's not much use to the audience who are watching
and listening to this.
PRIME MINISTER: I am sorry they weren't there last night, but on
your radio station you can play the lot.
QUESTION: Last week Senator Willesee, as Foreign minister, released
copies of letters he had sent to Australian companies with
subsidiaries or associates in South Africa suggesting that they should
do several things to upgrade the conditions of black and coloured
employees in South Africa. Has the Government any power at all to
enforce such improvements, and does the Government intend to take
any action to try to enforce improvements or is this just a general
moral exhortation which will probably be ignored?
PRIME MINISTER: We might not have any sanctions against the companies
concerned. They are not breaking any Australian law. There might not
be any law that the Australian Parliament can make about it. They
aren't breaking South African laws. But other countries have, for
some time past, used this method of spurring th6ir subsidiaries the
companies who are domiciled in their countries but who have
subsidiaries in South Africa they have used these methods to spur 
-4-
them to improve conditions in South Africa. Particularly the
United States and the United Kingdom have done it; but the
Scandinavians, West Germany and, I think, above all, Canada have
done so. It was time we did it; there has been some improvement
as a result of what the other governments have done. V~ hope there
will be some improvement on the part of subsidiaries ot ,. LiJtralian
companies.
QUESTION: I was thinking specifically of things like exchange
coming back to Australia from these subsidiaries and possible
taxing powers on companies. You had nothing of that sort in mind?
PRIME MINISTER: I would doubt it.
QUESTION: Back to your speech last night. In the course of that
you referred to nervous Nellies in your party on tariff matters.
Could you give us any examples or indicate the areas in which we
might find these nervous Nellies?
PRIME MINISTER: Now, if the tape is played I haven't got a
copy of it you will find that I was not just referring to
nervous Nellies in my party. I said nervous Nellies in public
life, including in the. Parliament, and there were some of them
in my party.'
QUESTION: Well, that was the point I
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Well, I am not going to specify it, no.
QUESTION: After the Budget last week you made a strong speechdi
in which you said that the Budget laid the groundwork for
co-operation and restraint. Will the policies outlined in that
Budget work if you don't get wage restraint? If not, will you take
action on a different policy?
PRIME MINISTER: The policies in the Budget will obviously work much
more effectively and promptly if there is wage restraint. No
Government in Australia can deal with all these matters which have
to be done in the economy. There are a great number of things
which have to be done by employers, employees and investors and
the Budget would encourage all of them to do some of those things.
It is important for employees to understand that the Government's
policy of restraint in the growth of wages and other incomes doesn't
mean that the Government intends to reduce the purchasing power of
wages. When we use the word " wage restraint" we don't mean that
we mean to reduce the real level of wages or the level of real wages.
What we want to do is to discourage the excessive claims which were
being made and the frequency of those claims. One of the things we
are doing is to help the indexation of wages, the restoration of
automatic, periodic wage adjustments. When this comes about, as
there seems to be a very good chance of it * coming about as a result
of agreements between employers and employees at Mr Justice Moore's
conferences, then there will clearly be less incentive for employeesblue
collarwhite collar employees to make exaggerated claims.
They will know that indexation will maintain the level of their real
income. I am hopeful that the ACTU unions at present meeting in
Sydney will bring about a situation where the overwhelming majority
of trade unions will co-operate with the Government which is pledged
to fight inflation and to minimise unemployment using policy
instruments which will be fair and equitable over the community as
a whole. 
QUESTION: Do you think the unemployment caused by tariff cuts has
been serious? What action do you think is needed against it? And
specifically, can I ask you your view on the arrangements between
the Government and the unions to impose quotas on certain'items
made in the announcement last Friday?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been serious unemployment brought about
in some regions. As a result partly of the tariff reduction and
partly as a result of revaluation, and maybe partly as a result of
reducing the excessive liquidity. You ask about restoring tariffs,
is that it? Or imposing quotas?
QUESTION: I was asking specifically about the decision last Friday
to impose quotas on textiles?
PRIME MINISTER: This is from South Korea. Previously you will
remember there were agreements made with Hong Kong, India and
China. Also, since they are not in GATT, restrictions were imposed
on Taiwan. The general emphasis on what we are doing is to maintain
employment, either by giving assistance to those particular textile
factories or to other forms of employment in the regions concerned.
I am not attracted to the idea of imposing quotas all over or
increasing tariffs all over or placing embargoes or refusing to
unload cargoes because these would help areas where help is not
required. There is a problem which we are tackling in certain
non-metropolitan areas.
QUESTION: The situation concerning information coming-to the
Government which prompted you to make those remarks last night.,
do you think that that posed a real threat to the drive for'*
tariff reform which has been one of the features of your Government?
PRIME MINISTER: I very real threat, yes, I do.
QUESTION: Do you think that the threat is silly, and d6 you
accept that you are in the vanguard of your own party in questions
of tariff reform and particularly to the fore of your deputy?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a continuing threat to the rational use
of resources in Australia by the misinformation which is sedulously
peddled by some industries. My deputy and I are in complete
agreement, constant consultation, on all these aspects. There is
no disagreement; there hasn't been; there is most unlikely to be.
But I do believe that the press has some obligation too in letting
the public know the facts. Very often, I regret to say, lobbyists
are able to get their stories in the newspapers, including sometimes
in your own. Now, you are all commendably inquisitive or critical
or cynical about things that elected people say, iuncluding ministers
or the Prime Minster himself. You are quite reightly critical in
these matters but you are not, if I may sa-y so, sufficiently critical
of some of the stories that are giveni to you by lobbyists.
I wohldv e toucjt Lhat the reports of Industries
Assistance Commission, of which the establishment was one of the
triumphs of my Government so far, would illustrate how much the public
are taken down by the rorts which have grown up behind Government
assistance of one form and another. I don't want to see policies
which were taken at an easier economic time reversed or abandoned too
readily. If hardship is being caused to individuals then that
hardship must be alleviated promptly and fully. But there is no
excuse for using the hardship of some communities to impose on the 
-6-
whole community for the benefit of some industries in some areas
where no assistance is justified.
I was speaking last night at this Heavy Engineering
Manufacturers dinner and I pointed out that manufacturers, in general
in Australia, should get out of the purely negative, defensive
attitude of saying that their future depends upon Governments
imposing tariffs on competing imports or imposing embargoes or quotas
on competing imports or paying subsidies for certain local products
or allowing taxation deductions for the production of certain local
products. A much more positive way to assist basic industries in
Australia is to have a rational, procurement program by governments.
Now the industries concerned last night were particularly
apt to benefit from rational programs. I pointed out that the heavy
engineering manufacturers depend very greatly on orders coming from
the public sector and my Government has tried, conspicuously in the
transport field, to see that there are forward orders for that
industry. The industry will be much more assisted by, say, a
re-equipment program for the railways or a proper national roads program
or pipeline program or I know this one is more difficult a
shipbuilding program, in all of which government orders are crucial,
sometimes a predominant factor, than those industries will be
assisted by just putting up the price of everything for the Australian
consumer. I believe the message got across there.
Naturally enough I also commended them for the fact that
they do not tender or peddle misinformation. They are an effective
industry association and I think them for the fact that they have
publicly expressed support for some of the policies which my
Government has proposed to help them gain export markets. We still
don't have an export bank in Australia. We are going to establish
one. We still don't have an overseas trading corporation. My
Government is going to establish one. And the Heavy Engineering
Manufacturers have not opposed, in fact they have very often
expressed support for, the expansion of the Australian Industry
Development Corporation, the Pipeline Authority, the Petroleum
and Minerals Authority, the Australian Government Purchasing
Commission. They are a good body, but one's entitled to draw the
contrast. One takes notice of an organisation which collects and
submits accurate information and cogent arguments. By contrast some
other industries ought to understand that if they give misinformation,
not only is the Government less likely to be impressed, but the
public also ought to be alerted.
QUESTION: Do you believe that the strong stand which you are now
taking on tariff protection could prejudice the efforts of your
Government to secure support from the trade union movement for wage
restraint? If you do believe that, are you prepared to modify the
stand you are currently taking?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that anything I've said would be
resented or resisted by most responsible trade union people. After
all, I am certain that trade unions as well as companies and
governments will only have public support if the public is certain
that they are acting on accurate information. The public shouldn't
the government shouldn't blithely accept an imposition on the
taxpayer for the benefit of people who can't make out an accurate,
honest case. 
-7-
QUESTION: My question goes back to your earlier comment on wage
indexation. if agreement can be reached with the union movement
on the introduction of wage indexation, would you see n-vrit in the
system of tax indexation which would ensure the cost of -iving
increases granted are not taken away again in higher taxation?
In other words, when the cost of living rises push a worker into a
higher tax scale, can he be sure that the real cost of living
adjustment, the adjustment for inflation, will not be diminished
by higher income tax?
PRIME MINISTER: There are many attractive features about tax
indexation. I was discussing them with Mr van Lennep the Secretary-
General of the OECD about 12 days ago. Mr Crean, however, has
pointed out that it might be better still to have an annual review
of the tax schedule. Tax indexation would preserve the present
ratio of incomes to taxation but it would do nothing to remove the
unfair features of the present scale of the scale which there
was until Mr Crean announced the changes, the firs * t changes for
years in the Budget last Tuesday. So I don't want to discount
the advantages of having tax indexation but I believe to have an
annual review of the tax scales and, as Mr Crean has done for the
first time last Tuesday,' would have advantages in that it would be
more fair.
QUESTION: You said that there were allegations made that somewhere
in the vicinity of 900 people had been laid off in the textile
industry in Launceston. When investigations were made into that it
was shown that only 360 people were being laid off.
PRIME MINISTER: No, 340.
* QUESTION: 340. Well, you said 360 last night.
PRIME MINISTER: I was speaking, you will remember, from memory
of a glance at the report. I have now seen the report again.
QUESTION: So that we may be better informed on the effects of
your tariff decisions, is it possible for that report into Launceston
to be released?
PRIME MINTSTFlR: Mr Cameron soJ-. qht And got. 1% he report. You should
ask him.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, if you can get agreement on indexation
and wage restraint from the union movement would you see any merit
in going again to the people to try to get wage and price control
at a referendum so that that indexation and restraint: could be
imposed both ways?
PRIME MINISTER: As all of you would know quite 1 " ell, i believe 1-he
Australian Parliament ought to have tho ame ai-tliori ty ; avz), . i. aos
with respect to prices and incomes and interest rates that every
n. ther national government has. Nevertheless I have to look at tK-c!
timing of these matters. I expect that after the next meetinq of tht-
Constitutional Convention, which is in the first full we-ek of
': o' 7ember, there will. be agreement between most Governments in
-u. Lc--aif I wouldn't like to forecast that the agreement of the
Queensland Government would be forthcoming on the proposal for
interchange of power which one or tow governm~ ent New South Wales 
and there might have been another one too suggested at the
Convention in September last year and which I accepted. Most Premiers,
I believe all Premiers except Bjelke-Petersen and Sir Charles Court,
have accepted the draft which was prepared by the Parli,... e2ntary
draftsman and circulated. There is a very good chance of such a
referendum therefore being endorsed by the leaders of the Governments
or the majority of the Governments in Australia. Also, one ought
to expect that there should be a referendum on say, syncronising,
the two Houses and perhaps abolishing appeals to the Privy Council
and also simplifying the industrial laws. As you remember, the
Constitution says that the Australian Parliament can only pass laws
with respect to conciliation and arbitration for the settlement
of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one State.
It would be very much better if the Parliament had constitutional
power to pass laws with respect to conciliation and arbitration
for the settlement of industrial disputes.
QUESTION: Are you suggesting there that you would hold these
referendums simultaneously?
PRIME MINISTER: I mention a range of ones. Let me see what the
options are.. Clearly one would plan to hold any referendums at
the same time as there was a Senate election.
Gentlemen, I will be seeing some of you within the next
fortnight, I believe, in the South Seas and in North A ' merica.
Perhaps I could give you the expected itinerary. On Friday we will
go to Rarotonga in the Cook Islands where there is a meeting--of
the South Pacific Commission. The Government will be represented
by Mr Morrison and the Parliament by Senators Primmer and Bonner.
I am inviting them to come with me and we will spend the morning
the dateline of course will mean that it will still be Friday
morning with the delegates to the South Pacific Conference. We
will then go to New York for the General Assembly and then to
Washington on Wednesday 2nd October where I will meet President Ford;
on Friday 4 October to Ottawa where I will meet Mr Trudeau; and
I am going back to " meet the Press" in Washington on 6 October.
Then we are going to Fiji, which is celebrating the 100th anniversary
of the cession to Britain. Prince Charles is also attending those
celebrations. It is the first time that a senior ininisLer from
Australia has ever visited Fiji and they have become a bit restive
at that fact. Thert we will. go to Norfolk Island, which Captain Cook
discovered, as far as Europeans are concerned, on 10 October 1774.
So I am looking forward immensely to the company of those distinguished
members of thje gallery whose proprietors have sponsored them. 



or I PRESS STATEMENT NO. 334'
September 1974
DEVALUATION STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
This is the most important single economic decision
we have taken this year. Its main effect its basic purposeis
to mnake it easier to sell our goods overseas.
This means bigger markets abroad for our farm products
and minerals and manufactured goods.
It will make it easier for our exporters to compete
in overseas markets; it will make it easier for local
manufacturers to compete with imported goods.
I believe this decision will give an immediate boost
to general business confidence.
It will improve the prospects in our rural industrioe3-.
It will give added confidence to the motor industry,
textile manufacturers, and local manufacturers of appliances,
electronic goods and a whole range of other products.
It will safeguard the jobs of Australian workers who
may be threatened by import competition. It will reduce unemploymen~ t
our mining industries -copper, nickel, lead, zinc will
benefit from our action. The recent decline in their prices will
be cushioned by the new value of the dollar.
We have always been flexible in our approach to the exchange
rate. Along with most other countries we are prepared to vary
the exchange rate when economic conditions make it necessary to
do so. 
OF -2-
Last year we twice increased the value of the dollar.
Our exports last year far exceeded our imports. Our reserves
were at record levels.
In that situation it mnade sense to appreciate the value
of the dollar. That policy succeeded completely.
Now it is appropriate to reduce the value of the dollar
and improve the prospects of our export industries.
Our decision means that we will also be cutting the fixed
link with the U. S. dollar.
This action means that the external value of our currency
will remain generally stable against that of our competitors
and trading partners overseas.
Unless we decide to change the rate of our dollar it will
now keep a stable value compared with other major currencies
such as the Japanese Yen, the German Mark and Sterling.
As a result of our decision I believe the whole community
unions, businessmen, farmers, manufacturers, exporters can look
forward to better markets, better trade, better business and more
secure employment.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



tA U S THA A,,
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 337
September 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO THE COOK ISLANDS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced
in Canberra today that he would be visiting the
Cook Islands and participating briefly in the
South Pacific Conference, which is being held there
from 25 September to 7 October 1974. He will be
in Rarotonga from 26-27 September, en route to the
United States to begin his North American visit.
The Australian delegation to the South Pacific
Conference will be led by the Minister for Science,
Mr. Morrison. Senators C. G. Primmer and N. T. Bonner
will also attend the Conference as Parliamentary
Observers. The 1974 Conference will meet under new
arrangements agreed on earlier this year. These
arrangements resulted from an initiative by the
Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee, to
broaden and strengthen the Conference.
Mr. Whitlam said that Australia attaches importance
to the South Pacific Conference as the one body which
embraces all Pacific Island communities and those countries
which still have direct responsibilities in the area.
He said Australia saw its role in the South Pacific
as one of co-operation and good neighbourliness.
To this en&amp; Australia supported the Conference in its
many activities directed towards the economic and social
development of the region.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister
The Hon. E. G. Whitlam, Q. C. M. P.
Change in the Exchange Rate
of the Australian Dollar
The Australian dollar will be devalued by
12 per cent as from 6.00 the Prime Minister
announced today. The initial rate against the US dollar
will be $ A1 $ US1.3090.
The fixed link to the US dollar will be
discontinued. In future the exchange rate for the
Australian dollar will be determined by changes in an
average of foreign currency values weighted in accordance
with trading significance to Australia. This means that
the rate for the Australian dollar will tend to vary
from day to day against all currencies including the
US dollar, in a manner which will maintain constant
the weighted average exchange value.
When the Government came into office it was
faced with a situation of high and growing international
reserves and an excessive level of domestic liquidity
giving rise to strong inflationary pressures. In these
circumstances it was appropriate to appreciate the
Australian dollar and the Government had acted to do so
by 7.05 per cent within weeks of taking office in
December 1972. In September 1973 a further appreciation of
per cent was undertaken. Since that time there had
been a further effective appreciation of' the Australian
dollar of about 51-per cent as a result of the rise in
value of the US dollar against other currencies, taken 
2
as a whole. The Prime Minister said that in 1973/ 74
the Australian economy had benefitted from the rising
international value of the Australian dollar. As the
Treasurer had said in his Budget Speech, nearly one-half
of the increase in demand in 1973/ 74 had been satisfied
by the increase in imports which had been induced by this
amongst other measures.
It had been appropriate to appreciate the
Australian dollar when reserves were excessive and a
boom in demand was over-straining domestic resources. It
is now appropriate, in the light of the changed outlook
for the balance of payments and the slow-down in the
domestic economy, to depreciate.
The Prime Minister emphasised that the
depreciation will give a fillip to many domestic
industries. Export industries, such as the rural and
mining industries and manufacturing exporters, will
benefit particularly, as will those sectors of industry
experiencing undue pressure from import competition.
In these ways the devaluation will have beneficial
effects on the climate in which business operates. It
will thercby assist in restoring the general level of
ousiness activity and in the maintenance of employment
) portunities. If unchecked, unemployment could destroy
the efforts which the Government is making in co-operation
with unions, employers and State Governments to reduce
inflation. While some increase in costs of a number of
import items will probably result from this move, it is
essential, if inflation is to be overcome in Australia, 
-3-
that conditions be created which are favourable to
continued economic growth and full and effective use
of Australian resources.
September 1974 1 



AUSFRA. IA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 336
September 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO FIJI AND NORFOLK ISLAND
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced
in Canberra today that he would be payi. ng official visits
to Fiji and Norfolk Island on his way home from his
North American visit.
Mr. Whitlam said he had been delighted to
accept an invitation from the Prime Minister of Fiji,
Ratu Sir Kamesese Mara, to attend the celebrations of
the Centenary of Fiji's Cession to the British Crown.
Mr. Whitlam, accompanied by Mrs. Whitlam, will be in
Fiji from 9 11 October.
Mr. Whitlam has visited Fiji several times,
but this will be his first visit as Prime Minister.
He said he was very much looking forward to this
opportunity of renewing his acquaintance with Fiji
and its Government and people. Australia had many close
ties with Fiji and he was glad of the opportunity his
visit would provide to underline the imrportance Australia
placed on its relations with South Pacific countries, and
to further deepen the friendly spirit of co-operation and
equal partnership appropriate between close neighbours.
The Prime Minister and Mrs. Whitlam will pay
a short visit to Norfolk Island for the Bi-Centenary,
arriving on 11 October, before returning to Australia
on 13 October.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH, SOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE, RAROTONGA,
26 SEPTEMBER 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen: thank
you very much indeed for allowing me to say a few words to
you at your conference. This is my first visit to the Cook
Islands and I am making this visit because of the hospitality,
the very good personal relations which Sir Albert Henry has
been able to establish with so many people over the years at
various conferences. I have attended, as a member, the South
Pacific Forum. I did so shortly after becoming Prime Minister
in April last year. The conference was held in western Samoa,
and the conference was held a few months earlier than had
originally been arranged because there had been brand new governments
in New Zealand as well as in Australia in December 1972. On that
occasion, as a full member of a South Pacific body, I was able
to learn more closely than ever before many of the things which
concerned us jointly as well as individually. The South Pacific
Commission is the first of these bodies to be created it was
created under the Canberra Agreement named after Australia's
capital in 1947. It seems now very much an. archaic and fraternal
body. It was composed entirely of metropolitan powers. It became
clear for many years past that that was not enough to satisfy
the aspirations of the people of the South Pacific and thereupon
theSouth Pacific Conference emerged. It * was composed of all the
territories in the South Seas. Those who were independent, those
that were associated with metropolitan powers, but they were all
represented there. And eventually the South Pacific Conference
came to discuss matters of great substance, matters which concerned
all the people whatever their language, whatever their political
arrangements and now the position of the Commission and the
Conference has been very largely transposed. Now, I am happy
that last year my country was very anxious that the conference
should become even more significant and the Commission should
become a Commission of the Commonwealth. As I understand it my
country is not entitled to be a member of the conference except
in so far as it has responsibilities for Norfolk Island and still
for Papua New Guinea. By the time of the next South Pacific
Conference I would expect that Papua New Guinea, in international
terms, will be an independent country as, from Australia's point
of view, we are already happy to regard. But as head of government
in my country I am able to attend meetings of the South Pacific
Forum and I find it a very interesting and significant body.
At the conference, over the next few days, my Government
will be represented by Mr. Bill Morrison who was a member of the
Australian diplomatic service for about 20 years before he became
a minister in my government. As a member of the diplomatic service
he has served in Singapore and Malaysia and had responsibilities
on behalf of Australia in many programs thatAustralia was engaged
in in some parts of Malaysia. He therefore comes to this conference
with twenty years or more experience of international arrangements
and particularly in developing countries; countries developing
not only economically but politically. When I formed my government
I made him the last minister in charge of External Territories,
in effect Papua New Guinea. When last December Papua New Guinea 
-2-
bdcame self-governing, we in Australia no longer regarded it
as appropriate to have a minister responsible for it, so he
retained the position of Minister for Science but we have
wanted him to continue as Minister Assisting the Foreign
Minister in respect of the affairs of the South Pacific.
So, my Foreign Minister who is at the General Assembly of
the United Nations ( and I am bound there in the next couple
of days) has been very anxious that he should participate
on behalf of Australia in so far as Australia's participation
is appropriate in the affairs of this continent. Mr. Morrison
can participate on all the matters of substance which are on
your agenda. In addition, to indicate the interest which
we place in Australia in this representative body we have
brought with us two representatives of the Australian Parliament,
Senator Primmer and Senator Bonner. In Australia we believe
that representative institutions are extraordinarily important.
We are the last to deny that there are very great deficiencies
and shortcomings in Australia's representative institutions.
I could scarcely urge any country in the South Pacific to copy
Australia's political institutions a federal system or a
bicameral system. I don't urge this plan but naturally we still
have the idea that representative government is quite basic if
one is to involve the people in the affairs of government
if government is to be soundly based. We are in population
and also in area a very large country in South Pacific terms.
We therefore are aware that many people might believe us to be
unconcerned or remote or indifferent. We don't want you to
believe that we are indifferent or unconcerned. We have had
experience of very many problems which must concern you. Some
are matters which have arisen only in the last few years.
In the South Pacific the ratio of sea to land is greater than
any other part of the world. Accordingly, there are very many
international matters of navigation and resources which concern
all of us. It is just as important to Australia as it is to
any other country in the South Pacific that there should be
proper international standards set as for the rights of access
by surface or by air or underwater, whether it is for strategic,
political or economic purposes. You are very much aware that
in the South Pacific the law of the sea is quite basic if all
are concerned. There is no difference of interests between
Australia and archipelagos in the south seas. There are also
again many matters in the economic field where our concerns
in Australia may be different in degree but not in time from
those of all the other countries in the South Pacific. All
of us, Australia and all the other countries in the South Pacific,
have been concerned with the price that their products get elsewhere
in the world, the degree to which their products are processesed
in our own countries, the degree to which the products, the
resources of our countries are discovered or developed or marketed
by ourselves or by organisations in which we have a fair share
of the responsibility. And, in these days when inflation
affects so many countries and certainly all the countries with
which the South Pacific countries are trading or with which
they have relations relating to transport and the like, it
is very important that we should all understand the economic
opportunities properly. We want to ensure that even if we depend
on a very few products we can get a fair return from them as
we get a fair share in development. 
Well, ladies and gentlemen, the deliberations of the South
Pacific Conference are of concern to Australia not just because
we are all geographically so close but also because as far as
the rest of the world is concerned there are very many things
which concern us just as muclin Australia as they concern people
in the South Pacific. My minister, Mr. Morrison, will be
participating in the conference I am happy to say and will be
reporting to me and our other colleagues on the matters you raise
here. Looking over the last 25 or more years, we can take
quite a deal of satisfaction in the way that this very large
tract of the world's surface has come together, by the way
it has developed its appropriate institutions, the institutions
have changed as the needs have changed and it would seem to us
that this conference is the one which you can not only make
wider representation but it is the only comprehensive one and
despite all the political diversions, the differences, you must
confess, have been largely introduced in political terms in the
last 150 years. Despite all this we are coming to see in the
South Pacific how much we have in common and how much the things
which we each individually want to achieve can be more fully and
promptly achieved if we can consult together. Allow me to conclude
by saying how much more our deliberations will be promoted, how
much more harmonious as well as fruitful they will be because
we are meeting in this beautiful hall, on this beautiful island,
in this benine and benevolent regime. Well, I have only the
opportunity with my senior officials, my Treasurer and our wives
to thank you for your hospitality on our way to North America.
On the way back we will be calling into Fiji for the Centenary
of its association with Britain and at Norfolk Island to commemorate
the 200th anniversary of Captain Cook's landing at that then
uninhabited island, so our way between Australia and North America,
the United Nations, new President Ford, re-elected Prime Minister
Trudeau, will be made all the more interesting, we will be
fortified on our way, refreshed on our way back by going to the
islands of the South Pacific, our neighbours. And for those
who are fortunate enough to be spending weeks instead of days
on this island in this arghipelago, on behalf of the Australian
Government I wish you-/ 8HIy a happy but a very fruitful conference
believing that it will mark another big step in our associations
with the people of the South Pacific. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 338
26 September 1974
TARIFF BOARD REPORT FIBREBOARD CONTAINERS, PAPER AND
TEXTILE BAGS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Tariff Board in its report on Fibreboard Containers, Paper
and Textile Bags.
The Government's decision to implement the Board's
recommendations will mean that a General rate of duty of
will apply to boxes, bags and other packing containers of paper
or paperboard. Existing ad valorem rates of duty, including
primage, range from 24% to 47% approximately. The Board
recommended that the existing rate of duty on corrugated
fibreboard remain unchanged at 30% or, if lower, $ 48.225 per
tonne. It is not expected that there will be any significant
changes in the industry as a result of the Government's decision
because of the substantial natural protection afforded local
production. Mr W~ hitlam. said that details of the Customs tariff
changes arising from the Government's decision will be announced
when administrative arrangements to implement them have been
finalised.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AUSI HAI. I A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 339
26 September 1974
RELEASE OF INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released
the Industries Assistance Commission report on Wood and
Metal Working Machinery, Etc.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government's decision on
the report will be announced at the earliest practicable
date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



iI f'C loUlC-4 If~
6.
.1
No 127 28 0 Fember 1974
JOINT COhIMUNIQUE
The attached is the text of the
Joint Communique issued at the conclusion
of the Visit to Australia by Their Imperial
Majesties the Shahanshah Aryamehr and the
Shahbanou of Iran. 
JOIIFT U~~ hIiIl * SU'-, jb uf'L'Hl~ CJC~ OF t
VTISIT TO AUSTRALIA '' HEIR 11K1' JUHAL 1AJEL,) TIEL;
THflE~ l AIUA_' lSIlA ARYA" lIIBR _ ArI TlE IRAI
A-t-he invit_, tion of the Governor-Gcneral.
His Excellency Si"-John Kerr, XK . St. J. Q. C.
Their Irnerisil Majesti.-s, The Shah ashah Aryamehr and
The Shahbanou orf Iran, mnade a State Visit to Austr' . lia
from 20 27 September 1974,
In Cnhilera tne ' qovernor-General was host to
Their Irxl-eri. aIJ f-I'ut athsofflicial residence,
Government IoeDuring ' thei-r stay Their lImperial
Majesties also vite ecsad* New South ' d4ales and
ictoria whey-o Thei!. uiimneriol Via-jes : ties enjoyed the
hospital-Lty of the State JI" ove'nors -arLQ Premi~ ers.
W h J. 1n A iist x-a ThIieiJr imperial Majest~ ies visited
plaes cf ecciici,'.( I~ .015. C uiturul an A s scieritif. Thc
inflte" Lt. Whiile in CaInberra His 1" merial Mlajesty
The Shahanshah Aryamehr held discussions with -the
Prime Miister the Hornourable 13. 1Ohi tiam, 0, P
The discussions were attended on the Iranian side by:
* His Excellency Dr Abbas Ali Khalathari,
Linister for Foreirn' Affairs o~ f Iran
oHis Excellency Eir hlosan shraghil
Ambassador of Iran to Australia
* His Ex, c ellEMcy 1FIr Houshan Batmari-elidg,,
. Direct or-Gen eral of the MinLris try of Fore i Affa: i r.,
oMr Anoushi ravan Sad igh.
Private Secretary to the Minister for For'-ign Affsi . rz;
oand other officialsF
and on the Australian side by:
* The Deputy Prime Minister Lind Minister for Ovorseas-
Trade, the Honoura,-, ble Cairns., M. P.
The Minis-Ger for li ~ neri'uls anid ' Pnergy,
the llonourable R. F. X. Connor, M. P..
oThe Treasurer, the llonourah. le Frzank Crean, 1'. P.
* The Minister -for Defence,
the Hlonourable Lance B3arna~ rd, 1h. P.
oThe Minister for Manufacturing Industry,
thle Hlonourable Kep. Rnderb,,;, Q. C. II. P.
* The Australian Ambassador to Iran,
Mr I. Dowden
* and senior officisiss 
ATtn dLueknsdtaryrt oo thuepT hcI~ noHr couVH pi, is. X Kl-cetp i, 1h7&gt; ie m ptvesMiirnMjv7' tj i jo s; W, loeP 1W OW'. Vf'o r MiOl is~ ne r irn~~ i no
athJreeeira dym uetxuisatcl dede nlb'ef( y-rnn4i ~ 0 MP7" o ando' Astriha IOrvioon -0WK~. PWi' Ko4a' 3 3 hM-e~ iI T
dit ~ evmealIao pmhonr: pt ' d ofW K rnu thejra~ V~~ n vo' 0w5ii anda O, WOU3 ,,.' utuvnr ' o* hiao n: I Cn S, O i
OT rlot. .. te tonQr e M i co. c M ycm) n
ld : L1 3(-nii
tihnq'. t erUOnnaitteidon afAl Mpblnrao c c Mn Q *&gt; ouri y based-oni Me oi rioncjlo of
of~ tho people of Ausona'rnlv, L i3 ,3ndW 11 WaWn . e'nn ri 1ho n3 oWW inN O' 0O . iO. 1n, cf -' u( I; loazr
rnte'' tonal r.. ay ars W the nuaLA of t&gt; h n 302L.
i-r ; lJ ionfnIho t eon aLLi iO P hd2i'n-uq uL ) Mto; u. oninTgh eyIm) r c aind ror1n Wer-
I. C2' IdonIl Ir ~ an o-mJ us rIjk hod nn i~ cosnl pabtiv rok,'(
vM. iinea Cjtow0 8rsc hy to re'wO. oe iñ Meuhwjy t e hdte hn1oi n t~ ] Iwocd o nCtt' eHhy a'' ut t ron t ~ h e. tL hgre ne oi n2Pa ' r 3icimm-p:: o r.' 1i r 1K:' rre vg; j= Ol) w1W uud-Kanai d. nd doiMn1WM 1Mt M s W; noIt p3. r13O1
aeeeonwixnxn~ nedidp taL e r3rsfpentItph~ oia nacnnrt o: sgsr nOt~ rvl ia ii otnancaGndtoduhL n3nl ea a(-il1p rtAti h mrurdol rysioop; itL l0doa rseor r ia p( mtt5ol o2ai ' 2tminr3. hau mre ina5ltoot( on 0 F9fc2 e r'G0uo1eI)' nmCh. gLetcd.&amp; i i oelte eXC' 7r ov ubhsi -aiaw ', c~ l o ooitv mxnT ininrtL ~ h hev -np L r r nrVoaus St~ orcilednLe nv dy ' a Q~ Lnsnttti Lhvoor if . eac tlret. 1qh. shtn qrWu n Lu. ot h: c i. LMi1' 3lO r1L. i-c. iwrl.
. entwtHlhersuoaaep~ C~ icnarouij~ ottlg-di Pl yaoKr srorb iuelaoin wnftf ou'dse i s Cat) r p: trtWcL ohho3ooa1rnL. 5 nAi ci2tn M len lurte't oI" Ylrn i'O" h -MTpcaee fbrp ~ i . o2lLbr. tI " i yra 2 t: i 2mthc1. nge' 3uInrc 1; luMM e2r!' i 2vW -3y nhL ros-n2fo2wCt a L ona n1aa k-lM oirjm.' Srnor o3t t-f) ehP c dei nisminrW plmoanId t h~': 1i0( . sh50iL 3. oc 1h'dCt1u frdt ou On -~ W ooNOfT5'' Ln" w ItfoUNhi~
naifi'tnu d1 c itshlbeeti3deas ecr nrH pFa r( itr2oncixn ecpC'r oc'lnus'usKr c adow. e.. rxIedi-oSoAinrnc u siTit hhtrnanQl jiarrai.' esop mcib Col. atny/ 2 ' w52 aoof'FfL ' o rm Wte hn; u1tv 3a hle2a32h ) Mi0M ti'cdLh to ~ [ nSlMs eOsshrpln ro'O2t 3h nou lpE, n o nsuQT b) h. I eWof cwIkhV cvhrtio;' r
discussedth. He iss eciumrIpirtiya M AjhLuvtan Gl WO the .03-1Nt1 NeOIWd airc,
T e e ' cu' ' j12 v-d th e o wu i LShC r to t he P0, 3Umc,.!
atwrgader ellE-edb er otihnugatjet so. t fh et'hH eTi snO w iionm rpledr :' W1. o0ef; A: i slih 4o3uMyMa) h0 3j enc3t3 edare n-dmha iIntt. r: hd ee a Prnio&gt; n0e3tm a MoifSn in pitcietio= a ' ct ; er, o l 
-3-
f re e f ro m e U o; e r r 1 v ,11 anc tI ed~ o O :. 1n
by t; he C-rco at ro es i 1 i . Lnrf. e 1 h
N1utual irnte' rct the~ t11o co-urtriec. th01Porit. c h
Indian Cccan thfIn t ( D-L I~ rT2z cA srlu e' ~ r
of the Un-ited 1' atiol--Adj bCCm tc on Jv! rl p
-one Of Peace. H~ is T,:' r2n ' n18t n h rim ist
uc i. vthot th t h ro Q Pc ~ thr
. gree that trfedtc ' o. nse~ i n~ e 0 0OC 2o
: LjThe' e 0' co 0 0' tUhhe Xo r' 1jtn ooCr: I. iu in 1 '' o
rOn mat e~ frs by, ti ciSt o dte n iio
nth sd rc 0o1 nHm ewar era e Ih r er wfh ~ d r n
nui~ lnd efo' o I. n s, o a~ pn I e t h e 1' rxem
CX r d It! 1' t 11n t I3 0 L A i Or f t n rF Ic t
ont e urets need u. 1. eflI n. rbis noto enei i
1r yrtdie c
so3a anS eco( oeroI pl ' co) i ben of th ofteei n
iilnlsn er s .1t oi l e1n anD t e r; eNLI: 1o
a. re hi h " Awt cut n1. olrra:
endatv or exandthecidtur. elai-ai tween th'i, rNemip
alsvi to ' etoh e ng Igrealte. rl inderOthdi-D4 st A'; t tey~ poopeet
of te otheren ' s cultur , n ii. liro ; zi] 1ht Uon, ot
counstrhiuesd teefr ulo tabio tesheaene ofi cnorn ion
science and therl'i eVca! oa ctPviti. eu
Agreement ebodin thes obetie wa onldd uin
thheea dqua rter-s ecomnn a ci entii and
Soindutrald esearmc Oreaihuin 0' 30 andl was shew rome
of~~~ E-n h th-okrog cto o uthe~ a indur, 1yI. T( J ~ r,
alo1eiee ta clImpe'ral I'irjstywecdtepooa
inraina ea futthu re. 
His Imperial 1' ajesty tand the Pr~ I. me ' i. i Later
reviewed the nature of the eoomtc . reia.-' tions bee
Iran and Austr-l~ l ia They aredtliat L temn existed. farren:.
chinj, possi .' iJ fJ. I e s_ for~~ cdn oopiaLo be-two
the two countri eS and dca L cd -' 11 e' 2: d shot I ho,
taken to strenmar Jcn furUL hor: th Laoli Lionhi ox't
economic bettermc at of h i un'Je
.1he Ve-~ tod their Cir a sctu * L-or ' t! la. t Uhe ; 7. o
-overrments wer--; o-' he, 1vc i n rio r n'V 2It'r
'œ or~ al trod e ri Lo us L'e nA'i rlia &amp; d r' I Oy t 1,1
conei l.. cojiT of a tr. 1C LC h h w s sj. r'ri, J lu-ririg
vis it, r:-Cv i. t Zarmir c. O~ r the_. two I; vinmnt
Cn, ci t i o I Ie i A 1; o I 1o1 r' h l J. t ~ I f Lsl' e K
o t oh e ojo &amp; L! Caen th e~ r)' L2~; O
0 1.1 ,, atior 0f L o w ion t. 1 t:. rtl1r h
-A W2 0 1V ' icr. 1t rid to cr'ov lue a
C thicev s mri of
two-way trade and of in; E r a]. w id-rtoc' ni a.
His Timner-L2 1 andj 4I ; he. . LrA. nr-Jillistcr
we~ lcome:. d thecie evelonmenat C ir: i] prooa I 1r
ar'an;' emenIic onusoriL~ c t'i the pro v i' tosn s of 1-he 1r3 n
A" ree -it which ! Ild c) I 1' 0i " n'. DuE " cf a Siotii
in croeus e : i Au s tra1i-an l~ ~ a cC i I L I.,
Australia could 1plo. y a in'ro loe ' s U' Ir y 1. r; n;' n
wi th a ul'stan ti.. a 1 uani t ; ood I wv y]* I e1 i : md c 1-o* irEi
products x'equi.. red . Folr o iyo Ald1rgeorn
also reoc: n~ ised. that Ti:. Alfn ia 11ab: i OV t rol: s'L
in supplyin(. Aus tralia wi; th Ct?. e cr ' unl mc: C.; 1
the po,. sibil. l~ ies ef " 12e!' a M wcato n Li're' mnt-''
government b,, tss ir ocnad e'r to le the L. r eectiv Log-t'n
trade anid i ovea-tent i~ wL s C. Phr irietrn
appropriate % Crovermrnent na LIldijO t i. es. a~ rid SCt,, Ate owniedi
' corporations would i, e ccure sad as i rab1. rmCeA nsc CA
achiLeving these obj ectives
ther ovIca; v 0 ofl' the spi it oJ' co-Pe ration
bc~ i providced by the Aurn7; r'aI i n Fj'or'ts Paymnnt Tn1.. urYancC-
.1orpor~ ation to the newl'*. 1 Lc 1i'rnor't G uaran; tee Funird of TIran
and by t~ he intent ion of thre Auitti'~ nOwrric to send La inar'ke;
develoc ament-gino on to I ran in11L. 1 c ne . r -future to s J_ t 1) o t; C Y Li a-i
Iran n. exn or ti-r to( 1vw m'] ea. i Aus Ir; rt. i .1 a'( or I hi
products. His ImperL;{ l iJ ij(~ y the C" haha,., n. hiah! 1 ryar(, ir
conveyed hiS de. ep appr3'. ci. at. . on an i. tof ' Ier TnornI n) lia et
theC ' Shahbanou. of Iran -to the oneni an ee ate o. FAutria for
thie warm hospitaliLty oxtbonecd to -0' te-n lhe'r'ever ti-ey wen~ t and
expressed. the hope th; at the Prime Mi' 2n'mster o-f Iwo Iral. ia would % vj.--. it
Irn in the near future. The Prtne f'iiaten' iic Ated h-is1, p. eao.,-uro
at-t this oropoa Tlhe daeof. o. J etv_ 0l. 1 ! he det irindI:' 



AU^-\ LJTqt\ L. AN MISSION
TC3 TH 7= UN"' 7 NATIONS
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA,
MR E. G. WHITLAM,
AT THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, NEW YORK,
MONDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER, 1974
Mr President, In this year in which Australia has established
diplomatic relation~ s with Algeria, it gives me particular
pleasure, as head of the Australian Government, to congratulate
you upon your election as President of this 29th Session of
the General Assembly. The Algerian experience has encompassed
many of the deepest problems facing the world and this world
Organisation today. Sir your nation's experience and your
own ensure distinction and significance to your occupancy of
this high post.
As head of the first Australian social democratic
government since Australia helped to found the United Nations
and to frame its Charter more than a quarter of a century ago,
I re-affirm our loyalty to both. Such pledges are easily
enough given; yet no nation makes them more sincerely, more
earnestly today than Australia.
No country needs more than Australia the fulfilment of
the international objectives of the United Nations to reach
the fulfilment of her own national objectives. There are few
countries in which the paradox is demonstrated with such force
1K 4% 44 
-2-
that true national independence depends upon international
interdependence. There are few nations to which the mirage
of national self-sufficiency can be made so tempting; yet
there are few nations for which that mirage can be so easily
shattered. Australia, fortunate In possession of great
resources, confident in the ability of her own people to
develop those resources, is nevertheless not ashamed to admit
her interdependence with her neighbours and her partners
across the world and her dependence upon them. We are a
people without illusions; we Australians neither falsely
exaggerate our strengths nor fearfully exaggerate our
weaknesses. It is precisely because we make a rational
assessment of our strengths and weaknesses that we recognise
that we depend upon a better international order to preserve
those things we most value about our national independence.
In seeking a better international order, we give primacy to
the United Nations.
It is therefore with growing concern that we witness
what can only be called a drift away from international order
and international co-operation at present occurring in world
affairs. Australia's concern springs not just from the real
difficulties created by recent events but, even more, from the
feeling that there has been a weakening of will, a loss of
momentum in Internationai determination to meet and overcome
those difficulties. Great hopes were born two years ago. The Australian
Government wholeheartedly endorsed the movement towards detente
between the United States and the Soviet Union. We wholeheartedly
supported China's return to her true place in the
family of nations in this Organisation and ' in the worldo We
wholeheartedly endorsed the Paris Agreement to end the war in
Vietnam. We therefore ratified the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty, moved our Chtna Embassy from Taipeh to Peking, and
ended Australia's own military Involvement In Indo-China.
Above all, we have been determined to do all we can -to
ensure that our region and the world should not for a second
time lose the opportunity for a new settlement, a new step
towards peace and progress, in the way that the chance was
thrown away after the war In Korea and after the Geneva
meetings in 1954. Yet we have to acknowledge that the hopes
springing from the remarkable events of 1971 and 1972 are
beginning to sour. There is increasingly a sense of drift, a
sense of events out of control. The task of~ this Assembly
should be to help stop that drift. Our natu,? l preoccupation
with our national problems -and for most of us
they are very great indeed must not lead to a loss of 
-3-
international concern and involvement. We cannot turn inwards.
E-en the ,! ost immediate problems of domestic worry such as
inflation which so many of us share, the strongest, the most
highly developed along with the weakest and the least
developed are in essence international problems, for which
there can be no ultimate, no complete national solution
without an international solution. No nation, no group of
nations, no bloc, no alliance, can live alone, can live
entirely to itself in this new world. We are all internationalists
now by necessity. Australia is internationalist
by necessity and by choice. Each of us has our bilateral
arrangements and our regional arrangements. Many, like
Australia, through treaty or trade or tradition, have
honourable alignments and valuable associations.
It is however through this Organisation, its Assembly
and its councils and through the specialised agencies, that
the enduring international settlements must ultimately be
sought and the drift away from international co-operation
must be arrested.
So there must be no loss of nerve, no loss of will
here. If we here lose our nerve, if we here allow that
drift to continue unchecked, we face the breakdown of the
nuclear non-proliferation treaty, the breakdown of world
economic order, the breakdown of all our high hopes and high
words about closing the gap between the developed and
developing nations and the breakdown of any claims of the
United Nations OrgA~ iisation to be an effective peace-keeper
and peace-maker.
We should all stand guilty of betrayal of our peoples
if we did not act now to stop the drift in these matters0
The special obligations which the might of the superpowers
imposes upon them should not be made an excuse for
indifference or~ Indecision on the part of? the rest of us0 We
continue to urge upon the superpowers the need for them both
to maintain the utmost mutual restraint in their relations
between themselves and towards us. They can, of course,
easily destroy each other; they can also destroy all of us0
!, 4e are entitled to ask them to move forward to a stage of
complete detente where their tremendous power can be used
jointly for the betterment of the whole civilizationo We
are entitled to insist upon restraint In their deployment
of forces overseas, in areas such as the Indian Ocean.
Australia is strongly opposed to the Indian Ocean becoming
a ground for competition, much less confrontation between the
great powers. 
-4-
Mutual restraint is also essential to prevent the
excesses and dangers of the nuclear arms race.
Let me recall that those of us who are so far parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
have given the nuclear powers certain rights; they in turn
have accepted certain responsibilities and given guarantees,
as part of a two-way process. We undertook not to develop
nuclear weapons in return for guarantees of protection and
assistance in the development of nuclear knowledge for peace.
Above all, the sponsoring powers undertook to promote and
maintain a world order based upon comprehensive disarmament.
Unless these obligations are sincerely fulfilled, the incentive
abroad and the pressure at home for more and more nations to
get nuclear weapons will increase. A co-operative effort by
all leaders must find effective means of halting the arms race
and preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. There is
nothing more urgent facing any of us today.
Australia there~ ore sees with deepest anxiety the
continuing and new testing of nuclear devices, the prospect
of an ever-increasing number of nat~ ons possessing nuclear
weapons, and an even greater number possessing the capability
of exploding nuclear devices. Where It has been open to
Australia, we have expressed our concern in action before
the International Court of Justice.
All of us face a nightmare world in which as many as
fifteen or twenty nations may possess nuclear weapons by the
early ' 080s. There is time to prevent it, We have perhaps
about a year, two years at the most in which to prevent it.
Now is the time; it may be our last chance.
For our part, the Australian Government pledges that
it will neither develop nor acquire nuclear weapons.
Our first aim must be to strengthen the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and work for Its acceptance everywhere.
Real and rapid progress can best be made through this Treaty.
We should build on what we have. We have not time to start
all over again. Six years after it was concluded and more
than four years after it came Into force, some States have
still to ratify the Treaty, or to make clear their
renunciation of nuclear weapons development. Certainly
we understand the difficulties the Treaty presents to some
nations. We understand their reservations0 We acknowledge
discriminatory aspects of the Treaty as it now stands0We 
would hope that the forthcoming Review Conference will remove
some of these difficulties, but the Conference will be more
successful and meaningful if more nation3 ratify the Treaty
and work within its framework to improve it and apply it.
Secondly, we should make a comprehensive treaty to ban
nuclear weapons testing an urgent priority. The treaties
which have been concluded and resolutions which have been
adopted are Important achievements, but they have not gone
far enough towards stopping the nuclear arms race. They are
only steps towards unive-sal and comprehensive agreement on
nuclear weapons testing. We must complete the journey.
Thirdly, we need effective international arrangements
to govern and control ruclear experiments for peaceful
purposes. We all recognise the promise which scientific
collaboration on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy holds
for economic development in the interests of all mankind.
But the world cannot afford the risks which lie in the
prospect where increasing numbers of countries possess
nuclear devices e'-en if they profess to have them for
peaceful purposes only. We cannot shrug off nuclear
explosions which present us with such a threat, particularly
those conducted outside existing safeguards and without
international inspection0 Australia seeks support for an
international arrangement by which all states could gain
access to nuclear explosive services under agreed and secure
international controls for peaceful purposes0 We urge all
nuclear states to co-operate In establishing such a service,
preferably under the auspices of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. I join with the Foreign Minister of Canada in
this call. Another approach to the goal of disarmament worth
serious exploration is the concept of peace zones. They are
of course no substitute for comprehensive disarmament and no
substitute f'or an effective Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Australia, however, takes a particular interest in the
agreements and proposals embodying this concept, because
most of them affect our continent and our region directly.
The Antarctic Treaty, the Indian Ocean peace zone, the ASEAN
declaration, the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and the proposal by
Iran for a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East all
move in the right direction. They command Australia's broad
support since they assert the dangers inherent in an
uncontrolled, unregulated use of our planet for the deployment
of nuclear weapons; they seek to limit the development,
emplacement and use of nuclear weapons in the areas and 
-6-
environments they cover; they all express growing anxiety
about the spread of nuclear weapons; they all seek paths
towards reducing tensions among the nuclear powers. For the
Australian Government, these initiatives not only represent
ends In themselves but, we believe serve to stimulate
progress on other important measures intended to bring to
fulfilment the hopes of !. nkind to live in security, free
from the threat of nuclear war,
Let me say that Australia's anxiety about the nuclear
arms race does not blind us to the risks to international
peace and security from localised conflicts using conventional
weapons. We, the members of the international community,
stand condemned for our failure so far to find the sense of
responsibility and the means of authority to stop regional
disputes being settled by force. It is equally bad that
some members of the international community have made
possible for profit massive recourse to arms and the means
of waging wars about to start or already begun. A world order
which pcovmits. or which, by default, sanctions the large scale
transfer of weapons from one country to another where the risk
of conflict is high, is gravely at fault and very foolish. It
shortcircults the process of peaceful negotiation and puts
primacy upon settlement of disputes by war, by bloodshed, and
as always happens must always happen in modern war by the
bloodshed of the innocent.
Clearly, we still have far to go before the international
community will agree collectively to forsake the short term
gains on arms sales abroad in return for the longer term but
less tangible benefits that this self-denying ordinance would
confer on the weapons prn~ ucers. Nevertheless, we now ask
that the major weapons producing countries should set an
exo~ mple by imposing the strictest restrictions on the export
of arms abroad to areas where there is a clear risk of conflict.
Recent events have shown that preservation of peace is
more than a matter of arms control. It is also a matter of
keeping the peace when violence threatens or occurs. It is
not enough for members o the United Nations to pay lip service
to the United Nations' peace-keeping role. Individual members
have the duty to provide the material and financial resources
to allow the United Nations to deal with threats to security,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.
Australia stands ready to participate in peace-keeping
operations in whatever way would be most useful. Australia is
of course allied by trep-ty with the United States, and we make 
-7-
no apologies for it. There is however no area of actual or
potential conflict anywhere in the world where loyalties,
ideology or interests, should make an Australian involvement
in peace-keeping unacceptable or unwelcome. We wish
Australba to be always among the first nations from which
the United Nations would ask for peace-keeping forces; we
shall be among the first~ to respond. We undertake to keep
the Secretary-General regularly informed on the nature and
size of contributions we are able to provide over a given
period. Australia fuirther believes that the importance of
preventive diplomacy must come to be more widely recognised
and accepted and that the ample provisions offered by this
Organisation for peace-keeping and good offices should be
reinvigorated, explored more thoroughly and more thoroughly
exploited. It is time, thern~ ore, to look again at the
hitherto untapped provisions of the United Nations Charter,
to make all that we can of its capacity to provide useful
contributions to such activ,: ties as fact-finding,
conciliation mediation and negotiation.
We here should particularly devote increased attention
to the role of the International Court of Justice. Not enough
nations use the Court. Members of the international community
cannot be compelled to take their cases before the Court but
we should strive to build confidence in its worth, its wisdom,
its worl rbility as one way of rationalising and harmonising
international relations. If the rule of international law
and justice is to prevail, then an international tribunal is
indispensable. The Court's jurisdiction should be widened0
Jurisdiction should become compulsory and universal. New
multilate~ al treaty arrangements like that which will
emerge from the Law of the Sea conference should enforce
compulsory settlement oP disputes, with the International
Court as the final court' 0o' appeal0 By such steps the rule
of law can be established and strengthened in a better world
order. In this difficult, complicated, crowded world we all
are creating for ourselves, the causes of conflict multiply.
Nuclear brinkmanship, ideology, border disputes, race hate,
religious bigotry, national ambitions, foreign exploitation
all provide actual or potential sources of tension, conflict,
bloodshed and war. Yet there remains for the future one of
the oldest of all the causes of war the threat of war for
the possession of resources. Huge population increases, the
revolution of rising expectations, the enormous and often 
-8-
wasteful demands our technological civilization makes upon the
world's resources, have increased the pressures on our world
civilization to the very threshold of the tolerable.
. For countries which lack resources the situation has
become critical. The developing countries have been grossly
disadvantaged. Last year's oil crisis brought this sharply
home to all of us developed and developing alike.
It is proper that In this world forum I should state
the Australian Government's attitude to the use and development
of Australia's own very considerable resources. There is no
place in our thinking f'or " economic nationalism" in its crudest
sense. We do, of course, wish to ensure steady markets at
fair prices for what we produce. We recognise the great scope
for increased co-operation between producers of raw materials
and for groups of exporting countries to associate to build a
better fr%-)-ework for orderly and rational development of
production and trade0 As a relatively developed and thriving
nation, which also produces many resources shared by developing
and poorer nations, Australia recognises its duty to cooperate
with such nations in obtaining fair and reasonable
return for our products. And we are co-operating. Equally
however we in Australia accept our responsibility to reassure
countries which depend upon our resources that they shall
have steady, secure access to those resources at fair prices.
We must protect our interests and we shall, but Australia is
not in the business of resources blackmail0 That is the way
to international disaster for producers and users alike0
Let us accept the plain fact that war for resources
or food or markets by any nation or group of nations would,
in modern times, represent the supreme folly0 There is no
war, nuclear or " conventional" by which the victor so-called,
assuming there was one, could conceivably win back by war the
resour0ces used and destroyed in waging it0 If we choose not
to listen to the voice of humanity against war, we might at
least listen to the voice of commonsense and indeed ordinary,
rational self-interest0
As a major food producer, Australia is particularly
interested in the proposals on~ food which President Ford and
Secretary of State Kissinger have made at this session0
Australia undertakes to work constructively and cooperatively
towards implementation of these proposals.
Suggestions such as the establishment of an international
system of grain reserves are thoroughly commendable and
deserve our most serious attention0 
-9-
Of all the changes which have occurred in the international
community since World War 11 none has more
profoundly altered the r7ace of the world than the accession
to independence by those peoples and states formerly under
colonial rule. The process is not yet complete, but we look
to a time in the near future when no territory will be
controlled against 4ts choice by a metropolitan power with
whom it has no geographical, social, racial, cultural
affinity. In this regard we particularly welcome recent
decisions of the Government of Portugal.
Australia has acted with determination and vigour to
apply the relevant artic', es of the Charter. Papua New Guinea
became self-governing on I December, 1973. It will become
fully independent as soon as the House of Assembly of Papua
New Guinea decides. We expect this decision soon. Let me
emphasise the decision we await is by the House of Assembly.
The Australian Government made its own decision long ago
we utterly reject a colonial role for Australia. Meanwhile
the Australian Government deals with the Government of Papua
New Guinea in all significant respects as that of a nation
already independent.
There is to me, I must say, a most satisfying symmetry
in the march of events by which Portugal the oldest, and
Australia the newest, of the colonial powers are acting at
the same time towards the liquidation of colonialism. Across
the distance of 400 years the new world in Australia clasps
hands with the old, in ending a false, demeaning, unworthy
power over others.*
The dramatic and welcome progress made towards the
dissolution of the oldest and last of the colonial empires
now enables -che United Nations to direct even more con%
centrated attention upon the twin evil of racism
particularly its posc-colonial manifestations in Southern
Africa. We must be unremitting in the efforts sanctioned
by the Assembly to break the illegal regime in Rhodesia, to
end South Africa's unlawful control over Nambibia and to end
apartheid. We should all make determined efforts to see
that the momentum which launched the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination is not lost. My
Government conscious that Australia's own record is
seriously flawed is determined to remove all forms of
racial discrimination within our own shores, notably now,
as notoriously in the past, against our own Aboriginals. 
While racism remains as cruel as any example of man's
inhumanity to man, we should not, however, overlook the
existence of other forms of discrimination which rob men
and women of their right to live in dignity and peace of
mind. Throughout the world political prisoners languish in
jails or are otherwise deprived of their civil liberties.
There are thoroughly unacceptable constraints on the right
of political asylum. Religious and ethnic minorities are
persecuted, workers are denied the protection of ILO
Conventions, women are denied equal opportunities. The
Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee will during
the discussion be putting Australian submissions to express
our views and proposals on these matters.
There has never been a time in human history when the
truth of the one-ness, the indivisibility of humanity, has
been so manifest. It is no longer only a philosophical or
religious proposition but an assertion of sheer reason and
commanding commonsense, All the momentous recent developments
have profound implications for the future conduct of international
relations since they have one common theme the
interdependence of us all. That interdependence is now almost
total. An attempt by any state to bring about political or
economic change in another through unconstitutional,
clandestine, corrupt methods, by assassination or
terrorism, undermines the rule of international law,
encourages adventurism and anarchy, endangers world peace
and turns quite quickly against even the most powerful
nations who would seek to advance their cause by such
methods, The wilful erection of trade barriers by one state or
a group of states without regard to the hardship caused to
others can cr-eate economic dislocation around the world by
curtailing or closing export markets to which their
industries have become geared and on which their foreign
exchange earnings depend.
Refusal to recognise the inalienable rights of all
people to freedom and independence produces tension and
conflict not only between the oppressed and the oppressors
but between them and other nations which become associated
or involved in these just and legitimate struggles. 
-11-
Now more than ever, we look to the United Nations.
It has the experience, the stature and the capacity to help
us identify the sources of tension between nations, to
prescribe collective measures to mitigate and eventually
remove the causes of conflict, and to anticipate and prevent
situations developing which have the potential for disturbing
world peace.
Mr President, It is claimed that the world is now short on leadership.
It's truer to say that the nature, complexity and
universality of the problems rushing in upon us render
irrelevant and obsolete that concept of world leadership
whereby a handful of powerful men in charge of the most
powerful nations can chart the course for the rest of us to
follow. So the challenge of the United Nations to provide
a genuine and continuing source of leadership, of hope and
purpose for the world is more urgent, the opportunity more
real, than at any time in the Organlsation's history. In
the response we here make to that challenge, we shall be
judged as nations, as representatives of our nations and
as men and women not by our power or size or wealth, but
by the honesty of our efforts to promote and practice the
principles of the Charter of this United Nations. 



Press Statement No. 335
September 1974
ROYAL COMMISSION ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION
SUBMISSIONS BY PUBLIC SERVANTS
In reply to recent representations about public servants
rights to make submissions to the Royal Commission on Australian
Government Administration, the Prime Minister has informed his
correspondents that the Government itself and the Commission are
anxious that individual public servants should be given every
possible encouragement to come forward with their views.
Mr. Whitlam said: " The Royal Commission was established
in pursuit of the Government's aim of improving Australian
Government Administration and the Government believes that any
submissions individual public servants may wish to make to that
end are to be regarded as being in pursuance of their official
duties. The Government therefore would not wish any obstacle
to be placed in the way of Public Servants making submissions
drawing on information acquired in the course of their duty
except insofar as this might infringe the confidentiality of
personal or business information provided to the Australian
Taxation Office, Australian Bureau of Statistics etc. The Royal
Commission has stated that it would not be necessary for Public
Servants to produce copies of official documents to which they
refer but that where it felt it necessary the Commission would
ask for documents referred to."
Mr. Whitlam ' also said that he was ensuring that advice
on the Government's attitude towards disclosure of information to
the Royal Commission is being made known to the Chief Officers of
all* Departments and to others concerned.
The Prime Minister said the Government considers that
restrictions on freedom of expression of Public Servants and former
Public Servants should be reduced to the minimum necessary for the
conduct of affairs of state and that Public Servants should have
maximum possible freedom to exercise civil and political'rights
enjoyed by other citizens.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
AT THE UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK
TUESDAY, 1 OCTOBER 1974
QUESTION: We had a report from your country that the Shah of Iran
mentioned a possible exchange agreement of oil and Australian
uranium. Could you tell us something about this?
PRIME MINISTER: It would be putting it too simply to say an
exchange of oil and uranium. The Trade Agreement which Australia
has made with Iran doesn't mention oil. It is not, I understand,
ot the Iranian practice to mention oil in her Trade Agreement with
other countries. The Shah is very interested in obtaining regular
supplies from Australia of those resources which Australia is fortunately
situated. Uranium, of course, iron ore and the like. The suggestion
is that no arrangements have been completed of course the Iranian
Government could take in some of the Australian instrumentalities in
this field such as the Australian Industries Development Corporation
or the Petroleum and Minerals Authority. This would be a way of
preserving Australian ownership and control of these basic Australian
resources and at the same time guaranteeing a certain share of the
resources for the purchaser.
QUESTION: Can you just give us an idea of the'amount of uranium
they want?
PRIME MINISTER: No, there has been nothitig so specific as that.
All the discussions we had last week were to produce a climate in
which we can then get down to the details of the arrangements. But
we were very pleased with the discussions and got to understand each
other very well. The sort of resources the Shah would like to obtain
from Australia, and also, of course, he emphasises his preference
for Government-to Government arrangements in respect to resources
and to operate through state corporations.
QUESTION: Sir, one of the American newsagencies today reports from
Australia that the climate of your Government and you personally
are becoming recently more friendly to the United States since
Mr NiXon. Can you say anything about your present relations with
the United States?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe our relations with the U. S. have been
friendly along. I don't want to personalise these relatio..
I would thi. % k that relations between the United States and Australia
would be satisfactory whatever the Government was in Australia or
the United States. There is a basic community of interests.
QUESTION: I was intrigued by your opening lines in your speech where
you r-zferred to the fact that you are the first Head of an Australian
Sdemocratic Government to speak at the United Nations. I have
a d your philosophies carefully so I have some conception of
what changes you have brought. My question is designed to clarify what
a social democratic government means in terms, of course, internally,
and what does it mean in terms of foreign policy? I didn't was---
to ask you what it means in terms, idealogically, because I want to
avoid that and I want to spare you that? / 2 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: Don't spare me. Let me cite what I would regard
as the social democrat governments at the moment or in recent years.
There would be the Scandinavian countries, West Germi-ny, Austria,
Britain, New Zealand, Australia. Those countries in particular would
have what we call Democratic Socialist Labor Governments. Well,
there are others one could add, the Netherlands. Now you can see
from those other countries I have mentioned what would be the
general attitude of an Australian Labor Government in international
affairs. We would probably place particular emphasis on the United
Nations. The other side in politics would be inclined to say that
we would take a starry-eyed attitude towards the United Nations.
Internally there would be particular emphasis by social democratic
governments on government initiatives in social and as well as in
economic directions. The last question I was asked regarding resources
you can see as an illustration. In Australia our Government would
be wanting to promote or create those public institutions for the
discovery, the development, the marketing of natural resources such
as the Petroleum and Minerals Authority and the Australian Industries
Development Corporation.
QUESTION: Can I follow this through with a supplementary question
on that in light of the fact that the Foreign Minister of Malaysia
referred to the organisation of South East Asiak in a regional phase
as a region of peace and neutrality. Now, does the social democratic
government concept, as you would apply it regionally, mean that you
in effect and I know that you are working very closely in South
East Asia with your neighbours that the region is gearing-itself
to join the non aligned concept of the world?
PRIME MINISTER: My Government supports the ASEAN concept which
you quote as being expressed by the Foreign Minister of Malaysia.
Australia and Malaysia follow a very closely similar line in all
foreign affairs matters in South East Asia and in the Indian Ocean.
I'm not particularly anxious to adopt a nomenclature aligned or
non-aligned. As I said in my speech to the Plenary yesterday we
are aligned in some traditional ways for which we don't apologise.
Nevertheless, we want to avoid a polarisation in the Indian Ocean,
for instance, between the two superpowers.
QUESTION: I have two other questions. The first one concerns the
five nation agreement which you have among Australia, New Zealand,
Malaysia and Singapore.
PRIME MINISTER: And Britain.
QUESTION: Yes. What is Australia's view regarding the continued
validity and effectiveness of this agreement, in particular the
stationing of ASEAN Forces in Singapore? My second question is
regarding the Australian Immigration policy which has caused some
concern to South East Asian Governments including that of Singapore in
that it has led to a brain drain from these particular countries. ./ 3 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: Australia supports the framework of con~ sultation which
the Five Power Agreement provides. I'm not sure tha' all -the
correspondents would be familiar with the Five Power ,. grt; ement. It
is an arrangement between Singapore, Malaysia, Britain, Australia
and New Zealand. We do not believe, however, that it is necessary to
have troops from Australia, or for that matter from Britain and New
Zealand, stationed in Singapore, or for that matter in Malaysia,
in order to preserve the advantages of consultation undX! r the Five
Power Agreement. Australia no longer has soldiers in Singapore.
It does have some aircraft in Malaysia and we are bv * y to have those
* aircraft in Malaysia as long as they serve the purpo-! s of Malaysia
as well as Australia. In effect, Malaysia at this stage does not have
adequate fighter protection. She has for many years depended on
Australia to provide it.
You mention as your second question the position of
students from South East Asia in Australia. There have-been for the
last 25 years many thousands of students from South East Asia studying
at Australian universities and also at technical colleges or at
boarding schools. Australia believes that this is a contribution which
she can make to providing skills for her neighbours, in particular
areas where at this stage they do not have sufficient educational
institutions themselves. There is no objective by Australia to entice
bright students from her neighbours to carry on their careers in
Australia. Australia is, however, very happy to make places
available in her own quite crowded educationa institutions for
students from ' her neighbours where they can't get thc.., e forms of
training at home.
QUESTION: I'm not only taling about the students but the professional
people, some of whom have emigrated to Australia from developing
countries like'the Philippines and Singapore.
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's not that so many people have come
from the neighbour countries to practise their professions in
Australia but that many who have gained professional qualifications
in Australia have chosen or sought to remain in Australia. If, for
instance, we were not to allow those students from South East Asia who
had acquired university degrees, namely medicine or engineering, to
stay in Australia we would then be accused of pursuing a raci. 1t
policy. My Government, which came to office 22 months ago tomorrow,
has taken the attitude that if people have quali-fications which are
needed in Australia, they can come to Australia or stay in Australia
irrespective of their racial or religious beliefs and, accordingly,
there are, it is true, quite a number of. doctors in particular who
were born in South East Asia and who are now practising in Australia.
We can do with many more doctors in Australia than we have. 1 ould
be, we believe, an infringement of human rights to say th .~ can't
stay in Australia if they want to. Obviously, thei; qual... 1io ns
are acceptable, if they were gained in Australia. 1 4 th'il' aE
caused some misgivings among some of our neighbours '-hat zjiCy sent to
the expense of providing their primary and secondary edu-We
provided their tertiary education and then you have the iare
you to say that they are not to practise their prf.~ in
Australia. That they have to go home? That was said by the previous
Australian Government. Some of the students, doctors generally, didn't
want to go back to the countries of birth so they went to Canada
instead. Now that didn't serve Australia. It didn't serve our
neighbours. 
-4-
QUESTION: like to follow up the question about resources.
You said jA your speech " Yet there remains for the future one of
the oldest' of all the causes of war the threat of war for the
possession of resources." Well, in my book, l~ ind is a resource and
a very valuable one and you have about the biggest per capita
possession of land in the world. Living space has been a cause of
wars for some time as you well remember. What is your policy about
* letting people, not qualified, not educated but Chinese, Japanese,
Indian, who want a place to settle because they're hungry and there
isn't enough room where they are?
* PRIME MINISTER: It is true that Australia has a very large land
mass. It would be one of the, what I suppose, five largest members
of the United Nations territorially. Nevertheless, it is the driest
country in the world. The average rainfall over the whole of
Australia would be lower than that over any comparable land mass in
the world. It would just not be possible to readily pvt under
cultivation those parts of Australia which are not already under
cultivation. It would not be possible regularly to~ pasture animals.
in those parts of Australia where animals are not pastured already.
I don't say fhat there are not very large tracts in Australia which.
could not be used for agriculture or pasture.. I do point out,
however, that it would require a very much larger capital expenditure
to make them fertile, fruitful, dependable than pretty well any other
part of the w~ orld-The parts of Australia which are already used for
agriculture or pasture are those parts which are comparable to the
other parts of the world which are used for . agriculture or-pasture.
People who come to Australia don't want to settle on the land
* generally. The people who come to Australia in general want to settle
in the two very large cities of Sydney and Melbourne.
QUESTION: Sir, on the question of oil, I understand that your
Government was not consulted by the Gnited Nations when they opened
the campaign here with President Ford's speech. Do you think that
the strategy was good, or do you think that they got off on ti",,
wrong foot, with this-question, what has been-your feeling sii~ ce
you've been here about the reactions to the American campaign to get
oil prices down?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't been long enough-in the United Si ~ zes t,.
comment appropriately or affectively on the matters you roire.
Perhaps I can say that Australia is not serio~ usly aff&amp;_
the oil d. wvelopments of the last 12 months as are, say, soitle
industrialised countries such as Germany or France or BritriLL,,
believe also that while the United State's oil reserves are,~
and Australia's are quite small, in practise wp pnAudct2
oil a larger percentage of the oil we use thanx does the United
States. Australia produces about 70 per-cent of the oil she consu.'.-s
and she will be able to produce that percentage for another ten yea -S.
That's the limiting factor, the ten years, and the oil in which wo
are deficient is largely the heavy oil, the lubricating fuel oil .' id
so on. We are much more fortunately situated in other energy sources
than we are in oil. The other point I might make is that Australia
is naturally sensitive to the attitude of the developing countri(" s in
the use of their resources. Geographically, we bear their attiZ.:" 1C23i
in mind. Geographically,* we are not in Western Europe or North
America. We are not in the North Atlantic context geographically, we
are more akin therefore economically as well as geographically to 
other countries, many of them developing countries. We share
their aspirations to have a fair price for our produ'ts. We would
wafit to see the price we got for our primary and natu... al products
was indexed to what we happened to pay for our necessary imports.
QUESTION: Yesterday, you expressed considerable concern on the
question of non-poliferation or poliferation and enumerated certain
agreements and initiatives that your Government favoured. You did
not perhaps inadvertently or otherwise, mention the Pakistan
South Asian Nuclear Free Zone. Could you tell me wh . ther your
concern and support extended to the Pakistan initiative and if so
does it extend strongly enough for you to vote for the item if it
comes up in the General Assembly?
PRIME MINISTER: Our attitude towards the Pakistan proposal is the
same as our attitude to the other proposals I listed. I didn't
purport to make an exhaustive list. We support the gen * eral concept.
We support the Pakistan proposal as well as those other ones which
I did in fact mention.
QUESTION: Mr-Whitlam, you were reported in Australia today as
saying that the Australian representative in t ' he Security Council
voted for South Africa's expulsion from the United Nations. A
spokesman for Senator Willesee has been reported as saying that
we have no final position. Could you reconcile the two õ tatements?
PRIME MINISTER.: I don't think that I've made any pronouncement on
this. I think it would be premature for me to express a view on it.
We did of course, as you know, and nearly everybody else did too
suppose, vote for this matter to be considered by the Security
Council. We are a member of the Security Council. I wouldn't want
to pre-empt the discussions on the-Security Council in which ofcourse
we shall have to take part.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlam, in your speech yesterday, fairly well down,
you mentioned any attempt by any State to bring about political
or economic change through clandestine or corrupt methods. You
also mentioned about even the most powerful nations can't do this.
In this country at the moment Chile is a big story. Were you
referring to the United States and what has happened in Chile with
the C. I. A.?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what the C. I. A. did in Chile or if they
did it. I believe there have been instances over the years in which
the Soviet Union as well as the United States have sought to guide
events in other countries. I hope that that guidance is counterproductive
and it is realised to be so.
QUESTION: Will it continue to be your Government's 0izyto
yield to the K. G. B. and return defectors who seek asylan in Australia
as you returned the musical genius Mr Ermolenko last August.
PRIME MINISTER: We refused to detain Mr Ermolenko agair. c4-hius will.
QUESTION: You allowed him to be with Mr Kabalevsky for 4 hours
alone -during which time it-is all-eged-he changed his mind. ./ 6 
-6-
PRIME MINISTbi Mr Ermolenko was for very many hours in'the company
of people. AuL'. ralians, people who were not Russians, Russian
officials or Russian private citizens. There is no question that
Mr Ermolenko wanted to go home. He did express apparently to a
couple of Australians the view that he would like to remain in
Australia. A day later, no longer, he changed his mind and he kept
resolutely for several days to his wish to go home. In those
circumstances it would have been a gross infringement of his rights
to detain him. No man should be detained against his will.
QUESTION: I apoligise if you have already been asked and answered.
this question I couldn't come on time.' Iran has made some rather
sweeping suggestions about the Indian Ocean and asked for Australia's
cooperation, what is your reaction
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not sure what proposals or reports you have in
mind. The Shah of Iran spent 8 days in Australia. He left last
Friday. There were wide-ranging discussions between him and his
Ministers and me and mine. We welcome the interest that the Shah has
shown in the countries to the east of Iran and the countries around
the Indian Ocean including our own which is diagonally across it
from his country. We believe that this interest by Iran, which has
become a very considerable nation under the present Shah, will be
beneficial for many other countries around the Indian Ocean.
QUESTION: Have you mentioned in particular the American potential
base in Diego Garcia and what is your view -on that possibility of
a base there? Do you oppose it, are you in favour of it, or do
you have no opinion on it?
PRIME MINISTER: I know of no country around the Indian Ocean which
has welcomed it.
* QUSTION:. Just across the street facing this building Ihere w7as
a very large demonstration the other day. The leaflet that
distributed I have here which says your recognition of the
incorporation of the Baltic States, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania
Into the Soviet Union. It goes on to say that the elected
representatives, the Senate, in your country has denounced -hat
decision. Do you care to comment on your reaction and trl) the
Senate.. rdaction to it?
PRIME MI-ISTER: You said a very large demonstration. I-was
there was going to be one but I had to look very hard yesterday to
see anyone. Perhaps I should point out that in Australia the Senate
doesn't have the status that it has, for instance, in the United
States. In Australia we have a system inherited from Great Britaint~
v Parliament of Westminster. Accordingly the Government is composed
'~ that party or those parties which have a majority in the House
Representatives, which we call ours, just as the British
wvernment is composed of that party or parties with a majority in
the House of Commons. Foreign policy is determined in Australia,
as in Britain or Canada or New Zealand or India other countries
which have the British Parliamentary system by the Governments.
It is not determined by-the Parliament, still less by the Sena.',-in
our case, the House of Lords in Britain' s case. Accordingly, the
a/ 
-7-
Government determines matters of foreign policy and the Government
in Australia the Australian Labor Party which has a majority
in the House of Representatives. Now what my Govern ent has done
is to re-cognise the de jure, the incorporation of the Republics of
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in the Soviet Union. The historical
fact is that these three countries have been, except for the
years between the First and Second World Wars, parts of Russia.
Lithuania has, except for those years between the two wars, been part
of Russia since Catherine the Great. Estonia and Latvia have, except
those years between the two world. wars, been'parts ol Russia since Peter
the Great. And, before that, they were parts of Sweden since the days
of Gustavus Adolphus. Now I know that in Australi-, to a certain
extent, as in North America, both the U. S. and Canada, that there
are migrants from those countries who pursue-the proposition that
they should be separate independent states. They won't become
separate independent states unless there is a world war which the
Soviet Union lost. Now there are two particular points I would
like to make about this. It produces unnecessary tensions in
Australia, maybe also in the United States or in Canada, for people
to pursue this mirage of a separate statehood independent
sovereign statehood for Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Some people
pursue the same attitude in Australia about Croatia. Now the fact
is that in the case of Croatia all of us have recognised Yugoslavia
ever since 1918. None of us have ever recognised a separate state
of Croatia except Hitler's Germany and Mussolini's Italy in 1941, 42, 4
and 44. Now so much for the attitude of people who have settled
overseas in countries like Australia. It is a divisive policy
to encourage the belief that there may be separateo. states again.
I come to the attitude of people in those countries themselves. It
maybe that some would again like them to be independent sovereign
states. I bear in mind, however, that there was a great deal of
encouragement by radio, particularly, and maybe by pamphlets,
stirring up people who wanted to have a change of Government in
East Germany or in Poland or Hungary or in Czechoslovakia, and there
were a very great number of disappointed persons afterwards as a
result of the riots in Stettin or Warsaw or Budapest in the early
and middle fifties, or in Czechoslovakia in the time of Dubjeck in
1969. It:-is a deception to believe that countries which could not:
assist East Germany or Poland or Hungary or Czechoslovakia in the
early or middle fifties or in 1969, would lift a finger to hc-lp in
Estonia, Latvia or Lithuania. There are also some humanitarian
considerations which led to the recognition de jure of the
incorporation. Russia is a federal state. As long as Australia had
diplomatic relations with Moscow on the basis of the pre or the
inter-war boundaries, Australia could only make representations on
behalf of people living in Australia to the Federal Government '. n
Moscow. It could not make representations on what in thc 13. F r
Australia would be called state matters. It couldn't mr
representations to the republic governments in Estz i c and
Lithuania about matters which fall within their ju. sqi,' t.
QUESTION: Australia had been until last year a staunch ; upnorter
of South Korea on the Korean question in the United Nati since
then you have established diplomatic relations with Not. Krea.
I wonder what your position would be this year? 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: At the General Assembly a year ago there was
a consensus to defer consideration of the Korean question. For the
first time the Assembly was not forced to a vote on this question.
The general view seemed to be that it would be desirable to encourage
the two governments in the Korean Peninsula to settle their
differences and to give away the prospect of confrontation. The
Australian Government applauded this change of attitude. It therefore
worked Very patiently but steadily towards the situation where we
could have diplomatic relations with both those governments. Of
course, we don't presume to say what our attitude is territorially
on the claims by the two governments. We don't do that in Germany,
* we don't do it in Vietnam, we don't do it in Korea, but we believe
these governments are both securely in power. It is therefore
desirable for us to have diplomatic relations with both of them.
Australia now has diplomatic relations with all the governments
between Australia dnd the North Pole all of them. By diplomatic
relations we don't say that we approve the nature of any government,
we merely say we accept its credentials, we believe it proper to
have official relations with them. We naturally hope that the
relations between the two governments in the Korean Peninsula
will become less strident than they have often been.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlam, can you explain why you-are going to Nashville?
PRIME MINISTER: Come along with me and see. 



', AAA1) SI L I PRESS STATEMENT NO. 340
2 October 1974
I. A. C. REPORT FOUNDATION GARMENTS
The Acting Prime Minister, Dr Cairns today released
the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on
Foundation Garments.
Dr Cairns said that the Government's decision on
the report will be announced at the earliest practicable date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



3
PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH N. B. C.' S " MEET THE PRESS",
WASHINGTON, 6 OCTOBER, 1974
ANEL
Mr Lawrence E. Spivak Moderator
Mr Bernard Gwertzman Chief Diplomatic Correspondent
of the New York Times
Mr Carl T. S. Rowan Chicago Daily News, Syndicated
Columnist and Television Radio
Commentator
Mr Henry Brandon Washington Correspondent of
the London Sunday Times
Mr Robert Goralski N. B. C. News
SPIVAK: Our guest today. on " Meet the Press" is the Prime Minister
of Australia, E. Gough Whitlam, who is in this country on a. visit.
Elected in 1972, he is Australia's first Labor Party Prime Minister
since 1949. We will have the first question-now from
Mr Robert Goralski of N. B. C. News.
GORALSKI: Mr Prime Minister, no nation has been spared the agony
of runaway inflation. Is there any kind of collective international
action that can be taken to alleviate the situation?
PRIME MINISTER: None of us have thought one up ~ yt. But it is. clear
that it affects all of us and we have to try to work out solutions
together. GORALSKI: The other day at the United Nations you talked to nations
of the world, and talked about " sheer folly" in terms of possible
military action. Is that a real possibility in your mind?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so. I don't believe any head of
government would resort to it. There have of course been comments
that it was in contemplation.
GORALSKI: Are you basically hopeful that some solution can be
devised before the world does fall apart financially?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
GORALSKI: What kinds of steps, sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that we will come to a better balance
between the needs of the developing countries and of the developed
countries. We won't see the system disrupted so suddenly as it
has been in recent months; but we accept the fact that there will
have to be changes that the great disparities between nations will
have to be reduced. / 2 
-2-
SPIVAK: You ha ' l just met Robert Goraiski of N. B. C. Ne * ws. The
other questioncrs on our Panel today are Bernard Gwertzman of the
-New York Times; Carl T. Rowan of the Chicago Daily News and
Henry Brandon of the London Sunday Times. We will continue the
questions now with Mr Gwetzman.
GWERTZMAN: Mr Prime Minister, in your speech to the United Nations
you talked about world events beginning to sour and a sense of
drift setting in. In your opinion is it more necessary now to
strengthen security in your part of the world, or have tensions
been reduced as you said when you took office a-couple of years ago?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think the big problem so far as we in
Australia are concerned is security in our region. What does worry
us is the proliferation of armaments and particularly nuclear
armaments. We are worried that the high hopes which attended the
inauguration of the non-proliferation treaty should be now so
oftendisappointed. We have done all we can. We hope and this
is largely why I was at the United Nations to get more joint
action; to realise the objectives of that treaty.
GWERTZMAN: Dr Kissinger spoke about this danger in his speech also.
Do you think there will be a concerted effort to strengthen the
safeguards on the spread of nuclear weapons?
PRIME MINISTER: I can only hope so.
GERTZMAN: One more security matter. In this country the United States
has been concerned about perhaps a break up of SEATO. Do you
think SEATO is still necessary?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is still useful. There was a useful
meeting of all the participants last week. And they 11 seemed
to be happy with it. It has changed its character. Is is no longer
designed to contain China. It is quite useful as a group to
discuss problems regularly.
ROWAN: Mr Prime Minister. Shortly after taking office you opened
diplomatic relations with Peking, you pulled Australian troops out
of Viet N. im, opened relations with Hanoi, gave money to the Viet Cong,
opened relations with North Korea. Are you trying to make Australia
neutral or a sort of Sweden of the Pacific?
PRIME MINISTER: No, but we did want to dissociate ourselves
promptly with the activities in which we had participated in
Viet Nam and in Cambodia. I don't agree that we have given money
to the Viet Long. We haven't. And we have only just established
di. plomatic relations with North Korea. The other matters that you
mentioned, Mr Rowan were done promptly. It was time to do them.
F-TNN: Now recently in debates in your country your Foreign Minister
Willesee said this: " The policies of the former Government were
geared to a colonial era in which Australia dared take no action
unless either Britain or the United States moved first". Do you
share Senator Willesee' s view, that the previo2s Government made
Australia " the laughing stock of the world"? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I agree with all that you have quoted my
. Foreign Minister as saying. But, I don't necessarily want to
pursue any factional or partisan attitudes while I am in your country.
I think it's enough to say there will be no going back to the
attitudes that our predecessors pursued. I believe that they accept
the inevitability and propriety of those things which we have
initiated. ROWAN: Mr Prime Minister is it simply a matter of your having
concluded that some of the interests of the United States and Great
Britain in the Pacific area are now inimical to the interests of
Australia? PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't believe that. But we have helped
the change in attitudes of the United States. The United States
doesn't take the same attitude towards matters in the Pacific that
it was taking in the 1960' s. America has changed.
BRANDON: Mr Prime Minister. Australia, earlier-' this year I think,
joined the International Bauxite Association which will control*
about two-thirds of the world supplies. We have heard a lot about
oil cartels. I was just wondering whether the Bauxite Assocation
will create similar financial difficulties to the industrial world.
PRIME MINISTER: I would think not. We certainly have joined the
International Bauxite Association. The Association very largely
stems from suggestions I made in North America fourteen months ago.
But we have spelt out in the guidelines for the Association the
fact that we want to see that the consumers of bauxite are assured
of regular supplies, on fair conditions.
BRANDON: Biut there was some talk about fair prices for the producers
and that raises the question whether there won't be some price
gouging. PRIME MINISTER: I know that there has been some talk of this as
there has been in respect of any commodity agreement whateve~ r,
agricultural or mineral. But Australia, I believe under previous
governments as well as under my Government has a good record
for wanting to have commodity agreements. And we naturally
understand the attitude that the other bauxite producing countries
have in that their prices for their sole export, in most cases
bauxite, hasn't kept pace with the prices they have to pay for
their necessary imports. There ought to be some relation between it.
We share that view.
BRANDON: Let me come back to the earlier debate about Australia's
security. I think there are three theories. One is based on the
forward strategy from which Australia seems to have withdrawn;
then there is the fortress Australia strategy; and then there are
those politicians in Australia who say that Australia really doesn't
need much of a defence. I was just wondering where you stand. 4 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: Well 1. wouldn't be in any of the three categories
You chose. There is the other one that the best arrangements are
regional or collective ones. Some necessarily have to be global.
We must be worried for instance if India, or further afield Israel
and Egypt, acquire a nuclear weapons capacity. That concerns us.
It concerns everyone in the world. But also in our own particular
neighbourhood it is necessary that there should be a lack of
tensions. We ought to play our part in reducing them and eliminating
them. And we are doing that. We aren't waiting for initiatives by
Britain or the United States. We are establishing good relations
with our neighbours, ourselves, directly.
SPIVAK: Mr Prime Minister, there are some people in this country
who are puzzled by your sixteen day visit to the United States
and Canada at this time when Australia has so many domestic
problems of its own. Is this just a pleasure trip or is there some
special reason for your trip?
PRIME MINISTER: The trip is a pleasure. I make no bones about that,
in America,-Canada, or at home. But the matters we have mentioned
such as non proliferation, or commodities, or resources are*
important to Australia always will be not least now; and they
can be dealt with in many cases only on a visit like this. On top
of my visit to the United Nations, there was the fact that I thought
it appropriate to become acquainted with the new President in the
United States and to be in touch, as I always am when in North
America, with the Prime Minister of Canada who has just been re-elected,
as I have.
SPIVAK: Mr Prime Minister, we have had reports in this country*
that over the past few months at least that your position towards
the United States is not as friendly as Australia's position has
been in the past. Can you tell us in your own words how you now
view our present relationship?
PRIME MINISTER: My attitude towards the United States has always
been friendly. That of my party has been friendly, but as I said
in answer to one of the panel earlier, nations do change their
policies. America has changed her policy since the 1960' s, and if
we recognise Peking instead of Taipei, that is not to be wondered at.
It is not resented by America. If we get out Qf Viet Nam or Cambodia
we are doing what America is doing. May I add that there are some
countries, such as Japan and Indonesia noteably, with which our
policies tally very effectively with America's interests too.
SPIVAK: Are you saying this then, that although for a great many
years Australian security depended on its firm ties with the United
States, that's no longer true?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I think that in the ultimate circumstances
Australia's security is tied with America. In the case of a world
war there is no question where Australia's interest would lie.
GORALSKI: Mr Prime Minister, how has Australia benefited from its
relations with mainland China, with East Germany, North Korea,
North Viet Nam. 
PRIME MINISTER: If one is to have relations with other-countries
then one has to !. ave relations with them on the diplomatic level.
' Now I don't know how much further you want me to go on this. The
fact is that the relations which my Government has established
with these other countries which you have mentioned will be continued
by any Australian Government; and to take East Germany, the United
States has now established diplomatic relations with East Germany.
I don't think that if there is a change of administration in the
United States those relations will be severed, as you will ultimately,
obviously, also establish diplomatic relations with the Peoples'
Republic of China. You have very meaningful liaison already with
the Republic and you will also establish diplomatic relations with
North Korea as well as with South Korea. That is taking sides
in the case of these divided countries no longer serves any national
or world purpose.
GORALSKI: I think the point I am getting to, Mr Prime Minister,
that charting a new foreign policy, a more independent foreign
policy as you have, where do American and Australian foreign
interests not coincide.
PRIME MINISTER: Well one could give instances in the past. I
would believe that America over-reacted between Korea and the Paris
agreements to events in East Asia. Now I am very happy to see
America's attitude has changed there. We have collaborated in
that change. In many ways we have made it easier for the change
to be made..
GWERTZMAN: Mr Prime Minister, I would like to ask you about a
problem which has bothered some Americans. It was your decision
to recognise Soviet de jure sovereignty over the Baltic States.'
As you know-it caused some concern among Americans of-. those
nationalities as well as in your country. Could you tell us how
you decided to do this? What was the motivation for it?
PRIME MINISTER: We just wanted to faceup to the facts. We believed
it is a delusion worse it is a deception to suggest that Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania will again be independent sovereign political.
entities as they were only between the two world wars.-
GWERTZMAN: Do you find an-inconsistency with this position with
your othe;. well know position of urging humnan rights and ending of
exploitations of other people?
PRIME MINISTER: ' There are some cases ' where you can do something
about human rights in a country with which you have diplomatic
relations, where you can't with a country which you don't have them
w . ith. For instance with Chile we have been able to do some things
with Chile by recognising the new regime, that we couldn't have
dor-if we had not recognised it.
ROWAN: Mr Prime Minister, I think it is known that in the past
Australia was thought of as European all her ties to Europe. Are
you consciously trying to make Australia look more Asian? / 6 
-6-
PRIME MINISTTi No, we are obviously a European nation and we,
. as far ahead a. ne can see, will be a European nation. Nevertheless
it is clear that geographically and economically we must recognise
the fact that we are right on the opposite side of the world from
Europe. ROWAN: Well with regard to the racial implications there, you got
a lot of publicity as the man who set out to right the wrongs that
had been committed against Australia's aborigineds. Reports now come
out that you may be caving into a white backlash. Is there any
validity to this.?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not, nor I believe are any of my colleagues.
It is very difficult to get overall satisfaction with new policies
particularly where they are policies which are reversing policies
which have been pursued for some generations. But the hopeful thing
is that the aboriginal people in Australia, under my Government,
now have sufficient confidence to express their dissatisfaction.
If they are dissatisfied with my Government they will let us know,
and that is a necessary aspect of any self respect or emancipationthat
people will speak up and act where they think that their
interests are being harmed.
ROWAN: Might I ask what your polJicies ewith regard to who
can migrate to Australia. Will the door now be open to colouredsto
blacks?
PRIME MINISTER: If coloured have blacks have close dependent
relatives in Australi-a they ca. i c~ ome i n pretty well automatically.
If they have skills but have no relatives they can also come in,
but there i s some waiting list. But there is no discrimination now,
whatever, in those who can come in to stay, or to vigit, on the
grounds of race or colour.
BRANDON: There is a strong group on the left of you, Mr Prime
Minister, in the Cabinet and I gather in the Party Caucus
that sometimes is very difficult for you to control, and. I was
wondering whether there is a danger that they might oust you.
PRIME MINISTER: They would be cutting their own throats.
BRANDON: Why would they be cutting their own-throats?
PRIME MINISTER:. Well I you come from England don't you?
BRANDON: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: Well you know perfectly well that this is the
stock-in-trade of any criticism of any Labor Government that it is
faction ridden, that the right and the left are at arms length and
the Leader is about to topple; well it doesn't apply.
BRANDON: You have been quoted I think off and on that you have
certain policies that you would like to pursue but have difficulty
in getting through your Cabinet or the party machine. ./ 7 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I get through whatever I set my heart on, and all
, the matters that have been mentioned to me in your questions today
have produced no resistance or resentment whatever.
SPIVAK: Mr Prime Minister, . you have-been critical -of United States.
-plans to strengthen naval facilities in the Indian Ocean island
of Diego Garcia. Do you think it is unnecessary for the United
States to do that in order to meet increased naval pressure in that
area? PRIME MINISTER: As I said when I was asked at a press conference
at the United Nations only three days ago, there is no nation around
the Indian Ocean which welcomes the build-up on this uninhabited
British group of islands.
SPIVAK: Would you like to see the United States withdraw entirely
from the Indian Ocean regardless of what the Russians do?
PRIME MINISTER: No, certainly not'. Russia and-Almerica-are the.-
world's great naval powers they can sail wherever they choosethat's
clear. But we don't want a proliferation of armaments in
the Indian Ocean which up till now has been-freest of all the world's
oceans, of this American-Soviet confrontation.
GORALSKI: Mr Prime Minister. The United States and Australia have
a similar petroleum problem. I believe we have both produced
about 70 per cent of our petroleum requirements and import about
per cent. Do you feel that you can go along with an
independent foreign policy, without being pro-Arab, to ensure the
percent flow of oil from the Arab States?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't stress independent foreign pc~ licy so much
as inter-dependent foreign policy. Now as far as we are concerned,
we aren't strong in oil but we are strong in other energy sources,
such as coal and uranium and natural gas, and we are very anxious to
see that energy sources in the world are not disrupted. But at
the same time we want to see that other countries which have energy
sources, like Australia, get a fair price for them.
GWERTZMAN: Mr Prime Minister, you said your Government depends on
the United States in case of a big war. Do you intend to permit the United
States to retain its intelligence gathering and comrmunications facilities in
Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: My Government knows wiat the United States is doing
in Australia,. and we know that nothing the United States does in
Australia will be done except with our full knowledge and our
full concurrence.
ROWAN: Do you share the view of some of your countrymen that
Australia's economic future depends more on Japan than any other
single country?
PRIME MINISTER: More than any single country,' yes. That would be
true. ./ 8 
-8-
ROWAN: In that case do you intend to give Japan long-term access
to Australia's minerals and other resources?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, we are doing that. We don't want to see that
Japan is driven to desperation again as she was in 1940. We want
to see that she has dependable access to markets and resources.
We are playing our part in that.
BRANDON: You have imposed a ban on uranium exports. I wondered
what the reason for it is?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, there are two things that we want to achieve
and one is that we want to see that there is a proper return for
these exports. Secondly we want to see, if we can, that we have
some say in the processing of this mineral, of which we possess
about one-fifth of the known reserves. But there have been some
legislative difficulties in Australia which have delayed the solution
of this matter.
SPIVAK: Mr Prime Minister, it has been reported in this country
that you are steadily severing the cord between Australia and Britain..
Is that true?
PRIME MINISTER: No, not at all. Australia would have closer
sentimental or personal ties with Britain than with any country
including the United States.
SPIVAK: Why does Australia remain in the British Commonwealth
at all? Why don't you become an independent republic?
PRIME MINISTER: Being in the Commonwealth is not inconsistent
with independence. We are completely independent, but like the
three dozen members of the Commonwealth, we see advantage in
belonging to a body which is very diverse racially, economically,
politically, but wheie there is such complete freedom in
exchanging views. There is no-one who wants to get out of the
Commonwealth. GORALSKI: I was going to ask you very briefly Mr Prime Ministeryou
were very critical of Mr Nixon when he was President, particularly
aspects of foreign policy. What is your view now of Mr Ford's
administration? PRIME MINISTER: I criticised privately some of the things that
Mr Nixon was doing at the time that we came into office Hanoi,
Haiphong and so on. But I met Mr Ford for the first time. He is
a good man. He will get on well. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 342
9 October 1974
REFERENCE TO INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr Connor, announced
today that he hed forwarded a reference to the Industries
Assistance Commission on whether Australian production of
railway locomotives should be assisted against competition
from the importation of second-hand locomotives. The Commission
has been asked to furnish its report by 28 February 1975.
Mr Connor said that this reference was additional
to the general reference on the rolling stock industry
forwarded to the Commission on 20 September 1974. The
Commission is due to report on that reference by 31 March 1976.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 


93D~SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P. 1AT THE OPENING OF THE FEDERAL CONFERENCE OF THE FEDERATEDMISCELLANEOUS WORKERS' UNION OF AUSTRALIA,DICKSON HOTEL, CANBERRA, 14 OCTOBER 1974I WELCOME THIS OPPORTUNITY, SO SOON AFTER RETURNINGTo AUSTRALIA, TO COMMENT DIRECTLY ON SOME OF THE BASICISSUES WHICH HAVE BEEN DEBATED IN AUSTRALIA IN THE LAST TWOWEEKS. I HAVE OF COURSE BEEN IN CLOSE TOUCH WITHDEVELOPMENTS AD DECISIONS AFFECTING'THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMYWHILE TRAVELLING OVERSEAS. IMAKE THAT POINT BECAUSEOUR OPPONENTS AND SOME SECTIONS OF THE PRESS HAVE TRIEDTO SPREAD THE IDEA THAT BECAUSE OVER THE LAST TWO WEEKSIHAVE ADDRESSED THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS.-HAD DISCUSSIONS WITH THE NEW PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATESAND THE RE-ELECTED PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA-AND ATTENDED THESOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE, THE Fiji CENTENNIAL AND THENORFOLK ISLAND BICENTENNIAL. THEN SOMEHOW I HAVE BEEU OUTOF TOUCH WITH AUSTRALIA AND INDIFFERENT TO DEVELOPMENTSAT HOME. IDO NOT NEED TO LABOUR THE ABSURDITY OF THISARGUMENT. IMERELY SAY THAT IN MY ABSENCE MY COLLEAGUESAND I HAVE CONSULTED AND WORKED TOGETHER. ICOMMEND THE ACTIONSTHEY HAVE TAKEN, THE DECISIONS WE HAVE TAKEN TOGETHER.-AS A GOVERNMENT, AS A TEAM. mi. / 2
-2-I REAFFIRM MY COMPLETE CONFIDENCE IN THE STABILITYOF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, MY COLLEAGUES ACTED DECISIVELYTO DEMONSTRATE THAT OUR FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS BANKSAND BUILDING SOCIETIES ARE SOLID AS A ROCK, I BASE MYCONFIDENCE ON THE FUNDAMENTAL SOUNDNESS OF OUR ECONOMYON THE STRENGTH OF OUR NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE CONTINUINGECONOMIC PROGRAM OF THE GOVERNMENT, TODAY I SHALL REFERDIRECTLY AND FRANKLY TO THE PROBLEMS WHICH ARE FOUND INSOME DEGREE IN THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, FIRST, HOWEVER,I UTTERLY REJECT THE WARPED ATTITUDE OF THE OPPOSITION INSEEKING TO MISREPRESENT AND EXAGGERATE THE PROBLEMS WEFACE, FIDAMENTALLY THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS IN THE FIELDSOF EDUCATION, HEALTH AND TRANSPORT, AND THE GOVERNMENT'SDETERMINATION TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, MEANTHAT AUSTRALIANS CAN LOOK FORWARD TO A CONTINUING ANDIMPROVING HIGH STANDARD OF LIVING, OUR OPPONENTS, FORSELFISH POLITICAL REASONS, REJOICE IN CREATING AN ATMOSPHEREOF PANIC, CONFUSION AND RUMOUR-MONGERING, THEY PREACHABOUT A LACK OF CONFIDENCE, YET NOTHING DOES MORE -TODESTROY CONFIDENCE THAN THEIR OWN INCESSANT PROPHESIES OFDOOM AND DISASTER, LET US REJECT THESE MERCHANTS OF GLOOMAND THEIR MESSAGE OF DESPAIR, THESE NAGGING AND NEGATIVEMEN HAVE NOTHING TO OFFER US IN OUR PRESENT DIFFICULTIES, / 3
-3-I EXPRESS MY CONCERN NOT MORBID PESSIMISM, BUTA FRANK AND REALISTIC CONCERN ABOUT THE NUMBER OF AUSTRALIANSREGISTERED AS UNEMPLOYED. ON THIS ISSUE I EMPHASISE WITHALL THE FORCE AT MY COMMAND THAT THE GOVERNMENT REJECTS THECONSERVATIVE PHILOSOPHY WHICH SAYS THAT MASSIVEUNEMPLOYMENT SHOULD DELIBERATELY BE CREATED AS A DEVICEFOR SLOWING DOWN THE RATE OF INFLATION. IN MANAGING THEECONOMY THE GOVERNMENT CONTINUES TO PURSUE THE GOAL OFFULL EMPLOYKENT. ALL OF US WHO ARE INVOLVED INCONSIDERING THESE NATIONAL ISSUES SHOULD ACKNOWLEDGE THATIT IS NO SIMPLE MATTER, GIVEN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICFORCES, TO SECURE BOTH FULL EMPLOYMENT AND ALSO A LOWINFLATION RATE. OUR OPPONENTS PRETENDe QUITE DISHONESTLY,AND IN THE FACE OF EXPERIENCE IN OTHER COUNTRIES WITH.ECONOMIES SIMILAR TO OUR OWN, THAT THE LIBERAL PARTY ALONEHAS A MAGIC FORMULA TO ACHIEVE THIS GOAL. MY MEETINGSWITH WORLD LEADERS HAVE SHOWN ME JUST HOW COMPLEX, HOWUNIVERSAL, HOW DIFFICULT THIS PROBLEM is. No ONE HASFOUND A SOLUTION EXCEPT THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITLON INAUSTRALIA, AND MRWII WJINI MdAHON. I AM GLAD TO SEE THATMR MCMAHON HAS EMERGED AS CHIEF LIBERAL SPOKESMAN ONTHE ECONOMY-WITH THE EXCEPTION OF O-IS LEADER HE KNOWSMORE* ABOUT ECONOMIC MISMANAGEMENT THAN ANYONE IN AUSTRALIA.THEIR EXPERIENCE IS UNRIVALLED. THEY ARE THE ARCHITECTSOF THE TWO MOST DISASTROUS BUDGETS IN RECENT HISTORY.BETWEEN THEM THEY CREATED THE CONDITIONS WHICH HAVE LED TOOUR PRESENT INFLATION. YOU DON'T HAVE TO TAKE MY WORD ' FORIT. I GIVE YOU THIS QUOTATION FROM AN EDITORIAL IN OURLEADING ECONOMIC JOURNAL, THE " AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW".iss/ 4
L4f r -u /; iA/THIS IS WHAT THE " FINANCIAL REVIEW" HAD TO SAY/ ABOUTTHE RECORD OF OUR TWO CHIEF DOOM-SAYERS:" THE MCMAHON GOVERNMENT... FOR ELECTORAL REASONS,PROMOTED A RATE OF MONETARY EXPANSION WHICH WASTOTALLY UNJUSTIFIABLE IN ITS RAPIDITY ANDWHICH, WITH THE ACCOMPANYING RATE OF CAPITALINFLOW, WAS MAINLY RESPONSIBLE FOR THEDEMAND INFLATION OF 1972-73 AND THE INEVITABLECONSEQUENCE OF THE CURRENT COST INFLATION.THIS IS SOMETHING WHICH HAS BEEN SAID OFTENENOUGH BEFORE, BUT WHICH SHOULD NOT BEFORGOTTEN IN THE HEAT OF POLITICAL CONTROVERSY..."IN ITS ECONOMIC POLICY THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADYINDICATED ITS DETERMINATION TO TAKE IMMEDIATE ANDAPPROPRIATE ACTION IN ORDER TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.THE TREASURER'S STATEMENT, MADE WHEN PRESENTING THE BUDGET,SAID THAT " SHOULD THE NEED ARISE, WE STAND READY DURINGTHE YEAR TO TAKE ACTION ON THE EXPENDITURE OR REVENUE SIDEOF THE BUDGET TO GIVE A QUICK STIMULUS TO DEMAND ANDEMPLOYMENT. CRUCIAL AS THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION IS,IT CANNOT BE MADE THE SOLE OBJECTIVE OF GOVERNMENT POLICY.THIS GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO THE PROGRAM OF SOCIALREFORM TO IMPROVE THE POSITION OF THE LESS PRIVILEGEDGROUPS IN OUR SOCIETY AND TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENTOPPORTUNITIES." -4-
THE ALTERATION IN THE EXCHANGE RATE WHICH WEMADE ON 25 SEPTEMBER WAS ONE IMPORTANT EXAMPLE OF OURWILLINGNESS TO BE FLEXIBLE AND RESPOND TO DEVELOPMENTS INTHE ECONOMY. THE GOVERNMENT SHOWED BY THAT ACTION ITSSENSITIVITY TO THE CLIMATE IN WHICH BUSINESS OPERATES.THE NEW EXCHANGE RATE WILL ASSIST IN RESTORING THE GENERALLEVEL OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY AND IN MAINTAININGEMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES. THE EASING OF CREDIT WILL HAVETHE SAME EFFECT. I EMPHASISE OUR UNDERTAKING THAT ANYAVOIDABLE TENDENCY FOR UNEMPLOYMENT TO INCREASE WILL BECHECKED BY GOVERNMENT ACTION. IN ITS POLICIES TO REDUCEINFLATION AND MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, THEGOVERNMENT NEEDS THE ACTIVE COOPERATION OF TRADE UNIONS,EMPLOYERS AND STATE GOVERNMENTS. I BELIEVE THEAUSTRALIAN PEOPLE EXPECT THAT COOPERATION AND WILL BEMAKING THEIR JUDGMENTS ACCORDINGLY.SOME AUSTRALIANS MAY FIND THE CURRENT PUBLICDEBATE ON IMPORTANT POLICY ISSUES DISTURBING BECAUSE MOSTOF US WANT LIFE TO GO ON SMOOTHLY AND WITHOUT ANY PROBLEMS.HOWEVER, SOME OF THE CURRENT DEBATE AND DISCUSSION ON POLICYISSUES IS NECESSARY BECAUSE OF THE VERY REAL COMPLEXITY OFTHE RELATED MATTERS OF COUNTERING INFLATION, MAINTAININGEMPLOYMENT LEVELS, AND CONTINUING THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM.,/ 6
BECAUSE THE POLICIES NEEDED TO COUNTER BOTHINFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT ARE COMPLEX IN THEIR RELATIONSHIPTO EACH OTHER THE GOVERNMENT IS USING A NUMBER OF DEVICESTO ACHIEVE ITS ENDS. IN SPEAKING ABOUT MEASURES TOMAINTAIN THE LEVEL OF EMPLOYMENT WE CAN LIST THEFOLLOWING ACTIONS:FIRST, WE HAVE THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENTSCHEME WHICH IS DESIGNED TO IMPROVE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIESIN CERTAIN GEOGRAPHICAL AREAS WHERE UNEMPLOYMENT EXISTS.THE SCHEME WILL ENCOURAGE LOCAL INITIATIVES IN SUCH AREAS.THE RELEVANT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY, FOR EXAMPLE,. WILLBE ENCOURAGED TO SUGGEST SUITABLE LABOUR-INTENSIVE WORKPROGRAMS WHICH WILL HELP BUILD UP PUBLIC FACILITIES-INTHE AREAS CONCERNED.SECONDLY, THE NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAININGSYSTEM WILL PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE TRAINING AND RETRAININGSCHEMES. IN THE DETAILS ALREADY ANNOUNCED THE GOVERNMENTHAS SAID THAT IT WILL GIVE PRIORITY TO THOSE SEEKINGRETRAINING BECAUSE OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN INDUSTRYOR BECAUSE OF GOVERNMENT POLICIES SUCH AS THE ACTION LASTYEAR IN REDUCING TARIFF LEVELS BY 25 PER CENT. THEMINISTER FOR LABOUR IS INTRODUCING THIS TRAINING SYSTEMAS FAST AS POSSIBLE. REMEMBER THAT WE HAVE HAD TO SET UPA COMPREHENSIVE NATIONAL RETRAINING SYSTEM VIRTUALLYFROM NOTHING BECAUSE THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT DID NOTHINGIN THIS FIELD IN ITS 23 YEARS OF OFFICE. a/ 7
-7-THIRDLY, ANY PEOPLE WHO LOST THEIR JOBS EITHERDIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY BECAUSE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S TARIFFCHANGES CAN BENEFIT FROM A RANGE OF ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCEMEASURES, FOURTHLY, IN A MORE WIDE-RANGING APPROACH, THEBUDGET SHOWED THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO MAINTAINEMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES THROUGHOUT THE COMMUNITY, I HAVEALREADY EMPiASISED THAT THE GOVERNMENT STANDS READY TOTAKE FURTHER STEPS TO ENSURE CONTINUED PROGRESS INBUILDING UP EMPLOYMENT,FIFTHLY, THE CHANGE IN THE EXCHANGE RATE, RECENTLYANNOUNCED, IS A PARTICULAR MEASURE WHICH WILL HELP TO PROTECTEMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES BY IMPROVING THE COMPETITIVEPOSITION IN THE AUSTRALIAN MARKET OF INDUSTRIES COMPETING WITHIMPORTS AND THE COMPETITIVE POSITION ON OVERSEAS MARKETS OFAUSTRALIA'S EXPORT INDUSTRIES,IN REAFFIRMING MY CONFIDENCE IN THE LONG-TERMBASIC STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY I AGAIN DECLARE THAT THEGOVERNMENT CANNOT AND WILL NOT BE DETERRED FROM THE PROGRAMWHICH THE PEOPLE TWICE ELECTED US TO CARRY OUT, WE MUSTOVERCOME THE PROBLEM OF OVERCROWDED AND INSUFFICIENTLYSTAFFED SCHOOLS A SITUATION INHERITED AFTER A GENERATIONOF NEGLECT BY THE LIBERAL PARTY, 1 ,/ 8I
-8-IN AUSTRALIA THE WELL-TO-DO HAVE READY ACCESS TOSOPHISTICATED HEALTH SERVICES WHICH PEOPLE ON MIDDLE ANDLOWER INCOMES MAY OFTEN BE DENIED, OUR OPPONENTS ARECOMPLACENT ABOUT SUCH INEQUALITIES IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY,THE CONTINUING PROGRAM OF MAJOR REFORM BY THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT IN THE FIELDS OF EDUCATION, HEALTH, TRANSPORTAND GENERALLY IMPROVING COMMUNITY FACILTIES MEANS THATGOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES WILL HELP SUSTAIN THE GENERALLEVEL OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY, AT A TIME WHEN SOME AREAS INPRIVATE INDUSTRY ARE PROCEEDING SOMEWHAT CAUTIOUSLYWITH THEIR PLANS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND EXPANSION THISCONTINUING PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT ACTION IS OF SPECIALADVANTAGE TO THE ECONOMY AS A WHOLE,To KEEP OUR PRESENT DIFFICULTIES IN PERSPECTIVE,IT IS USEFUL TO MAKE SOME COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIANEXPERIENCE AND EXPERIENCES IN OTHER COUNTRIES, WE CANLOOK AT THE RATE OF INFLATION IN THE 24 COUNTRIES WHO AREMEMBERS OF THE ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION ANDDEVELOPMENT( OECD), IN 1961-71 THE AVERAGE RATE OF INFLATIONIN THESE 24 COUNTRIES WAS 3,7 PER CENT, IN 1972 THEAVERAGE RATE OF INFLATION IN THE OECD COUNTRIES WAS 4.7PER CENT AND IN 1973 IT ROSE TO 7,7 PER CENT, AT THE PRESENTTIMEt TAKING THE YEAR TO AUGUST 1974, THE AVERAGE RATE OFINFLATION IN THE OECD COUNTRIES IS 13.4 PER CENT, THEANNUAL RATE IN AUSTRALIA AS INDICATED BY THE MOST RECENTQUARTERLY FIGURES IS 14,4 PER CENT,
-9-IN OTHER WORDS, IN 24 COUNTRIES ALL AROUND THE WORLD,INCLUDING ECONOMIES VERY SIMILAR TO AUSTRALIA, THERE HASBEEN A STRONG TENDENCY FOR THE RATE OF INFLATION TOINCREASE, EVEN THE MOST NEUROTIC OPPONENTS OF THEGOVERNMENT WILL CONCEDE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTDOES NOT CONTROL THE ECONOMIES OF THE USA,, CANADA, THEUNITED KINGDOM AND THE OTHER MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE OECD.ALL THAT HAS HAPPENED IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY INITS CHANGE IN PRICE LEVELS HAS HAD AN EXPERIENCE SIMILARTO THAT OF MOST OTHER COUNTRIES,LOOKING AT THE QUESTION OF UNEMPLOYMENT INTERMS OF INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS IS NOT A SIMPLE MATTERBECAUSE OF THE DIFFERENT DEFINITIONS OF UNEMPLOYMENT INVARIOUS COUNTRIES, HOWEVER, WE CAN NOTE THAT IN BROADTERMS WE HAVE IN THE UNITED STATES AND IN CANADA OFFICIALUNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES WHICH ARE ABOVE FIVE PER CENT COMPAREDWITH THE AUSTRALIAN FIGURE FOR SEPTEMBER 1974 OF JUSTOVER TWO PER CENT, I AM NOT SAYING THAT WE SHOULD RESTEASY MERELY BECAUSE THE ECONOMIES OF THE UNITED STATES ANDCANADA ARE SUFFERING FROM AN UNEMPLOYMENT RATE WHICH ISMUCH WORSE THAN OUR OWN.
UNLIKE OUR OPPONENTS WE DO NOT REGARD ANY INCREASE INUNEMPLOYMENT AS " ACCEPTABLE OR " TOLERABLE" I iEWSPAPERSHAVE RECORDED THE ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES OF THESE COUNTRIESAND ALSO THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS FACING BRITAIN. ALL I AMSAYING IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, IN WHICHINTERNATIONAL TRADE PLAYS A SIGNIFICANT PARTI IS INEVITABLYAFFECTED BY SOME OF THE ADVERSE FORCES WHICH ARE FOUNDIN THE ECONOMIES OF VARIOUS OVERSEAS COUNTRIES,ALL IN ALL WE CAN SAY THAT AUSTRALIANS WHILETACKLING THEIR OWN ECONOMIC PROBLEMS, SHOULD REMEMBER THATTHEIR STANDARD OF LIVING AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM'FORA BETTER LIFE FOR EVERY FAMILY COMPARE VERY WELLI NOTJUST WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN OUR REGION, BUT WITHTHE STANDARD OF LIVING IN MOST OTHER WESTERN ECONOMIES,THERE IS A SEPARATE AND FUNDAMENTAL ISSUE WHICHOUR OPPONENTS WOULD LIKE TO OBSCURE, IN THEIR CRITICISMOF THE GOVERNMENT THE OPPOSITION IS ASKING THE PUBLIC TOACCEPT THAT THE PERSONAL INCOME OF THE FAMILY MAN IS ALLTHAT MATTERS, AND CAN BE CONSIDERED IN ISOLATION FROMEVERYTHING ELSE THAT HAPPENS TO HIM AND TO HIS FAMILY,AN AUSTRALIAN FAMILY DEPENDS ON ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY SERVICESTO MEET ITS NEEDS, IN ADDITION TO THE NEEDS WHICH ITFULFILS FOR ITSELF FROM ITS OWN DIRECT INCOME, ,/ ii
-11-TAXES PAID BY ORDINARY AUSTRALIANS ARE NOT BEING FEDINTO SOME MYSTERIOUS MACHINE IN CANBERRA WHICH ISOPERATED FOR THE SOLE BENEFIT OF THE WHITLAM GOVERNMENT,THE GOVERNMENT HAS NO INCOME OR PURPOSES WHICH ARESEPARATE FROM THOSE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY,AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS, THROUGH THEIR TAXES, ARE PROVIDINGTHE FUNDS TO PAY FOR THE ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY SERVICESWHICH ARE NECESSARY IN A MODERN ADVANCING COUNTRY,IN ADDITION TO THE GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN THAT WAGE ANDSALARY EARNERS SHOULD CONTINUE TO IMPROVE THEIR TAKE-HOMEPAY, THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY HAS DECIDED THAT ESSENTIALCOMMUNITY SERVICES MUST BE PROVIDED AND MUST BE IMPROVED,THE GOVERNMENT REJECTS THE IDEA THAT EVERY CITIZEN SHOULDBE ENTIRELY SELF-CENTRED IN THE WAY HE DISPOSES OF HISINCOME AND IN HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WIDER COMMUNITY,WE REJECT THE NOTION OF " EVERY MAN FOR HIMSELF", BECAUSETHIS ATTITUDE WAS ENCOURAGED BY THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTWE HAVE STILL IN MANY PARTS OF AUSTRALIA NEGLECTED SCHOOLS,INEFFECTIVE HEALTH SERVICES, HOPELESSLY INADEQUATEAND UNCORDINATED SYSTEMS OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT, A HUGHBACKLOG OF UNSEWERED HOUSES AND ALL THE PROBLEMS OFOVERCROWDING IN OUR MAIN CITIES, To ANY REASONABLE PERSONIT MUST BE CLEAR THAT PROVIDING ESSENTIAL COMMUNITYSERVICES IS NOT SOMETHING WHICH CAN BE DONE IN JUST A YEAROR TWO, PARTICULARLY AFTER 23 YEARS OF COMPLACENT NEGLECT,OUR OPPONENTS WANT THE ORDINARY AUSTRALIAN TO THINK ONLYOF WHAT HE PAYS IN TAXES AND TO NEGLECT THE GIANT STRIDESTHAT HAVE BEEN TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCEBEING ELECTED IN DECEMBER 1972, / 12
-12-THE BUDGET FOR 1974/ 75 ANNOUNCED AN EXPENDITUREON EDUCATION OF $ 1,535 MILLION, AN INCREASE OF 78 PER CENTON THE PREVIOUS YEAR, HEALTH EXPENDITURE ROSE BY21 PER CENT IN 1973/ 74 AND ' IS SET TO RISE BY $ 285 MILLIONOR 30 PER CENT THIS YEAR, OUR EXPENDITURE ON SOCIALSECURITY AND WELFARE AMOUNTS TO NEARLY ONE QUARTER OFBUDGET OUTLAYS AND IS EXPECTED TO REACH $ 3,441,5 MILLIONTHIS YEARI AN INCREASE OF 38,3 PER CENT OVER LAST YEAR,WHICH WAS ITSELF WELL UP ON THE PREVIOUS YEAR, OUTLAYSON HOUSING ARE SET TO REACH A RECORD $ 401 MILLION THISYEAR, COMPARED WITH $ 77 MILLION SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORSIN THEIR LAST YEAR IN OFFICE, EXPENDITURE ON URBANIMPROVEMENTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT WILL ALMOST REACH$ 400 MILLION, A THREE-FOLD INCREASE ON LAST YEAR ANDEIGHT TIMES THE AMOUNT SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN1972/ 73, WE HAVE ALSO TAKEN IMPORTANT STEPS IN IMPROVINGPUBLIC TRANSPORT, WATER SUPPLY AND ELECTRICITY, RETRAINING,REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND IN NATIONAL COMPENSATION ANDREHABILIATION SCHEMES,WHILE THIS LIST IS OBVIOUSLY NOT AN EXHAUSTIVESTATEMENT I WOULD EMPHASISE THAT THESE PROGRAMS ALL SERVETO CHANNEL RESOURCES INTO AREAS OF MOST BENEFIT TO LOWAND MIDDLE INCOME GROUPS, / 13
-13-THE CHANGES IN THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX SCALEANNOUNCED IN THE BUDGET WILL LEAD TO A FURTHER IMPROVEMENTIN THE REAL INCOME AND LIVING CONDITIONS OF WAGE ANDSALARY EARNERS, PARTICULARLY THOSE IN LOWER INCOMEBRACKETS, TO THE ORDINARY'AUSTRALIAN TAXPAYER, TO THOSEWHO NEED PERSUASION ON THIS ISSUE, I MAKE AN OBVIOUSPOINT: THE HEALTH CENTRES, HOSPITALS, SCHOOLS, BETTERTRANSPORT AND ALL THE OTHER ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY SERVICESDO COST LARGE SUMS OF MONEY, THIS IS ALL THE MORE TRUEAS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SETS OUT WITH DETERMINATIONTO MAKE UP FOR THE HOSTILITY AND NEGLECT WHICH OURPREDECESSORS SHOWED TOWARDS THESE COMMUNITY SERVICES,WHO WOULD DENY HEALTH CARE AND A GOOD EDUCATION TO THECHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA? THIS IS A PERFECTLY FAIR QUESTIONBECAUSE THIS IS PRECISELY WHAT WOULD BE DENIED TO THECHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA IF THE FORMER REGIME HAD ITS WAY,ALTHOUGH THEY TRY TO HIDE WHAT THEY ARE REALLY SAYING IT ISNOTHING LESS THAN A PROPOSITION THAT THE AVERAGE AUSTRALIANFAMILY SHOULD " MAKE DO" AND SHOULD PUT UP WITH CROWDEDSCHOOLS, AN OVER-WORKED AND INEFFICIENT HEALTH SYSTEM,CHAOTIC TRANSPORT SYSTEMS, POLLUTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAND THE OTHER EVILS WHICH FOLLOW IF YOU NEGLECT OURCOMMUNITY SERVICES, I AM SURE MY MESSAGE IS PERFECTLY CLEAR,1 ,/ 14
-14-WHAT THE GOVERNMENT WANTS TO GET ACROSS TO THE PEOPLEIS THIS BASIC IDEA: A DECENT AND IMPROVING STANDARDOF LIVING IS NOT MERELY OBTAINED BY CHASING A HIGHERLEVEL OF PERSONAL INCOME. A DECENT WAY OF LIVINGAND CONTINUING IMPROVEMENTS IN THE STANDARD OF LIVINGFOR ALL AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES IS ACHIEVED, IN FACT, INTWO WAYS: BY STEADY IMPROVEMENTS IN THE PURCHASING POWEROF OUR PERSONAL INCOMES AD BY THE USE OF MODERNCOMMUNITY SERVICES WHICH MEET THE REAL NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE,IT IS TRUE THAT RAPID PROGRESS IN HEALTH ANDEDUCATION AND OTHER AREAS IS MADE MORE DIFFICULT BY CERTAINCURRENT ECONOMIC PROBLEMS, WHEN, EARLIER IN THIS SPEECH,I ASSESSED THE AUSTRALIAN SITUATION AND MADE SOMEREASONABLE INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS, I WAS IN EFFECTEXPRESSING MY AGREEMENT WITH THE OPENING LINES OF THERESOLUTION CARRIED BY THE MEETING OF ACTU UNIONS INSYDNEY ON 24 SEPTEMBER, THE ACTU RESOLUTION SAID THAT" THE TWO PROBLEMS OF INCREASING INFLATION AND RISINGUNEMPLOYMENT ARE NOT UNIQUE TO AUSTRALIA". MY GOVERNMENTWAS HEARTENED BY THE FACT THAT THE ACTU CONFERENCE OFUNIONS EXPRESSED " ITS GENERAL SUPPORT FOR THE SOCIALCONCEPTS AND ECONOMIC STRATEGY CONTAINED IN THE BUDGETIN 1974/ 75", IN RELATION TO WHAT I HAVE SAID ABOUT THEIMPORTANCE OF PROVIDING COMMUNITY SERVICES THE GOVERNMENTALSO WELCOMES THE ACTU SUPPORT FOR WHAT IT DESCRIBED AS" THE SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED OUTLAYS UPON EDUCATION.HEALTH, WELFARE AND URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
THE ACTU RESOLUTION STATED CERTAIN POLICY GOALSOF THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT, WE DO NOT FIND THE LISTINGOF THOSE POLICY AIMS STRANGE OR SOMETHING WHICH NEED CAUSEDISAGREEMENT WITH THE GOVERNMENT, IT IS PART OF THETRADITION OF THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT THAT IT SHOULDIDENTIFY THE IDEALS AND THE POLICIES WHICH IN THE FUTUREWILL SERVE THE NEEDS OF THEIR MEMBERS,. THESE PROPOSALSAND THE GOVERNMENT'S OWN ECONOMIC POLICY ARE TO BEDISCUSSED AT A MEETING BETWEEN THE ACTU AND THEGOVERNMENT, THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IN THE PRINCIPLEOF CONSULTATION WITH COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS ANDON THE SUBJECT OF PAY FIXATION AND ECONOMIC POLICY ITIS RELEVANT FOR THE GOVERNMENT TO HAVE DISCUSSIONSWITH THE ACTU. THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SAME WAY HASCONSULTED, AND WILL CONTINUE TO CONSULT, WITHEMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS, PRIMARY PRODUCERS AND OTHERBODIES EXPRESSING A WHOLE RANGE OF VIEWS WITHIN THEAUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY, / 16
-16-THE DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND TRADEUNION SPOKESMEN WHICH ARE PRINCIPALLY TAKING PLACE UNDERTHE CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE ARBITRATIONCOMMISSION, MR JUSTICE MOORE, WILL BE COVERING THE EXACTDETAILS OF WAGE INDEXATION AND OTHER ASPECTS OF PAY FIXATION.HOWEVER, I WANT TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO CLEAR UP ACOMMON MISUNDERSTANDING ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY ON WAGESAND SALARIES. I SPEAK NOW TO ALL OF AUSTRALIA'S WAGE ANDSALARY EARNERS-AND I SAY TO THEM THATTHE OBJECT OF THEGOVERNMENT'S POLICY OF RESTRAINT IN THE GROWTH OF WAGES ANDOTHER INCOMES IS TO SLOW DOWN THE EXCESSIVE AND SELF-DEFEATINGESCALATION OF MONEY INCOMES. THE GOVERNMENT NEVER INTENDSNOR EXPECTS ANY REDUCTION IN THE PURCHASING POWER OF WAGES.ON THE CONTRARY, THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT A SLOWER GROWTHIN MONEY INCOMES WOULD ENHANCE THE PROSPECTS FOR FASTER GROWTHIN REAL WAGES AND IN LIVING STANDARDS.As I HAVE SAID, PROPOSALS ON PAY FIXATION ARE BEINGCONSIDERED BY THE CONFERENCE BEING CHAIRED BY MR JUSTICE MOORE.THE GOVERNMENT IS REPRESENTED IN THAT CONFERENCE AND WILL MAKEA CONSTRUCTIVE CONTRIBUTION TO PROMOTE AGREEMENT BETWEEN ALLTHE PARTIES. THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECLARED ITS SUPPORT FORQUARTERLY COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS, COMMONLY DESCRIBED TODAYAS INDEXATION, IN THE BELIEF THAT SUCH ARRANGEMENTS, AS PART OFA PACKAGE, WILL HELP TO RESTRAIN THE EXCESSIVE GROWTH IN MONEYWAGES TO WHICH I REFERRED WITHOUT DEPRIVING WAGE EARNERS OF THEPROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENT OF REAL EARNINGS MADE POSSIBLE BY RISINGNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY.
-17-I TURN NOW TO SOME REMARKS WITH PARTICULAR RELEVANCETO YOUR OWN ORGANISATION, PLEASE LET ME SAY THAT I WELCOMETHE OPPORTUNITY TO BE WITH YOU AT THE TIME OF YOUR FEDERALCONFERENCE, I AM VERY MUCH AWARE OF THE SUPPORT, IN FINANCIALAND MORAL TERMS, WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY HAS RECEIVEDFROM THE MWU, IN THE YEARS LEADING UP TO OUR WIN IN 1972AND ALSO IN THE PERIOD SINCE THEN,I AM AWARE OF YOUR SUCCESS IN EXTENDING YOUR MEMBERSHIPRULES SO THAT YOUR UNION IS ESTABLISHED IN EFFECT AS BOTH ACRAFT AND AN INDUSTRY ORGANISATION$ YOU HAVE COME A LONG WAYSINCE YOUR ORGANISATION WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1915. You HAVE 13BRANCHES IN ALL AROUND AUSTRALIA AND YOUR UNION HAS ALMOST120 FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES IN THE VARIOUS STATES AND TERRITORIES,YOU HAVE ALREADY ESTABLISHED A REPUTATION AS A MODERN GO-AHEADTRADE UNION AND THIS IS SHOWN BY YOUR EMPLOYMENT OF 10 RESEARCHOFFICERS, YOUR DIVERSITY IN MEMBERSHIP COVERAGE IS AREFLECTION OF THE FACT THAT YOUR TRADE UNION SERVICES SOME360-AWARDS, DETERMINATIONS AND AGREEMENTS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.I AM HEARTENED BY THE FACT THAT YOUR UNION, WITH ITS90,000 MEMBERS, HAS ALL ITS BRANCHES AFFILIATED WITH THEAUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, / 18
-18-. II PAY TRIBUTE TO YOUR SUCCESS IN ENTERING INTO NOFEWER THAN 15 AMALGAMATIONS WITH VARIOUS TRADE UNION BODIES.MY GOVERNMENT HAS SOUGHT TO ENCOURAGE TRADE UNION AMALGAMATIONSO THAT DEMARCATION DISPUTES ARE AVOIDED. THERE IS ALSO THECONSIDERABLE ADVANTAGE FOR EMPLOYEES TO HAVE A LARGE MODERNTRADE UNION WHICH CAN REPRESENT THEM IN AN EXPERT WAY ANDWHICH CAN PROVIDE ALL THE SKILLS REQUIRED FOR'THE PROCEDURESOF NEGOTIATION AND ARBITRATION. THE. GOVERNMENT WELCOMESSUPPORT FROM EMPLOYEE ORGANISATIONS SUCH AS YOUR OWN AND FROMMANY OTHER GROUPS IN THE COMMUNITY WHO ARE CONTINUING TOSUPPORT THE PROGRAM OF THE GOVERNMENT.



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, TUESDAY, 15 OCTOBER 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Are there any questions?
QUESTION: In light of Mr. Snedden's remarks that he is waiting
for the call of the people, that he is planning to move towards
an early general election and in light of the reports that you,
yourself, have briefed ministers about the possibility of an
election in December, can you now spell out your views on the chances
of an early election? Will there or won't there and, if so, when?
PRIME MINISTER: My view is that the people spoke in December 1972
and again in May 1974 they spoke decisively in each case. In each
case they intended to elect a government for the following three years.
They elected, in each case, a Labor Government. The Parliament-first
sat in July. That means that there should not be another election
for the House of Representatives until the middle of 1977. My
Government is proceeding with its program on that basis; that it
has been re-elected for three years. Now, the Opposition is clearly
wanting to get the public used to the attitude that there should be
elections more frequently than at theee-year intervals. The
Constitution very clearly has proposed that there should be an
election every three years for the House of Representatives and
every three years for half the Senate, those elections being at the
same time. Now, because of the Double Dissolution, there must be
an election for half the Senate just before the middle of 1976* and
there shouldn't be an election for the House of Representatives
until the middle of 1977. Now, it is true that any time, twice a year,
the Senate can refuse Supply and thus produce an election for the
House of Representatives. It was done for the very first time in
April this year. It'can be done, of course, any time in November
when the Budget for the whole of the current financial year has co
be decided or, say, the following May, when there have to be
provisional appropriations for the first five months of the next
financial year. Now accordingly it would be possible for the Senat.'!
to reject~ a Budget in November or the Supply Bills next May, and it
could reject them by just being evenly divided.
Mr. Snedden constantly suggests that there may be an
election. Now, it will depend not only on what he says but on wha.
the senators say and he has no control over his senators. There
two Liberal parties in the national Parliament. There is the Libc~.-, i
Party in the House of Representatives; there is the Liberal Party
in the Senate. And the Liberal Party in the Senate has a Leader
and a Deputy Leader who are elected wholly by senators. Mr. Snede'
has no part in choosing who the Leader or Deputy Leader will be in
the Senate Liberal Party. They go their own way. So, naturally, ho~
is confused. But I think there is more seriously an attitude by the
Liberals in general to produce the idea that it is natural to have
more frequent elections than the constitution envisaged, to give
the impression that an election is always around the corner or may contt
about you know, election jitters and upset business confidence
through that idea. I don't believe there is any substantial view 
-2-
in Australia that there should be another election for the House
of Representatives or that there should be an election for half
the Senate before the due time just before the middle of 1976.
It is on that basis that my Government is proceeding.
Now it is true that there have been ten bills already
rejected by the Senate since the new Parliament was elected. I forget
about the six bills which they rejected a third time and on which
there was a joint sitting. Apart from those six there have been ten
rejected, two I think the week before last. Now, if after an
interval of three months any of those bills is rejected again there
can be a double dissolution situation again. If there is a double
dissolution situation the Government won't advise the Governor-General
to dissolve both Houses unless Supply is refused by the Senate.
Obviously, if Supply is again refused by the Senate then I shall
advise the Governor-General to dissolve both Houses on the basis
of a second rejection if there is in fact a second rejection of any
of these ten bills. I think the next work by Laurie Oakes and David
Solomon is to be called " The Grab for Power". It is an account of
the election in May last. I think that's just behind the whole of
this talk. Mr. Snedden miscalculated, mistimed, last April.
He blew his top in a bit of hysteria and the events of April.
He miscalculted. Well, he always has to s * trut to justify what he did
then. I believe, in fact, he will be very cautious about himself,
and the Senate Liberal Party will be rather cautious also.
QUESTION: While you were overseas the Education and Economic
Commnitte'e of Caucus decided that the $ 400 tax allowance should be
restored. What's your own personal view on this? What do you think
Caucus is likely to decide, and do you think that this sort of
recommendation, as Mr. Snedden has already said publicly, reflects
on the quality of your leadership?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not obsessed with the qualities of my leadership.
I've been leader of a political party in the national Parliament
longer than most people have the privilege of leading any political
party in this Parliament. I've been leader of my party for nearly
eight years and t every election we have improved our percentA. je
of the vote. I chn't have to promote the Fuhrerprinzip. I'll
leave that to those who have failed as leaders. Now, about this
education deduction proposition. My view is it remains that ztha
' 1-00 deduction is a waste of money. The $ 150 deduction is ju~ tified.
I 3t port the $ 150, I reject the $ 400. Now. Caucus Economnic
arid Education Committees, which like all Caucus cormaittees ar.: selfappoii--
d, made a recommendation that the deduction 5zhould remain
at $ 400. sometimes wonder who my colleagues believe elected a
Labor Govern. ' nt. Who they think a Labor Government should have first
in mind. Now, the Lb cor Government has introduced legislation it
was opposed at certain -2tages by our opponents but we have introduced
legislation, and so far i' bFs been passed which means that there
has been more than seven times a-large a provision * rurl For
education by the Australian Government in the calen. pars 1974/ 75
the two full years under us as was allocated by t~ i. last two full
years 1971/ 72 by our predecessors. I advise you to look at Mr. Beazley's
splendid article in today's Age. It gives a chapter and verse for
the increased expenditure for education under my Government.
The Education and Economic Committees self-apppointed of the
Caucus recommended that the deduction should remain at $ 400, i. e.
they recommended that $ 30 million more should be spent this year 
-3-
than the Budget provided. I mentioned this at the Cabinet meetinicj
yesterday. I asked if any minister wished to re-consider this
matter. Not one suggested we should re-consider it. Accordin-1y,
when this matter comes up before the Caucus it will have the
re-asserted view of the Cabinet that the money can be better spont.
The last statistics show they are for 1971/ 72 that the average
deduction for a dependent student only exceeded $ 150 a year for those
who were on an income of $ 10,000 or more. It is quite obvious that
money is better spent in the education field on improving facilities
all over. Now, I don't deny that there are some parents who have to
spend more boarding and so on for their children but we have
catered for them through the isolated children's allowances which
we-introduced. And similarly, of course, you could say that there
were some disadvantaged areas where the community has to spend more,
as for Aborigines, and we have done so. I commend Mr. Beazley's
article to you for this. It will come up in Caucus and I believe
it will be rejected as I strongly believe it should be.
QUESTION: Mr. Connor said in Parliament this morning that he had
prepared a White Paper for you on energy or uranium and that he
had prepared it in good time. Will you now release that. paper?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a Cabinet submission and it will be
discussed in Cabinet.
QUESTION: One of the reasons for the devaluation of the dollar
was atit would have a beneficial effect on business confidence.
Do you believe that it has? Has it had enough? And, particularly,
would you consider any other forms of incentives such as some
incentive like the investment allowance, re-introduction for a
tentative period, if it turned out that business confidence hasn't
reacted as you thought it would at the time of the devaluation?
PRIME MINISTER: The devaluation has given a boost to business
confidence. Those who study the Stock Exchange tell me that there
has been a marked improvement there. Of course the Government
will consider any of these matters. I, myself, at this stagje,
would think there was no justification whatever for restoring
the investment allowance. But, nevertheless, if circumstances
change then obviously we would consider it. My Government, I believe,
has shown that it is prepared to consider matters, or reconsider
them, as circumstances change. It so showed in respect to devaluation
and there is not a single member of Parliament who objects to the
devaluation. In effect, our revaluations over the first 22 months,
has been cut down to half that amount. The dollar is considerabi;,
more valuable than it was when we came into off icc, 1-, it it has br~ er
devalued from the height which it had reached.
QUESTION: You just made reference to your own longevity as Leader
of the Labor Party. I wish to ask a supplementary question to one
which you answered in a recent Washington " Meet the Press" program.
You were questioned about the dangers of left-wing groups in the
Caucus ousting you and you replied that they would be cutting their
own throats. I now ask....
PRIME MINISTER: Any group that wanted to oust me w~ ould be cutting
their own throat. I don't want you to think that the only throats
to be cut would be those you describe as left-wing. 
QUESTION: Do you regard yourself as indispensable to-the Labor
* Party and do you believe that you are the only person competent
to lead a Labor Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I believe there is a wealth of talent in
the Australian Labor Government in this Parliament. I believe
that I have the greatest amount of talent at the present time.
But quite apart from what I may think about this, this is unquestionably
the view of all my colleagues. This is not an issue on which I feel
disposed to differ from them.
QUESTION: Does it concern you that Caucus has already made one
deciionon one of your Budget matters, namely the 10 per cent
surcharge, and are threatening to do so on the education one as well?
or, do you consider that this is just pure bloody mindedness?
PRIME MINISTER: Let me get this in perspective. We've been in
power for over 22 months now and the Caucus has overuled the Cabinet
on two occasions. Once was a year ago on the gold subsidy. The
second was on reducing the range of taxpayers who had to pay a higher
rate of tax on their unearned incomes. Now on this latter one
there was no surprise on my part because,, in fact, when the matter
came up for discussion in the Caucus one of those who supported the
discussion of it by committees of Caucus was the Treasurer himself
And what emerged from the committee consideration was in fact
proposed by the Treasurer at the very Caucus meeting where it arose.:
Now, I wasn't particularly upset by the change which was made. There
has been an advance in what I believe was an equitable principle
that people should pay a higher rate of tax on their unearned
income than on their earned income. Now there is one other matter
where you can say that during the lifetime of my government my view
has been rejected by the Caucus, that was on the question of
Parliamentary salaries. But the Cabinet wanted, proposed a view
which the Caucus adopted. I was in a minority in the Cabinet and
in the Caucus.
QUESTION: I was just going to make an aside, Sir, that if there is
any'blood letting or blood cutting, neck cutting, would you take
that tie off and leave it for one of us before it happens. But,
on a more serious note, have you made any comment yet on the result
3f the British elections?
-' RIME MINISTER: I sent a cable to Mr. Harold Wilson but I haven't
made public comment. Nevertheless, I am very happy to say
here, an.-it would come as no surprise to you, that I am delighted
that the Labor Government has been re-elected and has a majority
in its own right. rather sorry that my old professor, Enoch
Powell, is exiled to the neighbouring islands and so on, but
nevertheless, clearly I bull y7e that there should be government by a
party which has a majority in its own right. I auw tlad that the
British Labor Party now again has that.
QUESTION: What is your view about the unsolicited distribution
of bank cards and do you feel that they could add to inflation?
And, also, did you receive one?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes I did, I did. -1 
QUESTION: Did Mrs. Whitlam, receive one?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, she did. In recent months she has got an
account of her own actually. So we received bank cards. Now, at
last, when I don't have to establish my bona f ides as a creditor,
credit is being foisted on me. I am not sure that we will use them
or destory them or return them. I think that is the increasing
order of probability.
QUESTION: Can you say which one has the greater credit, or is
that too personal?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh I think it is, but you are an old friend and
I will talk to you afterwards. I mean you and I both married well.
Comment: You have more houses than I have.
PRIME MINISTER: I think I was at your wedding and you at mine,
and they have both lasted.
Comment: Amazing.
PRIME MINISTER: This was the first and best of my apppointments.
QUESTION: Can I interrupt? Did you in fact in Cabinet yesterday
discuss with your ministers the possibility of a December election?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I repeat, though, that we will not be working
for any election before the three years is up.
QUESTION: Did you have a discussion outside Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, obviously, one talks about varibus contingencies
but I don't want to talk about what goes on in Cabinet. There were
no agenda items on this and I shouldn't have to repeat that I
believe that if you go to the people with a three-year program as
we did, . then you should try to carry it out.
QUESTION: On October 1, in his first day on the floor of the House
as Acting Prime Minister, Dr. Cairns made it clear to the Parliament
that the present reference to the Industries Assistance Commission
apropos the new lands in Western Australia could be opened up as
a general reference on the question of superphosphate and, in fact,
was wide enough for a general reference. In view of that do
you still adhere to what you said in the House this morning?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what Dr. Cairns said on this matter.
Of course I adhere to what I said this morning.
QUESTION: There seems to be some suggestion that the Government,
afterall contrary to Mr. Enderby's announcement, may not buy the
Leyland land at Waterloo. Was this matter discussed yesterday in
Cabinet, and as far as you are concerned will the Government be
proceeding with that?
PRIME MINISTER: There was a report on this matter in Cabinet.
I had discussed it with two or three of my colleagues before
I went away three weeks ago and the general idea is that that land
could be very effectively used by the Australian Government for a
range of activities which it has in the urban field. 
-6-
It would not only be well situated for housing but also, quite
clearly, for child-care and health centres and other initiatives
.4n that area.
QUESTION: Were you aware during the flight from Hawaii to Suva
th~ at the Permanent Head of the Foreign Affairs Department, Mr.
Renouf.... PRIME MINISTER: Well, before you go any further here, I was asked
questions i1n the Parliament this morning and I will answer no further
questions on it.
QUESTION: Do you believe that Australian uranium producers should
be allowed to negotiate new contracts for the sale of uranium abro-id?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Connor discussed this on a motion by Mr.
Anthony on 2 October while we were away and again on a motion by
Mr. Anthony this morning. I heard this time whAt he said, I read
what he said on 2 October and I find each speech completely convincing.
As I said in Question Time today, he massacred Mr. Anthony on 2
October and he would masacre him today and he did.
QUESTION: Yesterday morning you were offered some friendly advice
from the President of the Miscellaneous Workers' Union, Mr. Roy
Cameron? PRIME MINISTER: I have got nothing to add.
QUESTION: On one point that you didn't refer to yesterday, Sir,
was his remark that you should say more and your ministers should
say less...
PRIME MINISTER: I agree completely with what he said on that.
QUESTION: If the education deduction of $ 400 is a waste of money,
;;_ iT~ Wt an education deduction of $ 150 not also a waste of money?
PRIME MINISTER! There are still a great number of things and
services whic parents have to pay for themselves in the education
fi ~ ld. We have, of course, made tertiary and technical education
'. We have vastly increased the expenditure on schools. We are
unc-. aking expenditure on the pre-schc~ ols and child-care facilities,
tli~ jeneral matters in the scope of the children's commission which
we arc ' oointing an interim committee. The objective, of course,
must be tu t all the materials and services in the educational
field provide2 free but they are not yet provided free, but $ 150
would certainly cover v1' lat is not yet free.
QUESTION: How important do you think the so-called " social contract"
is in combating inflation and how optimistic are you that the
forthcoming talks with the A. C. T. U. might lead to somec basis for
such a contract?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Justice Moore's conference is resuming today
and we are taking part in it so, although it is meeting in private,
you know the attitudes we are taking there and you know also our
reaction to the decisions of the A. C. T. U. meeting of unions three
weeks ago. The " social contract", as you call it, as it's called 
-7-
in Britain, is the best hope for restraining cost inflation and
we are moderately optimistic that we can bring about such arrangements
in Australia. Clearly, a Labor Government is more likely to got
those arrangements in Australia, as in Britain, than a Tory
Government. 



. jA U S RL A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 343
October 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT FOOD PROCESSING
MACHINERY, ETC.
The * Prime Minister, Mr Whi'tlam, announced today that
the Government has accepted, subject to international commitments,
the recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission in its
report on food processing machinery.
The report covers a wide range of machinery used in
bread grain milling; for the working of cereals or dried.
leguminous vegetables; in sugar manufacturing; in brewing,
confectionery or chocolate manufacture; and the preparation of
meat, fish, fruit or vegetables.
The Government's decision will mean that minimum
rates of duty will apply to machinery for working bread grains,
cereals or dried leguminous vegetables~ and for the production of
pasta products; a General rate of 15% will apply to machinery
for sugar manufacturing, brewing, and confectionery and
chocolate manufacture; and a General rate of 25% will apply to
other food processing machinery under reference.
In the main the decision will mean a reduction in the
existing rates of duty, but for some goods there will be a slight
increase in protection for imports from Britain, a major source
of supply. Implementation of the Commission's recommendations
would have little effect on the structure of industry and the
employment involved because the industry enjoys a degree of
local advantage. Mr Whitlam also said that details of the Customs tariff
changes arising from the Government's decision will be announced
when administrative arrangements to implement them have been
final ise d.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITL. AM, M. P. f
AT THE INAUGURATION OF THE ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE.-
SIDING SPRING, NSW.
WEDNESDAY, 16 OCTOBER, 1974
THERE COULD BE NO MORE FITTING SYMBOL OF THE
ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN RELATIONSHIP THAN THIS TELESCOPES IT
COMMEMORATES A SPIRIT OF SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOUR -AND A
HISTORY OF ASTRONOMICAL RESEARCH -THAT BEGAN WITH COOK'S
FIRST VOYAGE TO THE SOUTH SEAS. THE ASTRONOMERS OF THE
ROYAL. SOCIETY IN THE LATE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY SET OUT TO
OBSERVE THE TRANSIT OF VENUS. COOK FINISHED UP CHARTING
THE EAST COAST OF AUSTRALIA. ASTRONOMERS WHO IN SUCH
MATTERS, AS IN ALL THINGS, TAKE THE LONG VIEW WILL..
DOUBTLESS CONTINUE TO ARGUE WHICH OF THESE PHENOMENA WAS.
MORE IMPORTANT. THE FACT REMAINS THAT THE COLONISATION OF*
AUSTRALIA By EUROPEANS HAD ITS ORIGINS IN AN
ASTRONOMICAL PROJECT. TRADE FOLLOWED THE FLAG, BUT THE
FLAG FOLLOWED THE TELESCOPE. IT MAY NOT BE TOO ROMANTIC
TO SUGGEST THAT THE TELESCOPE ON THE ENDEAVOUR WAS AS
POTENT A SYMBOI OF BRITAIN.' S IMPERIAL GREATNESS AS
NELSON'S TELESCOPE ON THE VICTORY. MORE THAN TWO CENTURIES
AFTER COOK'S VOYAGE, BRITISH AND AUSTRALIAN ASTRONOMERS
CAN NOW PURSUE THEIR OBSERVATIONS OF THE SOUTHERN SKIES
WITH THIS NEW ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE THIS BRILLIANT
EXAMPLE OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY AND PRECISION ENGINEERING
WHICH WE SEE BEFORE US. om./ 2 
-2-
I COMMEND PROFESSOR HOYLE'S VIEW. THAT " A-TELESCOPE
IS A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE THINGS WHICH OUR CIVILIZATION
DOES WELL". ITIS A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE'THINGS WHICH
A TRUE CIVILIZATION ALONE CAN DO. ASTRONOMY IS ONE OF
THE FEW SCIENTIFIC PURSUITS CERTAIN BRANCHES OF
MATHEMATICS, CERTAIN BRANCHES OF. THEORETICAL NUCLEAR
PHYSICS ARE OTHERS WHICH EXIST FOR-NO OTHER PURPOSE
THAN THE PURE SEARCH FOR KNOWLEDGE. No ONE DOUBTS THAT
ASTRONOMY HAS ITS PRACTICAL USES, GOVERNMENTS ARE
FREQUENTLY REMINDED OF THEM BY ASTRONOMERS THEMSELVES.-
NEVERTHELESS, THE TRUE GLORY OF ASTRONOMY LIES IN THE
VALUE IT PLACES ON KNOWLEDGE FOR ITS OWN SAKE KNOWLEDGE
OF AN ABSOLUTE AND FUNDAMENTAL KIND. No CIVILIZATION
CAN REMAIN INDIFFERENT TO THE ORIGINS OF THE EARTH OR
ITS PLACE IN THE COSMOS.
ASTRONOMY IS RICH IN THEORIES BUT SOMEWHAT
DEFICIENT IN PRACTICAL RESULTS. IN THAT RESPECT IT CAN
BE LIKENED TO ECONOMICS. IN ITS ATTEMPT TO PROVIDE
ANSWERS TO THE ULTIMATE QUESTIONS ABOUT MAN'S ENVIRONMENT
AND HIS PLACE IN REALITY, IT CAN BE LIKENED TO RELIGION.
IT IS NO ACCIDENT THAT THE HIGH PRIESTS OF ASTRONOMY
CONDUCT THEIR NOCTURNAL RITES IN REMOTE TEMPLES ON
INACCESSIBLE MOUNTAINTOPS. SO I THINK THERE IS AN
EXCELLENT CASE FOR GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR ASTRONOMY, JUST
AS WE GIVE STATE AID TO OTHER RELIGIOUS ENTERPRISES. WE
ARE NOT ALONE IN THIS. THE AMERICANS, A PRAGMATIC AND
HARD-HEADED PEOPLE, HAVE PROVIDED VAST PUBLIC FUNDS FOR
/ 3 
-3-
A SPACE PROGRAM WHOSE ULTIMATE PURPOSE IS TO ADD
TO MAN'S KNOWLEDGE OF THE COSMOS AND HIS PLACE
WITHIN IT. I WOULD NOT WISH TO JUSTIFY THE
SCALE OF THAT EXPENDITURE, BUT I APPROVE
WHOLEHEARIEDLY THE PURPOSES BEHIND IT.
GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR ASTRONOMY HAS A
LONG HISTORY. IT CAN BE TRACED FROM THE ANCIENT
CIVILIZATIONS TO THE PRESENT DAY, FROM THE
EGYPTIANS, THE PERSIANS, COPERNICUS, GALILEO,
NEWTON AND KEPLER, TO THE PLATFORM OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY. OUR POLICY ON SCIENCE
PLEDGES " PARTICULAR SUPPORT TO AREAS IN
WHICH AUSTRALIA CAN MAKE A SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION,
INCLUDING ASTRONOMY... 
r -4-
IN THE EIGHTEENTH AND NINETEENTH CENTURIES ASTRONOMY WAS
RECOGNISED FOR ITS IMPORTANCE TO NAVIGATION AND
CARTOGRAPHY. IT WAS SUFFICIENTLY IMPORTANT AT THE TIME
OF FEDERATION FOR THE FOUNDING FATHERS TO MAKE SPECIFIC
PROVISION IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION FOR THE PARLIAMENT
TO MAKE LAWS WITH RESPECT TO ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS
TWO SUCH LAWS HAVE BEEN MADE: IN 1930, WHEN PARLIAMENT
ESTABLISHED THE COMMONWEALTH SOLAR OBSERVATORY, AND
IN 1970 WHEN IT PASSED LEGISLATION SETTING UP THE AGREEMENT
FOR THIS TELESCOPE AT SIDING SPRING. IT IS APPROPRIATE
THAT THE STUDY OF THE LAWS OF THE PLANETS AND STARS SHOULD*
BE MENTIONED IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION A DOCUMENT AS
TIMELESS. AND IMMUTABLE AS THE HEAVENLY BODIES THEMSELVES.
THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN COMMITMENT TO ASTRONOMY
IS EXTENSIVE. THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSI-TY OPERATES
MAJOR OPTICAL TELESCOPES AT MOUNT STROMbLO AND HERE AT
SIDING SPRING. MAJOR RADIO TELESCOPES ARE OPERATED BY THE
C. S. I. R. 0. AND BY SYDNEY UNIVERSITY. THE UNIVERSITY OF
TASMANIA HAS A GROWING INVOLVEMENT IN ASTRONOMY AND THERE
ARE STATE GOVERNMENT OBSERVATORIES IN SYDNEY AND PERTH.
THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY ASTRONOMERS HAVE GAINED
A WORLD-WIDE REPUTATION FOR THEIR WORK ON THE STRUCTURE AND
EVOLUTION OF GALAXIES, STELLAR STRUCTURE AND THE CHEMICAL
COMPOSITION OF STARS. RADIO ASTRONOMERS IN C. S. I. R. 0. AND
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY HAVE MADE IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTIONS TO
QUASAR ASTRONOMY AND TO THE STUDY OF THE STRUCTURE AND
EVOLUTION OF THE. UNIVERSE. 
GROUPS WORKING WITH THE PARKES RADIO TELESCOPE HAVE
RECENTLY DISCOVERED MANY DIFFERENT SPECIES OF ORGANIC
MOLECULES IN THE GAS CLOUDS OF INTERSTELLAR* SPACE. THESE
DISCOVERIES MAY THROW LIGHT ON THE PROCESSES THAT LED TO
THE EXISTENCE OF LIFE ON EARTH. ASTRONOMERS AT SYDNEY
UNIVERSITY HAVE PERFORMED WORK OF FUNDAMENTAL SIGNIFICANCE
IN THE MEASUREMENT OF THE SIZES OF STELLAR OBJECTS.
THE BUDGET LAST MONTH PROVIDED A GRANT TO ENABLE A STUDY
OF A NEW INSIRUMENT TO EXTEND THIS WORKS
ASTRONOMY FOR MANY YEARS HAS ENJOYED A WIDE MEASURE
OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION BOTH AT THE INSTITUTIONAL
AND THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL AND AUSTRALIAN ASTRONOMY HAS
BENEFITED FROM THIS. AUSTRALIA AND BRITAIN ARE SHARING
EQUALLY THE CAPITAL COST OF THIS TELESCOPE, AMOUNTING TO
$ 16 MI. LLION AND THE ESTIMATED ANNUAL OPERATING COST OF
$ 1.3 MILLION. MANY OF THE ASTRONOMICAL FACILITIES IN
AUSTRALIA WERE-BUILT WITH FUNDS CONTRIBUTED PARTLY FROM
ABROAD AND Vt4NY OF THE ASTRONOMERS WORKING IN AUSTRALIA
WERE BORN OVERSEAS. SOME ARE HERE AS VI'ITORS AND SOME
ARE'PERMANENT RESIDENTS. THEY CONE FROi' A VARIETY OF
-OUNTRIES INCLUDING SRI LANKA, INDIA, KOREA, THE PEOPLE'S
REPUbL-C OF CHINA, ISRAEL, POLAND, THE UNITED KINGDOM,
GERMANY, ' FW ZEALAND AND SWEDEN. THE DIRECTOR
OF THIS TELESCOPE, DR E. J. WAMPLER, ! S AN AMERTCAN CITIZEN
AND TWO OF THE THREE AUSTRALIAN MEMBERS ON THE AAT BOARD,
DR WILD AND PROFESSOR STREET, WERE BORN IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
THERE ARE MANY AUSTRALIAN ASTRONOMERS WORKING OVERSEAS. 
I AM. PROUD TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE INAUGURATION
OF THIS TELESCOPE.. I AM PROUD THAT MY GOVERNMENT, IS
CONTRIBUTING TO ITS COST.. ITS BEAUTY, ITS POWER, ITS
PRECISION REFLECT THE HIGHEST CREDIT ON ALL'WHO DESIGNED
AND BUILT IT. THOSE WHO USE IT, LIKE POLITICANS, WILL
SIT THROUGH THE LONG REACHES OF THE NIGHT. YOU WILL
CONTRIBUTE TO MAN'S UNDERSTANDING OF THE EARTH AND THE
UNIVERSE. THE QUESTIONS YOU ASK ARE OF'TRANSCENDENTAL
IMPORTANCE TO OUR KNOWLEDGE OF OURSELVES AND OUR SURROUNDINGS.
IT MAY WELL BE THAT THE ULTIMATE ANSWERS YOU SEEK WILL
ALWAYS ELUDE YOU; THAT IN THE LAST RESORT THE MYSTERIES YOU
ATTEMPT TO UNRAVEL WILL REMAIN IN THE PHILOSOPHER'S COURT.
FOR ALL THAT, IT IS GOOD TO REFLECT THAT HERE IN THIS
BUILDING AND IN OTHERS LIKE IT, AMONG YOU AND YOUR
COLLEAGUES, SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN ITS PUREST, MOST
PEACEFUL AND MOST DISINTERESTED FORM WILL GO FORWARD FOR
THE ENRICHMENT OF OUR UNDERSTANDING AND FOR THE BENEFIT
OF FUTURE GENERATIONS.
4' 



AUSlftALI( A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 344
18 October 1974
RECEIPT OF TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY REPORT FOOTWEAR
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced that the
Government had imposed temporary import restrictions on most
types of footwear as from today. The import restrictions are
intended to limit imports over the next twelve months to a level
per cent higher than the level of imports in 1972/ 73, within
each of the specific tariff items set out below. This would mean
that imports over the next year would be at a level about 30 per
cent less than in 1973/ 74. Imports of gum boots, wading boots
and specialist sporting footwear would not be covered by the
restrictions. Mr. Whitlam said that this action had been taken
following the Government's acceptance in principle of the
report by the Temporary Assistance Authority of 10 October 1974
on Footwear. The Authority found that urgent action was necessary
tp protect the Australian industry producing footwear and parts
therefor in relation to the importation of footwear falling within
tariff items 64.01.4, 64.02.3, 64.02.9, 64.03.9 and 64.04.9, which
cover footwear with soles and uppers of rubber or plastic, with
soles of leather or rubber, with outer soles of wood or cork and
with outer soles of other materials.
Mr. Whitlam said that because of the possibility of
substantial existing commitments to import, it would be some
time before quota entitlements for individual importers could
be determined. Initially, consideration will be given to entry
of goods in transit and goods in bond as at the date of this
announcement, and of goods covered by irrevocable letter of credit
established on or before 11 September 1974. Allocation of quotas
to individual importers would only be considered after these
commitments were assessed. 
In order to make the allocation of any such quotas
more equitable, should a balance remain for allocation after
accommodating the import commitments mentioned above, Mr. Whitlam
said that the base period criterion for determining possible
quota allocations would be widened to include importers in 1973-74,
as well as 1972-73.
Mr. Whitlam also mentioned that a reference on the
long-term prbtective needs of the footwear industry had been
sent to the Industries Assistance Commission, which had been
asked to report its findings to the Government no later than
April 1976. Further details of the Government's decision will be
announced by the Department of Manufacturing Industry which will
be responsible for implementation of the import licensing controls,
in conjunction with the Department of Customs and Excise.
Copies of the Temporary Assitance Authority's report are now
available. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



bAUSTKA
PRIME MINISTER 18 October 1974
PENSION PORTABILITY STATISTICS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released
figures showing the number of former Australian residents*
now receiving social security payments overseas. The figures
show that at the end of June 1974 a total of 1,429 people
were receiving Australian benefits or pensions in Greece,
Italy and Yugoslavia. Mr. Whitlam said the Labor Party had
promised in the 1972 election campaign to implement a policy
of full portability of pension rights for migrants. This
Wdo1id enable migrants, especially old or retired people, to
return to their homielands without sacrificying their pension
rights. " It can be seen from the figures prepared by the
Immigration Advisory Council that we have fulfilled this
pledge in full" Mr. Whitlam said. Attached is a table of
portability statistics.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 2600 
DFP,%' lii: OF SOCIAL SM&amp; Y7TTY
Age, Invalid, Wife's ard Pensiors and
Supoorting iMothcrs' Benefits raid Overseas
By Sex, Payin' Office, ' ype of Pension/ Bnefit
Numbcrs Current at 50.6.? 4
Lo-. on Office pays persons residiv' in the United Kingdom an6 Ireland
Geneva Office pays persons residin-in the Western European and some West Asian countries
.;' ellinrton Office pays persons residing in Nev: Zealand.
ie, York Office pays persons residing in North America. 



to
-4j,, AUSTKALIAy
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 348
18 October 1974
RELEASE OF TARIFF BOARD REPORT -PHOTOGRAPHIC AND CINEMATOGPAPHIC
APPARATUS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released the
Tariff Board's report on Photographic and Cinematographic
Apparatus. The report covers a wide range of apparatus including
process~ cameras and enlargers and reducers suitable for use as
cameras but not including other cameras, cinematographic
projectors or slide viewers.
The Prime Minister recalled that he had previously
announced the Government's acceptance of the Board's report,
but because changes in tariff rates had implications for
international commitments the Government would not release
its decision or the report pending the completion of necessary
GATT negotiations with overseas countries. These negotiations
have now been concluded.
Mr. Whitlam said that in accordance with a decision
taken by the Government in September last year, where it accepted
a recommendation of the Tariff Board in a report received prior
to 19 July 1973, the duties approved for inclusion in the
Customs Tariff would, subject to international commitments,
be those recommended by the Board less 25 per cent. Consequently
a rate of 15 per cent will apply to the majority of goods of
types made in Australia. Currently the process cameras, the
enlargers and the reducers are free of duty while many other goods
are subject to protective duties.
Mr. Whitlam said that details of the customs tariff
changes arising from the Government's decision will be announced
when administrative arrangements to implement them have been
finalised.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 346
21 October 1974
REPORT OF COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY CABINET ON TAXATION
MATTERS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released the
report of a committee appointed by Cabinet.
The report is attached.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
TAXATION MATTERS
REPORT OF COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY CABINET
i. The Committee was asked to report on what may be
done through the taxation system
a. to restrain cost inflation, including the possibility
of excluding wage and salary increases
beyond an established norm from acceptable costs
for the assessment of company income;
b. to encourage saving and investment, including the
possibility of imposing a tax on income for which
a rebate is given for saving;
c. to prepare for a possible balance of payments problem.
2. We took these references to be concerned with particular
modifications of the system of taxation and not with
the structure of rates within the present system or with the
outcome of the Budget as a whole. At the same time, we were
aware that these more general matters were of great relevance
to the Committee's work and accepted that the possibilities
we were asked to examine were to be seen in a Budget context in
which, we understand, the Government was seeking to limit the
growth of its own expenditure.
3. A detailed consideration of proposals to index tax
schedules was outside the Committee's terms of reference, since
such proposals relate more to desirable levels of rates than to
the system of taxation itself. However, since informal 
-2-
representations were made to us on this matter, perhaps two
specific comments on tax indexation might be made. First,
such an approach eliminates the stabilising properties of a
progressive tax system in an inflationary situation. Secondly,
as most proposals for tax indexation envisage at most annual
revision of rates, tax brackets and concessions in line with
an approximate formula, whatever decisions need be made could
be made consciously with the Budget, and in the light of the
Government's own judgments, rather than automatically.
4. We were also acutely aware of the limits to the
Committee's considerations set by the time available. It has
therefore been necessary to leave many issues for further
investigation. The Committee met on August 19, 20, 21 and 22.
6. For convenience, our comments appear in a different
order from that set out in paragraph 1 above.
SAVING AND INVESTMENT
Saving
7. From an overall viewpoint, the object of most taxes
is to restrain private spending in general, whether on consumption
or investment, so as to make room for Government claims on
resources and for outlays on social services etc. At the same
time considerations of equity point to placing the heaviest tax
burdens on the relatively " rich", who do most of the private
saving. Given the present income distribution, a tax system
designed to encourage saving would tend to run counter to the 
-3-
equity objective ( even though in no particular case is it
certain that a " rich" person, if relieved of tax burdens,
would save more rather than spend more).
8. Against this background, it has been suggested
by some that there would be net advantage in replacing all
income taxation by progressively graduated expenditure
taxation. The Committee considered a less ambitious suggestion
that there should be a special tax or surcharge on income, progressively
graduated, but subject to rebate to the extent that
a taxpayer could show by the net addition made to his assets
( less debts) that he had saved in the course of the year. To
the extent that the introduction of the special tax and rebate
resulted in an increase in savings, it should permit other tax
rates to be reduced below the levels otherwise necessary.
9. The Committee agreed that
the task of determining and policing the rebate
would be a new administrative enterprise of great
complexity; and
( ii) personal incomes, as currently determined for
income tax purposes, inadequately reflect " capacity
to save" to such an extent that the introduction of
a special tax related to saving would be likely to
cause serious anomalies and widespread evasion,
e. g. through intra-family gifts.
The objection under ( ii) would remain even after
the now-contemplated restructuring of tax rates and concessions,
including the provisions to benefit low-income single-income
families. 
-4-
11. Finally, it was acknowledged that the suggested
special tax and rebate, although possibly important for
long-run taxation policy, would not make a direct impact on
the cost aspects of the present inflation. The Committee
concluded that such a tax should not be introduced at the
present time.
Investment
12. Measures to encourage private investment in the
aggregate are inherently in conflict with the objective of
restraining private spending and partly inconsistent with the
idea that Government capital-formation should play an increasing
role in the economy. The Committee noted that action against
inflation might discourage private investment and that conventional
accounting in a period of inflation might also work
against investment.
13. If it were desired to mitigate any possible
reduction, provisions such as accelerated depreciation or
investment allowances could be considered but they would
reduce tax revenue and increase company profits without necessarily
increasing investment. For directing investment towards
particular avenues, the taxation system is not an appropriate
instrument. 14. The Committee thought that the worst danger to
investment levels was not in action against inflation, but
in fear of what action the Government might take, and equally
of the consequences if the Government failed to take action.
If business men believed that effective action was
being taken against inflation and were confident also that 
demand generally would be sustained at adequate levels,
private investment decisions would be made in the light of
normal long-term considerations of economic advantage. There
should then be little need for special measures to boost private
investment generally.
COST INFLATION
16. The Committee agreed that a tax penalty on wage
and salary increases beyond an established norm could, if
practicable, be a valuable supplement to demand management
in slowing down price increases as the pressure on capacity,
labour, imports and other resources eases.
17. Equally, such a penalty or other like device cannot
work unless that pressure of demand is limited. The penalty
can only stiffen the resistance of employers to excessive wage
claims by increasing the cost of meeting those claims in the
event that the employer is unable to pass on a cost increase
in full. If an employer is confident that he can pass his costs
on, then he could not care less what wages he is asked to pay,
regardless of the tax penalties placed upon him if he pays.
18. In a sellers' market, such as we have had in recent
years and which for the most part we still have, all antiinflationary
efforts will be frustrated. Similarly, the
comfortable expectation that international competition would
be eased by exchange depreciation and/ or controls on imports
when domestic inflation makes that competition uncomfortable
would be a green light for cost increases and would undermine
measures to restrain inflation. 
-6-
19. With this background, the Committee considered
a mechanism for excluding wage and salary increases beyond
an established norm from acceptable costs for the assessment
of company income, a possibility to which attention was
directed in our terms of reference.
It would be necessary for the Government to lay
down a norm for permissible wage increases. The Committee
carried on its discussions in terms of a norm which in any
quarter would be the level of the Consumer Price Index in the
preceding quarter related to a fixed base after adjustment
for a predetermined " betterment factor" of, say, 0.5 or 0.6
per cent per quarter. It would also be necessary, but more
difficult, to arrive at a figure for an actual average wage
being paid by an individual employer for comparison with the
norm and so to provide a basis for the determination of tax
penalty. 21. The Australian Bureau of Statistics estimates
each month the Average Weekly Earnings per Employed Male Unit
by States for Australia as a whole, largely on the basis of
Pay-Roll Tax statistics. A similar method is used to establish
Average Wage Earnings for application in the formula for
Reimbursement Grants to the States.
22. Greater difficulties arise in an attempt to produce
a corresponding figure for individual firms which might be used
to determine what are " excessive" wage and salary payments.
The Committee agreed that, despite the difficulties, such a
f igure could be produced for each firm concerned. However, if
this figure were to be used as the basis for a penal tax, there 
-7-
would be many anomalies and the Government would be enforcing
penalties which in many instances would clearly be unjust.
23. It would be necessary to rely on an over-simple
formula in considering whether individual firms are paying
" excessive" wages and salaries because it is impossible, from
award determinations or other sources, to determine how changes
in pay rates, occupation by occupation, will affect pay-rolls,
firm by firm, and quarter by quarter. No formula, even if valid
statistically, will accurately represent the situation of any
individual firm with a labour force the relationship of which
to its average in the base period is changing as time goes on.
Even if no wage rate increased, the average might rise because
of a different mix of sexes, skills etc. and because of variation
in overtime, holiday pay etc. Some of these changes could reflect
developments planned earlier but only now Coming into effect. A
firm in which such changes occur could be penalised for an average
pay increase which did not arise from any change in rates to which
it had agreed.
24. Just as bad would be the plight of a firm affected
by large award increases resulting from a meaningfully contested
case before a statutory wage-fixing authority. An example is
the progress of women towards equal pay which could heavily
penalise employers with a large proportion of female staff.
Similar problems would arise for firms which find it
necessary to work an unusual amount of overtime after oil
industry strikes). 
-8-
26. Accidental factors such as weather, strikes,
shortages of material, components or power might also impair
the validity of the formula for an individual firm and call
in question the usefulness of the base period.
27. For every firm disadvantaged by such factors
there would probably be another firm receiving a positive
advantage. But this may only increase the protests of the
first set of firms without attracting fan mail from the second.
28. No doubt some of these defects could be set right
in the course of administration but it would be impossible to
hope for more than the roughest of justice. It may be that
rough and ready justice can be tolerated if it is the price of
coping with the inflationary situation. But if the injustices
were sufficiently common and glaring there would be widespread
resentment against the scheme even if it would help keep prices
down. There might also be industrial unrest and unexpected
failures of businesses.
29. Coming closer to home, the Australian Government
must consider how best to deal with remuneration in its own
employment. Much of this employment would not be subject to
company income tax and therefore not subject to penalties in
the course of the scheme. However, a Government which imposed
the scheme and set the norm by which penalties were determined
for other employers would presumably be obliged to conform. The
same considerations apply to State Governments.
We have been advised by the Commissioner of Taxation
that it would be practicable to administer a penalty scheme
along these lines within and through the assessment of companv 
-9-
incorte. Further, it is his opinion that, if such a plan is
to be introduced, it would be preferable to give effect to it
through the company income tax system rather than to use the
State Pay-Roll Tax or a revived Australian Government Pay-Roll
Tax. He emphasises that its administration would be costly, in
money and in skilled personnel, even if the firms to be covered
were confined to a few thousand large employers. To achieve
this limitation it would be necessary to exempt a large proportion
of the 80-90,000 firms at present subject to State
Pay-Roll Tax. This would not exempt a corresponding proportion
of employment. It would perhaps lead firms included to seek
exemption by splitting their enterprise into separate smaller
units. 31. Again, these difficulties could perhaps be dealt
with in a rough and ready manner but not without protest..
Furthermore, it seems desirable to repeat that there will be
most serious anomalies and inequities that no tax law, if it is
to retain community respect, should permit. These will exist
as between firms to which the scheme applies and between those
firms and firms outside the scheme. They cannot be eliminated
legislatively and it is to be expected that some affected firms
will try to take matters into their own hands as far as possible
by manipulating pay-rolls and labour to avoid them.
32. We have emphasised the anomalies and injustices
because the Government would wish, in considering whether to
set out on a new path, to do so with its eyes open. If these
anomalies and injustices could be countenanced by the Government
Ait would be Possible to give effect to the measure we have 
outlined and if applied as part of a total program it could
help contain cost inflation. It would, however, be impossible
to sustain such a plan for any considerable period of time. If
it is to be employed, it should be seen essentially as a shortterm
measure.
33. The Committee considered various suggestions,
including those put forward by the Institute of Applied Economic
Research and a group of Adelaide economists. These suggestions
have included a tax similar in objective to that referred to in
paragraphs 16 to 28 above and a suggested tax on profit margins
in excess of those in a base period. We saw no reason to prefer
their suggestion for taxes on excess wage and salary payments to
that we have examined in detail. While the proposal for a tax
on excess profit margins is seen by the Adelaide economists as
a desirable complement to a tax on excess wage and salary payments
we found it necessary to reject it both conceptually and because
of acute administrative difficulties.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
34. Generally the Committee felt that the tax system
was not an appropriate instrument for dealing with general
balance of payments problems whether they exist currently or
are anticipated. There may be a case for encouraging Australian
industries to involve themselves to a greater extent in exports,
for instance, to take advantage of previously unrealised opportunities,
or of possible economies of scale, and to expose the
industries concerned to the competitive and technological stimulus
of international markets. Such encouragement should therefore be
selective outside the tax system, and follow examination of the 
circumstances of each case. Desirably, the form and extent
of the encouragement should be subject to Government and
parliamentary scrutiny. Experience with the previous Government's
export incentives schemes suggests that the tax concessions
involved tended to reduce revenue without necessarily achieving
significant results. H. C. Coombs ( Chairman)
F. H. Wheeler
E. T. Cain
T. W. Swan
F. H. Gruen
Brian Brogan
August 22, 1974 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SALARIED
AND PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS, CANBERRA, MONDAY 21 OCTOBER
1974
MY MEETING WITH ACSPA TODAY IS PART OF A CONTINUING PROGRAM
OF VISITS BY MINISTERS AND LABOR MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT TO TRADE
UNION FORUMS&gt;, WITH MY COLLEAGUES I WELCOME EVERY OPPORTUNITY TO
TELL UNIONISTS, EMPLOYEES, WORKERS OF ALL KINDS WHITE COLLAR,
BLUE COLLAR, MEN AND WOMEN ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S ACHIEVEMENTS,
ITS PLANS, AND ITS PROBLEMSY WE ARE READY TO DISCUSS FRANKLY
WITH YOU THE ECONOMIC QUESTIONS THAT FACE US AND FACE THE
GOVERNMENTS OF MOST OTHER COMPARABLE COUNTRIES5 SENATOR BISHOP
AND SENATOR WRIEDT HAVE SPOKEN ABOUT THE BUDGET TO THE TRADES
AND LABOR COUNCILS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIAV SIMILAR
VISITS BY MINISTERS ARE BEING MADE TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES AND
VICTORIAN COUNCILSx AFTER DISCUSSIONS WITH EMPLOYEE
JF3ANISATIONS WE HAVE AGREED THAT MINISTERS WILL ATTEND A
VARI-TY OF'UNION CONFERENCES, TRADES AND LABOR COUNCIL MEETINGS,
FEDERAL STATE EXECUTIVE MEETINGS AND GATHERINGS OF RANK AND
FILE UNION MEMSERSX A HOPE-YOU WILL REGARD MY VISIT TODAY
PLEASURABLE AS IT IS FOR ITS OWN SAKE AS PART OF A BROAD
PROCESS OF DISCUSSION AND CONSULTATION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
AND THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENTA 
-2-
SUCH A PROCESS IS VALUABLE TO BOTH OF USX I DOUBT IF
ANY PRIME MINISTER, HOWEVER ELSE HE MAY BE CRITICISED FOR THE
WAY HE SPENDS HIS TIME, GIVES MORE OF IT TO PUBLIC SPEAKING,
TO PRESS CONFERENCES, TO EXPLAINING AND CLARIFYING, I HOPE WITH
SOME SUCCESS, THE POLICIES AND PHILOSOPHIES OF THE GOVERNMENTX
THE SAME IS TRUE OF MY SENIOR MINISTERSX WE ARE COMMITTED TO
OPEN GOVERNMENT, BUT WE RECOGNISE THAT THE SUCCESS OF OUR
POLICIES DEPENDS ON THE FULLEST UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT WE ARE
DOING. JUST AS IMPORTANT, WE NEED THE VIEWS, THE ADVICE, THE
OPINIONS OF UNIONS AND EMPLOYEES AND THEIR ORGANISATIONS)
WE HAVE YOUR INTERESTS AT HEART AND WE HAVE GREAT INTERESTS
IN COMMONX OUR OBJECTIVES WILL BE ACHIEVED ONLY WITH THE
FULL CO-OPERATION AND UNDERSTANDING OF THE WHOLE LABOR MOVEMENT-
LET ME AT ONCE ACKNOWLEDGE THE VALUABLE SUPPORT THAT MANY WHITE
COLLAR UNIONS'GAVE THE GOVERNMENT AT THE LAST ELECTIONSX FOR
THE FIRST TIME THEY GAVE OPEN SUPPORT TO A POLITICAL PARTY
THE A. L. Px I HAVE GREAT RESPECT FOR YOUR JUDGMENT AND GOOD
SENSE IN THESE MATTER. 
-3-
BEFORE THE ELECTIONS I TOLD THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
FRANKLY THAT WE FACED SEVERE ECONOMIC PROBLEMSK I HAVE
NEVER CONCEALED FROM THE PEOPLE THE NATURE OF THOSE PROBLEMS
OR THE NEED FOR TOUGH MEASURES TO DEAL WITH THEMK IT IS TOO
EARLY TO RELAX OUR EFFORTS. IN THE COMING YEAR WE WILL NEED
e ALL THE VIGILANCE AND DETERMINATION WE CAN SUMMON TO OVERCOME
THOSE PROBLEMS,) WE WILL NEED A GOVERNMENT THAT IS STRONG,
RESOURCEFUL AND HUMANE WE WILL NEED THE CO-OPERATION AND
GOODWILL OF ALL SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, AND ESPECIALLY
OUR OWN SUPPORTERS, THE WORKING PEOPLE WHOSE INTERESTS AND
WELFARE WE HAVE AT HEART: ONLY A LABOR GOVERNMENT A GOVERNMENT
TWICE ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE, A GOVERNMENT THAT POSSESSES THE
DEMONSTRATED CONFIDENCE OF THE PEOPLE, A GOVERNMENT THAT PUTS
THE WELFARE OF THE PEOPLE ABOVE VESTED INTERESTS AND SECTIONAL
GROUPS CAN LEAD THIS COUNTRY THROUGH A PERIOD OF ECONOMIC
DIFFICULTY THAT AFFLICTS ALL THE WORLD'S DEVELOPED INDUSTRIAL
NATIONS( 
JUST AS WE HAVE NEVER CONCEALED THE PROBLEMS, SO WE
HAVE NEVER EXAGGERATED OR DISTORTED THEMK I HAVE FULL
CONFIDENCE IN THE BASIC STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMYK WE HAVE
ONLY TO REMEMBER THE FOUNDATIONS OF THAT STRENGTH RICH
NATURAL RESOURCES, VIGOROUS TRADE, HEALTHY OVERSEAS RESERVES,
A MATURE AND INDUSTRIOUS PEOPLE, A SECURE DEMOCRACY.,-IT IS
TRUE THAT ALL THESE ASSETS CAN BE DEPLETED OR SQUANDERED OR ABUSEDOUR
OPPONENTS AT DIFFERENT TIMES AND IN DIFFERENT WAYS HAVE DONE
JUST THAT. K MY GOVERNMENT WILL PRESERVE AND SAFEGUARD THESE BASIC
ASSETS. WE HAVE EXPANDED OUR TRADE, WE HAVE PROTECTED OUR
RESOURCES FROM FOREIGN EXPLOITATION?( WE ARE' GIVING BETTER AND
BRIGHTER OPPORTUNITIES TO OUR PEOPLE FOR HEALTH, EDUCATION
AND SOCIAL SECURITYe, WE ARE RESISTING THE ATTACKS ON DEMOCRACY
AND IN THE LAST WEEK OR SO YOU HAVE HEARD THESE THREATS'
RAISED YET AGAIN BY RUTHLESS AND EMBITTERED SENATORS AND
AN OPPOSITION DETERMINED TO RUSTRATE THE PECF'.-' S WL..,
SO I REJECT THE HYSTERIA AND DESPAIR OF THE OPFOSIT! ON,,
I ACKNOWLEDGE THE .: FRIOUSNESS OF OUR PROLEMS. AND T4-NEED
S. TESTING AND DIFFICULT SOLUTIONS, UNLIKE OUR OPPO-NTS.
I ,. IEVE OUR PROBLEMS CAN BE LICKED AND WIL: BE LICKEDe
YOU u, HAVE FROM ME OR ANY OF MY MINISTERS A MESSAGE OF
PESSIMISM OR -EFEATK YOU WON T GET PANIC TALK OR DOUB31E TLk,,
YOU'LL GET REALISM, HONic-vAND WHENEVER ACTION IS N EDED,
YOU'LL GET PROM" F AND POSITIVE ACT. Y" K 
AS EMPLOYEES THE ISSUE THAT PARTICULARLY CONCERNS YOU IS
UNEMPLOYMENT) THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES YOUR CONCERN AND SHARES
YOUR CONCERN, ON THIS ISSUE I GIVE YOU THREE FIRM AND UNEQUIVOCAL
ASSURANCESK FIRST, WE ADHERE FIRMLY TO OUR GOAL OF FULL EMPLOYMENT
A JOB FOR EVERY AUSTRALIAN MAN'AND WOMAN WHO IS ABLE AND WILLING
TO WORK-SECONDLY, AND FLOWING FROM THAT GOAL, WE WILL NEVER
RESORT TO THE DELIBERATE CREATION OF MASS UNEMPLOYMENT AS A
MEANS OF CHECKING INFLATIONk-THIRDLY, IF UNEMPLYMENT DOES OCCUR
IN THE COMMUNITY DESPITE OUT EFFORTS AND INTENTIONS WE STAND
READY TO CUSHION ITS EFFECTS, TO PROTECT THOSE AFFECTED, TO CARE
FOR THEM AND THEIR FAMILIES, TO ASSIST THEM IN FINDING NEW JOBS
AND IF NECESSARY TRAIN THEM IN NEW JOBSv SO THERE YOU HAVE A
THREE-FOLD COMMITMENT TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THIS COUNTRY 
-6-
WHEN EMPLOYEES ARE TEMPTED TO ASK, " WOULD UNEMPLOYMENT
BE LESS UNDER THE LIBERALS?" JUST REMEMBER WHAT HAPPENED WHEN
THE LIBERALS WERE IN POWERY UNEMPLOYMENT WAS THEIR PRIME
WEAPON, THEIR CHOSEN INSTRUMENT FOR CHECKING INFLATION AND
INTIMIDATING THE UNION MOVEMENTA. IT WAS THE ONLY WEAPON THEY
UNDERSTOODX THEY CALCULATED THAT THE VICTIMS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
WERE MOST LIKELY TO BE LABOR VOTERS WHO HAD NEVER SUPPORTED A
LIBERAL GOVERNMENT AND WERE THEREFORE UNABLE TO WITHDRAW THEIR
SUPPORTK THEY MADE lEi CALLOUS AND CYNICAL ASSUMPTION THAT
UNEMPLOYMENT WOULDN'T HURT THEMK THEY WERE WRONG IN 1961 AND
THEY WERE WRONG IN 1972k YET THAT WAS THEIR ASSUMPTION ON
EVERY OCCASION WHEN SIGNS OF INFLATION APPEARED THEY ACCEPTED
WITHOUT QUESTION OR HESITATION THE ADVICE THAT MEN BE PUT OUT
OF WORKK YET THE LIBERALS WERE TOTALLY INDIFFERENT TO THE
EFFECTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT ON THE WORKING MAN AND HIS FAMILY AND
ON THE WHOLE-COMMUNITY5 THEY HAD NO PLANS TO ALLEV! ATE UNEMPLOYMENT,
TO PROTECT ITS VICTIMS, TO CREATE NEW JOB OPPr! Ti) NTUN" T-! T'T EJ. UI!
MEN FOR OTHER WORK. WHEN YOU HEAR THE PIOUS CRIES O THE nPPOSITION
ABOUT UNEMPLOYMEi,' TODAY REMEMBER rHOM'U CH WORSE iT :' OULD 3E IF
THEY WERE IN POWER, HOW OFTEN THEY CREA'TD DELIBERATE UNEMPLOVMENT
THElELVES, AND HOW UTTERLY INSENSITIVE THEY ': iRE TC THE PLIGHT
OF IT " TrTIMS. 
-7-
IN OUR ECONOMIC POLICIES WE HAVE SHOWN OURSELVES READY
TO TAKE ANY ACTION NEEDED TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIESA
AS THE TREASURER SAID WHEN PRESENTING THE BUDGET: " SHOULD THE
NEED ARISE WE STAND READY DURING THE YEAR TO TAKE ACTION ON THE
EXPENDITURE OR REVENUE SIDE OF THE BUDGET TO GIVE A QUICK
STIMULUS TO DEMAND AND EMPLOYMENTk I E HAVE ALREADY DONE SO.
WE HAVE GIVEN EVIDENCE OF THIS READINESSk
THE DEYALUATION OF 25 SEPTEMBER WAS INTENDED TO GIVE
A BOOST TO GENERAL BUSINESS CONFIDENCE AND STIMULATE THE ECONOMYV
OUR GRADUAL EASING OF CREDIT, OUR MEASURES TO BOOST HOUSE
BUILDING, OUR SELECTIVE RESPONSE TO DIFFICULTIES IN THE FOOTWEAR
INDUSTRY ARE ALL EXAMPLES OF FLEXIBLE GOVERNMENT ACTION WITHIN
THE CONTEXT OF AN OVERALL POLICY TO RESTRAIN THE RE-EMERGENCE
OF SPENDINGk THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME IS
DESIGNED TO IMPROVE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN CERTAIN AREAS
BY ENCOURAGING LOCAL INITIATIVES AND ENLISTING THE SUPPORT OF
RELEVANT LOCAL AUTHORITIES3, THE NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND
TRAINING SYSTEM IS PROVIDING COMPREHENSIVE JOB TRAINING AND
RETRAINING SCHEMES FOR THOSE AFFECTED BY TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
OR GOVERNMENT POLICIESK NOTHING OF THIS SORT WAS EVEN CONTEMPLATED
BY OUR PREDECESSORS, DESPITE A CLEAR NEED FOR ITX MANPOWER
POLICIES ARE NOT SOMETHING NEEDED MERELY TO RELIEVE UNEMPLOYMENT*
THEY ARE BASIC TO THE CREATION OF A MORE MODERN, EFFICIENT AND
RESILIENT INDUSTRIAL ECONOMYX 
OUR MEASURES CANNOT CURE OUR PROBLEM OVERNIGHT,. IT
WILL TAKE TIME FOR THEIR EFFECTS TO BECOME APPARENT+ PITH
EVERY ECONOMIC DECISION'THERE IS A LAG BETWEEN IMPLEMENTATION,
AND RESULTSk THAT IS WHY I APPEAL TO YOU FOR UNDERSTANDING
AND CO-OPERATIONk REMEMBER THAT NO COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS
FOUND A QUICK, EASY SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF MAINTAINING
PROSPERITY WITH FULL EMPLOYMENT AND A LOW LEVEL OF
WE ARE DOING AS WELL AS MANY COUNTRIES IN COPING WITH INFLATION
AND BETTER THAN ANY OTHER COUNTRY IN MAINTAINING EMPLOYMENT. I
DON'T WANT YOU TO THINK WE ARE COMPLACENT ON THAT SCORE PIE
DON'T REGARD-ANY INCREASE IN UNEMPLOYMENT AS ACCEPTABLE FOR A
MOMENTA ONE MAN NEEDLESSLY UNEMPLOYED IS ONE MAN TOO MANYk LAST
YEAR WE CLEANED UP THE MESS OF LIBERAL UNEMPLOYMENT. ' E ARE
STILL COPING . WITH THE INFLATIONARY PRESSURES THEY LEFT BEHINDX
IN THEIR LAST YEAR OF OFFICE THEY SCATTERED THE SEEDS OF INFLATION
FAR AND WIDE OVERHEATING THE ECONOMY, FLOODING US WITH HOT
MONEY IN A DESPERATE ATTEMPT TO BUT OFF ELECTORAL DEFEATX 
-9-
TODAY THE FIGURES FOR THE SEPTEMBER CONSUMER PRICE
INDEX WERE RELEASED THEY SHOW AN INCREASE IN THE SEPTEMBER
QUARTER OF 5.4% k SUCH A DISTURBINGLY HIGH RATE OF INFLATION
CANNOT CONTINUE WITHOUT PERMANENT DAMAGE TO OUR ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE THERE SHOULD BE NO DOUBT THAT THIS
SEVERE INFLATION WILL CONTINUE IF THERE ARE EXCESSIVE WAGE
CLAIMSk IT IS IN THE INTERESTS OF ALL WORKERS TO RElfRAIN
FROM MAKING UNREASONABLE WAGE DEMANDS, BECAUSE LET ME BE
FRANK, INFLATION COSTS JOBS. INDUSTRIES WHICH MUST COMPETE
WITH IMPORTS WILL BE PRICED OUT OF THE MARKET AND ALL INDUSTRIES
CANNOT PLAN AND INVEST FOR THE FUTURE IN THE UNCERTAIN CLIMATE
WHICH ACCOMPANIES INFLATION OF THIS MAGNITUDEk
THE GOVERNMENT HAS SHOWN THROUGH ITS TAXATION
POLICIES; ITS EXPENDITURE POLICIES AND ITS LEG VLATION ON
PRICES JUSTIFICATION AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES THAT IT
EXPECTS THE PRINCIPAL BURDEN OF RESTRAINT TO FALL ON THOSE
BEST ABLE TO THE LOAD, THAT RESTRAINT IS ALREADY IN
EFFECT AND WE NOW EXPECT THE LABOR MOVEMENT IN ITS IND! JSTRIAL
ING TO RESPOND TO THE GOVERNMENT S CALL aW COOPERATE IN; A
" TY WIDE EFFORT TO STOP INFLATIONk 
As THE TREASURER STATED IN HIS BUDGET SPEECH,
THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN EXPLORING A TAX PENALTY MECHANISM
BY WHICH WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES BEYOND AN ESTABLISHED
NORM MIGHT BE EXCLUDED FROM ASSESSABLE COSTS FOR THE
ASSESSMENT OF COMPANY INCOME TAX. I HAVE RELEASED TODAY
A COPY OF A REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY
THE CABINET TO INVESTIGATE THIS MATTERA SUCH A TAX WOULD
CREATE ANOMALIES AND DISTORT MANY ECONOMIC PROCESSES THE
GOVERNMENT WOULD PREFER NOT TO BE FORCED INTO INTRODUCING
SUCH A MEASURE EVEN ON A TEMPORARY BASISA HOWEVER, IF WAGE
SETTLEMENTS CONTINUE AT THE RATE THEY HAVE* IN RECENT MONTHS,
THEN WE HAVE TO FACE THE FACT THAT WHAT IS NOW MERELY AN
OPTION MAY BECOME AN OBLIGATION.
THE PRICE INCREASES REFLECTED IN THE SEPTEMBER
QUARTER FIGURES ARE A REFLECTION OF WAGE INCREASES SOME
MONTHS* AGOV THERE IS STILL A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF COST INFLATION
IN THE ECONOMIC PIPELINEX WAGE CLAIMS IN THE COMING MONTHS
WILL DETERMINE WHETHER THE RATE OF INFLATION WILL BE REDUCEDx.
WE LOOK TO THE COOPERATION OF EMPLOYEES AND THEIR
ORGANISATION IN THIS OBJECTIVEA WE DO SO WITHOUT ATTEMPTING TO
ALLOCATE BLAME FOR THAT IS A FRUITLESS EXERCI-SE5( THE QUESTION
OF WHAT COMES FIRST, WAGE INCREASES OR PRICE INCREASES IS A
CHICKEN AND EGG QUESTIONA WHAT WE MUST DO ISTO BREAK THE
SPIRAL OF INTERACTION BETWEEN WAGES AND PRICESA THE GOVERNMENT
HAS SET THE PRE-CONDITIONS, WITHIN THE LIMITS* OF ITS OWN
CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITY, FOR A COMMUNITY EFFORT TO BREAK
THAT SPIRAL, WE MUST NOW PROCEED TO DO SO 
i
WE SHALL PRESS FORWARD WITH OUR PROGRAMl IF THERE IS
ONE THING OUR OPPONENTS WOULD LIKE TO SEE IT IS THE ABANDONMENT
OF OUR PROGRAMX IT IS OUR PROGRAM, ABOVE ALL, THAT GIVES MEANING
AND PURPOSE TO THE LABOR GOVERNMENT AND EXPOSES THE COMPLACENCY
AND EMPTINESS OF THE OPPOSITION, WE DON'T ADHERE TO OUR PROGRAM
OUT OF STUBBORNNESS OR SENTIMENTX WE DON'T REGARD IT FOR A
MOMENT AS INCOMPATIBLE WITH A DETERMINED AND RESOURCEFUL
ANTI-INFLATIONARY PROGRAM FAR FROM BEING HOSTILE TO OUR
ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICIES, OUR PROGRAM IS INTEGRAL TO THEM,
AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE BATTLE TO RESTRAIN INFLATION, TO REMOVE
ITS CAUSES AND PROTECT ITS VICTIMSk YOU, . MR PRESIDENT, HAVE BEEN
GOOD ENOUGH TO ACKNOWLEDGE IN YOUR ADDRESS THE MANY ACHIEVEMENTS
IN THE GOVERNMENT'S RECORD TO DATEk I TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THEM
BUT WHAT IS THE POINT OF THEM? WHAT IS THE POINT OF BETTER
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES, BETTER HEALTH SERVICES, BETTER SOCIAL
SECURITY, BETTER CHILD CARE, BETTER CITIES, BETTER TRANSPORT,
BETTER ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS, BETTER MANPOWER POLICIES, BETTER
AND MORE EFFICIENT METHODS OF ASSISTING OUR RURAL AND MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES? 
12
CLEARLY ALL THESE ARE GOOD THINGS IN THEMSELVES XTHEY
ARE DESIRABLE FOR THEIR OWN SAKE5TOGETHER, HOWEVER, THEY HELP
CREATE A MORE EFFICIENT, MORE RATIONAL, MORE ORDERLY SOCIETY.
THEY RAISE OUR STANDARD OF LIVING OUR CHANCES OF ENJOYING LIFE
IN WAYS THAT ARE QUITE INDEPENDENT OF OUR INDIVIDUAL INCOMES,
INDEED IN WAYS THAT INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE INCOMES, HOWEVER GREAT
THEY MAY BE, CANNOT OF THEMSELVES ACHIEVEk THEY HELP REDUCE WASTE
AND CUT DOWN COSTS,( THEY HELP SOCIETY MAKE THE MOST OF ITS
AVAILABLE TALENTS AND RESOURCESX THESE THINGS, THEN, ARE PART
OF A TRUE ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICY BECAUSE THEY GO TO THE ROOTS
OF OUR DIFFICULTIES NO COUNTRY, BECAUSE OF THE REALITIES OF
WORLD TRADE AND CURRENCY MOVEMENTS, CAN ESCAPE INFLATION ALTOGETHER
IF, HOWEVER, WE LOOK AT THE COUNTRIES WHERE INFLATION IS LOWEST,
WE FIND THEY ARE THOSE WITH THE HIGHEST DEGREE OF INDUSTRIAL
EFFICIENCY, THE HIGHEST DEGREE OF SOCIAL SECURITY, THE MOST MODERN
INSTITUTIONS, WHERE EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS AND OTHER SERVICES ARE
NOT BLIGHTED BY CLASS DISTINCTION, SOCIAL UNREST OR GROSS
INEQUALITIES OF INCOMEX a/ 13 
13
I DO NOT WANT TO OVERSIMPLIFY THIS PROBLEM UNLIKE
MR SNEDDEN I CANNOT CLAIM TO HAVE A MAGIC CURES I SUGGEST, HOWEVER,
THAT IN THE LONG RUN THERE ARE TWO WAYS OF APPROACHING THE PROBLEM
OF INFLATIONX ONE IS TO BLUDGEON THE ECONOMY INTO SUBMISSION;
TAKE IT OUT ON THE WORKERS THAT IS THE LIBERAL APPROACHV THE
OTHER IS TO REFORM THE BASIC INSTITUTIONS OF A MIXED ECONOMY, TO
MAKE OUR FACTORIES AND SERVICES MORE MODERN AND EFFICIENT, OUR ROADS
AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MORE UP-TO-DATE AND BETTER CO-ORDINATED, TO
IMPROVE OUR EDUCATIONAL SERVICES FROM PRE-SCHOOLS TO TECHNICAL
COLLEGES TO UNIVERSITIES, TO MAKE OUR CITI-ES LESS CONGESTED AND
POLLUTED, TO ENSURE FAIR AND HEALTHY COMPETITION IN THE PRIVATE
SECTOR, TO CUT OUT WASTEFUL RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES AND PROTECT THE
CONSUMER, TO REMOVE THE CAUSES OF FEAR AND INSECURITY AND NEEDLESS
INDUSTRIAL UNREST BY GIVING EMPLOYEES A FAIR SHARE OF THE NATION'S
PROSPERITY' THAT IS OUR APPROACHK THAT IS WHAT OUR POLICIES
AIM TO DOK THEY ARE NOT JUST A COLLECTION OF ATTRACTIVE PARTSy
THEIR UNIFYING AND CONSISTENT PRINCIPLE IS SOCIAL REFORM AND
REGENERATION ,/ 14 
11-
OUR PROGRAM IS RAISING THE LIVING STANDARDS AND THE
SECURITY OF EVERY AUSTRALIAN.. IT IS AS MUCH A CONTRIBUTION
TO THE WORKERS'I WELFARE AS HIS AGITATION FOR MORE PAYK
THE BUDGET FOR 1974/ 75 ANNOUNCED AN EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION
OF $ 1,535 MILLION, AN INCREASE OF 78 PER CENT ON THE PREVIOUS
YEARtC, WE ARE SPENDING SEVEN TIMES MORE THAN OUR PREDECESSORS
ON SCHOOLS AND FOUR TIMES MORE ON THE WHOLE FIELD OF EDUCATION
HEALTH EXPENDITURE ROSE By 21 PER CENT IN-1973/ 74 AND WILL RISE
BY 30 PER CENT THIS YEARK OUR EXPENDITURE ON SOCIAL SECURITY
AND lWE.-LFARErc AMOUNTS TO NEARLY A QUARTER OF BUDGET OUTLAYS AND
iS EXPECTED FO REACH $ 3,441 MILLION THIS YEAR, AN INCREASE OF
38.3 PER CENT OVER LAST YEAR, OUTLAYS ON HOUSING ARE SET-TO
REACH A RECORD $ 1401 MILLION THIS YEAR, COMPARED WITH $ 77 MILLION
SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN THEIR LAST YEAR OF OFF ICE#'
EXPENDITURE ON URBAN IMPROVEMENTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT WILL
AL. MOST REACH $ 1400 MILLION, A THREE-FOLD INCREASE ON LAST YEAR
AND EIGHT TIMES THE AMOUNT SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN 1972/ 73-
WE HAVE ALSO TAKEN IMPORTANT STEPS IN IMPROVING PUBLIC TRANSPORT,
WATER SUPPLY AND ELECTRICITY, RETRAINING, REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT
AND IN NATIONAL COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION SCHEMESo( 
I DO NOT MEAN BY THIS THAT HIGHER WAGES ARE UNIMPORTANT,
REAL PURCHASING POWER FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS HAS
IMPROVED UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT AND WILL CONTINUE TO DO SOK
TO THE EXTENT THAT HIGHER INCOMES REPRESENT A REAL GAIN IN
LIVING STANDARDS WE WELCOME EVERY ADVANCE THAT EMPLOYEES CAN
ACHIEVE,( WHAT IS FUTILE, AND WHAT WE MUST CURTAIL, IS THE
EXCESSIVE AND SELF-DEFEATING ESCALATION OF MONEY INCOMES THAT
BRINGS NO IMPROVEMENT IN LIVING STANDARDSX THIS IS WHAT WE
MEAN BY WAGE RESTRAINTA( NATURALLY, WHILE INFLATION PERSISTS
AS A RESULT OF PAST LIBERAL NEGLECT AND IRRESPONSIBILITY AS
WELL AS THE EFFECTS OF WORLDWIDE INFLATION,. WE WANT TO ENSURE
THAT EMPLOYEES' WAGES ARE ADJUSTED ACCORDINGLY,( THE CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION WILL NOW DECIDE THE MATTER OF WAGE
INDEXATIONK ( MAY I SAY IN PASSING THAT WE TAKE GREAT
SATISFACTION, AS YOU MUST DO, FROM THE APPOINTMENT OF MR.
BARNEY WILLIAMS, THE SECRETARY OF ACSPA, AS A DEPUTY PRESIDENT
OF THE COMMISSIONX) 
-16-
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECLARED ITS SUPPORT FOR QUARTERLY
., COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS IN THE BELIEF THAT THEY WILL HELP
RESTRAIN A WORTHLESS GROWTH IN MONEY WAGESWITHOUT DEPRIVING
EMPLOYEES OF THE PROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENT OF REAL EARNINGS MADE
POSSIBLE BY RISING PRODUCTIVITYX WE AGREE WITH ACSPA THAT WAGE
INDEXATION ON ITS OWN CAN NEVER BE SUFFICIENT AS A TOTAL WAGES
POLICY OR AS A GOAL FOR THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT5 WE SEE IT
SOLELY AS A COUNTER TO THE EFFECTS OF INFLATIONARY PRESSURES ON
INCOMES; WE DO NOT SEE IT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR THE BROADER AND
MORE FUNDAMENTAL REVIEW OF WAGES AND SALARIES BASED ON WORK
VALUES, CHANGING CONDITIONS OR PRODUCTIVITYk FOR THAT REASON
WE DO NOT INTEND TO APPLY A PERCENTAGE INDEX TO ALL WAGES AND
SALARIESK WE WILL DO THAT FOR LOWER PAID WORKERS AND MAKE A
FLAT INCREASE FOR THOSE RECEIVING MORE THAN AVERAGE WEEKLY
EARNINGS. IN THIS, QUITE FRANKLY, WE DIFFER FROM THE POLICY OF
ACSPA, WHICH FAVOURS A PERCENTAGE ADJUSTMENT FOR ALL WORKERSX
BECAUSE THE PRINCIPLE AT ISSUE IS IMPORTANT TO BOTH OF US I
SHALL TRY TO EXPLAIN TO YOU WHY WE BELIEVE OUR APPROACH IS THE
FAIRESTI IN THE FIRST PLACE IT CONFORMS WITH ALL HISTORICAL
PRECEDENTSX WHEN QUARTERLY COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENTS WERE MADE
IN THE PAST, THE INDEX APPLIED ONLY TO THE BASIC WAGE COMPONENT
OF A WORKER'S PAY, NEVER TO HIS MARGIN, PERCENTAGE RISES ACROSS
THE BOARD WERE NEVER MADE, AND IT IS WORTH RECALLING THAT WHEN
EMPLOYEE ORGANISATIONS INCLUDING ACSPA 5' CsSOUGHT RESTORATION
OF CO( ST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENTS IN THE MID-" ft IT WAS THE FLAT
RATE INCREASE WHICH THEY SUPPORTED 
PART OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY IS TO
REDISTRIBUTE INCOMES IN FAVOUR OF THE LEAST FORTUNATE AND LOWEST
PAID MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITYW THIS HAS BEEN A CONSISTENT
l THEME OF THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICIESX WE RAISED THE BASIC PENSION
LAST AUGUST BY $ 5 A WEEKX IT WAS THE BIGGEST SINGLE INCREASE EVER.
MADE IN THE PENSION 1E RESTRUCTURED TAX SCALES IN THE BUDGET
IN FAVOUR OF LOWER AND MIDDLE INCOME EARNERSX AS A RESULT, THE
MAJORITY OF LOWER PAID AUSTRALIANS WILL PAY LESS TAXy OUR HOME
MORTGAGE INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY SCHEME WILL BENEFIT THE LOWER
PAID WORKER MORE THAN THOSE ON HIGHER PAYj IN THESE SITUATIONS,
TO GIVE THE SAME BENEFITS TO EVERYONE IS NOT TO" TREAT ALL PEOPLE.
EQUALLY BUT TO TREAT THE FORTUNATE MORE GENEROUSLY THAN THE RESTk
CONVERSELY, IF WE TRULY BELIEVE IN SOCIAL EQUALITY WE MUST TREAT
THE POOR A GOOD DEAL BETTER THAN THE RESTx THE DEPRIVED IN OUR
SOCIETY ARE NOT DEPRIVED MERELY BY COMPARISON WITH SPECULATORS,
STOCKBROKERS AND BUSINESSMEN4 THEY ARE DEPRIVED BY COMPARISON
WITH OTHER WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS, AND THIS IS A MUCH MORE
IMMEDIATE CAUSE OF THEIR UNRESTX / 18
a 
-18-
IPUT IT TO YOU THAT THE HIGHEST PAID WORKERS IN THE
COMMUNITY HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE WELFARE OF THEIR
LESS FORTUNATE FELLOWS. OUR POLICY ON INDEXATION, LIKE
OUR CAPITAL GAINS TAX AND OUR SURCHARGE ON UNEARNED INCOME.-
IS AN ATTEMPT TO ESTABLISH GREATER EQUITY IN THE TAXATION
AND INCOME SCALES. EQUITY IS WHAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS ALL
ABOUT. IN FIELDS OTHER THAN WAGES THE GoVERNMEN" T HAS ACTED
WHEREVER POSSIBLE TO RAISE STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS OFEMPLOYEES.
FOR THOSE OF YOUR MEMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN
PUBLIC SERVICE WE HAVE INTRODUCED A WHOLE RANGE OF NEW
BENEFITS WHICH IN TIME.-WE BELIEVE, WILL* BENEFIT EVERYONE#
WE INTRODUCED FOUR WEEKS' ANNUAL LEAVE, AN ANNUAL LEAVE
LOADING5o MATERNITY AND PATERNITY LEAVE. WE HAVE * EXTENDED'
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO EMPLOYEES WITH THE SERVICE
AND REDUCED THE QUALIFYING PERIOD FOR LONG-SERVICE LEAVE
FROM 15 TO 10 YEARS. WE HAVE ENCOURAGED MORE FLEXIBLE WORKING.
HOURS, REMOVED AGE LIMITS ON ENTRY AND BANNED DISCRIMINATION
AGAIN'ST WOMEN. WE HAVE LIFTED RESTRICTIONS ON FREE SPEECH
AND ABOLISHED THE BONDING SYSTEM. WE HAVE IMPLEMENTED EQUAL
PAY FOR WOMEN A PRINCIPLE. WE SUPPORTED FOR-ALL WOMEN IN THE
WORK FORCE IN ONE OF THE VERY FIRST ACTIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT, 
-19.
I COMMEND THE BROAD POLICY OBJECTIVES OF ACSPA. YOUR
PRE--BUDGET SUBMISSIONS TO THE GOVERNMENT AND YOUR SUBMISSION
TO [ IR JUSTICE MOORE'S CONFERENCE WERE WELCOME AND IMPORTANT
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF CURRENT ECONOMIC ISSUES.
YOU HAVE DONE MUCH TO INVOLVE WHITE COLLAR', WORKERS IN THE REALITIES
OF INDUSTRIAL NEGOTIATION, TO ADVANEC E THEIR WELFARE AND IMPROVE
THE STATUS OF EMPLOYEES OF ALL KINDS, I VALUE THE SUPPORT AND
CO-OPERATION YOU HAVE SHOWN TO THE GOVERNMENT. WHILE I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES INVOLVED, I HOPE THE
CURRENT RENEWED-INITIATIVES TOWARDS THE AFFILIATION OF ACSPA
AND THE ACTU WILL LEAD TO POSITIVE RESULTS. ONE OF THE CONSTANT
OBJECTIVES OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN TO BRING ABOUT
THE AMALGAMATION OF UNIONS INTO MORE VIABLE AND EFFICIENT
GROUPINGS. THIS OBJECTIVE; CENTRAL TO OUR AIM OF GREATER
INDUSTRIAL STABILITY AND HARMONY, HAS BEEN CONSISTENTLY
FRUSTRATED BY OUR OPPONENTS. I BELIEVE THE PRINCIPLE OF
AMALGAMATION APPLIES WITH EQUAL VALIDITY TO UNION COUNCILS
THE CLOSEST POSSIBLE INSTITUTIONAL LINKS BETWEEN WHITE AND
BLUE COLLAR UNIONS WILL HELP BRING US CLOSER TO THE ACHIEVEMENT
OF OUR COMMON GOALS AND THE CREATION OF A MORE JUST AND
PROSPEROUS SOCIETY FOR ALL AUSTRALIANs, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P..
TO THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT LEAGUE MEETING
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, TUESDAY 22 OCTOBER 1974
THANK YOU COUNCILLOR GEMMELL AND THANK YOU
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT LEAGUE FOR
ARRANGING THIS CONFERENCE TONIGHT ON A MATTER WHICH IS OF
CONCERN TO ALL OF US PRESENT.
THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT LEAGUE SINCE ITS
FORMATION IN 1944 HAS PROMOTED THE CONCEPT OF THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTER-STATE BODY TO COORDINATE THE
BALANCED DEVELOPMENT OF THE RIVER MURRAY AREAS. I UNDERSTAND
THAT MR VERN LAWRENCE, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE LEAGUE.
IN HIS THEN CAPACITY AS ORGANISING SECRETARY. WAS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE 1946 MURRAY VALLEY RESOURCES SURVEY COMMITTEE.
ESTABLISHED BY THE CHIFLEY LABOR GOVERNMENT AND THE
GOVERNMENTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
THE LEAGUE HAS ALWAYS BEEN CONCERNED WITH THE QUALITY OF THE
WATERS OF THE RIVER MURRAY AND ITS TRIBUTARIES AND IT IS
LEA POLICY THAT THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR WATER QUALITY. 
-2-
THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION WAS, AS YOU ARE ALL
AWARE, FORMED NEARLY 60 YEARS AGO WHEN THE RIVER MURRAY
WATERS AGREEMENT WAS MADE. THE AGREEMENT WAS, AS NOTED
BY DR CLARK IN HIS MOST VALUABLE PAPER ON THE ADMINISTRATION
OF INTERSTATE RIVERS, " A PIONEERING AGREEMENT, NOT JUST FOR
AUSTRALIA, BUT FOR OTHER FEDERAL SYSTEMS IN THE COMMON LAW
WORLD", THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT COULD NOT HAVE SIGNED
THE RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT IN 1914 AND THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT COULD NOT HAVE PASSED THE RIVER
MURRAY WATERS ACT IN 1915 BUT FOR THE FACT THAT THE RIVER
WAS STILL BEING USED AT THAT TIME FOR INTER-STATE
NAVIGATION, A MATTER ON WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT
CAN MAKE LAWS.
THE ORIGINAL AGREEMENT AND ACT ENTAILED A SMALLER
EXPENDITURE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THAN BY EACH
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS. THE LEGISLATION WAS CONCERNED
WITH STORAGE OF THE RIVER'S WATERS AND LOCKS AND WEIRS
FOR NAVIGATION OF THE RIVER.
NOWADAYS THERE IS VIRTUALLY NO'INTERSTATE
NAVIGATION ON THE MURRAY, ACCORDINGLY, THE AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT NOW HAS VERY TENUOUS, IF ANY, CONSTITUTIONAL
POWERS TO PASS LAWS WITH RESPECT TO THE MURRAY. IN
PARTICULAR, IT CANNOT BY ITSELF PASS LAWS CONCERNING
THE QUALITY OF THE WATERS AND THE USE OF THE REPARIAN
LANDS. / 2A 
-2ATHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AGREES ENTIRELY
WITH THE VIEW PUT FORWARD BY THE LEAGUE THAT THE
RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD BE GIVEN RESPONSIBILITIES
FOR WATER QUALITY IN THE RIVER MURRAY. I WOULD GO
EVEN FURTHER AND SAY THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR AN
INTER-STATE BODY TO CO-ORDINATE ALL ASPECTS OF WATER
USE AND MANAGEMENT AND TO TENDER ADVICE TO
GOVERNMENTS ON THE USE AND MANAGEMENT OF RELATED LANDS.
v / 3 
-3-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ALSO AWARE OF THE CONCERN
ON THIS QUESTION THAT HAS BEEN EXPRESSED BY A WIDE RANGE
OF ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS, INCLUDING SOME OF THE
HONOURABLE MEMBERS OF BOTH MAJOR PARTIES PRESENT HERE TONIGHT,
IT WAS THE SAME SORT OF CONCERN THAT THE PREMIEROF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA , MR DUNSTAN, CONVEYED TO ME IN HIS LETTER
ON 19 JANUARY 1973. IN RESPONSE TO THIS LETTER I CONVENED
A MEETING BETWEEN MYSELF AND THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH
', IAL. ES, VICTORIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA ON 2 MARCH 1973 TO
DISCUSS THE RIVER MURRAY AND THE POWERS OF THE RIVER MURRAY
COMMISSION. AT THAT MEETING, ALL PREMIERS EXPRESSED CONCERN
OVER PRESENT AND POTENTIAL WATER QUALITY PROBLEMS IN THE
RIVER AND ALL SAID THAT THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION
SHOULD BE -INCREASED TO COPE WITH THESE PROBLEMS. WE. AGREED
Ar THE MEETING TO ESTABLISH A STEERING COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS
OF THE FOUR GOVERNMENTS TO WHICH A WORKING PARTY OF OFFICERS
IS TO REPORT ON THESE MATTERS.
IN RETROSPECT I BELIEVE THE WORKING PARTY SHOULD
HAVE BEEN GIVEN A DEFINITE COMPLETION DATE; EIGHTEEN MONTHS
AFTERWARDS THE WORKING PARTY APPEARS TO HAVE ACHIEVED LITTLE.
I UNDERSTAND THE WORKING PARTY HAS ESTABLISHED
EXPERT COMMITTEES ON SALINITY, WATER QUALITY, IMPROVEDJ
IRRIGATION PRACTICES AND BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION. LAST YEAR
THE WORKING PARTY SUBMITTED AN INTERIM REPORT TO MINISTERS,
WHICH THEY ENDORSED AND WHICH MADE A NUMBER OF RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING MINOR SALT MITIGATION WORK. A vss/ 
-4-
I UNDERSTAND THAT THE WORKING PARTY'S COMMITTEE DEALING WITH
WATER QUALITY IS LIKELY TO SUBMIT A REPORT BEFORE THE END
OF THE YEAR RECOMMENDING A WATER QUALITY MONITORING
NETWORK FOR THE MURRAY AND COMMENTING ON THE NEED FOR NEW
ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS TO CONTROL WATER QUALITY.
THE WORKING PARTY HAS ADOPTED THE POSITION THAT
IT CANNOT MAKE DEFINITE RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW THE FUNCTIONS
OF THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD BE MODIFIED UNTIL IT
HAS IDENTIFIED THE EXTENT OF THE PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH
THE MURRAY RIVER AND THEIR ROOT CAUSES. I'CERTAINLY DO NOT
ARGUE WITH THE LOGIC OF THIS POSITION; IT IS HOWEVER MY
STRONGLY HELD VIEW THAT THERE IS ALREADY MORE THAN ENOUGH
EVIDENCE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE CURRENT POWERS AND
FUNCTIONS OF THE RMC IN ASSOCIATION WITH STATE GOVERNMENT
POWERS HAVE PROVED TO BE INADEQUATE. THIS EVIDENCE IS
AVAILABLE BOTH IN TERMS OF TECHNICAL DATA AND IN ALMOST
UNANIMOUS EXPRESSIONS OF CONCERN BY THE PEOPLE MOST
INTIMATELY CONNECTED WITH THE RIVER SUCH AS YOURSELVES.
I AM DEEPLY CONCERNED THAT A MATTER IN NEED OF
REFORM IDENTIFIED 18 MONTHS AGO BY MYSELF AND THE PREMIERS
IS TAKING SO LONG TO BE EXAMINED. a. 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS FIRMLY CONVINCED
THAT THE WORKING PARTY SHOULD, IN PARALLEL WITH ITS TECHNICAL
INVESTIGATIONS, BE LOOKING AT THE MOST GENERAL CLAUSES OF
ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE, REQUIRING IT TO EXAMINE THE TYPES
OF MEASURES WHICH NEED TO BE TAKEN TO PROTECT AND IMPROVE
THE QUALITY OF THE RIVER MURRAY WATERS AND THE CHANGES WHICH
WOULD BE REQUIRED IN THE RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT TO
ENABLE THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION TO UNDERTAKE SUCH
MEASURES, IN SUMMARY, THE WORKING PARTY SHOULD BE CONSIDERING
NOT WHETHER CHANGES SHOULD BE MADE IN THE RIVER MURRAY
WATERS AGREEMENT, BUT WHAT CHANGES,
THE REALITY OF THE SITUATION IS THAT SALINITY IN
THE MURRAY IS ONE OF AUSTRALIA'S MOST SERIOUS WATER POLLUTION
PROBLEMS, A GREAT DEAL OF MONEY IS TO BE SPENT IN TREATING
ADELAIDE'S WATER SUPPLY, BUT IT MAY SURPRISE MANY PEOPLE
TO LEARN THAT WHILE THIS WILL PROVIDE SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENTS
IN MANY RESPECTS TO THE QUALITY OF ADELAIDE'S WATER IT WILL
HAVE NO EFFECT WHATEVER ON THE SALINITY OF THE WATER BEING
USED BY THE RESIDENTS OF THAT CITY, THIS MOST INTRACTABLE
PROBLEM MUST THEREFORE BE DEALT WITH EITHER BY DIVERSION OF
SALINE WATERS FROM THE MURRAY RIVER, OR BY CHANGES IN LAND
USE AND IRRIGATION PRACTICES, 
-6-
CONFLICTS OVER USE OF WATER IN THE REGION ARE
GOING TO INCREASE AS THE YEARS GO ON. AT THE PROJECTED
RATE OF INCREASE IN DEMAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S POST
DARTMOUTH ENTITLEMENT WILL BE FULLY TAKEN UP BY THE YEAR
2000, TO DATE NO ONE HAS MADE A COMPREHENSIVE, INTEGRATED
EXAMINATION OF THE IMPLICATIONS WHICH DIFFERENT LAND USE
PATTERNS HAVE FOR WATER RESOURCES IN THE VALLEY. TWO OF THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT USES WHICH SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN SUCH AN
EXAMINATION ARE, OF COURSE, IRRIGATION AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF URBAN GROWTH CENTRES SUCH AS ALBURY-WODONGA. SUCH AN
EXAMINATION MIGHT INDICATE THAT CHANGES IN EXISTING OR
PLANNED LAND USE ARE DESIRABLE IN ORDER TO PROTECT THE
QUALITY OF THE WATERS OF THE MURRAY SO THAT MAXIMUM BENEFICIAL
USE OF THE WATERS IN ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
TERMS CAN BE OBTAINED FOR BOTH THE REGION AND THE NATION
AS A WHOLE. THIS MATTER HAS NOT BEEN INVESTIGATED BY THE
WORKING PARTY. DR CASS PUT IT TO THE MINISTERIAL STEERING
COMMITTEt LAST YEAR BUT THE STATE MINISTERS REJECTED'THE
PROPOSAL. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS PROVIDING LARGE AMOUNTS
OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ALBURYWODONGA
AND MONARTO GROWTH CENTRES. ./ 7 
-7-
IT IS IMPERATIVE OF COURSE THAT THESE DEVELOPMENTS
DO NOT ADVERSELY AFFECT THE QUALITY OF THE WATERS OF THE
RIVER MURRAY. I AM THEREFORE PLEASED THAT THE CITIES
COMMISSION HAS BEEN SUPERVISING WHAT MUST BE ONE OF THE
MOST COMPREHENSIVE WATER QUALITY STUDIES EVER UNDERTAKEN IN
AUSTRALIA IN RELATION TO THE ALBURY-WODONGA GROWTH CENTRE.
THE REPORT OF THIS STUDY WILL BE AVAILABLE LATER THIS YEAR
AND I AM CONFIDENT THAT IT WILL ENSURE THAT TREATMENT
SYSTEMS WILL BE SO IMPLEMENTED THAT ALBURY-WODONGA WILL NOT
HAVE SIGNIFICANT ADVERSE EFFECTS ON WATER QUALITY IN THE
RIVER MURRAY, WHEN I MET WITH THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND VICTORIA ON 25 JANUARY 1973 IN ALBURY-WODONGA WE SAID
THAT SERVICES WILL BE PROVIDED TO THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE
STANDARD TO PROTECT THE INTERESTS OF OTHER USERS OF THE
RIVER MURRAY; THIS STATEMENT I STILL STAND BY,
THE IMPLICATIONS OF OTHER FORMS OF LAND USE HAVE
NOT BEEN EVALUATED IN COMPARABLE DEPTH AND I SAY AGAIN
THAT AN OVERALL EXAMINATION OF LAND USE IN THE MURRAY REGION
IS ESSENTIAL, OUR POSITION IN RELATION TO MANAGEMENT OF
THE RIVER MURRAY IS CLEAR: THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION
SHOULD HAVE THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONTROL OF WATER QUALITY
IN THE RIVER MURRAY, FURTHER I BELIEVE THAT THE RIVER
MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD HAVE CERTAIN RESPONSIBILITIES IN
RELATION TO ALL ASPECTS OF THE USE AND MANAGEMENT OF THE
WATERS OF THE RIVER MURRAY AND ITS RELATED LANDS, 
-8-
IN A COMPLEX SYSTEM SUCH AS THE RIVER MURRAY VALLEY WITH
ITS VARIOUS INTER-RELATIONSHIPS IT IS SURELY SELF-EVIDENT
THAT THERE NEEDS TO BE A BODY TO COORDINATE THE PLANNING
OF THESE VARIOUS ASPECTS. BECAUSE THE RIVER RUNS THROUGH
THREE STATES, AN INTERSTATE AGENCY SUCH AS AN EXPANDED
RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION IS CLEARLY REQUIRED. THIS CONCEPT
OF AN INTER-STATE BODY MANAGING WATER RESOURCES ON A RIVER
BASIN BASIS WOULD ACCORD WITH WORLDWIDE TRENDS IN THIS
DIRECTION EXEMPLIFIED BY THE DELAWARE AND SUSQUEHANNA RIVER
BASIN COMPACTS IN THE UNITED STATES, NEGOTIATED BY THE
STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS, AND THE RECENT ESTABLISHMENT
OF REGIONAL WATER AUTHORITIES IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD SEE SUCH A BODY
PRINCIPALLY PLAYING A CO-ORDINATING ROLE, MUCH OF I-TS
FUNCTION BEING OF AN ADVISORY OR DELIBERATIVE NATURE ONLY,
THE ORGANISATION MIGHT NEED SOME STRONG " LAST RESORT POWERS"
TO ENSURE ITS EFFECTIVENESS. HOWEVER, EXPERIENCE IN THE
UNITED STATES INDICATES THAT THESE ARE RARELY USED, IF AT ALL.
WE WOULD ALSO SEE SUCH A BODY HAVING A DEFINITE OBLIGATION
TO CONSULT WITH SUCH GROUPS AS THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT
LEAGUEI / 9 
-9-
I AM SURE THAT ONE OF THE REASONS FOR LACK OF
INTEREST IN THIS BROADER APPROACH TO THE USE AND MANAGEMENT
OF THE RIVER MURRAY IS DUE TO A FEAR THAT SOME OF THE STATE
POWERS MAY BE FORFEITED TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, WHILE
STATE GOVERNMENTS COULD LOSE SOME OF THEIR RIGHT TO
INDIVIDUAL ACTION, I EMPHASISE THAT THESE RIGHTS WOULD
BE VESTED IN AN INTER-STATE BODY ACTING IN THE BEST
INTERESTS OF ALL CONCERNED. AS PUT SO WELL BY DR CASS
RECENTLY, THIS IS A CASE WHERE STATES' RIGHTS ARE NONSENSE; IT
IS PEOPLES' RIGHTS WHICH ARE IMPORTANT AND THAT MEANS ALL
THE PEOPLE DEPENDENT ON THE RIVER AND ITS RELATED LANDS
IN ALL THREE STATES.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN DO LITTLE IN THE
WAY OF DIRECT ACTION IN THIS AREA; CONSENSUS IS THE ONLY
WAY OF ACHIEVING ANYTHING. I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE MADE
SUGGESTIONS TO STATE GOVERNMENTS ALONG THE LINES OF WHAT
IS DESIRED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE MURRAY VALLEY. WE SHALL
CONTINUE TO PUT PROPOSALS BUT WE CAN DO LITTLE MORE. I URGE
E FEDERAL MEMBERS HERE TONIGHT, WHATEVER THEIR POLITICAL
PERSUASIONS, TO TAKE THIS MATTER UP WITH THEIR STATE
COLLEAGU'. WITH A VIEW TO CONVEYING A GREATER SENSE OF
URGENCY AND PRIORI,.
I HAVE SAID THAT I AM CONCERNED WITH THE LACK
OF PROGRESS OF THE WORKING PARTY. IF IN MARCH 1975 WHICH
WILL BE TWO YEARS AFTER MY MEETING WITH THE THREE PREMIERS
PROGRESS HAS BEEN UNSATISFACTORY, THEN I SHALL CALL FOR
A FURTHER MEETING WITH STATE PREMIERS IN ORDER TO OBTAIN 
AGREEMENT ON AN ACCELERATED PROGRAM FOR COMPLETION OF
THE WORKING PARTY'S INVESTIGATIONS. THIS IS ONE EXAMPLE
OF DIRECT ACTION THAT I CAN TAKE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD ALSO GIVE
SERIOUS CONSIDERATION TO REQUESTS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
FROM STATE GOVERNMBENTS FOR MEASURES TO ACHIEVE AND MAINTAIN
SATISFACTORY WATER QUALITY, BE THEY FOR ENGINEERING WORKS
OR FOR THE RESTRUCTURING OF LAND USE IN THE REGION.
SUCH REQUESTS WOULD BE CONSIDERED IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT POLICY TOWARDS WAT ER RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT. IN THIS CONTEXT I WOULD LIKE TO REPEAT A
SPECIFIC. OFFER MADE TO STATE MINISTERS By DR CASS LAST
YEAR WHICH WAS NOT TAKEN UP THE AUSTRALIAN GOV'ERNMENT
WILL PROV'IDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TOWARDS ANY STUDIES
IN THE REGION WHICH IT CONSIDERS WOULD CONTRIBUTE
SIGNIFICANTLY TO THE IMPROVED USE AND MANAGEMENT OF THE
RIVER MURRAY WATERS AND RELATED LANDS. BECAUSE STATE
GOVERNMENTS APPEAR TO BE CONCENTRATING ON ENGINEERING
STUDIES, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD PREFER TO FUND
STUDIES BIASED TOWARDS THE SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SC I ENCES. I / 11 
-11-
SIXTY YEARS HAVE PASSED SINCE THE SIGNING
OF THE ORIGINAL RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT AND I
BELIEVE WE ARE AGAIN ABOUT TO ENTER A PERIOD OF CONFLICT
OVER THE USES OF THE RIVER MURRAY WATERSI TOGETHER
WITH INCREASING PRESSURES ON THE ENVIRONMENT. I DO NOT
BELIEVE THE PRESENT RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION OR EXISTING
STATE INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS WILL BE ABLE
TO COPE WITH THESE PROBLEMS AND I BELIEVE NEW ARRANGEMENTS
ARE NECESSARY, I URGE ALL PARTIES CONCERNED TO PROCEED AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE TO DEVELOP AN APPROACH TO THE
MANAGEMENT OF THE RIVER MURRAY WHICH WILL ENSURE THAT
THE WATERS ARE USED TO PROVIDE MAXIMUM REGIONAL AND
NATIONAL BENEFITS IN SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL
TERMS. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE, CANBERRA,
TUESDAY, 22 OCTOBER 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Are there any questions?
QUESTION: Do you expect to get support of any or all of the
States for the Federal Government's initiatives in building
hospitals? What indications do you have of their reaction
to the proposal? If you don't get support from any or all
the States, will the Federal Government still go ahead on its
own initiatives?
PRIME MINISTER: There is more than one matter upon which I
have writen this financial year to the States concerning
hospitals. I was asked at Question Time today about the specific
proposal that my Government had made to the Governments of New
South Wales, Victoria and Queensland. I had suggested to the
Premiers that since the money which had been made available
last financial year to the Governments for specific projects
planning or construction hadn't been spent to any degree at
all, they should let us take over the sites, complete the plans
and construct and operate the hospitals. The particular
hospitals concerned were Westmead and Campbelltown near Sydney,
Sunshine in Melbourne and Mount Gravatt in Brisbane. In each
case the Premier has replied. In each case I think I could say
that they didn't accept the proposition. I expect that the
Government will be going ahead. Ever since the 1946 referendum
the Australian Government has had the opportunity we would
therefore say the responsibility to provide medical services.
Clearly hospitals are a crucial item in the provision of medical
services. There are not adequate hospital facilities within
ten miles of Westmead or Campbelltown or Sunshine or Mount Gravatt.
The population in each of those areas is growing very rapidly.
It is quite clear that hospital facilities will be needed in
each of those areas much earlier than the States would ever be
able to provide them. In some cases the States haven't got
plans. In the case of Westmead, where New South Wales has had
plans for six or eight years and where, in the last financial
year, we made $ 4k million available, the State was only able to
spend, I think, about 10 per cent of that amount. It is clear
that we shouldn't wait any longer before seeing the people in those
rapidly growing areas are able to have a full range of medical
services at a modern hospital.
QUESTION: Has the Royal Commission into Australia's security
services begun its hearings yet?
PRIME MINISTER: There won't, I expect, be open hearings.
QUESTION: Has it begun its work yet?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Mr. Justice Hope, the Royal Commissioner,
has alreay consulted many people.
QUESTION: Will you ensure that as many public hearings as
possible will be held and where, for security reasons, they won't
be held in camera will you arrange for a list of witnesses to be 
-2-
made available so that the public are kept informed of the progress
of the Royal Commission?
PRIME MINISTER: I will do nothing of the sort. The Royal
Commissioner is free to conduct his Commission as he sees fit.
I have no doubt that he will conduct it in a completely proper
way none whatever.
QUESTION: If unemployment is increasing at the rate of 5,000
per week, what hope can you offer to the huge number of young
Australians leaving school this year?
PRIME MINISTER: There is a debate going on in the House at
the moment on this, among other aspects, and I don't propose
to duplicate it.
QUESTION: Mr. Cameron in the House last week in reply to a
question by Mr. Cairns said " No" to the question: " Will he
guarantee full employment to the Australian workforce, including
school leavers, by March/ April next year?" Does this mean, sir,
that; jou are presiding over the demise....?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, before you go any further, Mr. Power,
you.. know that I don't comment on things like this. If you
want an elucidation of this matter, you ask Mr. Cameron.
Mr. Cameron is never reluctant to go on radio.
QUESTION: You said yesterday that you and other ministers would
be talking to trade union leaders to explain the Government's
decision on wage restraint. What steps are you contemplating
specifically to secure return of business confidence? Have
you given any more thought to the question of investment allowances?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to specify any particular measures.
As I said last week, this is one of the measures which I am quite
happy to consider and my colleagues too. We have shown ourselves
completely flexible in considering proposals to have business
confidence. Business confidence is quite necessary, obviously,
if there is to be adequate employment or investment for the future.
QUESTION: If the Opposition in the Senate amends your Budget
legislation to restore the $ 400 education allowance, would there
be an election in December?
PRIME MINISTER: I won't speculate on that matter.
QUESTION: Are you planning or have you planned a second bid for
prices and incomes powers by a referendum?
PRIME MINISTER: I have taken no steps.
QUESTION: Do you have it under consideration?
PRIME MINISTER: I have taken no steps.
QUESTION: Will you be able to assure Mr. Tanaka, do you think,
when he arrives here later this month that the Australian Government
won't be stood over by trade unions to impose import quotas on
Japanese exports because of unemployment in Australia? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: You are, I think, referring to something that one
union did in respect to Japanese cars last week. The trade union
movement itself properly handled this matter.
QUESTION: Did Dr. Cairns consult with you before writing to the
Associatd Chambers of Manufactures in support of the campaign
to have the general review of tariffs deferred and its criteria
changed? Do you support that campaign?
PRIME MINISTER: I answered a question on this subject in the
House this morning. Dr. Cairns was acting as Prime Minister
when he wrote the letter which was published in today's
Financial Review. I stated today, at Question Time, that if
ACMA, to whose representation Dr. Cairns was responding, chose
to give its views to the Jackson Committee then it would be very
welcome to do so. I am sure the Jackson Committee would expect
to get the views of ACMA on tariff matters. The Jackson Committee
has been asked to look into tariff matters in the course of its
review of manufacturing industry generally.
QUESTION: Do you support that campaign though?
PRIME MINISTER: I % am inviting ACMA to put its point of view to
the committee which the Government has set up to prepare a Green
Paper on all aspects of manufacturing industry, including tariffs.
ACMA is certainly entitled to put its point of view, but obviously
its views should be put, among other places, to the Jackson
Committee. QUESTION: Further to Mr. Jost's question on the prices and
incomes, do you intend to discuss this matter with Mr. Hawke
at the weekend?
PRIME MINISTER: I wasn't proposing to.
QUESTION: When will you take further steps regarding prices and
incomes? PRIME MINISTER: I have got no further answer.
QUESTION: Do you hope to get the Japanese beef market re-opened
during the talks with Mr. Tanaka next week?
PRIME MINISTER: obviously all our exports to Japan will be
discussed and-among them beef.
QUESTION: Can you explain the logic of the Government's moves to
insist that the oil companies in Australia charge world parity
prices for aviation turbine fuel to international airlines?
Why should the Government be so determined to bood-the. profits
of oil companies at the expense of the airlines, particularly
Qantas and their passengers?
PRIME MINISTER: You ought to ask Mr. Connor about that.
QUESTION: Have you had drawn to your attention remarks made by
Mr. Tony O'Reilly in Albury at an advertising conference last
Sunday? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I have the cutting here.
QUESTION: Got any comments on it at all, sir? In particular
he gave a drubbing to the Prices Justification Tribunal?
PRIME MINISTER: But he gave a terrific boost to the Trade
Practices Act.
Comment: That's right, he did. I think he thinks they ought
to be centralised.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to comment on the Prices Justification
Trubunal. Its President is a distinguished judge He has made
some statements himself. He has given prepared addresses himself
on the operations of the tribunal. As you know the tribunal has
been in operation for less than a year and a v~ ery great deal
of pioneering work has had to be done. A great number of companies
don't like what has been done but the Government will introduce
amend;..,-ents to the Act we have done so already in the last month
where those amendments are seen to be necessary or desirable.
The Tribunal will be consulted on any amendments, as it was
concerning the amendments which were made last month. But I don't
want to comment on the operations of the Tribunal; it is properly
constituted and it has been a very effective body indeed.
But I am very happy to quote what Mr. Tony O'Reilly said about
the Trade Practices Act. He approved of the Act. In fact
it was modelled on two United States Acts, the Sherman and the
Clayton Acts, and if it was applied with the same vigour and
capability, it would sharpen competition, obviate monopoly,
increase above-the-line spending, decrease below-the-line spending
and frustrate discriminatory business dealings. Mr. Tony O'Reilly,
you might have pointed out, is the head of the H. J. Heinz company,
so while I don't want to comment about what he said on the Prices
Justification Tribunal T am delighted to quote what he said about
the Trade Practices Act. If it had been in a year longer, as
it should have been if the Senate had passed it when it first
got it, then obviously we would be in a better position than we
are today.
QUESTION: I believe Mr. O'Reilly also had something to say about
the way depreciation of capital assets was counted by the Income
Tax Commissioner in regard to company profits. Did you also take
note of that or not?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I didn't get that far. I don't know whether
he said it but I don't remember seeing it.
QUESTION: Apparently, it was reported?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I am going naturally on a paper of record,
teSydney Morning Herald. It doesn't report that.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, further down at the bottom of that
article he talks about a proliferation of nuclear devices by
hungry countries. Does that strike a chord with you?
PRIME MINISTER: I have said a few things, naturally, about the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. I did so at the United Nations
three weeks ago. 
QUESTION: Do you see any possibility of speeding up the processes
to introduce wage indexation?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter will be before the Conciliation
and Arbitration Commission. I would expect a decision would be
given before Christmas. We will be supporting the application
as you know.
QUESTION: This morning Mr. Hawke called for a series of supplementary
action to the Budget including a cut in indirect taxes, a cut in
imports, grants to the States to enable them to keep down fuel
and transport costs and both tax indexation and wage indexation.
How many of these things are you sympathetic towards?
PRIME MINISTER: These seem to be matters which were covered
by the resolutions of the A. C. T. U. meeting of unions about three
weeks ago. Several of my colleagues and I have discussed these
with Mr. Hawke, Mr. Souter and Dr. Jolly. Discussions will take
place on other occasions over the next few weeks.
QUESTION: Is the Government considering introducing a supplementary
Budget between now and Christmas?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Has any of the working parties set up after the last
Premiers Conference held any meetings? Have you 7Z-ad any...?
PRIME MINISTER: Most have made reports.
QUESTION: They have made a report?
PRIME MINISTER,: Most of them have made reports.
QUESTION: Are you going to make the reports public?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll consult with the Premiers about this.
QUESTION: Are there any worthwhile ideas flowing from these meetings?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there are. The State and federal officials
concerned have made a very good examination of the matters which were
referred to them by the Premiers and me.
QUESTION: Are you satisfied with the quality of advice and
submissions flowing to your Government from the Federal Treasury,
and are you finding them valuable in the fight against inflation
and unemployment?
PRIME MINISTER: The Federal Treasury is one source of advice.
My colleagues -and I get advice from several sources and all of
that advice is valuable and is given proper consideration.
Treasury advice is valuable on many matters.
QUESTION: In relation to the CPIs yesterday, both yourself and
Mr. Crean used the word " disturbing". Does the Government therefore
intend to take any more measures...?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter is being debated in the House at
the moment. I don't propose to duplicate the debate. 
-6-
QUESTION: Are you leaving it all to the trade unions to show
wage restraint?.
PRIME MINISTER: I expect them to show wage restraint but it
is not a matter for the trade unions only, quite clearly. I put
the point about wage restraint yesterday to ACSPA, and also to
the Miscellaneous workers' Union one of the very largest unions
in Australia and one of the biggest three on Monday of last
week. But it is not the unions only. I believe that the
discussions several of my colleagues have had with Mr. Hawke,
Mr. Souter and Dr. Jolly will help to bring about wage restraintwhat
we are doing, for instance, to urge and support the case
for wage indexation is one instance of that. As a result of
discussions which have taken place between the Government and
the various trade union organisations, ACTU and ACSPA, I believe
there will be fewer and smaller claims for wage and salary
increases. Most employees will find that their needs are
satisfactorily and more promptly met by wage indexation.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, is there any possibility of changes
to your ministry in the near future in the light of the
economic problems? And, in particular, have you given any
consideration to using Mr. Crean' s considerable talents in
another portfolio?
PRIME MINISTER: I would want to discuss this with the Governor-
General before I mentioned it in this wider circumstance.
QUESTION: When does the Government intend to announce its
plans for the development of the Northwest Shelf gas deposits
in sufficient detail so that work which has been held up now
for about nine months can proceed?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government hasn't held up any of these matters.
It is the Petroleum and Minerals Authority legislation which has
been held up again and again, of course; just as, for instance,
were some of the regulations under the Atomic Energy Act.
The Australian Government has been trying to get the necessary
legislative framework to implement its resources policy, its
resources program. We haven't held it up.
QUESTION: If this legislation takes another year or two to get
clear of the High Court will there be no development until then?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope that it won't take another year to get
clear of the High Court but we didn't take the matter to the
High Court, as you realise. This bill was three times rejected
in the Senate. It was passed at a joint sitting. It is now
under challenge in the High Court.
QUESTION: When would you be seeing the Governor-General about
any possible changes in the ministry?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course that was a purely facetious answer,
as you know. I know 2SM is a fun station but I don't wish people
to think that everything Laurie Oakes asks or every answer I give
him is dead serious.
QUESTION: Hasn't one of the major pieces of the legislation
involving the development of the north west shelf gas already
passed, namely the Pipelines Act and isn't it a matter... 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: That's under some challenge too, isn't it?
QUESTION: No, not that 7, know of. Secondly, doesn't the
dee-omn hinge on two things that are not connected with the
PIR, whether or not there should be ex ports and what price
the Pipelines Authority should pay for the gas and when will
arrwers be given to these questions which so far seem to have been
d Iayed until 1981, instead of 1977, the '.') ringing ashore of gas?
PRI1ME MINIS TER: There are challenges in the High Court to all the
Australian Parliament's legislation concerning offshore matters
including, for instance, the Act which we got through the
Parliament based on the bill which was introduced on Mr. McMahon's
behalf when he was Foreign Minister in April 1970. There has
been a long delay in getting the matter through the Parliament
and now that it is through the Parliament there is a challenge before
th. n High Court. Natural gas cannot come ashore for a few years
yet. I think it is about four years.
Comment: Six years.
PR'. cME MINISTER: I didn't think it was that long, but nevertheless
ot-s6bviously not an imminent matter. There is plenty of time
to miake proper arrangements concerning the Australian control of
this resource and a proper international price for it. The
Government has successfully resisted the attempt to sell off
Australian resources too cheap. You know that the world price
for many of our potential exports, such as uranium, is now very
much higher than the price which we contracted to sell it, or
at least the price that our predecessors approved in the
contracts to sell it overseas. In some of the matters where
contracts came up for renewal we have been able to get a very
much better price. For instance, the price of coal exports is
now three times what it was when we came into office. So, by
the time natural gas comes ashore, four or six years from now,
we would certainly get very much better prices than people would
have been disposed to settle for a year or two years ago.
QUESTION: You renewed your Government's commitment to full
employment yesterday. In this context would you be prepared
to impose quotas on Japanese car imports?
PRIME MINISTER: The whole of the Government's attitude towards
the car industry is under examination. The IACs report was
released as soon as it was got and there have been very full
consultations bigger consultations than have ever been held
bc. fo': e between Government departments and the various companies
cr~ rncerned. I wouldn't give an off-the-cuff reply to your question
at this stage.
QUFSTION: What stage have the Government's discussions reached
on the uranium policy? Has the uranium policy been finalised and
will it be ready in time for the visit of the Japanese Prime
Mii'ister, Mr. Tanaka, later this month?
PRIME MINISTER: This matter has been discussed between the
WX31Histers who went to Tokyo twelve months ago and I would expect
that this matter, like the other exports which I was asked about
p;: eveiously, will be discussed when Mr. Tanaka is here. I expect
thiat Mr. Tanaka is very interested in this matter. 
-8-
We want to ensure that there are proper arrangements made for
the supply by Australia to Japan of this resource, which we
have in abundance and of which Japan stands very much in need, k
and I would hope that we would also discuss the possibility
of enrichment of uranium or maybe together acquiring some
technology to enrich uranium.
QUESTION: Which one of the mining companies would be the
first to begin exploiting the deposits?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, let's tell them first.
QUESTION: Is not the production of uranium in Australia contrary
to your policy on world pollution?
PRIME MINISTER: There are some processes concerning uranium which
would produce pollution, that's true. I don't believe that our
Government is carrying out any of those processes or has any of
those processes in mind. We are very much aware, of course, of
that aspect. I might add, because I was asked earlier a question
here and I was asked also a-. question about it in the House this
morning, about some of the uses of uranium under various treaties
and so on. Now, we have made an arrangement with the International
Atomic Energy Authority that we will not sell uranium to any country
except under safeguards approved by the International Atomic
Energy Authority. Accordingly, even if a country hasn't
ratified the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty it can still receive
uranium from Australia under the safeguard arrangements we have
made with the IAEA, so all these aspects of proliferation of
weapons,. peaceful uses, pollution are very much in mind in the
whole of our uranium policy. There are some domestic matters
such as pollution, Aboriginal rights and overseas ownership.
QUESTION: Disposal of radio-active material?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, all those matters are obviously ones which
we have to bear in mind, and when we are discussing which company
will get the rights to extract or process or export uranium, we
will obviously bear in mind overseas ownership and Aboriginal
rights and environment.
QUESTION: Mr. Whitlam, can we clear up a misunderstanding.
In your reply to my questions....
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think there was any misunderstanding
by anybody else or by you. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 348
22 October 1974
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR COUNTRY CITIES AND TOWS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced details
of a scheme to give special assistance to country cities and towns
affected by certain Government decisions.
Mr. Whitlam said the Government had se-aside fundis
for this purpose from the $ 10 million allocated for structural
assistance. He said: " The Government has taken many decisions in
the national interest acz part of its fight against inflation and
its campaign for greater Productivity.
" These policies must stand. The fight against inflation
must go on. " Nevertheless, there are country cities and towns which
find it difficult to cope immediately with the effects of some
of these policies. " Our scheme is designed to help them over their
difficulties and prevent unnecessary unemployment.
" There will be continued close co-operation between
the Australian and State Governments so that this policy is
co-ordinated with decentralisation policy generally."
Mr. Whitlam said that those initially eligible for
assistance would be companies affected by:
1. the 25% tariff cut;
2. the consumer electronic components and equipment tariff decision;
3. the domestic appliances tariff decision;
4. the lifting of tariff quotas on woven shirts and knitted
outergarments; the decision of 18 December 1973 to revise the subsidy and
quota arrangements for the shipbuilding industry. 
-2-
The C'overnment would consider extendinq its assistance,
wherever necessary, to companies affected by other decisions
involving structural change.
The scheme will apply in all non-metropolitan centres
except those immediately adjacent to capital cities.
The Government will give priority to assistance to
relevant companies in Launceston and Wangaratta.
Mr. Whitlam said the scheme was being introduced to
supplement existing adjustment assistance measures.
The measures now approved include:
Subsidies to companies. Where necessary pre-payment of
subsidy may be arranged to grant immediate liquidity. A
profit limitation will be applied to such payments.
Capital grants to companies or local bodies for the establishment
of viable alternative production and employment.
Loan guarantees ( after necessary legislation has been passed)
Finance to companies or local bodies for feasibility studies
to improve methods of production or to examine alternative
forms of production.
Subsidies to help people travel from adversely affected towns
to jobs in nearby towns.
The scheme will be administered by the Department of
Manufacturing Industry in consultation with other interested
Departments pending the establishment of the Structural Adjustment
Board. The Interim Committee on Structural Adjustment will review
the program and provide advice on both policy and practical aspect3.
All enquiries should be directed to the Department of Manufacturing
Industry. A reference on the principles and operations of the
scheme will be sent to the IAC after the scheme has been in operatlon
for two years.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



jj A USFHALIA J,
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 347
22 October 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION INQUIRY INTO THE
PERFORMING ARTS IN AUSTRALIA
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
he had referred the question of assistance for the Performing
Arts in Australia to the Industries Assistance Commission for
inquiry and report. He said that he had been informed that
the Commercial Theatre in Australia is experiencing difficulties
at present and he considered it desirable that the question
of assistance for the Performing Arts as a whole should be
subject to a full and public inquiry by the Commission.
Mr Whitlam recalled that the Tariff Board ( the
predecessor of the Commission) inquired into the production of
Motion Picture Films and Television Programs in Australia and
its report had been well received by those involved in the
industry. He felt that this new inquiry should similarly be
welcomed by those involved in the Performing Arts.
Mr Whitlam said that for the purpose of the inquiry
Performing Arts including live performances of ballet, dance,
opera, music, drama, music hall, vaudeville, puppetry and
the like. The Commission was however free to take evidence on,
and if considered necessary, to make recommendations on any
other matter it considered relevant to the inquiry.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 


PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 35023 October 1974UNIVERSAL CHILDREN'S DAYMore than 110 nations join in observing UniveralChildren's Day on 23 October. It is 20 years since the daywas first proclaimed by the United Nations.The special theme of this year's day is " lA Future forEvery Child". UNICEF and the International Union for ChildWelfare, the International Co-sponsors of the day, have chosenthis theme to emphasise the individual importance of everychild, even in a crowded world.In the next 30 years, according to the best estimates,the world's population of more than 3,500,000,000 will almostdouble. Already the majority of the world's children aredeprived of many basic needs. Some 30% under the age of fiveare seriously malnourished.When problems of sheer global survival confront thehuman race it is important to redouble our efforts on behalfof the world's children. There are more children sufferingfrom extreme privation today than there were 20 years ago.About 70% of UNICEF money goes to equip health centres,schools, day-care arid community centres, directly benefitingmillions of infants and children. Nearly 30% goes to trainingnurses, midwives, health and nutrition field workers, primaryschool teachers and supervisors, child welfare and day-careworkers. In observing Universal Children's Day we should keepin mind the well-being of all children, the enhancement of thequality of their lives and the promotion of equality ofopportunity for both children and their parents. We inAustralia may hope to provide a model for the rest of the worldin the care of our own Children, but we must bear in mind ourresponsibility to all children, wherever they may live. " AFuture for Every Child" means no less than a future for ourplanet. CANBERRA. A. C. T.



USiIHA I A"'
PRIME MINISTER ~ PRESS STATEMENT NO. 351
23 October 1974
STATISTICAL SURVEY OF IMPORTS
The Prime Minister announced today that the Australian
Bureau of Statistics would begin immediately to introduce a
monthly survey of importers which would allow the prediction of
large, short-term fluctuations of imports in total and for
selected sensitive commodities.
" Information of future imports", he said, " particularly
on significant changes in their trend, is needed by the Australian
Government so that it can assess the potential effects of such
changes on our balance of payments and on the level of employment
in Australian manufacturing industries"
Mr. Whitlam said that the Government was concerned to
broaden the information base upon which its decisions were taken
but in doing so was concerned to avoid unnecessary cost and
burdening of Australian private enterprise. The system now being
introduced met these criteria.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G, WHITLAM, QC,, M. P.,
TO THE N, SW. COUNTRY PRESS ASSOCIATION, QUEANBEYAN,.-
THURSDAY 24 OCTOBER 1974.
THE REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON AUSTRALIA'S
RURAL POLICY THE GREEN. PAPER DREW ATTENTION TO A
VERY REAL DIFFICULTY FACED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND BY INFERENCE POINTED TO THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
COUNTRY PRESS. THE REPORT SAID: " EFFECTIVE
COMMUNICATION IS AN ESSENTIAL COMPONENT OF POLICY MAKING
IN ANY SECTOR OF THE COMMUNITYX THERE ARE PARTICULAR
FACTORS IN THE CASE OF THE FARM SECTOR THAT OUGHT TO BE
GIVEN CAREFUL CONSIDERATION SINCE THEY SUGGEST RATHER
SPECIAL NEEDSm FARMERS AND OTHERS IN RURAL AREAS ARE
RELATIVELY ISOLATED IN TERMS OF THE NORMAL COMMUNICATION
CHANNELS, THE MAIN DIFFICULTIES IN GETTING A BALANCED
VIEW OF CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES ARE COMPOUNDED BY THEIR
DEPENDENCE ON A SMALLER NUMBER OF COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS.
AT TIMES PRESENTING ISSUES FROM A PARTICULAR VIEWPOINTx",
ONE OF THE AIMS OF THE GREENPAPER ITSELF WAS
TO IMPROVE COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE RURAL COMMUNITYx WHEN I WROTE ON 14 DECEMBER
LAST YEAR TO DR STUART HARRIS AND ESTABLISHED THE WORKING
GROUP I SAID: " I HOPE THE REPORT WILL PROVIDE A BASIS
FOR WIDESPREAD DIALOGUE IN THE PARLIAMENT, IN RURAL
ORGANISATIONS AND IN THE COMMUNITY GENERALLYx". 
IN PROMOTING THAT DIALOGUE, COUNTRY NEWSPAPERS HAVE AN
INDISPENSABLE ROLEX I EMPHASISE THAT WHAT WE SEEK IS
A DIALOGUEe: THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, SENATOR
WRIEDT, HAS BEEN ASSIDUOUS IN PROMOTING ITx SOME OF
THE DIFFICULTIES IN MAINTAINING A DIALOGUE WILL BE
APPARENT TO THOSE OF YOU WHO SAW SENATOR WRIEDT ON
THIS WEEK'S " MONDAY CONFERENCE" FROM-TooWOOMBAx IT
IS VERY DIFFICULT INDEED TO HAVE A DIALOGUE WITH THOSE
WHO ARE JUST DETERMINED NOT TO LISTENx BE THAT AS IT
MAY, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO
CONTINUE ITS EFFORTS TO ACHIEVE MEANINGFUL, CONSTRUCTIVE
DIALOGUE WITH THE RURAL COMMUNITY, NOT ONLY THOSE WHO
LIVE ON. FARMS BUT THE FAR LARGER SECTION OF COUNTRYDWELLERS
WHO LIVE IN COUNTRY TOWNSK
THE QUOTATION I GAVE FROM THE GREEN PAPER
REFERS TO THE PHYSICAL DIFFICULTIES OF COMMUNICATIONSi
IT MUST BE ACKNOWLEDGED, HOWEVER, THAT THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT FACES AN ADDITIONAL DIFFICULTY NOT ENCOUNTERED
BY ITS PREDECESSORK' IT STEMS FROM A BELIEF A FALSE
BELIEF THAT THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY AND THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT IS EXCLUSIVELY URBAN-BASED
THAT WE ARE ANTI-RURAL, THAT WE ARE DOWN ON THE FARMERx
THE MYTH IS SEDULOUSLY FOSTERED BY OUR OPPONENTSr 3/ 
-3-
IT IS REINFORCED TO SOME EXTENT BY THE UNDOUBTED FACT
THAT THE MARGIN OF OUR VICTORY IN 1972 CAME PRINCIPALLY
FROM SEATS WE WERE ABLE TO WIN IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNEK
THE FACT THAT OUR SUPPORT CONTINUED FIRM IN THOSE AREAS
ENABLED US TO RETAIN OFFICE IN MAYx NATURALLY I AM
GRATEFUL FOR THAT SUPPORT; BUT IT IS IRRATIONAL TO
DRAW THE CONCLUSION THAT GRATITUDE FOR ONE SECTION IMPLIES
HOSITILITY OR INDIFFERENCE TOWARDS ANY OTHER SECTION OF
THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITYs THE FACT IS THAT THE LABOR
PARTY IS NEITHER AN URBAN NOR A RURAL PARTYx IT IS A
NATIONAL PARTY GUIDED BY NATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS' THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
WELFARE OF THE ENTIRE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY, FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS WHEREVER THEY LIVEK THE BROAD RANGE OF
OUR POLICIES ARE DIRECTED TO THE WELL-BEING'OF ALL
AUSTRALIANSX THE IDEA THAT OUR POLICIES ARE DIRECTED
AGAINST THE RURAL COMMUNITY WILL NOT BEAR EXAMINATIONX
IT IS TRUE THAT ON TAKING OFFICE WE CONSIDERED THAT AS
A MATTER OF URGENT PRIORITY IT WAS NECESSARY TO
REASSESS POLICY OBJECTIVES PURSUED BY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTSk
IT WAS NECESSARY TO RE-EXAMINE THE APPROPRIATENESS OF
BOTH THE LEVELS AND FORMS OF ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO
ALL SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY INCLUDING THE RURAL SECTORx 4/ 
AFTER 23 YEARS WE INHERITED THE CONSEQUENCES OF A
LARGE NUMBER OF DECISIONS AND NON-DECISIONS WHICH
WERE NOT ONLY INCONSISTENT WITH OUR DECLARED GOALS
FOR AUSTRALIA, THE GOALS WHICH HAD BEEN ENDORSED BY
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, BUT WHICH INDEED WERE OFTEN
INCONSISTENT WITH THEMSELVES AND COUNTER-PRODUCTIVEx
WE WANTED TO SEE THAT THE NATION'S ECONOMIC RESOURCES
WERE ALLOCATED MORE EFFICIENTLY AND MORE FAIRLYx
THAT IS STILL OUR OBJECTIVEr
IN THE CASE OF THE RURAL SECTOR I ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT WE HAD TO TAKE SOME UNPOPULAR DECISIONS IN THE
INTERESTS OF EFFICIENCY AND IN THE INTERESTS OF
FAIRNESSK IT IS ALWAYS UNPOPULAR TO APPEAR TO BE
TAKING SOMETHING AWAY, HOWEVER ILLUSORY THE PRESUMED
BENEFIT MAY IN FACT BEx IF WE WERE SIMPLY WITHDRAWING
BENEFITS WITHOUT ANY EFFORT TO SUBSTITUTE SOMETHING
MORE SUBSTANTIAL THEN WE WOULD DESERVE ALL CRITICISM,
BUT WE HAVE NOT ACTED IN THAT WAYx 
LET ME ILLUSTRATE A GENERAL PRINCIPLE BY
REFERRING TO ONE PARTICULAR GRIPEv THE REDUCTION
IN THE EDUCATION ALLOWANCE IS DEPICTED IN SOME
QUARTERS AS A MEAN TRICK AGAINST THE COUNTRY STUDENTS
OR THEIR PARENTSi THE FACT IS THAT WE ARE THE FIRST
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FULLY TO RECOGNISE THE
DISADVANTAGES SUFFERED BY COUNTRY-STUDENTS AND TO ACT
SERIOUSLY TO REDUCE THEMx WE WERE PARTICULARLY
DISTURBED BY THE FINDINGS OF THE KARMEL COMMITTEE ON
EDUCATION WHICH STATED: " THE LENGTH OF SCHOOLING
AND PARTICIPATION IN HIGHER EDUCATION AMONG COUNTRY
STUDENTS IN AUSTRALIA ARE CONSPICUOUSLY LOWER THAN
AMONG CITY ONES THERE ARE INDICATIONS THAT THE
PROBLEM GOES BEYOND RETENTION RATES HIGH TEACHER
TURNOVER, BOARDING DIFFICULTIES AND THE ADDED EXPENSE
OF TERTIARY EDUCATION IN DISTANT CENTRES ARE CLEARLY
SIGNIFICANT IN LOWERING RETENTION; ATTITUDES TO
EDUCATION, LIMITED CULTURAL FACILITIES IN THE COMMUNITY,
LACK OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THOSE WHO
COMPLETE SECONDARY EDUCATION AND THE POSSIBILITY THAT
THE CURRICULUM OFFERED IN THE SCHOOLS IS SEEN AS
HAVING LESS RELEVANCE TO COUNTRY CHILDREN HAVE BEEN I'
SUGGESTED AS EXPLANATIONS FOR LOWER ATTAINMENT. x
So FOR THE FIRST TIME WE ARE MAKING SPECIAL ASSISTANCE
TO ISOLATED CHILDREN ABOUT 5,000 IN NSW, ARE
CURRENTLY RECEIVING GRANTS TOTALLING $ 2 MILLION) .6/ 
THE KANGAN COMMITTEE ON TECHNICAL AND
FURTHER EDUCATION NOTED IN ITS REPORT THAT COUNTRY
PEOPLE HAD PROBLEMS OF ACCESS TO TECHNICAL
EDUCATION AND TO RETRAINING FOR A NEW CAREER AND
CONSEQUENTLY WERE OFTEN OBLIGED TO MOVE TO THE
CITIESX THE NEW STAGE OF OUR EDUCATION POLICY
EMBODIED IN THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE KARMEL AND
KANGAN COMMITTEES ADOPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT WILL
BRING NEW OPPORTUNITIES TO COUNTRY BOYS AND GIRLS;
AND WE WANT THEM TO BE ABLE TO ENJOY THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE PLACES WHERE THEIR PARENTS
LIVEx EDUCATION IS JUST ONE EXAMPLE OF THE
GREAT MOTIVE BEHIND OUR PROGRAM THE DRIVE FOR
NEW OPPORTUNITIES AND MORE EQUAL ACCESS TO THESE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANSx THIS IS THE
PRINCIPLE BEHIND OUR APPROACH TO REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENTW IT IS JUST NONSENSE TO PUT THIS IN
TERMS OF CITY VERSUS COUNTRYx WE DO NOT THINK IN
THAT WAY AND THE MACHINERY WE ARE CREATING TO
PROMOTE EQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS IS NOT DESIGNED
TO WORK THAT WAY .7/ 
-7-
FOR YEARS AND YEARS I HAVE PUT TO THE PEOPLE OF
AUSTRALIA THE PROPOSITION THAT INCREASINGLY A FAMILY' S
STANDARD OF LIVING DEPENDS NOT SO MUCH ON ITS INCOME
AS WHERE IT LIVES$ WE HAVE SET OUT DELIBERATELY TO
REDUCE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS AND THEREBY PROMOTE
THE REAL STANDARD OF LIVING OF ALL AUSTRALIANS WHEREVER
THEY CHiOOSE TO LIVE OR ARE OBLIGED TO LIVEK WHEN THE
AUSTRALIAN GRANTS COMMISSION WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1933
IT WAS EMPOWERED TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ON THE FINANCE. NEEDED TO REDUCE
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN STATES^ WE LEGISLATED TO DO
FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREAS FOR REGIONS WITHIN THE
STATES WHAT THE GRANTS COMMISSION USED TO BE'ABLE
TO DO ONLY AS BETWEEN THE STATESX WE HAVE ACCEPTED
A GREAT AND GROWING COMMITMENT ON BEHALF OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENTx WE WANT TO SEE THAT THE STANDARDS OF
ALL REGIONS THE COUNTRY TOWNS JUST AS MUCH AS
THE NEW SUBURBS ARE BROUGHT UP TO THE BEST
STANDARDS ACCEPTABLE MODERN STANDARDS WORTHY OF
THE REAL WEALTH OF OUR NATIONA ,8/ 
AND AS TO THAT WEALTH, LET THERE BE NO
DOUBT ABOUT OUR RECOGNITION OF THE CONTRIBUTION
TO IT WHICH IS MADE BY THE AUSTRALIAN RURAL COMMUNITYi
OUR BASIC OBJECTIVE FOR RURAL INDUSTRY IS TO PROVIDE
A FIRM AND LASTING BASIS FOR INCREASED TRADE IN
THOSE RURAL COMMODITIES'WHICH WILL PROVIDE ASSURED
LONG TERM MARKETS AT FAIR PRICESx WE HAVE BEEN
VIGOROUS AND SUCCESSFUL IN SECURING TRADE AGREEMENTS,
MANY OF THEM WITH COUNTRIES WITH WHICH HITHERTO WE
HAD HARDLY ANY COMMERCIAL CONTACTX
ABOVE ALL WE HAVE SHOWN THE GREATEST
DEGREE OF FLEXIBILITY IN OUR EFFORTS TO HELP THE
RURAL COMMUNITY TO ADJUST TO OUR DRIVE FOR GREATER
EFFICIENCY AND EQUALITYx WE HAVE HAD TO TAKE
MANY DECISIONS IN THE NATIONAL INTEREST AS PART OF
THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION AND PART OF THE CAMPAIGN
FOR GREATER PRODUCTIVITY; BUT WE HAVE BEEN SENSITIVE
AND SYMPATHETIC IN DEALING WITH THE IMMEDIATE
PROBLEMS CREATED BY THESE MEASURESy FOR INSTANCE,
ALTHOUGH THE 25 PER CENT TARIFF CUT IS ADVANTAGEOUS
TO THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF PEOPLE LIVING IN
THE COUNTRY, WE HAVE RECOGNISED THAT THERE ARE
COUNTRY CITIES AND TOWNS WHICH HAVE FOUND IT DIFFICULT
TO COPE IMMEDIATELY WITH THE CONSEQUENCESX .9/ 
_ 9-
UNLY THIS WEEK WE APPROVED A NEW SCHEME OF
ASSISTANCE TO COUNTRY TOWNS ADVERSELY AFFECTED
BY OUR STRUCTURAL CHANGES) THIS ASSISTANCE IS
BASED ON THE INABILITY OF COUNTRY TOWNS WITH A
LIMITED RANGE OF JOB OPPORTUNITIES TO ABSORB
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN THE STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENTx
I AM INDEBTED TO MY COLLEAGUE BOB WHAN,
M. P, FOR EDEN-MONARO THIS ELECTORATE FOR
DRAWING TO MY ATTENTION TWO SETS OF FIGURES WHICH.
I THINK PUT INTO PERSPECTIVE THE POLICIES OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THEIR CONSEQUENCESX
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS STATES THAT IN
1971, 775-7AUSTRALIAN FARMERS APPLIED FOR
AS 1IS'iCE F; OK; THE RURAL RECONSTRUCTION BOARD)
THIS YEAR, THE FIGURE IS DOWN TO-52 APPLICATIONSk
SECONDLY, THIS YEAR'S BUDGET PROVIDES FOR $ 487.6 MILLION.
IN RURAL ASSISTANCE, AN INCREASE OF $ 158 MILLION ON
1972/ 73x THIS SURELY IS NOT THE RECORD OF A
GOVERNMENT INDIFFERENT TO RURAL INTERESTS OR iNADEQt; ATE
TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS OF RURAL INDUSTRYx I DON'T
BRUSH ASIDE THOSE PROBLEMSX BUT WE HAVE TO RECOGNISE
THAT THOSE PROBLEMS, LIKE SO MUCH OF OUR CURRENT
ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES, SPRING FROM AN INCREASINGLY
DIFFICULT AND COMPLEX WORLD SITUATIONg 
THEY CAN'T BE SOLVED BY HYSTERIA OR FEAR OR PANICX
THEY CAN'T BE SOLVED BY CREATING NATIONAL DIVISION
AND BITTERNESS, PARTICULARLY THE MOST ARTIFICIAL
OF ALL DIVISIONS THAT BETWEEN CITY AND COUNTRYx
WHEN I ADDRESSED THE UNITED NATIONS I EMPHASISED
THE INTERDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE OF THE WORLD
COMMUNITYx IF THIS IS TRUE ON THE INTERNATIONAL
LEVEL, HOW MUCH GREATER FORCE IT HAS WITHIN THE
NATIONX I REPEAT, WE ARE DETERMINED AS A GOVERNMENT
TO MAINTAIN A GENUINE, A RATIONAL DIALOGUE WITH THE
RURAL COMMUNITY IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH RATIONAL
POLICIES WHICH WILL PLACE AUSTRALIA'S GREAT RURAL
INDUSTRIES ON A SECURE AND SOUND COURSEx AS THE
POSSESSORS OF A VERY VALUABLE MEANS OF COMMUNICATION,
YOU CAN PLAY A CRUCIAL PART IN PROMOTING THAT DIALOGUE
AND I SEEK YOUR CO-OPERATION IN ACHIEVING ITX 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 352
24 October 1974
VISIT BY PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
The Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
today announced details of the itinerary' in the Australian
Capital Territory for the visit by His Excellency Mr.. Kakuei
Tanaka, Prime Minister of Japan.
Mr. Tanaka will arive from New Zealand in a Japan
Air Lines Special Flight DC 8 aircraft next Thursday, October
31, to undertake two days of official engagements in the A. C. T.
He will be received at the Fairbairn Air Base by Mr.
Whitlam and given a 19-gun salute. On Friday, November 1,
Mr. Tanaka will have official discussions with Mr. Whitlam
and also with members of Cabinet. Afterwards he will witness
the signing of a cultural agreement between Australia and
Japan. An Australian Government luncheon, hiosted by Mr.
Whitlam, will follow. Both Mr. Tanaka and Mr. Whitlam will
speak at the luncheon.
In the afternoon Mr. Tanaka will visit the Australian
War Memorial and also the Mount Ainslie Lookout.
On Saturday, November 2, Mr. Tanaka will hold a press
conference before attending a luncheon at Government House
with the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr.
In the afternoon Mr. Tanaka and members of his official
party will fly to Sydney. At night Mr. Tanaka will attend a
reception given by members of the Japanese community in Sydney.
He has no official engagements on Sunday, November 3, before
leaving Sydney next day for Perth. Mr. Tanaka's itinerary in
Western Australia has already been announced by the Western
Australian authorities.
Mr. Whitlam recalled that during his visit to Japan in
October 1973 he had invited Mr. Tanaka to visit Australia and
Mr. Tanaka had accepted this invitation.
In welcoming Mr. Tanaka's visit, Mr. Whitlam said that
it would represent a further significant step in the development
of friendly and co-operative relations between Australia and
Japan. He also revealed that Mr. ' Tanaka will spend more time in
./ 2 
Australia during his official visit than he had in most other
foreign countries he has toured since becoming head of the
Japanese Government. Mr. Tanaka will be in Australia for
almost six days.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



A USTKA1 A f
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 354
October 1974
RELEASE OF INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT DIESEL ENGINES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released the
Industries Assistance Commission report on Diesel Engines
Exceeding 1500kw.
Mr Whitlam said that the report covers part of a
reference which was forwarded to the Industries Assistance
Commission on 11 February 1974 concerning the production
in Australia of marine and other diesel engines.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government's decision on
the report will be announced at the earliest practicable
date. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 353
October 1974
TOURIST ACCOMMODATION INDUSTRY REFERRED TO INDUSTRIES
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister announced today that he had forwarded
a reference to the Industries Assistance Commission on
whether assistance, other than assistance by way of taxation
measures, should be accorded the tourist accommodation
industry and if so, the nature and extent of such assistance.
Mr Whitlam said the reference had been sent following
representations made to the Government by the tourist
accommodation industry on the need for assistance. The
reference would cover not only accommodation facilities
but also convention, restaurant and other facilities which
the Commission may consider relevant to the inquiry.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 


EMARGO-7. 00 pm KCIIRCK AGAINST DELIIVERYIVNTIEIRVRI ETW HE PRIME l1E~ RYA D SONEON: PTA' CURREN AFFAIV. MONDAY. 28,.. OCTOBEK: 194STONEt rm Hiit therekqi vde-p~~ e~ n4tticutr ie n ' coomigmesi nd-tht -you-donutsem d-kovhdto:-handle, It. Nwiodoy epz tht feeling?PRIM-MINI$=%: is tethth puioarbevilderedtDru amibinerg . o -fo , thiinngdq., u. sbturti a. vliosw eI'n. du-n thtri ywInA-y,*, v. e-y6 . cguturytl. ik$ 4a. fe~ n..~ ov4arySTONE: Yes, but how do we know? We have been told that things arebad overseas but surely Australians only care about what is happeninghere and the-trust that they have in their own leadership?PIRIME MINISTER: I don't agree that all Australians oxily worry about.whnt goes on at home. I think more and more Australians realisethat what happens in Australia must be affected alsoby -what happensin other countries.STONE: Yes, but again we don't know what the conditions are there;,we don't know how they are handling the situation over there.We do know that unemployment i8 rising here and inflation is risinghere, and so far the Government has not seemed to, offer any deifinitesolution. PRIMIE MINISTER: There is no simple solution. If there was, obviouslywe would have adopted it. But people do have a fair idea what goes onin America or B~ ritain or Western Europe or lIn Japan and thdy knowthat Inflation is worse in Japan or in Britain than it Is here andthey know that unemployment is worse in all three areas, than it ishere.,STONE: Yes, I started off by saying that it was a feeling but thenare you willing to concede that there is reasonable grouid forassuming that the situation is at least sonmvwhat messy and that ourleadership is In some doubt about how to handle it?P'RIME MINISTER: Yes, inevitably. As I say, there is no simple, pasy,popular solution and that is the experience of people in government inthe three areas that. 1 have mentioned and in all the comparable countrie-Sthat you can i,:. ention.' Leadership in politics; is under. challengeeverywhere in the weste-rn world.STONE: Going back to your leadership, it seems that every poll is nowshowing a very sharp drop in popularity and a very -sharp rise in thenumber of people dissatisfied with what you are'doing. How does that.affect you?PRIMIE MINISMTR. I notice that the papers this morning said that I wasmore popular than myy competitors, so we are all dropping. And I don'tthing you will find a poll in any western country where the head ofgovernment is popular, has a popular majority, I am better than mycompetitors, that is all that I can say at the moment.STO( NE: But that's cold comfort.P'URE MINISTER: Mty word ' it Is.STONE: Particularly for a Prime N. inister w~ o is I wouldn't say0 gotistict. l, but certainly has a great deal of s~ lf-conrid ence, you
called yourself the beat Foreign Minister, one of the great PrimeMinisters. H-ow does this make you feel to 8ay Dohwt 1iha anper cent of the people t0hink you are doing a good job?' HIMLE MINISTER: Well, to be precise, I've said I waa the hestForeign Minister for 20 years I was mentioning since Evatt.I mean let's get it, precise.STONE: O. K. But isn't it, in a way a personal tragedy for you thotift man3 who doea exude so much self-zonfidence has not been able toinstill that kind of confidence into the public'?PP-114E MINIS'MR: Yes, yen. I think this is disappointing, frustratin iof courfse it in but I must say the fate of everybody el: e in evafrqwestern country# in every webtern democracy, the current leader copit. the same way.STONE: But perhaps for different reasonb. Let's just take again yolcase apecifically. There does seem to be a gap between what. youpromised in the wayv of' leadership * and what you're delivering. . Dir-iL1-the (-lection periods we heard mainly about Gough. Whitlam " You e~ qndepend on him." Now we seem to be hearing only about the four (; InCairns, Crean,. Came-ron find Caucus sending -as different messageI3,You've tended -to fade into the background.I'RI114T M INI. STER: Well, can Lyou be precise ( in any one of those?) 1n Yf-Imy Govvrnment has achieved a very great, des. l indeed. 11-18 achievedmore in the 23 months than I think our predecessors did in mostin 2: 3 years; t. hat we have done a very grc-al deal. But the vo~~.Aituation throughout the western world is more bewildering than ith a. s heen for over 410 years.ST( JNE: But I'm on a different point now, I'm even willing to conctihait your Government. 4has aeh~ eved a great deel. We're ta) ing.:, ahnulimage now and the image that. comes across, I think, to the public " isthat we're hearing an awful lot about D~ r Cairns1 an awful lot bMr Cameron? an awful lot, about Caucus, we see them on tele visionthe press, ' we're seeing less and less of you.PRI 1F. M4 NTSUE~ R You're seeing me now,STO"': Yea we are. it's beenl a long ti me.TPR !\ 11NI1J T2 I': don't remember when youl~ me.STONE: Wpll I think the invitation we won't go into those si~-thiriga. 4,1 he fact is, wouldn't you say, just looking your nc-wsevery inorning nd looking at, your television met, that. we do 6pe fin Wlot of D~ r Cuirns. and Mr f. ameron, for example.11RIMF. IINISTERi: Quite propc-:' ly, quite Properly.STONE: But I mean are you happy....PRIME MINIST'ER: I mean, you're talking in quite gent-ra~ ispi terms,You say Cal . cus and Connor atnd LCreon and Ctimeron anid ' Caiirns. 1 mean,What precisely do you mean? I meant let's come to,..STONE-: I'm talking about the physical number oftie..FIRMS MITNILSrPR.: Yes.
-3-STONE: that people like Dr Cairns and Mr Catoeron, and I mervtio]those two specifically, show up on television, ohow up in the newspaj~ O-vCsaying something about the econamy.PRIME MINISV1EU: Every Tuesday t. hat I'm in-Canberr, I give a pressc onference; that Is, everybdy in the Parliamentary Press Gallerycan ak me questions once a week. Now. it'. s true that I can' t, obvioxgi-ve much other time for press conferences, but I do, Imn thie firsthead of' government-in Australia to regularly have a pressa conference,STONE: ' Well, just to sum it up at thst, particular issue.-Are youhappy to see some of your senior Ministers appear on television a~ ndthepress as often as they do giving various opinions about what miglor might not happen in the economy?PRIME MINISTER: I want my colleagues to Ibe known to the pub I ic I. ha iture. I think sometimes they'll respond to requests for kerbsideopinions too readily and I als0 think that this is played up in ikea,which obscures the public knowledge or understanidlng of how govcrnmermust opera-te.STONE: Can I bring up a persistent ruimour? I'm not trying to preteriathatit's credible, hut it is a rumour that has exis~ e&amp;: that thereason why Pr Cairns has emerged In such prominence is that you d6n' 1r-eally care that much, or aren't really thay interested in economicmatters. PRIME MINISTER: I suppose I would have discussions on economic mattefat least twice a week with academica or officia~ s or emoployee bodiesbusinessmen: at least vice a week. Many times it would be more ofitc--vthan that. I would be discussing economic matters more than kny O'tHIEV'matters constantly.STONE; This rumour, I might say has been used to explain away youirnumber of overseas visits. It has been suggested that. you feel T'erscOstamorecotnfortabl'e as a statesman dealing in Foreign AffairA than youeW0oan a politician wrestling with domestic matters.PHIMP, M'INISTIER. I have to make anybd aas IrmVa .-astetrips overseas. Now th-ere again, can we lie precise about. the Ithere have been four times when I have been away a fortnight onti Ihaven't been away longer than a fortnighit and which of thosI aakt do you think the Prime MiniAter shoult'ts have uildertak~ en?Now, I know this is -said a very great deal, sct let me be, prE'cise.The-. was las-t August meeting of the Commonwealth Heiids of GOovc-rnmc&amp; r-.#in Ca~~ taa. I went to Mexico, New York# Wshingi,.--non the way. Doea' anyboely say that Austtalia should not have been represented at aCommnonwee.&gt;' Hesals Qf Government meeting? Then, in October, the-re vasreturn visit, ., nly the second viait, of the Japanese/ AustrallianMinisterial Ieeting. Five Japanese Ministers came down to Australiathe end of ' 72. It wan turn to reciprocate five of us wenrt; Ithe Poreign Minister still. Does anybody say that we shouldn't., amGovernment, ha-ve shown our irit&amp; c. s' in maintaining close relatic-unJapan? STONE: I don't think...PRIME MINISTIER: And I went next door to China, in ttit. i Same visit. T) i aLIwent right round South-1East. Asia. Does anyone say onie shouldn'tI. goxThat wam February. Then a couple of weoeks ago I went to the UnitedNations and I called on the new President and the re-elected PrimeMfinister of' Canada.
STONE: I don'-t think anybody tx saying'that' taking indi-vidual ,,. trVils,that* they're needless,FUTIfE mixiBTEut Tea.STOiE: Btit eriuyi qesinfpto'ia V64uldn'ty1oUu pthat'' there: are. oauy.. eople#.-Ineluzdlug people. iu . your ovn Caucus,_.. iath-itik that: lii hatd.~ me thePrim Hlinisatr! uw firtpae o4, PRIME~ MIUISTER:; -No I don' t belie'~ e tAt: 6t oIl don't ccep* t... thI reject it. I believe -it Viould&amp; have been the . vrong thing-for. AxistreL(not to be at, the Commonwealth meeting; for Australia not to go toIt. would lie the wrong thing not to go to the lnit-ed flat-ions. It, woiloLbethe wrong thing not to go to South-East Asia. Those were my dutieq-I did them, and I think I did. thom quite satisfactorily.STONE: There have been 10. trips in less -than 2 yeakrs,PHlIHE MlNIJ8TER; Yes. Wtell yes, that includes for instance, three ' to,New Zealanft: Norman Kirk's funeral, the Commonweulth Games apd. the f'vlS* Meeti) Ag after we hec'ame Primne Ministeris that is each two days. 01'course you can get that sort of thing. I go for a long weeend toIndonesia and spend it with President Sultarto: that.' s a fow--th trip.Now let's he reasonable. These are very 8hort trips.STon: I'm trying to be...P111HE* MINIISTERat I've mentioned the four substantial. onles. -They vachtcook a fortnight.STONE: I'm trying to be reasonable and explain what I thi nX pe opl efeel. PR IME 1411N11TER: Well I'm very happy to have the opportunity to givctpoint of view to you.STONE: I mean you happened to be out of the couatry when there wiimsh'. rt-lived, very short-lived, very erroneous run on building , ocietic?.Dti f. you think poople would have felt more comfortable then with t1&amp;, VFri,_. ister In control?PRIt E A1' INER: Nhot at all, not at all. My M1inisters cind 1' remier ikilled thb.. un in a day. It was started off by the-Q&gt; eenptland TeL(-YSTONE: Yes. You're say~ ing that It was started off biy the Qupenslat-'Treaisurer. What was thi, ' ntPRIME MINISTiER; In -aun, e syeasi, d. H e made some injud~ icikIremark. But that was killed in a It. didn't need wry irntervvritionfcMy Ministers coped with it very adequately and promptly &amp; tid sc didDon Dunslan in Adelaide.SrO~ N~ t Ye's. Whut do you think you accomplish on-theae trips? Forinst-ance, we heard that Dr ' Kissinger issid, perhaps to a member of tlie$Australian party, that the only time he'd ever visit. Autralia ja if"was on the way to somewhere and the only plaoc hie could think of vouiGltbe the South Pole. Now. obviously he's not treating us veryif he does irake remarks like that.PRIKE MINISTER-WellSTOUR{: What are we accomplishing in Washington?
PRM 4NIT e;, Ildnt t say ' that-. LIet take' you, back. Vhea-I vei% Ato that Coimonalth'uietinlln Ottava lA&amp; SVAugust, there W'as. a greatdeal of to do as-to vbeither. PresIdent -Nixon vould -receive me. :-This tiwQ-.there's no -suggestion -that. Fre6sdent -Ford -vonlt-.-: That, ia" yuan'. t W r\~Thered: never -beena!, n Australiau-PrimeN~ ae~. erepoal theL~Go'vrnent wvhose~ bead " of . Gov artaent ' Vas' xt-Ais. 4$. tugt1n aiddress theUnited. Hattions! a';. Geera1.. Assemby :, 1.-. itas aboutMai. w. eddIt*. heeemayAiWn igs&amp; t hat--tould only b dnintm. coer4'-_&amp; nd-,-I saw, Fo 4 Dand Trddea6 u th pro'cess.. No-vtd aebentknamis# If. Ihadnt. Ther~ e are many things vhlchonly-a head of Government-itan do;it has to be done on the spot at thxt level. And I do it. by recentAustralian experience, more than adequately.STONE: Right. Well I wvon't persist with this point, other than brf 0up another rumour, as ) Long &amp; S you're disposing o rumours. Would( you.,PRIME MINISTER: I inean this is all very-necessary...8 T 0 T Yes. But. would you ever accept the poat, of Secret-ary-Oeneralthe United Nations, and give up your job, becaune it h~ ls been* suggeste..that you would?PRIME MINIJSTRR: I belie-ve that Billy Wentworth-8uggested. it on theAdjourtnment the other-night.STONE: Yes.PJRIKE MINISTERs. I missed it. But lie's the only person who has suge34--it.. I don't, expect it to be offered and this is the joh I siought. andis the job I'll fulfil.STONE-. Could we 1talk now about the Labor Caucus? Are you proud of, lksperformanceof the Latbor Caucus in these troubled times? 7TIRTME MINISTER: On balance, yes. Obviously they make mistakes I woulaLhfive regarded from time to time, but let's be more precise there. Youtal-king In very generalised terms.STONE: Well without coaching you, what I'd like you to do is in two othrte quick sentences I-ell the audience just -what benefit you see inbai a Labor Cauculs that can overrule the decisions of the Prime Min,*'"andQ net orbee they've been announced.PRIME VINISTER: The Caucua comprises the Members of Parliament wbo've.,becien e. % s Labor candidates, arid obviously we should get together'&amp; owe do, once , week ometimes more often -to dccde how we'll % vol,ins the two Houtheh of Parliament. Now, you isay the Caucus can overthrow,.thte P-rimne Minister and Ca;. net.STONE: Overrole their decisions...PRIME MINISTER: Well, 0K. They've done it twice. Theuy dijid it. (, ncetlast yet.-r Rnd once thisi year, and thesfe have been in that time, at leaa('two thousand deeisionn thiat the Cabinet has made. Now that's a~ pretty.good record. They have reversed C( Lbinet decisions ob two ocuasiona ourof' over two thousand.STONE: Yes, Now many times have the delayed decisions that You thOugi-Yshould be brought about right away, and they've-said no, hold on?PRIME MINISTrER: I cen t. think of any. I can't thirik of bny case.STONTE: Or modified decisions.
6-RIME, MINISTER: I can't think. I include "' molify" in reversing, be'&amp; au~ e_.the two cases where they reve-ravd them were in fact only. mairaions,STONrE: Do you think you could have donePRIMi MINISTPER-I mear there were two cases in over two thousanti. I mecttthese are things that are always personalis~ ed. and dramritiiiedt but in fac-f..the Cabinet is ela~ ted by the Caucus and the present -Cabinet. hs.. beeu. Jtwice elected, by the Vanc ug without change. So you npedn't think I'mparticularly worried alt a record like that,STONE: No. but, at the same time the record may not. reveal what jaactually hatppening in...PRIME MINIS'PER1 Tit preCiMO.), RIM' MINISTER: L~ et's be precise.-8TONE: Well, precioely, are there meaisures that you would have~ likedI-ring to help the * economny, to help Axistralia, which you f'eel you) couldiget through Caucuis and thiereforp, perhaps, revised them?)'~ N~ MINISTFR: E'very decision that theG Cabinet -has made, and has got.through, with two exceptions...PRIME MINIST'ER: * Yea, but wait a minute, I'm a member of the Cabinet atik yCabinet decisions. I'm Dot going to reveal detailgsof Caietdiscussions.You wouldn't expf-ot me to do that.STONE: No, no, but I can...P'RIME MINISTER; You know the argument always used to be, befoure we c. i if einto of1' iev, t-hal. a Labor Government would be under direction fromi peoplewho weren't members of Parlium( ent. Now apparently,,-the obe~ tionis that it's underAirevoion f'rom people who arc-members of' Parliament.STONE: TeR, hut there, you know there's quite a fee~ lirg, I thinik, that* peppiv wbo don't understand Caucus..,.PRIM JK'STEIW. I think that is true, but let me~ repeat: Caucus compr-G*% sepeop.le wko are babor-Members of' Parliamnt. Nobo~ y v~ e B~ ut. eve ryN4odyewho is a rnmher.8 KE: Yea but Fian you say as Prime Minister that there is no stop youwould have taken without, the Caucus? I'll rephrase that again, becauseI said it very~ badly. But .&gt; tI'm trying to sky is thait there are ; Stc ryou would have taken except for Catuctis not, approving.PRIME 1INISTPRh There'a one instance thf~ t is known. beft're I comte 1~ cK.let ine say that of' those two matters where the Cabinet devci. ioz-i 1weismodified bt, Caucus, one was a year ago about taxation benefits for P C apt-Cin the gold-mining Industry and the other wfks concerning the higherincome tax on unearned income and that took place a r~ onth ago. Now theone wbere I would heve do'ne -something but the Caucus didni't agr e e norin fact did the Cabinet, that wets about tbe, Ilarliamentany nalarieq.B3ut. that's a well'known instance.
S, T ONR: Yepi, lut the trouble is although there's Jut a few incideuta,t. hty hi Wg becu~ use they do seem to indicate that..PHIV~ E HINISTPFIRt Yen, but don't give the impression that. they' re,11UflerclUl, I've listed the two wl-ere there's been a modificationand I men'tioned another one where I didn't w&amp;. nt the Caibinet to* ao whatit did, nr the Caucus to do what it did,STONE: Okay. Can we say, can you say categorically-that therejwsn( vcvr been a point where you have been brought to -threateningrosignal-cOIñ. because of some action of the Caucus or actions ofyour Miyii slc-ra?i'RIWME fNIATER: Not for years, not, for years. There were somneinsfiinei?' s in the past, of course,-but not for years.MINE: I'm just....PR1IME MINISTIERt; Yes, well let's be pretise. There was an instanceF~ Ix thid a half years ago where 1. resigned. There ' s bee~ n no other..STOE: T he r f was an incident last year, perhaps we wont c] iti&amp; n iticidv., in the lHuse -where you suggested thast if CAucus Wenitsliead t. o make youi reveal or give them prior inforMation abouttariff decisions that yc ohIœ~ esign your comomission -yuudid . ay that to Mr Kelly?M. M. N WINISTPRi but it never happeczir-d, did'it?STOINE: No it never happenea, but I'm saying that ' hen a. rimeMinjster gete up ini the House and Pays somneth~ ing like that, ? ehoP ayh it's a thremt., whio -Ays it's not a threat? The point is,.
PRIMEB MINISTER,. it's sufficient for mte to state it~ for everybody tobehave with propriety.$' TONE,: Alright. F'inally, on this pcdtitof CaUCUS. ' if it weren't.for CatucusP~ RIME MINISTLiU After all I'm a member of Caucus..STONL; Yet, you are one ineuber of nin-. ety-five.PPI14E 141NISTlPR. And I've been yes that's rtiht tn I've be* Aelected3 as the leader of Caucus, what, for over-nearly-eight years.S TO lE: 15ut if you 6idn't havePR~ IME MIN~ ISTER: Seve~ ral tte in that timec. I don't complain a bij rC'aucus. I thiiik their cbruice has been ezccel ent.STONEt You mean ' Prime Minister?STONd8: But if you didr,' t ha~ ve to deal with Caucus would you havep'ertap*. changed E~ ome of your Cabinet?*PIifLt' MINSI~ k! No, no. I've al~ ways said I much prefer the Fpystealw~ iereMinistrs arechosen by their Parliamvntary ! oi~( u15believe one of the great things that Itelped to bring dowii the LiYhey~ IPartyv in Government was the favt tba~ t Prime ministers chos; e thteirjliniihtcrs, and thie were, irtevitably, therefore, erliptiCILr 7n1STrOUB: Airiqht, t. hoxne isPP 14 E MI N I ST11 S F ut if anybody..FT11 F Trhere is no Ministe~ r there right now that yoju would preic'iriot have, Lut you have to have because of C I~ us attitudesi?PR1Me I e Tr Therelv'e been few peo~ ple elected to the M~ tiitrYthat I diu.." ohoose, thut I didn't vote for ticarly. two' yeLari; aqcwhten we vote-d for th(-m but I'm not saying imy choice would have )-oeeI\w iser. ,., TNE: I don't li)-ePRIKS M4INISTER.-but I don't want anybocy to get the ;.) 2P16S)~ O1 t;; eltrI wo'uld alfer the sy. Le that the Labor Party has of clioOs:: in( 4. theHinis-try. I Prefer it; I've always said that, and I'm still certaov.Wt' the st way.STORE: I don't particula-rly lik~ e to ask this rtext questiott, but Jthit'k expectlled Of me, It's been rumoured that you pla~ ri to ~ tr id of Mr. Crear, as Trc-asurer. -8-
PRIME M4INISTER., 1 liell, I will not pick on Mrz. Crcant or oiybody tAl.-u.have the responsibility in these mat-ters,* but I think he's been picleudonfar tou much, quite obscenely, Ile's been friand of mind for over210 years an6 I have confidence in him. After all, people. chould2,' tjust pick oxm the Treafsurtr.. These are. ditf icu~ t eco* nomic t~ imes. NoTrreasurer would have an easy job. Uut FrAnk Crean carrier, out theCabinet devielons.~ TONS Well, can you say, catn you assure the publ. ic that. thexe-wo:' tlie any reshuffling of Cabinet in the vext few months?4 PR~ fMr 141NISTt~ R 1 will give no assurariccs or denil on this ? natter.will not do it. You will then qc'through all the Hinistry. I'll not'~be in that. A couple of months ago they were suggestir'g it about C~ nsnd Cainex-on and everybody Cop's it. A couple of months ago it wi~ sriuggest~ ed that Caiimerein would be going9 to I. ondon.STZONEr: It's. just like you and LIN Secretary-Generol.PRI14IC MINISTER: * Tbat's r . ight There's ) lothi ng I've said ordotov tha twoeuld justify any speculation that Creant would be going.1,1TCJNr: B~ ut at least you're saying-that it is-* aPc0sibilityia Cabinet reshuffle is a pogsib ility?P* PXMC 14INIST~ eR; I'm not saying it is or Is hot. That is my epnt-hAnd there is nothing that I've said or dorne that would justify tecula4-v'NSTONE: Can we get on to the ecotiomy inow? You've &amp; aid that the Au:--ti QIIlciVcomomy is basicolly sound,PRI14E MINISTER: Yes, of course,.STrONE3 Are you basingj that on informai~ ton that's not known to ItIc pubit'-PRIME8 MIN~ ISTER: N~ o, Lut of courrse if'E true we bave a hr-althy, ldua(?. ctiv'e populationm and we have ve-ry grea. natur-al resources.SOVE Yes, but..TI'r E HIlNISTFRT; And we have healthy trad;-.&amp; rh2 ut. is that wia L you re cal3ling. basica iy--ounkd..PRlI'XM r~ Ye Yes.~ TOCHE in the i'ace of an increase in busintesa ccilli~ ptuea and an itri(-sinuri iployrunttPRIME MINISTER; NOW wait a wait a mninute. L~ et.' s ileprcñ:I dOnI't W'~ nt to be abraiive about this.STO 11E yee S1' RXLHE HIHISIFI: Let'sa bc preeia~'. What bsinetis* collapmes?STONE: Well, precis ely, ici instauce, the Victurien ehauibcr of Ca~ ameraeisaid that 240 Luc-IneLss firmsa had vollapses so far this year, cctmpaire,-thI: A, LO 160 in the..
PRIME MINISTERv Now the onea that would if I had to think ofFsoie business collapses, I would thirnk of n ame cbmpanies which hadkpeipulati~ d in land and which would only atake do if the boorn ln~ lrcontiniud. well1, wo stopped the boom in land. ILut. lat.' s be preciceconthese things.*STONE-Well, yes, it's good to be preclie, becaiuse, perhaps,these big companies have beirn stealing the headlioes. ! eut wha~ twe bavzen't. L-~ ern~ about is -smalller companies, all acios&amp; thespectrum of Australiani life, gatting themnelves into trouble andp. erhaps eollapaing because of what the Governmiet has~ done. I aMeQI've just quoted yoa the Victorian Chamber of Comaterco.~ PIY4 MINIST1ER. You said what the Gov'ernnehit 1i~ s d~ no. whint..$ IrO). t Right. Welli.. you don't believe tbat any busirtis arQ-( QII&amp; VSapain becAuse of what the Government bas done?PRIME t4INISTERt It would be true that the land ripeoulators hinve ), e~ xhurt. beauxse of what we did, and it was right that we should do it.-I meaun, if thu St. ntie. won't regulate the cost of land whiich thfeyCan do dircctly, and our Parl. iam. ent can't. then wehave to usethe measurcee that are available to u&amp;.STONE: So you're suggegting that the only companties that, are heinihurt by this are land companieg?* PiR1MiE MINI$ SLBR: That's right. You look at thein all.' I suppose UcoUld miention; beyland too,ST 0O E WFe, ll how do you explair,PR~ IMP. M! I11TLR: WhaL otzipanies; arv there that you can chivi:-of, 0' r! ruggest, o~ ther than Leyland an~ d some of the laie comrnies'STC'NL: Well, I cain't' deal with specific-cernpanier., but I c at ava)with specific reports. The Chamber of Commerce in assoeciaticon wiIl%he lNatiorlal Bank issued a report iii whIct, ts aa. I thlat centt:Cneff; only felt that. they were heavirv s; uoesftil orcompared to 83 per cent a few months ago.I-Ril14, f fi 3Tr. R. We talked o few inonthso ago fror: time to timie tc, 6c4of thein, Yb,. t we spoke to the reI7. reiientatives; of hbusiness beforeWe ] reW lip Lhe buidge ind there were not report,. at. ao-fniry incharacter as that. -1 ink it is quite damacjing to ' jive the imr~ s~that bUginesses arc Coll a pAnq ; All round the country. They &amp; rec f' rhey aro riot,STONE: How 4o you explairt a F'. irvey that indican. tcs that 4 pry L~ v'T_alwnt half the Australijans, cor~ jkidr economic condit ions to bc,right pmpoor or very pooreI'RIJK MINISTER,, Well, there again, what one are you quoting?STONE: The 74SRB Poll which appears in Ilrhe HvtA24V1 , n " TheI~ eP-RIME MIN$'? YR: People are givingq their impres! sions of how thixaqwill be ill, szy, a YL-arl's time'. NOW
ST14iB 140t only thit~ they were. talking about a yuar" a t ilFt Or now..But surely you must realise-that-if the people' $ a-ying thi-s" areLusirness leaders, sorle business leaders aresayingq the country's irta mess and some unilon. leaders are-saying the * economy is i n. L% Zyres a atisome people are registering this-in a poll, that -they must-at Iea&amp;.' tfeel that the economy's in a mess?.PRIME MINISTER: Now, it' quite clear that the figurea for' thd nticquarter,' on things like prices and employment, will be no iprc'vpmet.ob those that have-com~ e out in the last couple of weeks. Andlthequarter after that there may be no great improimtnt. After that, Xbelieve there will be. Now, what we've had to deal' wi th is the'olddemand Inflation; ' we have largely brought that. urbder control. we.n~ ow have cost.* push inflation'and I believe we are cowing -to a coialpuetrwi~ tl the employee orgabisations, the unsions, white-col-lar peop&amp; le, andso on, which will be able to retrt.* n that# and. we jre of oourse conferringwith them as to the casee we'll1 put before the Arbltratioi.Commtissioni. STONE. but let's get. this straioht it's very itoportant.. 1ot fortwo quarterg.-tor at least the next. qaiarters you expect inflation toPRI14e1 MlNIS11ERs I don't say that. X don'It believe that there willany sirnificarit improvement in the indices. I meavi I'Im being quitefrank with you! TOh1B: YeePRImE MIISTflt But X don't believe theke'll be a Aeterioration andthink the quarter after that, there will. be some marked itnrrovemerit.AR 7 say the demand inflatio'n bas been curbed, the cost inflation&amp; haSyet to be restrained.STN: Well, jaut las~ t Monday we saw-5.4 per cent for the quarleY.PRIt4F MZIITEJt Yes, and it may be 5.4 in the December quarter.STOREC: Or 5. 5, You could expectPR14E M 114 XcTLK. u it may, ok 5.3. it way be over 5 or. STONB-. But. no oubstantial improvetment, and a possi ble deterivratiomi* 1PRIME MXHISTCrR: I'm hotforecas. ting it, jioer for the Matrch ' quarter. AA0* tile figureA there will come out in A~ pri~ l. After that, I believa thewill-be an improvement. AN I say, there has beon an improvernent inthe demand inflation, ' iVicie hos been, in recent months, a deterifdOko* in the cost infl ; tion. I believe that we are coming to a compbctwhi'ch will restrain that.STONiU: Cost infl~ atcsn zneantitsg wage demans by un~-ors?VR1141 141NSIVER: HVxCeeSive income clai'f. by eumployees in general, bel-1-nloyeen Are noct the only peopleSThHL: S; omme criticil woul~ d say it too); you long9 anough to -get-aroundto b1&amp; miy~ q excessive wagqe demands fox-Soule of thl inflation that wio res ee I h9. It wa&amp; only in th'e last c'ouple of weeks that you've really...
PIMC14iNI STEfl: No. One 4ould have: said it for a few months pfi,. r'b~ ut one couldn It blame that-a year ago. ,* The inf lation Ut that. -tjv~waG much more demand than cost. much more.SToHwIy: o'vt aledabutinflttion pertiaps procesding on. -forthe next two quarters at least before At goes . down. Is that acorrect sumary 6f what you've j us t* said?P RIME~ MIIS~ TUR: HMi. I' not forecasting that there 1-ill beadecline.STONE: N4o but that's % ihat you'd . expect What about utt v-4 P1011merit the prog1ression of -unemlploymen~ t figures9?fI14E 14INISTBR: he I Say, well I was talking about thetf as well r:said prices and eimployment.,STONE: see. So that we ian what, in the nex* t two qu., rtersthe next two quarters..PRIME MINISTER: I don't think there'll be a sinificaht-prova. ve&amp;in the neikt two quarters. Abd let's be plain about this; There ' 1s6tep that%, one Can take whicb: has an impact in 1,6ss than a6bout sif. months. 3tverything you do economically, . takes about sixK ionths + 0have its œ wtpact. I don'It thkhk your viewers should have any im prm-ssthat there, is a oimple or eary or popular step' that one can take""cure it. if there wtere it's amazing that nobody' 4s used it... S1ONiD: Ye. s; but it is sirprising that for a government, a l. eado-tU tk~ ocame in with'. such progressive and radical ideas Imean*, f-0r rins'tance, the. recognition of maixiland Chin a, we'Ire ' one of the f 0*western countries to revognrise So~ viet control of theo Daltic couuirvel.-euidiinq conscription all of theiie radical and progressivePflIMB' 14l1IST'lI N4o, most countries have done these ChingS. 7STONEi ButPRIMR-MINISTER! We were* Just. late in doingr them.STON~ s But your treatme'nt of the.-economy seems to bie traditiana QA( ircsthcr-unimagitiative; you're osing some of-: the classiical measulresthat ' have always been used.PRIl4k MINSITERz No, on the contrary. For instance Clhe unempQnfbiieji~posit~ ion. We atre the first Australian Gove~ rnment toue atty weUs-omfor r-etraining": people fcix other joe or to. enlist local organizeto;in finding new:,. avenuen of employment or directly assisting cntop-qio_-dwhich are in difflcultkea outside] the metropolitan area.ST ON~ U it's very late, very late.PRIME 34lHISTEla; syeNNo,, wee lt maybe.
13.TOiPNE: Your measures hae' caught up really, your correctivemiiasures boven't caught. up with the ones,PRIM MINISTER:, These--should hav'e been done y eaurs,-ago. -We *, ere'the-. first Australian Government t-o do it. don't th) inrk that', youcan rtay there was never any need in the past, for adult. trainingcr retbraining or. for regionsl employment sch~ emes or for asisistaceet~ o particular companies hurt by particular programs in ' regionalareas. I mean, thr-se things ought tU have bee.-doupe long sInce.They were being done in some other c6untries. : They'd neverbeen donie h~ ere. We had to start them.* STONE:: Will you.' tell the. people you have within the Government-:dedicated socialibts, honqest socialistsi, who : b-e-lieve thiatcapitalism is p-erhapa in~ its last days, that capitalism is doomed?Now can it bp that even with the btst intentions....PRIMfE MINISTEFR; No we aren't. I me"~ it miay* be thuat theoreti, ally,* you'd expect: me to say that. The fact ir.. that all. the Ministersaccept the tact th~ at w: e have amixed economy, and-three-quartersof the job. s available in Australia must' be pro-4ided by privoate*-mployers,.; not by GoVernments, ThatSTONE: Yeat hut at the 6ame time....P'RIME HIN16TER: Th t is, we tuant to make the mlied society workthis way. Yout just ca. n It do this through Goverment initioativesalone, 3TONE: But you know-anough ahout -teaml iork to kiiov that u" lessy'ou have psychological attitude that s is, " Yes, v an aucceedl',that it tends to debilitate the whole ftam N~ ow-can peoplo whobelieve, just aying some: people in-+ your Government, wilobelieve ttPRIME HINISTER: Do: youwmind being precise? Youive mcrntionvd,what is itall th~ C's you've remtioned -Campton, Cairns,* Crca. n an&amp;. Curanor.. 4*.S'FON..: .( Inaudible) aud yet we don't....PRIMEn HiI'USTER: Well,, certaintly. So let,' s be prccisv About thi..All the oc-L:~ ' o0u+ ve, mentioihed: you can't quotvL them as,-everhaving, express. the view that you're-giving in gtineral -isc-dterms. A~ nd I d~ o. 1t doi ' either. " ov 0h df# YOU Sfty,. who doyou suggest, holds those -w.9TONE: Yes, vell I woil dn't like suggest. But Ia..PRIME H IN iSTfhR: No.. Well it'. 6 very, dif ficult.STONE: l1you that, we hiad a direc tor of otte qjf thiespeculative land' companies,. that you fsaid, wertt down quite nutura.) ily,in the cireurtsiances, StuggeSt that he thought there vtrc, elemetsin the Crovernment. who were quitesRatisfied'with the ' Collapse.betause it was part of, their socialist belief to try and gvt + ridOr tPRIME MNISTERH: I'm -iot surc-who you're: talking &amp; i) out there..Which compaby or which persion?-
14.(~ rft* 1? el l: alnline abd 14r Uichr-rd Bak~ er.1, r Ik 1i11 13Th'R: Yes. Vell it's a bit Unriacious cotitng from ' him1, ecause t6everal of my colleagues talked directly. to the executi ' Veaof Mitinline and I clidn t.. speak directly to them, hutl'waR intohelcpo, nsbuutl vthit~ : awtaiys Mn ' t inoiusrt erfsa ulwth ot'hwaerte , M aainndl inine vfaasc t oveer -dexidte ntdrey. 6-*. 1They wore one of. those companies, uufortunately, that vould only"...* succeeil could Quniy contiuue it * he boom cOutinued. No w* we did -help ve.: did try to htelp Mainline, and -the fact va9' that-. 7Ihr-y were beyonid tielp,STOKE; Can we get% O n to one-. other aresa? Surely you mustrelethat people are greatly disappointed in. the failure of the-.Lab~ or Goveriiment to ' deal with the unoi. They thtought if -thereV[ s A good Otance in ' you, it wruld lie that yo i would be able todt-al wi th the unions 6ffeetively. Instead, we have, ' the highestr1ate of btrikies, the highest. number of work days~ lost, tehighest. nm!) rIeS of wagesi lost., in' our history.PRIME MINISTER:. Yen, thl* s ig ar Oppalling i -ecord -inp I thinklt-i Se-c'ond quarttr of thiAs year. Bitt. the last quatrter-thercetIa* been n vv. ryv great. improvemrPt. Now I would cdnfess, have thought.,* that this was a wury great. ioinus for . us the, Industrial.situk-tirin it) AvOttalia but I niotice the recent poll aid you'vereferred* to pollsa lready found the: . people didn't think that* thif. would lie any )' etter indr our opponents. ' So it way . be-that. pt-cple aire just despairing about.' this isituation. We haveSTON{ E: : It's known: as cold 7conf ort.PIME xI1hJ$, 11R: : Oht it isa, it is. .1 find thci position. quitf,iuatigf actory. : But the polls showed th&amp; t they didn't b~ elieveour cpponent~ s would huve drine ai) y better at all, I'm certainthat t~ hings arr ' better heoause thtere iii f'requpnt consultationbetween1 the unicins'and tho white callar people and my-( Goernment,meaning myself. That is, -we are able to consult touch More freelyand effectively tfhan would. be the case with an y other Ooverniment&amp;STONE. But. we have jttst keen the spectacle Of Mr Hawke Coming 7-out. &amp; od irtually saying that, unless the fioveirnment tI~ kesemergency mnsuT-Cs to correct the pace of the ' economky. that it.could well facc. collapse the Labor Gove-nr nt.PR IMN MI N IS9TER: WellI I1 1 speak to Mr Hfawke quite f requently;only.: ye isterday,. anid then the weekend bef ore. that., and I canassure you that these are simplifications which get into theii* adlineh anda-so on.STON'E: You d1on't thiink there s nedfor % emrergency mieasuireseiralergency aeAtiOn?M-CTH MINISTER:-Not em'orgerncy ones -there. has to be~ constant.stittention to the economy. As I sayt I don't.. think th6at anywherein the western world thinga have beexi so conc~ entratedly difficultfor 40 years, ant we have aboun ourselves resourceful &amp; ad flexiblein deuiling with Vhje situation. Blut121' atisfied that we aregetting,,. we will get the co-operation. -our opponents wo'uldn'tget the co-operation of employees iii these proceedings' beforethe Arbitration Cammission.-
C1$Mr-. O n . oI Or t U] ih t f ir obsu v. riieut. k:in. e eaao q -at,* r 41quit: ni WSTOh'E n you're hippy to ha e your wife with fo'ur jobs?':PRIME MINIS7% R: Well: let's be preciae there a ga inb. What onewouldd you th'ink she shouldn't have?STONFE: I wouldn't niako a judgemrent. You're the hxibband.PrilME 141 NJ ' iER: Yr~ sp well I think she'r. the, heatlappointment.I e&amp; er mmde:-STONE: Yes.'PROM. 14INISTER: bet'si face it; ishe's been a very good wife, avery good mother and a ~' ery good-Itzember's wife too. : Buit I sxuppcsethrv xonly Job that she lies, anything that the Uovernmcent pays [ terfor,-is on'the Hotels, and she is very well quralified for thatjoh.,-After all, in my ( electoratp thereL have been fc'u-r suchhtostels. We ) ived in the next atreet to oile of' thern, and slic*knows, I would think bs*-* vll as aiiy womuan iin Australia, theproblems that grants in particutar ha[ vC, bcaUSC sae upsed to~.be'aiv in Rchool affairs, 8wirmuing club. thivgs and 8ac ono nd aBhe has a greut rapport with -heo.ST() VIE: s long ax you're happy I au ipose nobody (-Iseshiould...lfIIIHM MNlS'fER: 0 lEactlyo and vhfit' a moru she's lappy. A w( 6!-zia1, sfher experience arid lively W~ d intelligeit naturt can't Jbisthe expecteii to be walking Onl W ) Oft two Pact's 1bebi)) d th] roug hI pe. Sherx got a contribution to ih refTY OhlF As long as you still get clean aek i 1,PR( IME WflTR-Ye a, yes. Twice a day Pometirnes.fON9: Tupt on a note, and I suppose it'fs in a way vthatY4DU feUrc in. the ituleL, te f utuwre. M4r 11jelke-Phter's-en inQueensland.. l'ilMI4l I8'~ R: Yes, ye.STONE: is going to hold aW election.:PH1ME MINISTER: Tha fS right.S110h~ Ife i a going to ffake this -the symboal., in his wodofyo~ ur 04ility to stand or fall cis a Governiment. Aoeyou willing.to accept a cho. 1lenge a). ong thoUSCe
I K MIN] STER: of course, of cvurAe. For the first. titre thepeoO]' ofi Queensland will be alile to hear chapter iine v'erse forHr e~-je te~&amp; n. sobstruction. -that is, if Sir Robert Askintor Mr lH~ rier can co-operate : with my cioverroricini, why is it that* Mr Bjl-etr' an't? Hles right. out on his own. Can tCven agre~ e on the titre of dkay.STIONE-7 u s ay that, he's on -his own, ' iut every -iiidicatiou xeAThat lie will he rati -irned, or ' ct least the coalition will he-returned.ThIHE 14I1PI1TER-Y v 6, but under. that system, of coufftrse, it. ave ry i? ry..3ONE: But picking uip Labor rigats. And I-he question is ityou lose s-vats will -this be ab indication of diseatisfactiuin?PIME MINJSTER: I. 11li e looking at theL Io veral].' percentag ( ifvoteh ve-ry closely* sud of co'urse 8o wi111he, an Vill everytoodye) sp. 13A, let's face it.. . At the lalt Queensl. and elecotions thriLblor caindidates-got more votes than the Liber'e1/ Country P~ artycana~ idyteNi combined. And. the Liberal. candid't-es ' cit. mo0re voterthan Vir. ( Thurtry P'arty candidates,. That is, ill it wc,' s a~ fairSYO'" m UP t" he-e, asnuming the Coalition, tfie 1bibera3* and Cou-ntryPar~ ty won, '; ir Gorilon. Chalk would bet the Yrt: rmi( r of Queensl. fid,jpt, MrT Hjelke-Petvrrsen. I mean, we ought to acknaowledge that the0 . Ystew is r iged in favour of' ihp Ccvntx* Y P~ artyv think they. Pall thje el. VeS the n.-ational Varty up there Dow..-:STPONE: Itld been suggested that Mr Snedden woutld use this aisa sign Of public ilemand for'jireusing.:. or an elk-ction, if hefounid tbat the Li bral/ Couritry Party. coalitiot did pick-upALP tieats, Would you see it-ar just the opposite it you lostseats ' wouid yab consider' ifI. as EL vign that -the people: reject,'#.PR I KE -MINISTER-Mr Snedden inade one load miat hc' in timringlast AprlSTfONE: Ys.PR I M INISTER: .(, one load miste-ke. blut it does~ n't, depryid on* Mr Sn( eddeii. It dependR ( in what Liberal Senatcar. s will Andthere are., 1 know, I'm certain, there k%' Ce herallSenators who are men-of principle and would not. j-cfuse ' Supplyto a Government. They weren'tV in favour-of it Jla~ i ti meand this time would stick to their principles.STON[ P Well. you're a good roli-tician. AteP you counting on thefact that the, Libeicals -von't be able to pif sh you into an electionif' you don'tl want. it some time next. year?11,1WME HNJS'PE14 TChat's -rig ht. I -went to ftie peoIple last May nntt icte-year prograrD anxd-IL think w! R'll have that three years.Jim going Ethead. ( rn the banis that we will ha.* e I andi myMinisters, will-have three years to carry ou. the programwiihwe put to: the pe'ople, and which they tendoracri for thesC 01nd time.T0(' N Z; You're counting on that?VI1-JI11ST9Rl_ Yes.STONE4 Mr Whit-lum thsink you very' VuchY'R I M 71 N I ST'E, t: Thank youi Gerald.*


RESS STATEMENT NO. 35529 October 1974INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSIONREFERENCE ON RU1AAL INCOMESThe Pri~ Ie Minister announced today that he had sent areference to the Industries Assistance Commission asking it toinquire into and report on the provision of assistance bythe Australian Government to reduce fluctuations in theincomes of rural producers.This matter was raised with the Minister for Agriculture,Senator Wriedt, by the National Rural Advisory Council onOctober 1974. The Council requested that the Governmentgive urgent consideration to the stabilisation of after-taxfarm incomes. The Green Paper on Rural Policy had pointedout that instability resulted in a misallocation and underutilisationof resources in agriculture, it acted as adisincentive to investment, and it discouraged lending torural producers by financial institutions.A principal recommendation of the first annual reportof the IAC tabled today was that the question of assistanceto reduce fluctuations in the incomes of rural producersshould be referred to the Commission for inquiry and report.The Prime Minister said that it was necessary for theCommission to consider the role which income stabilisingmeasures might play in achieving the broad objective ofimproved efficiency in resource use. It would also be necessaryto have regard to the need to co-ordinate the various specificassistance measures designed to meet the requirements ofindividual rural industries with general assistance measureshaving application to rural industries as a whole.In considering measures for stabilising farmers'incomes regard will need to be had to instability arisingfrom fluctuations in production prices and returns as wellas specific measures to stabilise after-tax incomes. Thiswill necessitate consideration of all factors affecting farmincome including input prices.In recognising the importance to rural industries ofstable incomes as a basis for confident and efficient planningthe Prime Minister also pointed out that the effects ofinstability in primary production extended well beyond thefarm. gate. The Green Paper on Rural Policy recognised the recent
-2-large swings which had occurred in the level of activityof such service industries as grain storage, abattoirs,fertilizer production and farm machinery.Any measures which make a significant contributionto reducing the fluctuations in farm incomes will notonly directly assist the farming community but will be ofbenefit to the Australian community as a whole.CANBERRA. A. C. T.


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E, G. WHITLAM, M. P.,TO THE R. S. L. NATIONAL CONGRESS, MELBOURNE.,TUESDAY 29 OCTOBER 1974,IN OUR 22 MONTHS OF OFFICE AUSTRALIA'SREPATRIATION SYSTEM HAS BEEN UNDER CONTINUING REVIEW ANDHAS UNDERGONE CONTINUING REMODELLING., VENTURE TOSAY THAT NEVER BEFORE HAS A GOVERNMENT ADOPTED SOPROMPTLY SO MANY PROPOSALS ORIGINATING IN THE FORM* OFRESOLUTIONS FROM THE R. S. L. NATIONAL CONGRESS. WE HAVEBEEN CONCERNED, OF COURSE, TO SEE THAT THOSE ELIGIBLEFOR CASH BENEFITS ARE NOT DISADVANTAGED BY INFLATION.THESE PAYMENTS HAVE MORE THAN KEPT PACE WITH RISES INTHE COST OF LIVING. MOREOVER, WE HAVE BEEN CONCERNEDTO WIDEN ELIGIBILITY FOR THE WHOLE RANGE OF EXISTINGBENEFITS TO CREATE NEW BENEFITS AND TO EASE THEQUALIFICATIONS FOR THEM.
SPECIAL RATE PENSIONSephrnber 1972 $ 48.00Novejiiihr .974 64A 1 0Increase 33.5%INTERMEDIATE RATE PENSIONSeptember 1972 $ 34.00Novemiiber 1.974 44.1-6Increase 31.0%GENERAL RATE PENSIONSeptember 1972 $ 14.00November 1974 25.00Increase 78.5%WAR WIDOW'S PENSIONSeptember 1972 $ 20.00August 1974 31.00Increase DOMESTIC ALLOWANCESeptember 1972 8.50November 1974 $ 12.00Increase 41.2%
WAR PENSIONS:Special rate T PIIntermediate rateGeneral rate ( 100 percent)War Widows PensionDcmestic Allo: anceSERVICE PENSIONS:Single RateMarried Rate Pension Pension ( Dec) Pension Pension ( Sept) Pension Pension% ( JunAWE ( Dec) AWE ( June) A. W. E. ( J u n48.00 34.0014.00 20.00 8.5020.00 34.50 47.95 33.97 13.99 19.98 8.4919.98 34.47 64.100 44.550 25.000 31.00 12.000 31.00 51.50 50.75 35.27 19.79 24.54 9.5024.54 40.78 60 41 22 26 926 45 .10 .05. .00 .00 .50 .00 .50 47.59 32.5.0 17.42 20.59 7.5220.59 36.03A. W. E. Seasonally Adjusted figure for June 1974 used latestavailable0 Budget Item 197428/ 10/ 74 DEC. 1972JUNE 1974
-4-NEW BENEFITS INCLUDE:-ABOLITION OF THE MEANS TEST FOR ALLVETERANS OVERALL SERVICE PENSIONERS HAVE 25% OFTHEIR WAR SERVICE PENSIONS DISREGARDEDWHERE THE MEANS TEST STILL APPLIES.REPATRIATION PENSIONS PAYABLE INANY OVERSEAS COUNTRY.ALL COMMONWEALTH EX-SERVICEMENELIGIBLE FOR REPATRIATION BENEFITS.( GOVERNMENT NOW ACTIVELY CONSIDERINGEXTENSION TO ALL ALLIED PERSONNEL.)FREE MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENTFOR ANY CONDITION FOR ALL ANDFOR ALL AUSTRALIAN VETERANS IRRESPECTIVEOF AREA OF SERVICE.REPATRIATION TREATMENT BENEFITS*EXTENDED TO ALL VETERANS OF BOER AND WORLDWAR I, INCLUDING NURSING HOME CARE.DEFENCE SERVICE. HOMES MAXIMUM LOANINCREASED TO $ 15,000.
THE SAME PROCESS OF CONTINUING REVIEW APPLIES ITO SERVING PERSONNEL. IN OUR EFFORTS TO BUILD TRULYPROFESSIONAL FORCES AND TO ENSURE THAT ARMED SERVICE ISMADE AS ACCEPTABLE AS ANY OTHER PROFESSION IN THECOMMUNITY THERE HAS BEEN A CONTINUING REVIEW OF SERVICESALARIES AND CONDITIONS. THESE INCLUDE:THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE KERR/ WOODWARDCOMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVEDRATES OF PAY AND GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE$SINCE THE TIME RATES OF PAY WEREREVISED AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THE KERR/ WOODWARD COMMITTEERECOMMENDATIONS, I. E. 8/ 9 FEBRUARY, 1973, SALARIES HAVEBEEN INCREASED AS SHOWN IN THE FOLLOWING EXAMPLES:.PRIVATE PAY LEVEL 1 $ 1,628 OR 48.96%WARRANT OFFICER 1 $ 2,390 OR 30.08%LIEUTENANT ( MAXIMUMOF SALARY RANGE) $ 1,860 OR 32.92%COLONEL ( MAXIMUM OFSALARY RANGE) $ 3,042 OR 22.12%
-6-THE INTRODUCTION OF NEW MACHINERY TOSPEED UP THE DETERMINATION OF SALARIES AND RELATEDCONDITIONS$ THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDEPENDENTCOMMITTEE OF REFERENCE FOR DEFENCE FORCES PAY, TOPROVIDE EXPERT GUIDANCE ON PAY MATTERS.CE) THE EXTENSION OF THE BENEFITS UNDERTHE DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES ACT TO ALL MEMBERS OF THEPERMANENT FORCES WHO HAVE AT LEAST THREE YEARS' SERVICE.IMPROVEMENT OF THE RANGE OF SETTLEMENTBENEFITS. THE EXTENSION OF REPATRIATION BENEFI-TSTO PROV. IDE ENTITLEMENT WITHOUT WAR SERVICE.THE INTRODUCTION OF A TAX-FREERE-ENGAGEMENT BONUS OF $ 1, OOO PAYABLE TO OTHER RANKS WHO-ENGAGE FOR A FURTHER THREE YER SERVICE ONCOMPLETION OF AN INITIAL SIX YEARS' SERVICE.THE APPOINTMENT OF A DEFENCE FORCEOMBUDSMAN WHEN THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATION IS APPROVED$THE INTRODUCTION OF AN ANNUAL LEAVE BONUSSCHEME TO OPERATE ON THE SAM E LINES AS THE COMPARABLESCHEME FOR AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYEES.


MBARGO 900 PAL.SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E, G. WHITLAM, MoPe,TO THE AUSTRALIAN FARMERS' FEDERATIOQfCANBERRA, TUESDAY 29 OCTOBER 1974I RECALL WITH GREAT PLEASURE THE RECEPTION YOUGAVE ME A YEAR AGO WHEN I ADDRESSED YOUR FEDERATION HEREIN THIS CIT?, YOU SHOWED YOURSELVES THEN AS YOU HAVEALWAYS DONEIN YOUR NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT ANDIN YOU PRE-BUDGET SUBMISSIONS TO THE CABINET TO BERECEPTIVE, RESPONSIBLE AND REASONABLE. SINCE I LASTSPOKE TO YOU OUR ECONOMIC PROBLEMS HAVE INCREASED AND THEDIFFICULTIES FACED BY FARMERS HAVE INCREASED. I ACKNOWLEDGETHOSE FACTS FRANKLY AT THE OUTSET. I MAKE NO APOLOGY,HOWEVER. FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S RURAL POLICIES. I . INTEND TOSHOW YOU THAT OUR POLICIES ARE NOT ONLY SOUND BUT GENEROUS,AND THAT IF WE ARE TRULY DETERMINED TO IMPROVE THE'PROSPECTSOF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES THERE IS NO RATIONAL ALTERNATIVETO THEM. I AM NOT HERE TO OFFER YOU SOFT SOAP OR HOLD OUTPROSPECTS OF MAGICAL SOLUTIONS, ANY MORE THAN I AM PREPAREDTO DO SO FOR OTHER SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY. I WANT TOTELL YOU AS CLEARLY AND FULLY AS I CAN WHAT WE HAVE DONE FORYOUR INDUSTRIES AND WHAT WE HOPE TO DO. I WANT TO CONVINCEYOU THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS YOUR INTERESTS TRULYAT HEART, AND THAT YOUR FUTURE GIVEN GOODWILL AND GOODSENSE IS A BRIGHT ONE.
-2-IT IS TEMPTING FOR FARMERS IN TIMES OF ECONOMICDIFFICULTY TO SEEK A SCAPEGOAT FOR THEIR PROBLEMS. 1TisPARTICULARLY TEMPTING TO MAKE THE LABOR GOVERNMENT THESCAPEGOAT AND IMAGINE THAT ALL YOUR TROUBLES CAN BE LAIDAT THE GOVERNMENT'S DOOR. YOU WOULD BE VERY FOOLISH TOADOPT THAT ATTITUDE. IHAVE TOO MUCH RESPECT FOR YOURINTELLIGENCC AND YOUR REALISM AS MEN* OF. THE LAND TO IMAGINETHAT YOU WILL FALL FOR THE LINE, SEDULOUSLY FOSTERED BYOUR OPPONENTS, THAT LABOR IS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY. WE HAVEHEARD THESE SLOGANS BEFORE. IHAVE ANSWERED THEM BEFORE.IAM TIRED OF THEM AND I AM PREPARED TO BET THAT YOU. AREPRETTY TIRED OF THEM YOURSELVES. THEY SOLVE NOTHINGI.THE DIFFICULTIES FACED BY OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES ARE OF TWOBROAD KINDS. THERE ARE THOSE CONCERNED WITH CHAN~ GINGINTERNATIONAL MARKETS, WORLD PRICES AND CLIMATIC'ANDSEASONAL FLUCTUATIONS. No GOVERNMENT CAN DO MUCH ABOUT THESEDIFFICULTIES OTHER THAN RELIEVEHARDSHIP AS BEST IT CANTHOUGHON THE QUESTION OF OVERSEAS MARKETS WE HAVE APARTICULARLY FINE RECORD AND I SHALL DEAL-WITH IT LATER.THE SECOND KIND OF PROBLEM YOU FACE HAS TO DO WITH THEGENERAL ECONOMIC-CONDITION OF THE NATION. ' TO A LARGE EXTENTTHE PROBLEMS FACED BY RURAL INDUSTRIES ARE THOSE FACED BY THEENTIRE COMMUNITY. YOU ARE NOT ALONE.' INFLATION TOUCHES ALLOF US AND BEATING INFLATION IS A TASK FOR ALL OF US. ITALSO HAPPENS TO BE A PROBLEM FOR EVERY DEVELOPED COUNTRY INTHE WORLD. .3
-3-IT IS IN NO WAY HELPFUL TO PRETEND THAT FARMERS ' AN ISOLATETHEMSELVES FROM THE REST OF THE COMMUNITY OR FROM. THE RESTOF THE WORLD, OR THAT THEIR DIFFICULTIES CAN BE CUREDWITH A LITTLE EXTRA MONEY OR A LITTLE EXTRA LIP-SERVICEFROM A GOVERNMENT OF ANOTHER COLOUR. ANYONE WHO TRIESTO SELL YOU THAT LINE IS UNDERRATING YOUR GOOD SENSE,ANYONE WHO-BELIEVES IT IS DOING HIMSELF AND THE FARMERSOF THIS COUNTRY A DISSERVICE.THE LONG-TERM PROBLEMS OF THE RURAL INDUSTRIESARE DEEP AND COMPLEX LIKE THOSE OF ALL OTHER INDUSTRIES.THEY HAVE TO DO WITH A GENERAL AND PERVADING CRISIS IN THEWESTERN DEMOCRACIES, THEY HAVE TO DO WITH THE LONG-TERMEFFICIENCY OF OUR INDUSTRIES, THE USE WE MAKE OF OURMANPOWER AND RESOURCES, THE CONDITIONS OF OUR CITIES ANDTOWNS AND TRANSPORT, THE PROBLEMS OF MARKETS, INTERNATIONALTRADE AND CURRENCY FLUCTUATIONS. I ASK YOU TO FACE THESEFACTS WITH ME. IF YOU PREFER TO BLAME EVERYTHING ON THEGOVERNMENT, IF YOU IMAGINE THAT THE GOVERNMENT CAN SOLVEYOUR PROBLEMS MERELY BY A CHANGE OF HEART, IF YOU PREFERTO LIVE IN A WORLD OF FANTASY AND COUNTRY PARTY SLOGANSTHERE IS LITTLE MY GOVERNMENT OR ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT CANDO FOR YOU. IT IS TIME FOR MORE CO-OPERATION, MOREGOODWILL AND, IF I MAY SAY SO, A LOT MORE ' REALISM FROM THEFARMING COMMUNITY. I DO NOT'BRUSH ASIDE YOUR PROBLEMS ANDI DO NOT DENY YOUR RIGHT TO PROTEST IF YOU BELIEVE YOU HAVEGENUINE GRIEVANCES. I DO SAY THAT FARMERS WHO DEMONSTRATEAGAINST THIS GOVERNMENT SHOULD EXAMINE THE RECORD FAIRLY ANDLOOK AT THE FACTS ABOUT THEIR DIFFICULTIES AND WHAT THEGOVERNMENT HAS DONE TQ HELP THEM.
-4-I'AM HAPPY TO LET THE FACTS PSEAK FOR THEMSELV. S, I HOPEYOU WILL BE HAPPY TO LISTEN TO-THEM,I PUT IT TO YOU THAT NO GOVERNMENT HAS DONEMORE FOR THE FARMERS THAN MINE. NOT JUST FOR THE MANON THE LAND BUT FOR THE WHOLE RURAL COMMUNITY, FOR THE3,000,000 AND MORE AUSTRALIANS 24% OF OUR PEOPLE WHOLIVE IN COUNTRY TOWNS. AND NOT JUST IN TERMS OF CASHBENEFITS AND SPENDING BUT IN THE DIFFICULT, CREATIVE, TESTINGBUSINESS OF SEEKING LONG-TERM SOLUTIONS AND DEVELOPINGTHE'INSTITUTIONS AND POLICIES NEEDED TO SECURE A BETTERLIFE. FOR FARMERS AND THEIR FAMILIES.LET ME GIVE YOU SOME FIGURES FIRST OF ALL. MONEYISN'T EVERYTHING BUT THE FIGURES SPEAK LOUD AND CLEAR. INOUR LAST BUDGET, OUTLAYS ON RURAL ASSISTANCE TOTALLED$ 488 MILLION $ 158 MILLION MORE THAN LAST YEAR. THERE WASA NET INCREASE IN OUR PAYMENTS TO AGRICULTURE OF $ 88 MILLIONOVER THE BUDGET IN 1973-74. THAT IS HARDLY THE SORT OFBUDGET ONE WOULD EXPECT FROM AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY. I AMAFRAID WE HEAR ALL TO LITTLE FROM THE FARMERS AND THEIRSELF-PROCLAIMED ALLIES ABOUT THE CREDIT SIDE OF LABOR'SLEDGER THE $ 56 MILLION WE ARE SPENDING ON AN ANIMAL HEALTH,LABORATORY, THE $ 28 MILLION WE ARE SPENDING ON A DAIRYRESTRUCTURING SCHEME, THE $ 40 MILLION WE ARE SPENDING ININCREASED FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENTS FOR WHEAT, THE $ 45 MILLIONWE ARE SPENDING ON THE NATURAL DISASTER RELIEF FUND, MOST OFWHICH WILL GO TO PEOPLE IN COUNTRY AREAS. THESE ARE JUSTA FEW EXAMPLES.
IN* THE CONTEXT OF CASH BENEFITS PERHAPS I SHOULDDEAL PROMPTLY WITH ONE PARTICULAR AND NOTORIOUS GRIEVANCEOF THE RURAL COMMUNITY. TO LISTEN TO THE COUNTRY PARTYANYONE WOULD IMAGINE THAT ALL THE TROUBLES OF THE RURALSECTOR WERE DUE TO OUR DECISION TO ABOLISH THE SUPERPHOSPHATEBOUNTY. WE DECIDED TO END THIS SUBSIDY. BECAUSE THE ORIGINALREASONS FOR INTRODUCING IT REASONS WHICH ALONE WOULD JUSTIFYA MEASURE OF THIS KIND AT THE TAXPAYERSI EXPENSE NO LONGEREXIST. IT WAS INTRODUCED WHEN THE PARAMOUNT NEED OF THEAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS TO ENCOURAGE RURAL PRODUCTION. TOEARN FOREIGN EXCHANGE. THERE IS NO LONGER SUCH A NEED. THEABOLITION OF THE BOUNTY MOST OF WHICH WENT TO THE WEALTHIESTFARMERS WHO NEED IT LEAST WILL SAVE ABOUT $ 56 MILLION.THAT IS APPROXIMATELY THE COST OF OUR PROPOSED ANIMAL HEALTHLABORATORY. THE BENEFITS TO RURAL PRODUCERS FROM THATLABORATORY WILL BE INFINITELY GREATER THAN THE BENEFIT FROMTHE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY. SO HERE IS AN EXAMPLE OF THEMORERATIONAL USE OF RESOURCES,. As YOU KNOW, WE HAVE REMOVEDA NUMBER OF OTHER RURAL SUBSIDIES WHICH WE CONSIDEREDWASTEFUL OR SELF-DEFEATING. THE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY IS THEONLY ONE OF THESE SUBSIDIES WHICH THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTIESHAVE SPECIFICALLY PROMISED TO RESTORE AND IF THERE HAD NOTBEEN AN ELECTION LAST MAY I DOUBT IF THEY WOULD HAVE PROMISEDEVEN THAT. SO WHENEVER YOU ARE TEMPTED TO BLAME A LABOR6*GOVERNMENT FOR DECISIONS THAT YOU FEEL TO'BE AGAINST YOURINTERESTS, LOOK CAREFULLY TO SEE WHETHER OUR OPPONENTS WOULDACT ANY DIFFERENTLY$ / 6
-6-IWANT TO DEAL WITH THE BROAD ASP~ T.*: S OF OURPROGRAM AS THEY AFFECT COUNTRY DWELLERS NQT JUSTFARMERS. IT SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN THAT EVERYTHING THISGOVERNMENT HAS DONE FOR. CITY PEOPLE IT HAS DONE FORCOUNTRY PEOPLE AS WELL.,. IT IS CENTRAL TO OUR PHILOSOPHYTHAT THE OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE To AUSTRALIANS FOR ABETTER LIFE SHOULD BE AVAILABLE EQUJALLY TO ALL AUSTRALIANSWHEREVER THEY LIVE. OUR ACHIEVEMENTS IN EDUCATION, HEALTHCARE AND SOCIAL WELFARE, TO TAKE JUST THREE EXAMPLES, ARENOT BENEFITS FOR CITY PEOPLE ALONE. IN MANY WAYS TH EY AREOF GREATER IMPORTANCE TO COUNTRY PEOPLE. MY COLLEAGUESENATOR WRIEDT MADE THE POINT THE OTHER DAY THAT ONLY 4%OF AUSTRALIAN FARMERS HAD HAD A TERTIARY EDUCATION. THATREGRETTABLE FACT HAS A LOT TO DO WITH THE. LIMITED EDUCATIONALOPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE IN THE COUNTRY. CHILDREN IN RURALAREAS HAVE SUFFERED FROM THEIR ISOLATION. WE ARE THE FIRSTGOVERNMENT TO TACKLE THIS PROBLEM. ONE WAY OF SPENDINGFUNDS ON EDUCATION IS TO CONCENTRATE ON PROGRAMS FORISOLATED CHILDREN IN RURAL'AREAS. THAT IS WHAT WE-* ARE DOING.IKNOW WHICH COURSE IS MORE IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN. LETUS FACE THESE FACTS SQUARELY IF ONLY FOR THE SAKE OF OURCHILDREN. I 1 0 S 17
-7-THE LAST LIBERAL BUDGET PROVIDED $ 2k MI1LLION FORSPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR ISOLATED CHILDREN. THIS '( EAR WE.HAVE BUDGETED FOR $ 11k MILLION. THE LAST LIBERAL IlObtiETGAVE $ 6 MILLION FOR RURAL UNIVERSITIES. WE ARE SPENDING$ 21 MILLION THIS YEAR. FOR COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATIONIN THE RURAL SECTOR, IT WAS $ 12 MILLION IN THE LAST LIBERALBUDGET; IT IS $ 47 MILLION IN OUR BUDGET..IF WE TAKE SOCIAL SECURITY PAYMENTS WE FIND THAT$ 880 MILLION -OR 46% O OF OUR TOTAL EXPENDITURE THROUGHOUTAUSTRALIA GOES TO RURAL AREAS. OUR REGIONAL EMPLOYMENTDEVELOPMENT SCHEME, OUR NATIONAL ROADS AND HIGHWAYSPROGRAMS, OUR PLANS FOR CHILD CARE, OUR SPECIAL ASSISTANCETO INDUSTRIES IN COUNTRY CITIES AND TOWNS AFFECTED BYUNEMPLOYMENT -THESE ARE ALL MEASURES OF PARTICULAR BENEFITTO COUNTRY PEOPLE. OUR TAX CUTS FOR PEOPLE ON INCOMESBELOW $ 10,000 A YEAR WILL ASSIST MANY FARMERS. SO WILL OURPROPOSAL TO ALLOW MORTGAGE INTEREST PAYMENTS AS A TAXDEDUCTION. So WILL OUR RECENT DEVALUATION. SO WILL OURLOWER TARIFFS. SO WILL OUR ABOLITION OF RADIO AND TELEVISIONLICENCE FEES. ALL THIS SHOULD BE OBVIOUS, BUT TOO OFTENTHESE THINGS ARE FORGOTTEN.
-8-WE ARE ACUTELY CONSCIOUS OF FLUCTUATION INFARMERS' INCOMES. THESE FLUCTUATIONS CAUSE HARDHIPj,;AND UNCERTAINTY FOR MANY RURAL PRODUCERS. IN ADDITION TO THEPARTICULAR GOVERNMENT MEASURES I HAVE DESCRIBED, WHICH WILLRAISE LIVING STANDARDS IN ALL RURAL AREAS, WE ARE DETERMINEDTO DO WHAT WE CAN ABOUT INDIVIDUAL INCOME FLUCTUATIONS.I HAVE TODAY. ASKED THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION TOREPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT ON WHAT ASSISTANCE MAY BE NEEDED TOREDUCE THESE FLUCTUATIONS. THE INQUIRY WILL BE DETAILEDAND COMPREHENSIVE AND I AM CONFIDENT THAT CONSIDERABLESBENEFITS WILL FLOW FROM IT TO THE WHOLE FARMING COMMUNITY.WHEN I-SPOKE. TO YOU LAST YEAR I TOLD YOU THAT WE SAW THEI. A. C. AS THE GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR RATIONALISING AND, WHERE"' FCESSARY, AUGMENTING OUR ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRIES,SINl" THEN WE HAVE REFERRED MANY RURAL MATTERS TO THEI. A. C. FOR INQUIRY AND REPORT. IT WILL HELP YOU IF I LISTTHEM BRIEFLY: SUPERPHOSPHATE MANUFACTURING, MUSHROOMS,APPLES AND PEARS, DRIED VINE FRUITS, BOVINE BRUCELLOSIS,AND TUBERCULOSIS SLAUGHTER COMPENSATION cHEMES, RURALPROMOTION, RURAL RESEARCH, RURAL RECONSTRUCTION, DAIRYING,NEW LAiiD FARMS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, NITROGENOUS FERTILIZERSSUBSIDY. THUS YO. "' ILL SEE THE STRENGTH AND SCOPE OF OUREFFORTS TO IMPROVE THEIR I-" PECTS OF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES.I SHALL DEAL BRIEFLY" WITH OUR ACHIEVEMENTS INFOUR INDUSTRIES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE. .1/ 9
THE OUTLOOK FOR THE WOOL INDUSTRY DE TTEFALLING PRICES IS MORE SECURE TODAY AS A RESULT-. OFLABOR'S POLICIES, IN DECEMBER 1972 WE INHERITED MR. ANTHONY'SFLEXIBLE RESERVE PRICE SCHEME, Now THE LABOR GOVERNMENT' HAS DECIDED THAT THE WOOL INDUSTRY SHOULD BE PROTECTED BY AFLOOR PRICE. IT HAS BEEN FIXED AT THE EQUILAVENT OF 250CENTS A KILO CLEAN FOR THE FULL 1974-75' SEASON,. IN EFFECT,AUSTRALIAIS CUSTOMERS NOW KNOW THAT DURING THE CURRENTSEASON THEY WILL NOT BE ABLE TO BUY WOOL BELOW THAT PRICE.THIS WILL GIVE THEM CONFIDENCE IN THE AUCTION ROOM. THEY WILLKNOW THAT THE VALUE OF THEIR STOCKS WILL NOT FALL DRASTICALLYAND THAT COMPETITORS WILL PAY THE SAME BASIC PRICE FOR WOOLSUPPLIES AS THEY WILL. THE WOOLGROWER WILL HAVE GREATERCONFIDENCE IN THE INDUSTRY KNOWING THAT A FLOOR HAS BEENPLACED UNDER THE MARKET.IN ADDITION TO THE FLOOR PRICE MECHANISM, THEAUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION HAS BEEN AUTHORISED TO CONTINUETO OPERATE A FLEXIBLE RESERVE PRICE SCHEME WHEN MARKETVALUES ARE ABOVE 250 CENTS A KILO. IN OTHER WORDS, IF THEMARKET RATE IS ABOVE 250 CENTS AND A SLUMP SETS IN, THEDECLINE WILL BE SOFTENED WITH THE PRICE FALLING GRADUALLYUNTIL THE FIXED FLOOR IS REACHED,ON THE EVE OF THE BUDGET, THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED TOPROVIDE DIRECT LOANS TO THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION FORITS FLOOR PRICE OPERATIONS WHEN THE BANKS ARE UNABLE TO MAKEFUNDS AVAILABLE, IN EFFECT, THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IS NOWPROVIDING ITS OWN FUNDS TO SUPPORT THE WOOL MARKET AND NOT) U T UARANTEEIN LQAN$ FROM THE BANKLNG .110
WE HAVE ALREADY INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO PROVIflE $ 150 MILLIONTO SUPPORT THE FLOOR PRICE.WE HAVE HELPED WHEATGROWERS IN POSITIVE ANDCONSTRUCTIVE WAYS. ONE OF THE FIRST ACTS Or THE GOVERNMENTWAS TO RECOGNISE THE VALIDITY OF WHEATGROWERS' CASE FOR ANINCREASED FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENT, PARTICULARLY AT A TIMEWHEN STOCKS WERE AT AN ALL-TIME LOW. FOR THE FIRST TIME INFIFTEEN YEARS, THE FIRST'ADVANCE WAS ' INCREASED BY A SPECIALINCENTIVE PAYMENT OF 10 CENTS A BUSHEL. AT THE SAME TIME$THE GOVERNMENT AGREED TO APPLY THE INCREASED FIRST ADVANCETO A RECORD DELIVERY QUOTA OF 514 MILLION BUSHELS FOR 1973-74,WE ALSO INTRODUCED AN ADDITIONAL FLOATING POOL OFMILLION BUSHELS FOR STATES WHICH EXCEEDED THEIR QUOTA.FOR THE 1974-75 CROP, THE GOVERNMENT HAS ACCEPTED THERECOMMENDATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN WHEATGROWERS' FEDERATIONTHAT THE BASE QUOTA SHOULD REMAIN AT 514 MILLION BUSHELS.THE FLOATING POOL HAS BEEN INCREASED TO 74 MILLION BUSHELS.liH FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENT OF $ 1.20 PER BUSHEL WILL APPLY,IN ADDITION, AFTER NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE WHEATGROWERS'FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT, A NEW FIVE-YEAR STABILISATION,PLAN FOR THE WHEAT INDUSTRY HAS BEEN FORMULATEr. I EXPECTTHAT WE SHALL BE MAKING A FURTHER ANNOUNCEMENT THAT WILLENCOURAGE WHEATGROWERS LATER THIS WEEK. ./ li
S. 4;THE GOVERNMENT HAS SHOWN ITS CONCERN FOR THE MEAIINDUSTRY DESPITE STRONG PRESSURES FOR RESTRICTIONS ONTHE EXPORT OF MEAT, WE REFUSED TO INTERFERE WITH THENORMAL MARKET FORCES WHICH DETERMINE THE QUANTITIES OFMEAT RETAINED FOR THE DOMESTIC MARKET OR SENT FOR EXPORT.THIS DECISION WAS TAKEN IN THE BELIEF THAT IT WAS IN THEBEST LONG-TERM INTERESTS OF BOTH PRODUCER AND'CONSUMER.THE PROVISION OF OVER $ 1 MILLION TO COMPENSATE OWNERSOF REACTOR LIVESTOCK HAS ENABLED THE TUBERCULOSISERADICATION CAMPAIGN TO BE ACCELERATED, IN ADDITION TO'OUR PROPOSED ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY. THE GOVERNMENTWILL ESTABLISH A BUREAU OF ANIMAL HEALTH WITHIN THES. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. MR R. W. GEE HAS ALREADY:BEEN APPOINTED DIRECTOR OF THE BUREAU. IT IS ALSOPROPOSED TO SET UP A NATIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH ADVISORYCOUNCIL ALONG THE LINES OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH ANDMEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL. THERE IS A REAL NEED TOINTRODUCE A SINGLE MEAT INSPECTION SERVICE TO ELIMINATETHE DUPLICATION AND INEFFICIENCY THAT ARISES FROM THEPRESENT SYSTEM OF BOTH AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTSPROVIDING MEAT INSPECTION. DISCUSSIONS ARE BEING HELDWITH THE STATES TO TRY TO REACH AGREEMENT ON A-SINGLESERVICE TO COVER ALL MEAT PREPARED IN AUSTRALIA FORLOCAL OR OVERSEAS CONSUMPTION.
A'.-12-WE ARE BUILDING A STRONG EFFICIENT AND COMPETITIVE iSUGAR INDUSTRY THE GQVERNMENT HAS ALREADY ANNOUNCED THAT. IT WILL CONTINUE THE NITROGENOUS FERTILISER SUBSIDY AFTERDECEMBER 31 THIS YEAR TO ASSIST SPECIAWSED REGIONALeGROWTH AND TO ENSURE CONTINUEA. LOCAL FERTILISER. PRODUCTION.E. WANT TO ENSURE THAT AUSTRALiA IS NOT-AT THE MERCY FOVERSEAS. SUPPLIERS OF FERTILIZER. THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES',: THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS ASSISTANCE TO SUGAR PRODUCERS AND. THE HORTICULTURAL INDUSTRIES IN IRRIGATION AREAS WHERETHERE IS A NEED TO MAINTAIN A HIGH LEVE OF SOIL FERTILITY.9 1;i' IICITHE FRUIT GROWING INDUSTRY HAS PROBABLY SUFFEREDMORE THAN ANY OTHER RURAL INDUSTRY THROUGH RISING COSTSOF PRODUCTION, INCREASING FREIGHT RATES AND CONTRACTINGSMARKETS To ASSIST THE INDUSTRY THE GOVERNMENT MAINTAINEDSTA. 3LISATION ARRANGEMENTS FOR EXPORTS IN THE 1973 SEASONTHROUGH GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE OF $ 2.75 MILLION ITSALSO MADE iAAILABLE IN THE 1973 SEASON ABOUT $ 1.6 MILLION. TO HELP THE INDUSTRY ADJUST TO OUR REVALUATION OF THE 1AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR. FOR THE 1974 EXPORT SEASON, APARTFROM SUPPORT THROUGH STABILISATION, WE AGREED TO SUPPORTA TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT SCHEME FOR THE SHIFMENT OF APPLESTo EUROPE AND THL "' ITED KINGDOM,. WITH A FINANCIAL.COMMITMENT OF $ 2 MILLION. SiMILAR SCHEMES HAVE BEENAGREED TO WITH THE QUEENSLAND AND WESTERN AUSTRALIANS GOVERNMENTSe o / 13
-13THEY HAVE BEEN DESIGNED TO GIVE THE INDUSTRY A BREATHINGS SPACE SO THAT NECESSARY RESTRUCTURING MEASURES CAN BESPUT INTO EFFECT, WE HAVE REPLACED THE APPLE AND PEARBOARD WITH THE AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION, WHICHWILL BE A SMALLER AND MORE EFFICIENT BODY WITH POWER TOTRADE IN ITS OWN RIGHT IN FRESH FRUIT AND PROCESSED FRUITPRODUCTS,. i A YEAR AT CURRENT PRICES.-YTHERE IS ANOTHER BROAD THEME RUNNING THROUGHOUR POLICIES AND IT IS THE BASIS OF ALL RURAL PROSPERITY.THAT IS THE ENLARGEMENT OF MARKETS. . OUR BASIC OBJECTIVE FORRURAL EXPORTS IS TO PROVIDE A FIRM AND LASTING BASISFOR INCREASED TRADE IN RURAL COMMODITIES. SINCE DECEMBER1972 THE GOVERNMENT HAS CONCLUDED MANY TRADE AGREEMENTSOF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO YOU AS FARMERS, I AM PROUD OFTHESE AGREEMENTS, I SHALL LIST THE MOST IMPORTANT OFTHEM. ' IN JULY 1973, WE SIGNED A TRADE AGREEMENT WITHCHINA IN WHICH THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT SUPPORTED THEPRINCIPLE OF LONG-TERM COMMODITY AGREEMENTS, AUSTRALIANRURAL PRODUCTS MENTIONED IN THE AGREEMENT INCLUDE WHEAT.AND OTHER GRAINS, SUGAR, WOOL. COTTON, TALLOW, HIDES ANDSKINS, BREEDING ANIMALS, PAPER AND PULP, A LONG TERMCONTRACT WAS NEGOTIATED WITH CHINA FOR UP TO 4.7 MILLIONTONNES OF WHEAT OVER A PERIOD OF THREE YEARS. AT CURRENTPRICES, THIS WOULD BE WORTH MORE THAN $ 600 MILLION. CHINAHAS ALSO SHOWN INTEREST IN LONG-TERM AGREEMENTS FOR OTHERCOMMODITIES, INCLUDING A SUGAR AGREEMENT WORTH $ 50 MILLION
144333 7c .1.13 3' I-TAI F3R A TRADE3GR**PRUDCTR. ANLI~. AIN AND-WOOL:AA 197 7RD.; SOOOT AiOLLtON 22 DECEMBERIA 1972, NOjATI00, ON E OFEWHEA VALUED.. A , ITON1-. M LITNR. AE REEMN WHSICH WAISS GEIN RLINE SA2L3E WHERTAHTIYS U~ AROENA LOG-MANY HASISHOWNEL'S INTTERR ESTO I4N RLOCNG$ FRASRLAPRDUTSINL4hN GA S A-TERM'..-AGREEMENTS, D, UIG MY VIIJSYA TEPILPIEA 193TETISIN TOAD AGRELKMENTAWSFLLED Y SUBSONGTANTIAPLISALOF SUGAR0 TONN" ES OFMIW6HENAT VALUED AT $ 5 MILLIHONR EAR POS* SIBLTEFRC FURTHER ALES OF WHEATIAN' SUAfNALN" MBSSDICUSINSOTHE SUPLLPIL. Y IS ALGOINTERESTE INMMLONG-STRAGMNISN CLDING MYETE ANDTI YOEAPREDITEP HLICES OGOVERNMEN EXPRSEO ITERT INIMORTNCATLE.3i
S IMPORTANT AS OUR MAJOR EXPORT MARKETS ARE, WEARE CONSCIOUS OF THE NEED TO AVOID TOO MUCH DEPENDENCE ONONE OR TWO MAJOR MARKETS FOR OUR PRIMARY PRODUCTS. TOFURTHER EXPAND MARKETS FOR AUSTRALIA'S PRIMARY PRODUCTS,THE GOVERNMENT WILL ESTABLISH AN OVERSEAS AGRICULTURALMARKETING SERVICE, . THE SERVICE WILL BE STAFFED BYEXPERIENCED MARKETING MEN IN KEY MARKETS OF THE WORLD ANDSUPPORTED BY THE NECESSARY FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA,SITS ROLE WILL BE TO IDENTIFY AND MEASURE MARKETOPPORTUNITIES, PROVIDE MARKET INTELLIGENCE AND UP-TO-DATEINFORMATION ON LOCAL MARKET CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS,TO INVESTIGATE DISTRIBUTION CHANNELS, AND TO CO-ORDINATEPROMOTIONPROGRAMS, / 16A : TRADE AGREEMENT WAS CONCLUDED : WITHTHE L. SS.,. RS LAST YEAR WHICH LISTED MEAT. DAIRY PRODUCTS, GRAINS,FRUIT, SUGAR, HONEY, WINEf OILSEEDS AND WOOL AS POTENTIALFXPORTS, THE' ABOR GOVERNMENT IS MORE INVOLVED IN THEVITAL QUESTION OF MARKETING PRIMARY PRODUCTS THAN ANYS PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATION, WE BELIEVE A GOVERNMENT'S ROLEIN AGRICULTURE EXTENDS BEYOND STABILISATION SCHEMES INTOTHE FIELD OF HANDLING, TRANSPORTING AND SELLING THEPRODUCT, i
r 8-COM O A QUESTION OF. PARTICULAR INTEREST TOVTHE SMALL FARMER -THE FUTURE OF CO-OPERATIVES,S SHORTLY AFTWR'HE BECAME INISTER FOR PRIMARYINDUSTRY. KEN* WRI EDT CALLED FOR A REPORT ON THE ROLE, OFFARMER COOPERATIYES IN AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE, ' iE WASaTOLD THATi WITH A FEW EXCEPTIONS'THE CO-OPERATIVES WEREUNDERCAPITALISED AND FACING MANAGEMENT PROBLEMS, GENERALLYSPEAKING, THE CO-OPERATIVES, HAVE BEENUNABLE TO COMPETE WITH.,. FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS IN THE PROCESSING AND MARKETINGOF AGRICULTURALAND FOOD PRODUCTS, THE LABOR PARTY BELIEVESIN CO-OPERATIVES. WE BELIEVE THEY PROVIDE AN IDEAL FORM INWHICH FARMERS CAN MAXIMISE THEIR RETURNS AND ADJUST THEIR.PRODUCTION TO CHANGING CONSUMER NEEDS.FOR THESE REASONS WE BEGAN DISCUSSIONS WITH THECO-QPFRATIVE MOVEMENT ON WAYS OF ASSISTING THEM, AS ARESULT THE CO-0PERATIV FEDERATION. OF AUSTRALIA HAS DECIDEDTO ESTABLISH A SECRETARIAT IN CANBERRA i. iJ THE GOVERNMENT HASl... IED TO ESTABLISH A FARMER CO-OPERATIVE SERVIE WITHIN THEDEPARTML'T OF AGRICULTURE, THE FIRST TASI( KOF BOTH GROUPSWILL BE TO CO-O0PERATE'IN A MAJOR STUDY OF THE AIMS ANDOBJECTIVES OF FARMER CO-OPERATIVES IN AUSTRALIA.a. 1117./ 17: I j;-t ~ J : Sa. a-a. i. -' a a'. i.
-17-THE STUDY WILL LOOK AT THE LAWS AFFECTING COOPERATIVES1THEIR INFORMATION AND FINANCIAL NEEDS, METHODS OF IMPROVINGTHEIR-EFFICIENCY AND PROFITABILITY# THEIR MANAGEMENT TRAININGNEEDS AND OTHER MATTERS, THE BOVERNMENT SOUGHT TO HELPCO'OPERATIVES RAISE CAPITAL FOR NEW VENTURES BY EXPANDING THE'POWER'OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY D9VELOPMENT CORPORATION TO*'ENABLE IT TO ASSIST CO-OPERATIVES THIS INITIATIVE HAS BEEN. TWICE BLOCKED BY THE LIBERAL/ COUNTRY PARTIES IN THE SENATE,WE REAFFIRM OUR SUPPORT FOR THE CO-OPERATIVEMOVEMENT. GLADLY ACKNOWLEDGE THE PRESENCE TONIGHT OFSMR. JOHN BEYTAGH, THE CHAIRMAN OF THE NEWLY FORMEDAGRICULTURAL COMMITTEE OF THE CO-OPERATIVE FEDERATION OFAUSTRAL IA.' I -4S I1 r i Ii
I FE Pn) REASON WHY FARN' 67S SH'OULD LACK CONFIDENCEIN WhEIR FUTUR~ E UNIJEN A VYGOR iS ANDO G' 71AP-X GOVERNMENT.YOU CAN BlE SUrZE ThIAT MORE THAIJ A0 TXI GOES ON, THE.WORLD WILL NEED AND DEMAND YOUR PPRODUCTS. INITIALLY WEHAD TO T AKE GOME T OUGH DEC I S I GS I Tti I NT ER E 3TS 0OFEFFICIENCY AND. FAIRNESS, THE UFT! 0,7AL OF SON'-. YA4' CONCESSIONSAND SUBSIDIES LAST YEAR WAS UNPOPULAR WXTH ThIV FARtltlt-iCOMMUN17Y, WE DID N'OT EXPECT TO ZE POPULAR9 I SIMPLY ASK YOUTO REMEMBiER THAT THESE CONCLESSIOilS AND SUDSID1ES WERE NOT REALLYHELPING YOU. WE HAVE REPLACED THEM. WIT4$ MUCH NORE VALUABLEBENEFITS, YOUR LONG-TERM PROSPECTS ARE STRONGER IN CONSEQUENCE@...TiERE IS EVERY REASON TO HOPE THAT THE WORST DAYSFOR AUSTRALIAN FARMERS ARE OVER, TIE'SEVERE RECESSION OFTHE EARLY 70s NEED NOT HAPPEN1 AGAINv F'RIVID3ED WE ADOPT THERIGHT POLICIES Nt" Al PND FOR THE FUTURE. 1415. ER THE LABORGov~ maliaT WE19 HAVE SEEK' THE FIRST S iC--. 1ICAUT POST-WAR FALLFOR MANY~ J YEARS IN TH=-INDEBTEDNESS OF PJRA" L P11Z) UCERS,IN 1971 THEz BuREAU OF AGRICULY8' r. L ELgCsR EPORTED THAT'7,570 A JSTRALIAN FARMERS APPLIED FOR AS . SISTANCE FROM THE RURALRECONSTMUCTION BOARD, THIS YEAR THE FIGURE IS T) OVJ' TO 523APPLICATION4SI OUR POLICIES TO RAISE THE LIVING S7ANDARDS OF ALLAUS. TRALIANS WILL ATTACK THE CRUCIAL PROLLEMS OF RURAL POVFRTY.VIE CAHNOT IGNORE THE CHILLING FACTS SHGWN IN THE INTERIM REPORTOF THE tOMSINO INQUIRY INTO0 PGVF rZT' THAT ONE IN FOURFAMILIES IN COUNTRY TOWNS LIVE IN POVERTY OR'NEAR-POVERTY,.1/ 19._ lnU-
THR9R MOR PORFMLEtNASRL ON YT NDTERMAIREE MORE OO FAMNIRL EN UALASCNRYI ATONAND PROSPEROUS AUSTRALIA, FAR( 4 INCOMES, DESPITF A RECENTDOWNTURN INWOOL AND PRICES, WII. L CONTINUE TO RISE, YOUR* MARKETS W I L4 CONT INUF, TO EXPANP, I? 4' KEN WRIEDT * t~ U HAVETHE ABLF. ST* BEST INF. ORMEP, MOST. ' ACTIVE AND IRTELLIGENTMINISTER EVER APPOINTED TO ADMINISTER P* RIMARY INDUSTRY.IN OUR RECENT.-GREEN PAPfR ON RURAL* INDUSTRY YOU HAVE THEBEST AND MOST COMPREHENSIVE BASIS FOR INFORMED. GOVERNMENTPOLICIES ON RURAL INDUSTRY EVER DRAWN UP IN AUSTRALIA,IN OUR INDUSTRIEs . ASSISTANCE COMMISSION YOU HAVE THE MOST.EXPERT'AND FFFICIENT INSTRUMENT FOR GUARANTEEING T* HE STRENGTH* AND STABILITY OF. OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES EVER APPOINTED IN* AUSTRALIA. ALLTHESE TH4IQS PROVIDE FIRM GROUNDS FOR*. CONFIDENCE AND FAITH IN THE FUTURE. -3oNOBT3E TAKEN INiBY THE PROPAGANDA OF OUR OPPONENTS, OUR POLICIES AREflSIGNED TO ENSURE THAT ALL POSSIBLE MARK~ ETS ARE OBTAINED FOR* CUR PRIMARY EXPORTS* THAT MARKETING SYSTEMS ARE EFFICIENT,* THAT PKR ' UCTS GROWN ARE THOSE IN DEMAND, THAT OUR FARMERSIlCREASE ' THEIR ALRL.-Y HIGH LEVgLS OF EFFICIENCY AND THATALL AUSTRALIANS IN RURAL Aiii.. ENJOY EDUCATIONAL, hlEALTH#.AND LIVING STANDARDS EQUAL. TO ANY IN AUSTRALIA AND A~ NY INTHE* WORLD.



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO,. 357
October 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT -STEAM, GAS
AND WATER FITTINGS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Industries Assistance Commission in its report on steam,
gas and water fittings, subject to international commitments.
The report was released on 13 August 1974.
The report covers tube and pipe fittings of nonferrous
metals and valves ( including actuators). The fittings
are predominantly of copper or its alloys and, of these, most
are plumbing fittings. The large range of valves varies in
type, size and application.
The Government's decision to implement the
Commission's recommendations will mean that a rate of duty
of 25 per cent will apply to valves and actuators and a rate
of 20 per cent to tube and pipe fittings of copper, nickel and
their alloys. Minimum rates will apply to tube and pipe
fittings of other metals.
Mr Whitlam said that details of the customs tariff
changes and revised by-law arrangements arising from the
Government's acceptance of the Commission's report will be
announced when administrative arrangements to implement them
have been finalised. In the interests of consistency, in
the tariff treatment of valves some minor changes in respect
of certain valves not covered by the Commission's report will
also be announced.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



28
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 356
October 1974
APPOINTMENTS TO THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
the appointment of Mr. F. Pascoe, Dr. R. Dun and Mr. C. Grace
as Associate Commissioners of the Industries Assistance
Commission. Mr. Pascoe who was recently appointed an Associate
Commissioner for the inquiry into the clothing industry has
had his term of appointment extended for a period of five
years from 1 January 1975. Mr. Pascoe has had extensive
experience as a senior executive in manufacturing companies
and organisations. He is Chairman of Directors, Australian
Development Ltd., and a director of a number of other
companies. He was President of the South Australian Chamber
of Manufacturers in 1972-73, and is the first President of
the Amalgamated Chamber of Manufacturers and Chamber of
Commerce, South Australia. Mr. Pascoe is currently Deputy
President of the Associated Chambers of Manufacturers of
Australia. Dr. Dun has been appointed for the inquiry into
the financing of rural research. Dr. Dun has had extensive
experience in agricultural research and is currently
Assistant Director-General N. S. W. Department of Agriculture.
Dr. Dun's services have been made available to the Industries
Assistance Commission by the Premier of New South Wales, Sir
Robert Askin. Mr. Grace has been appointed for the inquiry into the
by-law admission of heat transfer printing paper. Mr. Grace
was recently re-appointed an Associate Commissioner on a
temporary basis in order to finalise a number of other inquiries
on which he is engaged.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



i~ AUSTKALIA
PROMFE MINSTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 361
1 November 1974
INDUSTRIAL CO-OPERATION BETWEEN AUSTRALIA
AND JAPAN
The Ptime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced that the
Australian Government had invited Japanese motor vehicle
companies to study the feasibility of their manufacturing
cars in Australia. Studies have already begun and Japanese technical
groups will visit Australia in the next few months to
investigate existing production facilities. A team of
Australian officials led by Mr N. Currie the Secretary of
the Department of Manufacturing Industry discussed the
proposal in Japan this week.
Studies would be conducted within the framework
of the guidelines for future motor vehicle policy in
Australia announced by the Prime Minister on 25 October.
Important aspects of the studies would be encouraginq
employment into areas of greater technological skill and
the use of existing resources.
The Prime Minister welcomed this development as
a further step in long term industrial co-operation between
Australia and Japan.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 360
1 November 1974
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO WORLD" FOOD
CONFERENCE
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs announced that
the Minister for Agriculture, Senator Wriedt would be leaving
Australia for Rome during the week-end to lead the thirteen
member Australian Delegation to the World Food Conference.
( 5-16 November). The Deputy Leader of the Australian
Delegation will be Mr R. S. Swift, Deputy Secretary of the
Department of Agriculture. The delegation will comprise
Australia's Ambassador to Italy, His Excellency Mr J. E. Ryan,
the Research Adviser to the Minister for Agriculture,
Mr David Thomas, and Senior officers from the Departments of
Agriculture, Overseas Trade, Treasury and Foreign Affairs.
The delegation will be accompanied by an adviser, Mr Allan Smith,
National Director of the Australian Freedom From Hunger Campaign.
The Conference is being convened in order to devise
measures for dealing with the world's present food crisis, which,
although it had been developing over a long period, suddenly
emerged in dramatic form in 1972 when, as a result of adverse
weather conditions, world food output declined.
The Conference's work will be divided into three main
areas: measures to increase agricultural production in developing
countries; world food security; and world food trade. Australia
intends taking an active role in the Conference's discussions in
these three areas and the delegation has accordingly been briefed
to adopt a positive and constructive approach towards proposals
for programs and objectives which will contribute to reducing
the food gap in developing countries.
CANBERRA.. A. C. T.. 



NO DATE
M/ 140 2 November 1974
JOINT PRESS STATEMENT
The attached is the text of the Joint
Press Statement issued after the talks between
the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the visiting
Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Kakuei Tanaka. 
I VISIT TO AUSTRALIA OF THE PRIME MINISTER OP JAPAIN
31 OCTOBER 6 NOVEMBER 1974
JOINT PRESS STATE. I: T
The PrimeMinister of Japan,. Mr. Kakuei Tanaka, is paying
an official visit to Australia from 31 October to 6 November 1974,
at the invitation of the Australian Government. While in
Canberra, Mr Tanaka held discussions with the Australian Prime
Minister, Mr Whitlam, and other Ministers. Mr Tanaka will visit.
Sydney and Perth and also the north-western part of Western
Australia. 2. The Prime Ministers expressed their satisfaction with
the development of broad exchanges between the two countries in
a spirit of close friendship and goodwill. They agreed that
Japan and Australia should further strengthen their efforts to
deepen and diversify their cooperative relations.
3. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to promote
world peace, security and progress in accordance with the
principles of the United Nations Charter and to strengthen the rule
of law in the conduct of international relations. They noted in
particular the inadmissibilñ ity of the threat or use of force in
international relations and the necessity for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes.
4. The Prime Ministers reviewed developments in the Asian
and Pacific region. They agreed that the last fevw years had given
rise to better prospects for the development cf peace ar4 progress
in the region, but that there were still some elements of
uncertainty. They agreed to promote regional cooperation in
accordance with the needs and interests of the countries in the
region and to work for a deeper understanding by all countries of 
each other's interests and objectives. They welcomed the. work
of such bodies as the Ministerial Conference for the Economic
Development of South East Asia and the South Pacific Forum in
achieving greater regional cooperation,
The Prime Ministers also discussed the situation in
Indochina. They agreed on the urgent need for the full
establishment of peace in the area, and full implementation of
the Paris Accords on Viet Nam by the parties concerned, in order
to promote the social and economic well-being of the people of
the region. The Prime Ministers deplored the continuing war in
a
Cambodia and urged the parties concerned to seek an early end to
the conflict through peaceful negotiations.
6. In discussing developments in North East Asia, the
Prime Ministers reaffirmed the importance they attached to the
preservation of peace in the Korean peninsula and expressed
their hope that the South-North dialogue would be further
promoted with a view to reducing tensions in that area.
7. The Prime Ministers also had an exchange of views on
the situation in the Indian Ocean. They expressed their support
for the concept that the Indian Ocean should be a zone of peace.
8. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their opposition to all
nuclear testing and expressed their profound concern at the
effect which recent developments in the nuclear field were having
on the nuclear non-proliferation. regime. The Prime Ministers
confirmed the determination of their Governments not to become
nuclear-weapon states. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their
conviction that all nations should make dedicated efforts to
promote disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament, under
effective international control, and to prevent nuclear
proliferation. In this context the Prime Ministers underlined
the high responsibility of nuclear-weapon states in such efforts.
They expressed their hope for further progress by the nuclearweapon
states in the field of arms control. They agreed to 
cooperate in the United Nations for the purpose of maintaining
and strengthening the existing non-proliferation regime and
bringing about a comprehensive test ban.
9. The Prime Ministers gave close attention to the current
world economic situation and expressed the conviction that it was
essential for all countries to cooperate closely in dealing with
such problems as inflation, raw material supply, foodand energy.
They agreed that Australia and Japan should strengthen such
cooperation, both on a bilateral and multilateral basis, to
ensure constructive and appropriate solutions to these problems.
While acknowledging that the period ahead would be a
difficult one, the Prime Ministers reaffirmed their determination
to avoid measures such as unilateral restrictions in trade and
other current account transactions in the spirit of the Declaration
adopted in May this year by the Governments of member countries
of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development at
its Ministerial Council.
11. The Prime Ministers reaffirmed that they attach great
importance to a successful completion of work already under way
in the fields of trade and international finance within a
multilateral framework with a view to establishing improved
international economic relations. They confirmed the intention
of Australia and Japan to participate fully in the GATT
multilateral trade negotiations, which had been initiated. at the
Ministerial Meeting in Tokyo in September last year. They
considered that given the present international economic
circumstances it was more important than ever to press ahead
with the negotiations, and thus stressd the need for an early
commencement of substantive negotiations. On monetary matters,
the Prime Ministers noted the steps being taken in the framework
of the IMF, the W'orld Bank and other forums towards the solution
of the complex problems involved. 
12. The Prime Ministers expressed their concern at the
particular problems facing the developing countries in the
present international economic situation. They referred to the
need for. urgent and sympathetic consideration of these problems
by all. countries, particularly in view of the serious difficulties
faced by non-oil producing developing countries. The Prime
Ministers agreed that assistance in the field of agricultural
development was important in this respect, and that there was
a need for forums such as the World Pood Conference to take a
constructive attitude to the problem of world food supply.
13. Recognising the close economic interdependence between
the two countries, the Prime Ministers agreed to cooperate in
further strengthening and developing trade relations between the
two countries. The Prime Ministers noted with satisfaction that
the discussions which had taken place in recent years at all
levels on trade and related matters had been extremely valuable
and agreed that these dialogues should be continued and
strengthened. The Prime iMinisters discussed the importance
of improving the conditions of trade and providing a greater
degree of stability in the trade between the two countries.
They also discussed -a number of issues currently of particular
importance, including the trade in beef, wool, sugar and motor
vehicles. 14. The Prime Ministers discussed trade in minerals. and
energy resources and the effects of the recent energy situation
and endorsed the need for the continuirJ cooperation in this
field both between the two countries and within the multilateral
framework. They also noted with satisfaction the continuing
exchange of views and information on developments in this field
between the two countries.
Mr Tanaka described Japan's increasing coal requirements
from Australia for steel making and for power generation and
Japan's intentions to plan a larger amount of electrical
generation by coal and nuclear sources. 
t Mlr Whitlam reaffirmed the assurances of Australia's
fullest possible cooperation in energy supplies and Australia's
intention to plan the progressive expansi6n of coal production
to meet Japan's requirements.
The Prime Ministers agreed to commence cooperation in
the field of coal hydrogenation research through mutual visits
of'experts and exchanges of technical information.
Mr Tanaka expressed his appreciation of the confirmation
of supply by Australia to Japan of the contracted 9,000 short tons
of uranium and the possibility of larger supplies to Japan between
1976 and 1986. He also stated that over the period 1986-2000
Japan would require to import much more uranium from Australia.
Mr V'hitlam replied that Australia would be prepared to consider
meeting these Japanese requirements.
Responding to the Australian proposal already made
concerning the enrichment of uranium, . Ir Tanaka said that Japan
would cooperate with Australia in studying the possibility of
uranium enrichment in Australia which, in principle, Japan would
favour. Mr Tanaka said that the study would be extended to
capital, the selection of appropriate technology from third
countries and other related matters.
Mr hitlam expressed readiness to provide for Japan's
expanded requirements from enrichment in Australia.
The Prime Ministers agreed that the joint studios should
be initiated as early as practicable,
The Prime Ministers discussed foreign investr. ent and
agreed that within their respective pclicies there was
considerable scope for mutual cooperation in continuing the flow
of capital b'etwveen the two count. i2s
16. The Prime Ministers agreed h: at in order to develop
mutual understanding and trust which would constitute a firm
basis for enduring friendly relations between the two countries,
it was essential that Australia and Japan should increase the
opportunities for the people of each country to come to know 
6.
each other better and to understand more deeply the
importance of each country to the other.
17. The Prime Ministers welcomed the signature of the
Cultural Agreement between the Government of Japan and the
Government of Australia and expressed their common expectation
that the agreement would serve as a valuable framework for the
further expansion of cultural exchanges and promotion of mutual
understanding between the two countries.
18. The necessity of assuring the implementation of the
broad range of activities provided for in the Cultural Agreement
was recognised and the Prime Llinisters expressed the intention of
their Governments' making matching expenditures of approximately
$ A1 million each to encourage such activities. They also agreed
that there should be further consultations on the arrangements
needed in each country, and between them, to advance a wider
spectrum of relations . between the two peoples.
19. The Prime Ministers expressed their joint wish for
extended cooperation in the fields of science and technology.
They considered that mutual benefits would flow from increased
exchange of scientific information and personnel in areas of
mutual interest. The Prime Ministers noted with satisfaction the progress
which had been made towards the conclusion of a treaty of friendship
and cooperation ( the treaty of Nara), which would express in a
formal way the community of interests, the friendship and the.
interdependence which exist between the two countries.
21. The Prime Miinisters reaffirmed the importance they attach
to the Australia-Japan Ministerial Committee and expressed their
belief that the Committee would play an even greater role in the
future for the development of mutual uenderstanding and trust between
the two countries. They looked forward to the holding of the third
meeting of the Ministerial Committee in Canberra in the first
half of 1975. 
220 Rr Tanaka expressed his deep appreciation to the
Government oand people of Australia for the friendship and
gracious hospitality extended to him and to-the members of
his party on the occasion of their visit to Australia. 



PRIME MINISTER S'lATFnMENT
FOREIGN EQUITY IN MINING.
I'HEi PRIME MINISTER, MR WHITLAM, TODAY
RELEASED THE GUIDELINES AGREED UPON BY THE
GOVERNMENT FOR FOREIGN EQUITY PARTICIPATION IN AND
CONTROL OF THE MINING INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA.
MR WHITLAM SAID THE GUIDELINES, WHICH
HAD BEEN COMMUNICATED TO THE JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER,
MR TANAKA, DURING HIS VISIT TO CANBERRA, WERE A
DEVELOPMENT OF TIE POLICY OUTLINED BEFORE THE
MINISTERIAL MEETINGS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND JAPAN
IN TOKYO LAST OCTOBER. THEY WERE TO BE READ IN
CONJUNCTION WITH THE STATEMENT LAST WEEK ON THE
URANIUM INDUSTRY BY THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS
AND ENERGY, MR CONNOR. 
PRIME MINISTER
GUIDELINES FOR FORE~ IGN EQUITY PARTICIPATION TN
AN!) CONTROLO F, TWIIEfr NN-NG ' INDUTR~ Y
i) Development in Austraianir Interests
The Government's basic aim io to ensure that Australia's
mi neral rusourcus are devel~ oped I n such a way as to br Ing niexinuin
be~ nefits to the Australian people, If this objective is to be
achieved, ultimate responsibility for the exploration, development
and processing of minerals must rest with Australians all
enterprises, whether Australian or foreign-owned, engaged in
exploration, development or processing, must conform with the
national interest. The Government will use all of its powers,
including its export and exchange control powers, to achieve
this aim.
( ii) Equity, Control and ownership
The Government desires, as 0 . major objective, to promote
Australian equity in and q9nro. of Its resources and industries,
and maximum Australian ownership compatible with Australia's longterm
capital requirements and its needs for access to markets,
advanced technology and khow-hv ' The Governiment recognises,
however, that many o-f the important existing enterprises engaged
in the development of Australian resources are under foreign
equity control. For this reason, the promotion of Australian
equity in and control of our resources and industries must be
viewed as a longer-term objective.
( iii) Roles for the Public and Private Sectors
The Government ' recognises that private participation in
exploration and development w~ ill continue to be essential. A
maximum level of activity-will be achieved only if there is
participation both by public bodies, such as the PMA and the
AIDC, and private enterprises. The Government recognises also that
participation by companies will be dependent on the prospect of a
return on capi-tal employed which is commensurate with the high
risks sometimes involved.
( iv) Exploration The Government seeks Australian participation in mineral
exploration. It believes, however, that because of the risks
involved and Australia's limited capital resources, it is more
important to secure a high degree of Australian equity participation
at the production stage. The development of any mineral discoveries
will, of course, be subject to approval by the Government in
accordance with these guidelines.
Processing The Government's objective is the maximum level of mineral
processing consistent with the rational use of Australia's resources, I I) 
PRIME MINISTER
( vi) Consultations with the Australian Government
The Government expects to be informed of all major
mineral development proposals by Australian as well as foreign
enterprises at an early stage. The point of contact will be
the Minister for Minerals and Energy who will refer to other
Australian Government Ministers matters coming within their
areas of responsibility e. g. the Treasurer on foreign ownership
and on financing aspects, the Minister for the Environment and
Conservation on environmental aspects, and the Minister for Urban
and Regional Development on urban and regional aspects. This will
assist the Government in ensuring that maximum benefits accrue
to the Australian people as a whole. 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENTSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, QC, M. P.,OPENING THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OFLOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATIONS, AT ALICE SPRINGS, ON MONDAY11 NOVEMBER, 1974.THERE IS A SYMBOLISM ABOUT THIS GATHERING WHICHONE MAY FIND FASCINATING OR FRIGHTENING ACCORDING TO ONE'SPREJUDICESx AUSTRALIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS AT LAST COMETO THE CENTREX WHEN YOU CHOOSE NOT ONLY TO MEET IN THECENTRE, BUT HAVE THE LUCIFER OF CENTRALISM OPEN YOURCONFERENCE AND HAVE YOUR MEETING ON AN AUSTRALIAN TERRITORYTHEN THE PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND MIGHT WELL WONDER WHAT THEWORLD IS COMING TOK I, NATURALLY AND BY CONTRAST, FINDBOTH YOUR CHOICES THE VENUE AND THE OPENING SPEAKERWELCOME AND GRATIFYINGX IN THE LIGHT OF THE NORTHERNTERRITORY ELECTIONS IT MIGHT BE EXCESSIVE TO SAY THAT I MEETYOU ON HOME TERRITORY; BUT IT IS AT LEAST NEUTRAL GROUND,AND FOR ALL OF US AS FAR AS THE WARMTH OF THE WELCOME OFTHE PEOPLE OF ALICE SPRINGS ON THIS OCCASION IS CONCERNEDFRIENDLY GROUNDx
THIS CONFERENCE ITSELF IS ANOTHER LANDMARK ONTHE RAPID MARCH TO MATURITY TOWARDS PARTNERSHIP INTHE FEDERAL SYSTEM WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS MADE INRECENT YEARS VERY RECENT YEARSx IT HAPPENS TO BE JUSTTWO YEARS THIS WEEK THAT I DELIVERED THE POLICY SPEECHON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY FOR THE 1972ELECTIONSX IT WAS NO ACCIDENT THAT THE LENGTHIEST ANDMOST DETAILED SECTION OF THAT DOCUMENT DEALT DIRECTLY WITHCITIES* CENTRES, REGIONS, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THESOCIAL, FINANCIAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTIONS ASSOCIATEDWITH THEMA IT WAS NO ACCIDENT IN EITHER PERSONAL ORPOLITICAL TERMS. FROM THE TIME I WAS ELECTED TO THENATIONAL PARLIAMENT TWENTY-TWO YEARS AGO AT THE END OFTHIS MONTH I REFUSED TO ACCEPT WHAT WAS THEN THECONVENTIONAL WISDOM THAT THE SOLE OR CHIEF CONCERNS OF THENATIONAL PARLIAMENT SHOULD BE FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE, THEANNUAL BUDGET AND THE LEVEL OF THE MAJOR SOCIAL WELFAREPAYMENTSx POLITICALLY, IT SEEMED OBVIOUS THAT A PARTY OFSOCIAL REFORM, SUCH AS OURS PROFESSED TO BE, EMASCULATEDITSELF BY ACCEPTING THESE LIMITATIONS AND PREOCCUPATIONSXIT COULD NEVER GET ANYWHERE UNLESS IT RECOGNISED, AS ANATIONAL PARTY, THE NEED FOR NATIONAL INVOLVEMENT BY THENATIONAL GOVERNMENT THROUGH THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT INTHE CONCERNS OF THE PEOPLE OVER THE WHOLE RANGE OF POLICYTHEIR SCHOOLS, THEIR CITIES, THEIR HOSPITALS, THEIRCULTURE, THEIR RECREATION, THEIR IMMEDIATE ENVIRONMENT, ANDPROVIDING ACCESS TO JOBS, SHOPS AND RECREATIONS) ,3/
AND IN ALL THESE AREAS I SAW IT TO BE NECESSARY ANDINESCAPABLE THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUST PLAY A FULLPART AS A FULL PARTNER WITHIN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM,I FOUGHT TO HAVE THE VIEW ACCEPTED BY MY PARTY ANDINCORPORATED IN ITS PLATFORM I FOUGHT SUCCESSFULLY,I THEN FOUGHT TO HAVE THAT: VIEW ACCEPTED BY THEAUSTRALIAN ELECTORATEX I FOUGHT SUCCESSFULLY I HAVESINCE FOUGHT TO HAVE THAT VIEW INCORPORATED IN THELEGISLATION AND THE CONSTITUTION OF THIS NATIONA IHAVE HAD SOME SUCCESSES AND SOME FAILURESX I HAVE NOTYET FINISHED THAT FIGHT WHEN AS LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTYI BEGAN TO BRING LOCAL QUESTIONS TO THE CENTRE OF THENATIONAL DEBATE I CAME IN FOR SOME " CHIACKING" x I EVENHAD THE POOR TASTE TO SUGGEST THAT SEWERAGE WAS ANATIONAL PROBLEM IN FACT A NATIONAL ISSUEX I REMEMBERTHE THEN PRIME MINISTER, JOHN GORTON, ACCUSED ME OFTALKING LIKE A SHIRE PRESIDENTx I ACCEPTED THE SOFTIMPEACHMENT I THOUGHT IT GOOD COMPANY TO BE INx IFIND IT GOOD COMPANY TO BE IN TODAYx IRONICALLYMR. GORTON HIMSELF IS NOW DEEMED AN EVEN MORE FEROCIOUSCENTRALIST THAN IX THE FACT IS THAT THE APPROACH I TAKETO NATIONAL AFFAIRS OWES NOTHING TO ANY DOCTRINE CALLED" CENTRALISM", IF SUCH A DOCTRINE THERE BEX
IT IS SCARCELY EVEN " SOCIALISM", IF SOCIALISM BE DEFINEDAS BERNARD SHAW AND THE WEBBS DID AND THEY WERE THEPIONEERS OF MODERN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS " THE INEVITABILITYOF GRADUALISM" K I AM RATHER ENTITLED TO DESCRIBE WHAT IHAVE BEEN ADVOCATING, DEFINING, AND RE-DEFINING OVER A LONGTWENTY-TWO YEARS AND MORE, AS HAVING BEEN THE GRADUALISMOF INEVITABILITY, FOR IT IS INEVITABLE, GIVEN AUSTRALIA'SNATURE AND SITUATION, THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUSTACCEPT GREATER INVOLVEMENT IN ALL THESE MATTERS WHICH WEREONCE DEEMED TO BE THE SOLE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATES OROF LOCAL GOVERNMENTx THE RESULT OF THAT OLD APPROACH WASTHAT THE FUNCTIONS WHICH A MODERN COMMUNITY REQUIRES SHOULDBE PERFORMED THROUGH ITS ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES WERE EITHERDONE INADEQUATELY OR NOT DONE AT ALL, WERE FINANCEDINADEQUATELY AND UNFAIRLY OR NOT FINANCED AT ALLx IT ISINEVITABLE THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST ACCEPT INCREASINGRESPONSIBILITY TO FINANCE THESE FUNCTIONS FAIRLY ANDADEQUATELYx WHAT I HAVE TRIED TO DO, WHAT THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT HAS TRIED TO DO, IS TO CREATE THE INSTITUTIONSAND MACHINERY AND TO APPOINT THE MEN AND WOMEN WHEREBYTHIS INEVITABLE RESPONSIBILITY CAN BE DISCHARGEDEFFICIENTLY AND FAIRLYxTO THE EXTENT THAT THE POLICY SPEECH OF 1972INCORPORATED THESE CONCEPTS IT MIGHT BE REGARDED ASSOMETHING OF A POLITICAL TESTAMENTx
IT MAY BE THAT HAD WE NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL AT THE ELECTIONSBEFORE LAST, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN MY LAST TESTAMENTX BUT* IT IS USEFUL TO LOOK BACK ON THAT DOCUMENT AND SEE HOW FARTHE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN ABLE TO ACHIEVE WHAT ITSET OUT TO DO FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE FORWHOM LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS SO GREAT A RESPONSIBILITYXI EXPLAINED OUR GENERAL APPROACH IN THIS WAY:" EVEN THE MOST ENLIGHTENED AND EQUAL APPROACH TOSOCIAL WELFARE CAN ONLY SCRATCH THE SURFACE OF THE BASICPROBLEM OF EQUALITY AND WELL-BEING OF MOST OF OUR CITIZENSXWE CAN DOUBLE AND TREBLE SOCIAL BENEFITS, BUT WE CAN NEVERMAKE UP THROUGH CASH PAYMENTS FOR WHAT WE TAKE AWAY INMENTAL AND PHYSICAL WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL COHESION THROUGHTHE BREAK-DOWN OF COMMUNITY LIFE AND COMMUNITY IDENTITYINCREASINGLY, A CITIZEN'S REAL STANDARD OF LIVING, THEHEALTH OF HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY, HIS CHILDREN'SOPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION AND SELF-IMPROVEMENT, HISACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, HIS ABILITY TO ENJOYTHE NATION'S RESOURCES FOR RECREATION AND CULTURE, HISABILITY TO PARTICIPATE-IN THE DECISIONS AND ACTIONS OF THECOMMUNITY ARE DETERMINED NOT BY HIS INCOME, NOT BY THEHOURS HE WORKS, BUT BY WHERE HE LIVESx THIS IS WHYLABOR BELIEVES THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST INVOLVEITSELF DIRECTLY IN CITIES AND CENTRES WHERE MOST PEOPLE LIVEA
PRACTICALLY EVERY MAJOR NATIONAL PROBLEM RELATES TOCITIEsx A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT WHICH CUTS ITSELF OFFFROM RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE NATION'S CITIES IS CUTTINGITSELF OFF FROM THE NATION'IS REAL LIFEx A NATIONALGOVERNMENT WHICH HAS NOTHING TO SAY ABOUT CITIES HASNOTHING RELEVANT OR ENDURING TO SAY ABOUT THE NATIONOR THE NATION'IS FUTUREy LABOR IS NOT A CITY-BASEDPARTYx IT IS A PEOPLE-BASED PARTY, AND THE OVERWHELMINGMAJORITY OF OUR PEOPLE LIVE IN CITIES AND TOWNS ACROSSOUR NATIONX I ITHEN OUTLINED SPECIFIC PROPOSALsKr THEY WERE:TO ESTABLISH A MINISTRY OR URBAN AND REGIONALDEVELOP ME N TTo SET UP LAND COMMISSIONS TO BUY SUBSTANTIALTRACTS OF LAND IN NEW AREAS BEING OPENED UPFOR HOUSING AND TO LEASE OR SELL AT COST FULLYSERVICED BLOCKS)(To MAKE DIRECT GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR URBANPUBLIC TRANSPORTxTO ASK THE PRINCIPAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITIESWHAT AUSTRALIAN GRANTS IN THAT FINANCIAL YEAR WOULDENABLE THEM TO EMBARK PROMPTLY AND ECONOMICALLY ONAN UNINTERRUPTED PROGRAM TO PROVIDE SERVICES TOTHE PREMISES IN THEIR AREAS BY 1978, K 1 37/ 0
To MAKE DIRECT REPRESENTATION FOR LOCALGOVERNMENT A CONDITION OF PARTICIPATIONBY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AT THEPROPOSED CONSTITUTION CONVENTION OF 1973ATO AMEND THE GRANTS COMMISSION ACT TOAUTHORISE THE COMMISSION TO INQUIRE INTOAND REPORT UPON APPLICATION FOR AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT GRANTS BY ANY LOCAL GOVERNMENTAUTHORITY OR GROUP OF AUTHORITIES, PREFERABLYON A REGIONAL OR DISTRICT BASISXTo SECURE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT A VOICE ANDA VOTE ON THE LOAN COUNCIL,WITH ONE NOTABLE EXCEPTION, THESE UNDERTAKINGSHAVE ALL BEEN FULFILLED IN WHOLE OR PARTx IN HIS ANNUALREPORT YOUR PRESIDENT MR GUERIN REFERS VERY GENEROUSLY TOTHESE ACHIEVEMENTS,. PROPERLY, HE DESCRIBES THE AMENDEDGRANTS COMMISSION LEGISLATION, THE SUBSEQUENT REPORT OFTHE GRANTS COMMISSION AND THE ACCEPTANCE BY THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT OF ITS RECOMMENDATIONS AS THE MOST SIGNIFICANTACHIEVEMENT THIS YEARA AS A RESULT OF THE FIRST REPORTWE HAVE AUTHORISED PAYMENT OF NEARLY $ 56 MILLION ($ 56,3' 45,000)TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIESA THE 806 AUTHORITIES WHICHBENEFIT COMPRISE 92 PER CENT OF ALL WHO APPLIED FORFINANCIAL ASSISTANCEA : 8' A
THE GRANTS RANGE FROM $ 3,000 TO $ 2 MILLION FOR THELARGEST AND MOST POPULOUS COUNCIL AREA IN AUSTRALIABRISBANEx I EMPHASISE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTACCEPTED THE COMMISSION'S RECOMMENDATION THAT THEGRANTS ARE MADE WITHOUT CONDITIONS ON THE MANNER INWHICH THEY ARE SPENT BY THE RECEIVING AUTHORITYx I ALSOEMPHASISE THAT THE NEW FUNDS SHOULD IN NO WAY BE ASUBSTITUTE FOR REVENUE NORMALLY RAISED BY COUNCILS BYLONG ESTABLISHED MEANS SUCH AS RATES AND CHARGES FORSERVICES NOR REPLACE ASSISTANCE NORMALLY PROVIDED BYSTATE GOVERNMENTSK As YOU WILL BE WELL AWARE, OUR CHIEF OBJECTIVEIS EQUALISATION OF SERVICES WITHIN REGIONSx WE HAVELEGISLATED TO ENABLE THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO PROMOTESTANDARDS AS BETWEEN REGIONS IN A WAY WHICH IT HAD ONLYBEEN ABLE TO DO, FROM ITS CREATION IN 1933, AS BETWEENTHE STATESY, THE GREAT INEQUALITIES IN AUSTRALIA NOWLIE NOT BETWEEN THE STATES BUT BETWEEN REGIONS WITHINTHE STATE BOUNDARIESX I BELIEVE THE NEW WORK OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION,AS IT UNFOLDS, WILL PROMOTE ANOTHER DEVELOPMENT OFPROFOUND SIGNIFANCE TO THE SHAPE, IMPORTANCE ANDEFFECTIVENESS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTX I REFER TO THECREATION OF REGIONS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF GENUINEREGIONAL THINKINGX 9/,
THE CREATION OF APPROVED REGIONAL ORCANISATIONS FOR THEPURPOSES OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION ACT IS NOW ALMOSTCOMPLETEX So FAR THERE ARE 74 APPROVED REGIONALORGANISATIONS) IN THE FIRST YEAR OF OPERATION OF THENEW ACT ONLY THIRTEEN LOCAL GOVERNING BODIES EITHERDECLINED TO ACCEPT MEMBERSHIP OF ANY REGIONAL ORGANISATIONOR DID NOT SEEK ANY FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE THROUGH THEGRANTS COMMISSION, THIS NUMBER HAS ALREADY BEEN REDUCEDAND WE LOOK FORWARD TO A VIRTUAL 100 PER CENT PARTICIPATIONXTHE SPIRIT IN WHICH INDIVIDUAL LOCAL AUTHORITIES ENTER INFOTHE REGIONAL PROGRAM IS, OF COURSE, A MATTER FOR THEIRDECISIONK I DO SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT AN IMAGINATIVEAPPROACH TO THE REGIONAL ORGANISATION, INVOLVING PARTICIPATIONNOT ONLY OF THE CONSTITUENT COUNCILS BUT OF THE REGIONALCOMMUNITY, WILL PROVIDE A MAJOR STEP TOWARDS BETTER REGIONS,BETTER LOCAL GOVERNMENT, BETTER COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERALAND STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND BETTERo HAPPIER COMMUNITIESAAT-PRESENT THE REGIONAL ORGANISATION$ CONSIST SOLELY OFREPRESENTATIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTx THE FUTURE STRUCTUREAND DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS IS NOT SOMETHINGTHAT SHOULD BE FEARED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BECAUSE IT IS AMATTER LARGELY FOR COMPONENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIESTHEMSELVES TO DETERMINEx THEY CAN IF THEY CHOOSE LEAVETHE REGIONAL ORGANISATION AS NOTHING MORE THAN A DEVICE FORMAKING APPLICATION TO THE GRANTS COMMISSIONX
I DO BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT EXPERIENQE WILL DEMONSTRATETHE ADVANTAGES OF REGIONAL CONSULTATION AND COOPERATIONIN A NATION WHICH HAS HITHERTO HAD FAR ' 00 FEW GENUINEREGIONS AND FAR TOO MANY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES; FARTOO LITTLE REGIONALISM AND FAR TOO MUCH PAROCHIALISMXI MENTIONED THAT THERE WAS ONE GREAT EXCEPTIONIN OUR EFFORTS TO FULFIL THE PROGRAM FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTOUTLINED TWO YEARS AGOx NOT, YOU WILL BELIEVE ME, FORWANT OF TRYINGX I REFER OF COURSE TO OUR EFFORTS TOSECURE A VOICE AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THELOAN COUNCILx IN THE 1972 POLICY SPEECH I SAID: " LETTHERE BE NO MISTAKE ABOUT OUR DETERMINATION TO MAKE LOCALGOVERNMENT A GENUINE PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEMX IN1927 WHEN THE FIRST FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THECOMMONWEALTH AND STATES ESTABLISHED THE LOAN COUNCILSEMI-GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEBTS WERE A MEREFRACTION OF STATE DEBTSx Now SEMI-GOVERNMENT AND LOCALAUTHORITIES HAVE TO FIND AS LARGE SUMS AS THE STATEGOVERNMENTS FOR THE REPAYMENT OF LOANS AND PAYMENT OF INTERESTJIT WOULD BE INCONCEIVABLE, IF THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT WEREBEING DRAWN UP NOW, FOR THE SEMI AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTALAUTHORITIES TO BE COMPLETELY IGNOREDA AT PRESENT ON THELOAN COUNCIL EACH STATE HAS ONE VOTE AND THE COMMONWEALTHHAS TWO VOTES AND A CASTING VOTE)( WE PROPOSE THAT ATNEXT YEARIS CONVENTION THE LOAN COUNCIL BE RESTRUCTURED TOCONSIST OF ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM EACH STATE GOVERNMENT,ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS IN EACHSTATE CHOSEN PY THEM AND FOUR REPRESENTATIVES OF THECOMMONWEALTH4
III" IT WILL THEN BE POSSIBLE FOR THE COMMONWEALTH. ONREQUEST. TO RAISE APPROVED LOANS QN BEHALF OF SEMIGOVERNMENTAND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES* THUSGIVING THEM TH9 ADVANTAGE OF THE LONGER PERIOD ANDLOWER INTEREST APPERTAINING TO THE LOANS RAISED BYTHE COMMONWEALTH ON BEHALF OF THE STATgS."I DON'T SUPPOSE I HAVE TO FOLLOW THROUGH THESTORY IN DETAIL% AT THE CONVENTION IN SYDNEY INSEPTEMBER 1973 1 DID SECURE SOME SORT OF AGREEMENT ORAT LEAST I THOUGHT I HAD SECURED IT FROM THE PREMIERSXAT LEAST THEY AGREED TO DISCUSS THE PROPOSAL AND WHENTHEY CAME TO CANBERRA ON 11 OCTOBER 1973 1 EXPECTED TOMAKE REAL PROGRESSK I HAVE TO SAY THAT WITH ONEEXCEPTION THE PREMIERS DID LITTLE MORE THAN REINFORCEEACH OTHERS I PREJUDICES IN FAVOUR OF THE STATUS QUOxREGRETTABLY THE ONE EXCEPTION IS NO LONGER A PREMIER.THEIR ARGUMENTS BOILED DOWN TO TWO: THAT THE PRESENCEOF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LOAN COUNCIL WOULD MAKE THATBODY UNWIELDY IF NOT UNWORKABL~ E, PARTICULARLY AS LOCALGOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVES WOULD LACK THE KNOW-HOW TOGRAPPLE WITH THESE PROBLEMS OF BORROWINGS, DEBTS, INTERESTAND FUNDING; AND SECONDLY, AL. L THAT WAS NECESSARY FORTHE SOLUTION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROBLEMS WAS FOR THEAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE MORE MONEY FOR THE STATESgIN OTHER WORDS, THE SAME SYSTEM1 THE SAME SET-UP# WHICHHAS SO MANIFESTLY FAILED, SHOULD BE CONTINUEDX 12/.
12,I DO NOT THINK ANY LXI" LIIENCE SINCE I UECAME PRIMMINISTER HAS SO COMPLETELY UPHELD THE ASSERTION I USEDTO MAKE AS LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION THAT THE STATESWHO COMPLAIN OF STARVATION FROM CANIERRA ARE INSENSITIVETO THE NEEDS OF THEIR OWN CREATIONSx I NEXTSOUGHT TOACHIEVE OUR OBJECT IN THE ONLY WAY OPEN BY REFERENDUM,BY GOING TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA, I DO NOT HIDEFROM YOU MY DISAPPOINTMENT AT THE REJECTION OF THATREFERENDUMA IN A SENSE, I SUPPOSE IT MAY BE REGARDEDAS ONE OF THE CASUALITIES OF THE ELECTION FORCED UPON USIN MAYX THE OFFICIAL CASE FOR NO WAS A MARVEL OFMISREPRESENTATIONK THE PROPOSAL WAS TERMED A " MONEYBRIBE" IT CLAIMED: " IMAGINE THE MACHINERY WHICHWOULD BE NECESSARY TO EXAMINE THE AFFAIRS OF 1,000MUNICIPALITIES AND TO DECIDE WHICH ONES WERE DOING WHAT,WHY THEY WERE DOING IT, HOW THEY WERE DOING IT, WHETHERTHEY NEEDED ASSISTANCE, IF SO WHAT ASSISTANCE AND HOWMUCH" IN OTHER WORDS, THE OFFICIAL CASE FOR No WASACTUALLY ATTACKING THE WORK ALREADY UNDERTAKEN BY THEGRANTS COMMISSION/., IT DELIBERATELY CONFUSED THELOAN COUNCIL AND THE GRANTS COMMISSIONA DESPITE THECONFUSION, DESPITE THE FIELD-DAY FOR ALL THE NAY-SAYERS1THE PROPOSAL RECEIVED A VERY HIGH LEVEL OF PUBLIC SUPPORT4THE INTERESTING FEATURE IS THAT THE SIZE OF THE YES VOTE WASIN DIRECT PROPORTION TO THE SIZE OF THE STATE THE LARGERTHE STATE THE LARGER THE YES VOTE. 131,
13.BY STATES THE RESULTS WERE: yu NN W SOUTH WALES 50-79 49.21VICTORIA 47.38 52,62QUEENSLAND 43.68 56.32SOWTH AUSTRALIA 42.52 57.48WESTERN AUSTRALIA 40.67 59.33TASMANIA 40.00 60.00AUSTRALIA 46.85 53,15WHATEVER THE PRESENT OUTLOOK ON THIS OR ANYOTHER MATTER AFFECTING LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AMDETERMINED TO CARRY OUT THE FUNDAMENTAL PLEDGE I GAVEIN 1972 THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL BE MADE A FULLPARTNER IN OUR FEDERAL SYSTEMXk THE GRANTS COMMISSIONACT. is OBVIOUSLY A BIG STEP FORWARDA., THE REJECTION SOFAR OF OUR EFFORTS FOR REPRESENTATION ON THE LOANCOUNCIL IS OBVIOUSLY A SET-BACK,~ YET WE ARE ACHIEVINGTHE BASIC OBJECTIVE PARTNERSHIP IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEMIN MANY WAYS)( WE ARE DOING THIS BY INVOLVING LOCALGOVERNMENT CLOSELY IN MANY OF OUR MOST SIGNIFICANTPROGRAMS, IN 1973 WE INSTITUTED TRIAL AREA IMPROVEMENTPROGRAMS INVOLVING SPENDING OF $ 8 MILLION IN THE SYDNEYAND MELBOURNE WESTERN REGIONSx, THIS YEAR THERE WILL BETHI. RTEEN AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS OPERATING WITH ASPENDING OF $ 14 MILLIONA&amp; ? 1
14.LAST YEAR WE PROVIDED $ 28 MILLION UNDER OURNATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM, THIS YEAR THE ESTIMAIE IS$ 105 MILLION AND THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN EXTENDED TO TOWNSWITH A POPULATION OF MORE THAN 10,000FOR THE FIRST TIME WE HAVE MADE URBAN LOCALROADS ELIGIBLE FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THEAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION ANDOTHER AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENTS SUCH AS DEPARTMENT OFURBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ARE CONSULTING AT LOCALLEVEL ON THE RECREATIONAL NEEDS OF THE PEOPLEx OURGRANTS PROGRAM HAS MADE A START TOWARDS MEETING THOSE NEEDSAWE HAVE THIS YEAR ALLOCATED $ 2.25 MILLION FOR GRANTS FORLOCAL TOURIST ATTRACTIONS AND FACILITIESx WE AREESTABLISHING ADVISORY COMMITTEES FOR CONSULTATION WITHLOCAL GOVERNMENT, REGIONAL TOURIST ORGANISATIONS ANDINDUSTRY REPRESENTATIVES TO PLAN REGIONAL TOURISTDEVELOPMENTX WE HAVE EXPANDED THE PROGRAM OF LOCALOWNERSHIP OF AERODROMES.
LOCAL GOVERN4MENT HAS PARTICIPATED IN THEINTERIM PROGRAM FOR PRE-SCHOOL AND CHILD-CARESERVICES,, ABOUT HALF OF THE 122 CAPITAL PROJECTSUNDERTAKEN THROUGH OUR CHILD-CARE PROGRAM WERESPONSORED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES) PROJECTS DEVELOPED, PROGRESS PAYMENTS WERE MADEDIRECT TO THESE AUTHORITIESx ONCE THE PROJECTS WEREWELL UNDERWAY RECURRENT GRANTS WERE PAID TO THEMANAGEMENT BODIES WHICH USUALLY INCLUDE LOCAL GOVERNMENTREPRESENTAT IONXWE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE MORE THAN MILLIONIN DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES FORABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT IN THE PAST YEARX MOST OF THATWAS ALLOCATED UNDER THE SPECIAL WORK PROJECTS SCHEMEADMINISTERED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIESX MAY SAYTHAT, IN GENERAL, WE HAVE BEEN VERY SATISFIED WITH THEADMINISTRATION OF THE GRANTS AND I APPRECIATE THESPIRIT IN WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS ENTERED INTO THEPROGRAMA WE HAVE COOPERATED CLOSELY WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENTTHROUGH THE CREATION OF THE REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIALD EVELOPMENT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIANASSISTANCE PLANA
16.THE LEGISLATION FOR THE -OSPITALS AND HEALTHSERVICES COMMISSION PROVIDES FOR THE COMMISSIONMAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO BEMADE AVAILABLE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO LOCALGOVERNMENTS AFTER CONSULTATIONS WITH THE STATESA THECOMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM AND THE COMMUNITY MENTAL HEATHOALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY PROGRAM, BOTH INTRODUCEDIN 1973, PROVIDE FOR DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTORGANISATIONS* LOCAL GOVERNMENT NOW HAS AN OPPORTUNIlYTO PARTICIPATE DIRECTLY IN THE PROVISION OF A WIDE RANGEOF HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES AT THE COMMUNITYLEVEL, WHERE ITS PARTICIPATION CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVEAWE HAVE BEEN GRATIFIED BY THE COOPERATION WEHAVE RECEIVED FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE REGIONALEMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEMEX So FAR, 350 PROJECTSCOSTING MORE THAN $ 8.5 MILLION HAVE BEEN APPROVED4 AFURTHER 100 PROJECTS ARE UNDER CONSIDERATIONg APARTICULARLY ENCOURAGING FEATURE HAS BEEN THE WILLINGNESSOF PROJECT SPONSORS, PREDOMINANTLY LOCAL GOVERNMENTAUTHORITIES, TO CONTRIBUTE THEMSELVES TO THE COST OFPROJECTS. 171,
174THE ROLE WE ASSIGN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ISTHE REAL IANSWER TO CHARGES OF CENTRALISMxK UNDER AVARIETY OF PROGRAMS WE HAVE PROVIDED LOCAL GOVERNMENTWITH THE FUNDS TO UNDERTAKE A RANGE OF ACTIVITIESPREVIOUSLY INADEQUATELY CARRIED OUT OR TOTALLYNEGLECTEDyK WE DELIBERATELY HAVE MADE A ND SHALL MAKELOCAL GOVERNMENT A VEHICLE FOR OUR LEGISLATION ON AGEDPERSONS'I HOMES AND HOSTELS, SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT,HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, MEALS ON WHEELS, HOME CARE ANDNURSING, NURSING HOMES AND HOMELESS MEN AND WOMENKTHESE ARE ALL ACTIVITIES WHICH CANNOT BE CLOSELYREGULATED FROM THE NATIONAL OR STATE CAPITALS AND AREBEST PLANNED AND IMPLEMENTED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORKINGWITH LOCAL COMMUNITIES), THEY JUSTIFY ASSISTANCE FROMTHE NATION'IS FINANCES BUT NOT INCREASES IN RATESXLAST MONTH WE WERE FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO BEABLE TO ANNOUNCE THAT MR JUSTICE ELSE-MITCHELL, JUDGE OFTHE LAND AND THE VALUATION COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALESSINCE 1962, HAD ACCEPTED APPOINTMENTr AS CHAIRMAN OFTHE GRANTS COMMISSION FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEARSx HE ISA MAN WITH A VERY DEEP UNDERSTANDING OF THE PROBLEMSOF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS WHEN HE WAS CHAIRMAN OF THE ROYALCOMMISSION INTO NEW SOUTH WALES' LAND VALUATION RATINGSYSTEMS IN 1965, HE SAID: am. 18/.
A18," PRESENT CENTRALI$ ED POLICIES, WHICH HAVE REDUCEDLOCAL GOVERNMENT TO A STATE OF VASSALAGE ANDCOUNCILS TO THE ROLE OF MENDICANTS, NEED DRASTICREAPPRAISEMENT, THOUGH I WONDER IF STATEGOVERNMENTS ARE VERY ANXIOUS FOR LOCAL AUTHORITIESTO GAIN ANY SUBSTANTIAL MEASURE OF FINANCIALINDEPENDENCE OR TO DEVELOP QUALITIES OF STRONG LOCALAUTONOMYx" THE POLICIES AND PROGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT WILL, I BELIEVE, GO FAR TO END THATCONDITION OF VASSALAGE, THE PARADOX IS THAT MOREDIRECT COOPERATION BETWEEN THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ANDLOCAL GOVERNMENT CAN HELP END STATE CENTRALISM BY GIVINGTHE CHANCE FOR THE GROWTH OF GENUINE REGIONALISMK OURAIM IS TO PROMOTE THE QUALITY OF THE REGIONS AND TOPROMOTE EQUALITY BETWEEN THE REGIONSx IT CAN BEACHIEVED ONLY THROUGH COOPERATION BETWEEN THE NATIONALGOVERNMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTx THERE IS NO OTHERWAYx THIS IS NOT JUST MY CHOICE; IT IS A CHOICEIMPOSED UPON US BY NECESSITY, BY THE INEVITABILITY OFAUSTRALIAN HISTORY, ( END)



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 363
11 November 1974
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LOCUST CONTROL
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, today
announced details of Australian Government assistance for
locust control in Queensland.
Speaking from Alice Springs, Mr Whitlam said
he had sent a telegram yesterday to Mr Bjelkc--Petersen
after receiving the necessary details a Queensland request
for financial assistance.
The Prime Minister's telegram stated:
2The Australian Government will be happy to
provide assistance on a dollar for dollar basis up to your
estimate of $ 720,000. In doing so, we have very imuch in
mind the great need throughout the world for the food
crops which are endangered."~
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



USrT1A1. AL
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 364
12 November, 1974
AUSTRALIAN~ AMERICAN FESTIVAL 1976
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced plans
for a nationwide Australian American Festival in 1976. Mr.
Whitlam said he had accepted an invitation to be the joint
patron of the festival with the United States Ambassador to
Australia, Mr. Marshall Green.
The festival would co-incide with celebrations in the
United States to mark the bicentenary' of American independence.
The Sydney program would be held from 27 March to 24
April 1976. No dates had yet been set for the program being
prepared for Melbourne and other capital cities.
Mr. Whitlam said the Australian American Association
had conceived the idea of a national Australian American
Festival and had received prompt co-operation from many
quarters including cultural groups, sporting bodies, retail
and business houses, art galleries, organisations and trusts
and many prominent citizens.
" The festival will heavily underline the ever-strengthening
bonds that exist between the two nations", Mr. Whitlam said.
" It will comprise three segments Heritage, Festival
and Horizons. The Heritage section will concentrate on the
historical association of Australia and America."
" Displays, art and other exhibitions, special theatrical
and orchestral performances, travel promotions, a street parade
and sporting events will be included in the Festival segment".
Mr. Whitlam, said the Horizons segment would draw attention
to present-day relationships between the two countries and
give an insight into future relationships.
" I commend the Australian American Association for the
part it has played over the years in strengthening the ties
between our countries and initiating the 1976 festival with
which I am honored to be associated," Mr. Whitlamr said.
CANBERMFA A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 365
12 November 1974
RELEASE OF INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORTS
TEXTILE AND APPAREL MACHINERY ETC AND PAPER MAKING AND
PRINTING MACHINERY ETC: AND MATTRESSES QUILTS EIDERDOWNS
AND CUSHIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlan, today released
two reports of the Industries Assistance Commission, namely
Textile'and Apparel Machinery etc and Paper Making and Printing
Machinery etc; and Mattresses Quilts Eiderdowns and Cushions.
Mr. Whitlam. said that the Government's decisions
on the reports will be announced at the earliest practicable
date.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. I?
PRIME MINISTER 



* EMBARGO: 8.00 P . M. 7
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
STATEMENT ON THE ECONOMY
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM.. M. P.,
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA, A. C. T.
TUESDAY 12 NOVEMBER 1974
Introducing the Budget in September the Treasurer emphasised
the importance of maintaining the utmost flexibility in responding
to economic developments. The Treasurer stated: " Should the need
arise, we stand ready during the year to take action on the
expenditure or the revenue side of the Budget to give a quick
stimulus to demand and employment".
Our underlying purpose is to create conditions for
co-operation and restraint. The measures I shall announce tonight
are designed to further that aim. The Australian economy is beset
by the twin problems of rapid inflation and rising unemployment.
We share these problems with all comparable economies. The t 4o
problems are universal but their concurrence is unique in modern
times. The Australian Government, therefore, like the Governments
of all comparable countries, faces problems of economic management
of unparalleled complexity, uncertainty a~ nd difficulty. For all
governments and for most nations these are testing times. In the
final analysis the test concerns not the basic strength of national
economies and Australia's basic strength is indisputable but
the strength of nerve and will on the part of governments and people
alike. It is essential therefore that the people of Australia
should understand what is happening and why. Concern, real and
genuine concern, must not give way to despair, for the situation
is '. fficulta nd changes are occurring with unprecedented speed.
They z~ i.-e not beyond control. The problems of the rapid rise in
unemployment and continuing steep rise in prices and costs are
interlocked. The rate of wage and salary increases has easily
outstripped the rate of increase in pri * ces. The consequential
squeeze on profits has been sharp. This has in turn led to a loss
of confidence by business in its ability to obtain an adequate
return on capital in an inflationary environment.
Employees can price themselves out of the market as
effectively as business can. There are signs that this is happening.
As the Treasurer said recently, in current circumstances:
" One -an's larger pay packet may mean another man's job."-
Employt_-. s are economising on labour, scaling down their operations
and their investment and hence the employment opportunities they
provide. The rapid increase in wage costs which businesses have
experienced introduces3 an element of uncertainty in business
oalculations which greatly increases the risk involved in making
new investments. 
-2-
The Government's immediate concern must be to stop
and reverse the downturn. The decline in employment and overtime
now evident will reflect itself in a weakening of demand in the
near future. If unchecked, the downturn would begin feeding on
itself. The Government has decided therefore to provide a further
demand stimulus to the economy. The Government also intends to
take action which strikes at the root of the cause of the present
downturn, the high rate of inflation and the decline in business
profitability. What is needed is a stimulus to the economy which
increases demand whilst at the same time abating cost pressures
and enhancing private profitability.
The Government has already taken a number of decisions
on the exchange rate and on the supply of money the most recent
of which were announced on Sunday by the Treasurer -which will
substantially lift business confidence.
These measures add up to a very substantial relaxatioi
obfe commoen etaa rgyo odp oldeiacly aenads iefri nainnc itahle mcoonntdhist ioanhse adc ant hbaen tehxepye ctheadv e tob* een
in the recent past. In the past week the Governor of the Reserve
Bank has written to the banks requesting them to increase
appreciably their rate of new lending and I1 would expect to see
a prompt response by the banks. Some savings banks are already
stepping up the rate of their housing loan approvals.
The new measures I announce tonight are designed to:
Firstly, maintain consumer demand through a substantial
reduction in personal income tax.
Secondly, attack inflation by reducing the pressure for
wage in,.--ases through a substantial improvement in after tax
take home pay next year and specifically to break the wage-price
spiral by giving business a breathing space in wage demands based
on price increases in the December quarter.
Thirdly, enhance profitability by a reduction in company
tax, by requesting the Prices-Justification Tribunal to give
particular consideration to the adequacy of return on capital
and by urgently investigating the implications of rapid inflation
for the taxation of companies; and
Pourthly, support particular industries where special
problems e emerging.
The proposeL. -easures together with the announcement
made by the Treasurer on Sunday night represent decisive action
to stimulate demand and employment, to contain the growth in
money wages and to restore business confidence. 
-3-
Personal Income Tax
The Government has decided to reduce further personal
income tax. Honourable Members will recall that in the 1974-75
Budget it was proposed that the rate scale be restructured to
reduce income tax payable by $ 370 million on a full year basis.
We now propose to restructure the rate scale to apply to 1974-75
. income in order to reduce income tax payable by an additional
$ 650 million. In total, then, the rate scale now to apply to
1974-75 incomes involves a tax cut of over $ 1,000 million.
Additional tax relief was provided in the Budget in the
form of a rebate of dependents' allowances for low income
families and deductibility of mortgage interest payments -these
will cost the revenue close to $ 200 million per annurta.
My announcement tonight thus brings the personal incore
tax cuts provided for by the Government this year to about
$ 1,200 million. The new restructuring of the rate scale I am announcing
ton~ ight will have the effect of increasing the take home pay of
most full-time employees earning up to average weekly earnings
by about 3 per cent. There will be lesser reductions at higher
incomes. The precise details of the new rate scale are being
made available separately.
As a consequence of the changes to the rate scale
. announced in the Budget as further modified by my announcement
toniqht, there will be very large reductions in tax payable by
the erage wage-earner. Let me give two examples, both relating
to a 4riyer with a dependant wife and two children and with
other cu~ icessional deductions equal to 10 per cent of annual income.
Such a taxpayer, earning $ 100 a week, would be liable
for an annual tax of $ 568 on the basis of the 1973-74 rate scale.
The new rate scale and the low income rebate will reduce this
liability by $ 304 to $ 264, or by 54 per cent. His after-tax
pay will be about 6 per cent more than it would have been without
the tax cuts. A taxpayer in similar family circumstances earning $ 140
a we would be liable for an annual tax of $ 1,160 on the basis
of the 7 3-74 rate scale. The new rate scale will reduce this
liability $ 283-to $ 877, or by 24 per cent. His after-tax pay
will be over 4 per cent greater than it would have been without
the tax cuts. It is proposed that the new rate scale announced tonight
will be reflected in PAYE deductions on pay days after 1 January
1975. PAYE deductions made from January on to the end of the
financial year will be set at levels designed as far as possible
to give the taxpayer the whole benefit of the new tax reduction
in respect of income year 1974-75 in the January-June half year.
There will be, in consequence, an even more substantial percentage
increase in take-home pay for most employees. 
Housing Loan Interest: PAYE Deductions
The scheme of housing interest deductions for income
tax purposes is to apply in-respect of interest payments after
1 July 1974 as announced in the Treasurer's Budget Speech. It
is intended that as from the first pay-day after 1 January
employees will be able to arrange with their employers for
adjustment of pay-as-you-earn instalments to allow for the effect
of the interest deduction. This will reinforce the impact of
general tax reduction by providing a further boost in take-home
pay. INFLATION
These measures are designed to achieve the first
objective I mentioned earlier namely the maintenance of
consumer demand. The substantial reduction in personal income
tax, however, bears directly upon the second objective the
attack on inflaticn by reducing wage pressures.
At present, applications are before the Australian
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission for the introduction
of wage indexation in other words, the automatic adjustment
of wages to price increases. The Australian Government will
play an active and positive role in these proceedings to support
wage indexation on the basis of full compensation for price
increases on a percentage basis up to the level of average
weekly earnings, with a flat rate adjustment for higher incomes.
The recent level of increases in wages and salaries,
bc; in terms of award and over-award rates, has been due in
part A-he need for trade unions to protect their members
agains. ubstantial future price increases.
A system of wage indexation would have the advantage
of protecting the real piirchasing power of wages anad , Aarie. s
generally. Th hearing of claii, coming from the ACT3 ; ind othcr
employee organi,, itions is to proceed during this month and in
December, and the Govrnment is hopuful fcr a " ecision from the
Commission at the earliest possible date.
The Government is aware that tbrrr ri-dy be an understandable
iL t-' ng amongst employees that too long a period will pass before
the i csion is able to announce its decision. The Government
will, thi. efore, -make submissions before the Arbitration Commission
to the effc. t that the changes in the rate of income tax, announced
in my statement ton. should be regarded by the Comiaission as
compensation for the increase in the cost of living which is
expected for the December t 1974. In other words, the
Australian Government will be submitting to the Com-ission, in
connection with the most appropriate date for the introduction
of cost of living adjustments, that the anticipated increase
in the Consumer Price Index for the three months October, November
and December 1974, will be compensated for by the increases in
take-hox: pay resulting directly from the reduction in personal
income tax announced this evening. 
The Government expects that the trade union Imovement,
in the interests of its members, will co-operate with it by
seeking the introduction of wage indexation in a way that will
minimise inflationary pressures and avoid unjustified wage
claims. Increases based on price movements in the December
quarter, whether by arbitrated decision or by agreement would,
in the Government's view, not be justified. Present trends
suggest that the commencement of a system of wage indlexation
would be fair and reasonable if it began with the Consumer Price
Index . figure for the March quarter 1975.
The Australian Government will put to the Commission
that it should take particular account of the tax reductions
which are designed to protect the take-home pay of employees.
To introduce cost of living adjustment on the basis of price
increases in the present quarter would involve double countingit
would continue the dangerous cost and price increases
harmful not only to the whole community but to the employment
prospects of wage and salary earners.
Inflation must be restrained to protect jobs as
much as anything else. We will be making it clear wherever
possible that money wage restraint is essential. Employees
and their representatives will be fortified in the knowledge
that steps are being taken in other areas to maintain and advance
real living standards. The re-introduction of cost of living
adjustments would ensure that the real wages of employees are
protected in the years ahead. In the transition period the
Government tax cuts will preserve the value 6f their take-home
pay. The Budget tax cuts took effect in PAYE deductions this
month January pay packets will in addition reflect broadly
double the cut we have now made in the rates announced in the
Budget. Those employees arranging with their employers for
adjustment of PAYE instalments to allow for the effect housing
interest paymel-. : s will enjoy a further increase in take-hom-e pay..
These benefits and the submission to be made to the
Arbitration Commission about the appropriate date for commencing
col-t of living adjustments, are actions and proposals which
e,. sentially go hand in hand and are meant to be related to each
other. They will give the business community a brea-thing space
from claims whilst ensuring that real wages are more than
maintaine). We have to break the vicious circle of prices chasing
wages and w-ges chasing prices.
The Government is concerned that all employee organisations,
all of Australia's employE-o-. ' Thould understand an&amp;. be fully
informed of the Government's policy on pay fixation and related
issues. The policies outlined in the Budget and thzo new measures
announced tonight will improve the real wages of employees and are
in this sense an-alternative to wage claims. This approach will
be discuISsed with employee organisations of all types and needs
to be explained to all trade union members. In looking at the
Government's proposal to offer a tax cut in compensation for the
cost of living changes for October, November and December of this
year, it must not be overlooked that under this Labor Government
wages and salaries have, in fact, more than kept pace with price
increases. 
-6-
The past year has been a year in which very substantialV
wage claims have been granted. In the 12 months to August 1974,
the average award rate has risen by 43 per cent for adult females
and by 27 per cent for adult males. The latest Consumer Price
Index figures available show an increase in prices of 16 per cent
in the year to the September quarter 1974. The important fact is
that, despite a period of rising prices, wage earners have had a
good increase in their standard of living in that time.
I intend to encourage a program of visits by Ministers
and Government Members of Parliament to speak at trade union
forums. They will outline the policies and objectives of the
Government. This program of visits is in keeping with the
principle of consultation and discussion which trade union
organisations have often emphasised as being desirable.
The visits to trade union organisations will be a twoway
process, with Ministers or Labor M. Ps also receiving
comments and questions on matters of interest and concern. It
is expected that visits will be made to a variety of employee
organisations including Trades and Labour Councils in each State,
White Collar and Public Service Organisations, Annual Conferences
of trade unions, Federal and State Executive meetings, and also
meetings of rank and file members during factory lunch-time periods
etc. Members of this Government have, of course, addressed
many such gatherings. The opportunity which the Government's
new proposals gives us to break the wage-price spiral requires
a more systematic effort in the areaof contact and consultation
with trade union organisations.
The ] L i. vate Sector
xhe third objective I stated earlier is to restore
business confidence by enhancing profitability. The Government's
decision to cut personal taxes for some wage increases is
particularly sicnificant for the private sector, both in terms
of costs and demand.
Business profits are being adversely affected by
flagging demand and by the effects of inflation on cash flows
and the replacement costs of assets. One consequence of declining
profitability of business generally has been that the capacity
and williingness of business to undertake new investment have been
eroded. The Government recognises these problems and is
determined to correct Lhem. The measures I have already
announced should adequately deal with the decline in demand,
even if, as is always the case, their full impact will be felt
only after a lag. However, ultimately these measures will be
ineffective unless they are accompanied by restored business
confidence and profitability. It is an essential part of the
Government's present strategy that we should stop the profits
slide, restore confidence and encourage renewed private investment.
7" 7 
-7-
The Treasurer announced in his Budget Speech that the
rate of tax on both public and private companies in 1974-75, in
respect of 1973-74 income, was to be 47 per cent. The public
company rate was already at that level and, as foreshadowed in
the 1973-74 Budget, the private company rate was to be increased
from 45 to 47 per cent to bring the private and company rates
together. The Government has now decided that the rate on public
and private companies in respect of 1973-74 income will be
per cent instead of 47 per cent. The public company rate will
therefore be reduced to 2 per cent below last year's level, and
the proposed increase in the private company rate will not take
place. The Budget proposal would have applied a common rate to
public and private companies; that will still occur, but the
common rate will be 45 per cent and not 47 per cent. A consequential
reduction will be made to the rate on 1974-75 income of a
superannuation fund that does not observe the 30/ 20 rule.
The 1974-75 financial year rate for taxable income of co-operative
and non-profit companies in excess of $ 10,000 will be 45 per cent
in lieu of 47 per cent.
Prices Justification Tribunal
I now turn to the continuing role of the Prices
Justification Tribunal. Since the Tribunal came into operation
in August 1973, it has played an important part in our efforts
to curb inflation. I believe that it has been very effective
in concentrating the attention of companies on the need to restrain
cost and pr. ice: increases C mpanies with wage and other cost
increases in the pipe-line are now finding that these increases
ar,. -eing. examined more critically than they may have expected.
Thert -a be no doubt that the Tribunal has been successful in
restra_ _ ng prices below the level to which they would have risen
if the Government had not established the Tribunal.
The inflationary problem is now more complex than when
the Tribunal wds established. Rapid inflation is now accompanied
by rising unemployment and a falling away in the private investment
on which economic growth and our continued prosperity greatly
depend. One of the problems is that, in Considering new investment
pro4* Acts, business is concerned about the prospects of maintaining
wortnv. " le returns, not just in the immediate future, but over the
whole eco'-mic life of the investments concerned, subject, of course,
to normal market risks. The rapid inflation that we have experienced
has added to the un. rtainties.
I am therefore writing to the Prices Justification
Tribunal to indicate the Government's view that, in the present
economic circumstances, it should now give particular attention
to the problems of sustaining and stimulating an adequate level
of private investment and of maintaining rates of return on capital
which will induce the new investment required to maintain economic
growth and employment. 
-8-
The Tribunal will1 of course continue to act in accordance
with its statutory responsibilities to ensure that prices are not
set at levels which are higher than are properly justifiable and
that companies are not passing on in priL'ces avoidable increases
in costs.
Tax Inquiry It is well known that rapid infl~ ation has a distorting
effect on the taxation paid by persons and, in some circumstances,
companies. The Government recognises that companies can be
adversely affected by taxation treatment of depreciation and st-ck
valuations. The tax measures I have announced tonight are direted
towards meeting a particular situation but, in the longer run, it
is important that attention in depth be paid to the question of
whether there ought to be any changes in our taxation system to
take account of the effects of inflation.* Accordingly, the
Government proposes to appoint a panel to report, by May 1975,* on
questions relating to the effects of inflation on taxation paid by
persons and companies. Membership of the panel and the detailed
terms of reference will be announced at a later date.
The fourth group of measures which I wish to mention
this evening invovles support for particular industries where
special problems are emerging. The Government is concerned to
preserve employment opportunities whilst ensuring that these
interests are balanced against the nation's longer term economic
interests. Housing The Government has decided to increase further the
availa Lity of finance for housing.
I mention that the Government has already approved no
less than $ 310 million for welfare housing purposes in 1974-75
and, after carefully reviewing the situation in Queensland, we have
now agreed to provide a further $ 8 million for welfare housing in
that State. These funds, which include $ 127 million to be channelled
primarily through terminating building societies, are over 40 per
cent more than those made available last year.
In the private sector considerable scope for increased
lendinñ, for housing by the savings banks was provided in early
Septembez with the amendments to the Banking ( Saving Banks)
Regulations. At the same time the savings banks were requested
to increase their lc7, n approvals for housing.
These amendments ha--e enabled the savings banks to increase
substantially their lending for housing and, on present indications,
loan approvals by the banks in the December quarter could be as much
as 50 per cent higher than in the September quarter. 
-9-
In addition to the stimulus being provided to housing
activity in both the public and private sectors by these measures,
we consider there is a need to further supplement the flow of
finance for housing. Accordingly, we now irntend to introduce
legislation at an early date to appropriate $ 150 million to the
savings banks for lending for housing.
The detailed arrangements will be discussed with the
savings banks but the funds will be provided directly to them
by the Government on terms and conditions to be agreed with the
banks. They will be lent by the savings banks on the same terms
and conditions as apply to normal savings bank -loans financed
by the banks from their own sources. They will be available to
men and women for the acquisition or erection of homes and for
extensions to existing homes.
I should make it clear that we gave careful considerat. i' 7n
to the possibility of channelling some of these funds through'the
permanent building societies. However, in view of the more even
geographic spread of savings banks and for ease of administration,
we have decided to limit the scheme to the savings banks. The
permanent building society movement has the Government's full
support in the role it is playing in provjiding home finance and
we hope that societies will be able to expand lending from their
own resources. The purpose of the additional $ 150 million is to provide
an additional quick-acting stimulus to activity and employment
in the home building industry. The funds made available to them
under this measure will be used by the savings banks to increase
further their rate of housing lending beyond the increased rate
th, have already been asked to achieve following bhe recent
amenu -ts of the Banking ( Savings Banks) Regulations.
The measure will provide an appropriate additional
stimulus to the building industry at this time. It is a shortterm
measure neared to current circumstances. The Co%;-rrrnevt is
determined, however, to avoid a return to the boom conditions
which were beneficial neither to the community nor to the industry.
Home builders can plan ahead w ' ith confidence that the
vernment intends to ensure that loans w b~ e available to
:. ome purchasers and that the significant increase in take-home
pa. -~ articularly from home interest tax deductibility, will
7 enabj. L,. lirchasers to service their loans. 
Motor Vehicles The Government has been considering the long-term
future of the motor vehicle industry for many months. The
public debate and inquiry has been more open and intensive
than any other industrial decision making process.
I am pleased to announce that the Government has
approved in principle a long-term motor vehicle policy. In
essence, the existing motor vehicle plans will be replaced
by a single, simplified, lower content plan which will encourage
longer production runs by both vehicle manufacturers and component
producers. In addition, the Japanese motor vehicle industry has
been invited to examine the new policy with a view to expanding
its operations in Australia. As part of the long run policy and
also because of the very high level of car imports ( comprising
over 40 per cent of registrations), relevant import duties will
be generally increased by 10 per cent. These duties will be
lowered again when imports fall to or below 20 per cent of
registrations over a designated period. Details of the proposals
will be announced in a separate statement.
This decision should have an immediate effect but I wish
to emphasise that this effect will occur within the context of
a long-term plan for the development and rationalisation of the
industry. Textiles* The Government has paid particular -attention to the
present difficulties of the textile industry. It has established
th, " 1exti' les Authority within the Industries Assistance Commission
to " nine cases, under the GATT arrangement regarding international
trade textiles, for restraints by countries exporting textiles
to Australia. Following the Authority's first report in July,
restraints have been negotiated for a wide range of knitted and
woven apparel. I have just received the Authority's s:: cond report
covering yarns, knitted fabrics and towelling and will announce
action on this in the very near future. I expect to refer further
textiles matters to the Authority later this week. At the same
time the Commission is reviewing the whole of the long-term
tective requirements of the Australian c?. bthing industry.
m. L-e textiles industry is, of course, vitaliy important to the
e'-c-n my of a number of country areas and the Government has
recel1announced a scheme of special assistance, including the
direct pc;_ ment of subsidies, to firms which have been affected by
certain Government decisions.
Beef Another industry in which there is very great uncertainty
at the present time is the cattle industry. We are aware of the
very severe problems which have been caused by the closing off of
many overseas markets. We are examining as a matter of urgency
representations we have received from the industry seeking help
for those producers who have been hardest hit by these developments.
Any such assistance of course needs to be administratively feasible
and directed to those least able to meet current problems. 
-11-
Loan Guarantees The Government's adjustment assistance program is
designed to assist firms to restructure their activities from
uneconomic to economic areas of production. Loan guarantees
are an integral part of the structural adjustment assistance
measures announced on 23 April 1974. Like the Government's
other structural adjustment measures, they are available to firms
adversely affected by prescribed structural changes under the
criteria announced on 23 April 1974.
It was the Government's original intention to
introduce legislation providing for loan guarantees with the
legislation to establish a Structural Adjustment Board.
However rather than wait for the legislation to establish the
Structural Adjustment Board, which will take some time to prep':.
the Government has decided to introduce separate legislation
providing for loan guarantees in the current Parliament session.
Conclusion The Australian Government fully recognises the crucial
importance of the private sector in the development of Australia.
It is not just the importance we attach to the private sector as
the greatest source of employment. We are deeply aware that in
a mixed economy such as ours the prosperity of the private sector
is basic to the Government's social objectives. The program of
social reform embarked upon by the present Government cannot be
achieved without a strong and growing private sector. Nothing
could be further from the truth than that we are anti-business
or stile to business; we recognise the interdependence of all
secto f the economy.
It is no solution to our current problems, as some would
have it, that we cut Government spending. If we were to take such
a decision now we would risk aggravating unemployment-, not to mention
undermining the confidence of that section of the business sector
which depends on Government orders. A reduction of Budgetary
expenditure would of necessity have a primary impact upon areas
which provide demand for products of the private sector. Cuts
in Government spending will simply aggravat: . jur present problems.
Our program of government expenditure has been achieved without
excc-"-ive increases in the number of public servants. The staff
ceilin, ' ontrol on the Australian Public Service will be retained
in a modi-ed form. This will be the subject of a separate stazement.
Further, an. it cannot be stressed too often, the
quality of life in Australia the real standard of living of all
Australians cannot be main-ained, let along rai. ed, unless
governments accept responsibility for community services which
individuals can no longer provide adequately for themselves.
L^ 
-12-
Mr Speaker: The Government will have to maintain its close
surveillance of the economy and retain its flexibility for
the months ahead. We believe the new stimulus to the economy
is appropriate to the problems we face. We must be wary of
the possible re-emergence of excess demand pressures within
our economy. The new measures announced tonight are designed
to ensure that the private sector* continues to grow.
Equally we believe these measures, building upon
the continuing program expressed in the Budget, provide a
sound basis for co-operation with all sections of the community
and between all sections of the community in the undoubtedly difficult
days which lie immediately ahead. The requirements of a mixed
economy in a democratic society are never simple, never easy.
The whole nature of such a society involves a tremendous range of
competing choices in making decisions the decisions made bygovernment,
the decisions made by organisations, the decisions
made by individuals. The pressures created by these competing demands are
now world-wide. Not for the first time, aLn Australian Labor
Government finds itself in power at a time of profound international
difficulty. As in those other times, the spirit of the nation is
as important to ultimate success as the policies of the elected
government. Quite apart from their economic thrust, the measures
I have announced tonight are aimed at strengthening the spirit
of national co-operation and confidence, by . showing Australians
that they have elected a government firm and vigorous in meeting
the challenges of our time difficult times indeed, yet like allsuchi
time-s, a test for the essential great qualities of this nation,
a tes* which together, Government, Parliament and people, I am
confidt-at we shall meet. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO: 3-j( r
12 November 1974
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, M. P.,
said in his statement on the economy in Parliament this
evening that he would issue a statement on the question
of staff numbers in the Australian Public Service. In his
statement in Parliament, Mr Whitlam said that:
" Our program of Government expenditure has
been Achieved without excessive increases in the number of
public servants. The staff ceiling control on the Australian-
Public Service will be retained in a modified form. This
will be the subject of a separate statement."
The separate statement is as follows:
" The staff ceiling control on the Australian
Public Slervice which was announced in my statement to the
Premiers4 Conference on 7 June will be retained, so that the
healthy influence on departmental efficiency of the
disciplii~ s of internal priority review and staff redeployment
will be maintained. The Government proposes, however, an
extension of the trainee intake to the Public Service by up
to 450 so that additional appropriate opportunities are
made available for vocational training, and an additional
intake of 1,000 youth and school leaver recruits to basegrade
office categories so as to maintain an intake more
consistent with recent years. These special intakes will
lift the staff growth ceiling of the Public Service above
the previously announced figure."
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 



EMBARGO: 7.30 PM
PRIME MINISTER 13 November 1974
NATIONAL BROADCAST
In Parliament last night I outlined a number
of measures which the Government is taking to deal with
some of our current economic difficulties.
The two greatest of these are, of course,
rapid inflation and rising unemployment. In a modern
economy like Australia, in a mixed economy like Australia,
these are now twin problems; they are interlocked. This
is a situation we find throughout the world in all
similar economies, in all comparable countries. It's the
first time in modern history where peoples and governments
have been faced with these two problems at the same time.
We have had unemployment before, we have had
inflation before, but the combination of the two poses
problems not before encountered, to a degree not before
encountered, in modern times, anywhere in the world.
This does not mean that the problems are
insoluble. It doesn't mean that the situation is out
of control. It doesn't mean that we just submit passively
to whatever fate or events beyond our control may decide.
We don't have to, and as far as your Government is concerned,
we are not going to.
But what it does mean is that democratic
governments have to be extraordinarily alert and flexible
in their response to rapidly changing circumstances. This
is what we are dong; and because circumstances are liable
to such rapid change, policies must be especially flexible.
It is a cliche now to say that there is no
simple or easy cure for this world-wide problem. All the
more important, therefore, that governments be unremitting
in their efforts to seek solutions for these problems;
unremitting, earnest and compassionate in their efforts to
protect those who suffer worst and first from the immediate
consequences of these problems. I offer the measures I
announced last night as evidence of your Government's
determination and sincerity in doing just that.
Briefly, the proposals I announced have four
broad aims: / 2 
-2-
First, we want to maintain consumer demand
through a substantial reduction in personal income tax.
Secondly, we want to attack inflation by
reducing the pressure for wage increases through a substantial
improvement in after-tax take-home pay next year and
specifically to break the wage-price spiral by giving
business a breathing space in wage demands based on price
increases in this December quarter.
Thirdly, we want to enhance profitability by
a reduction in company tax, by requesting the Prices
Justification Tribunal to give particular consideration to
the adequacy of return on capital and by urgently
investigating the implications of rapid inflation for the
taxation of companies; and
Fourthly, we want to support particular industries
where special problems are emerging housing, cars, textiles,
beef. And those four objectives are summed up in one
overriding objective, and that is to create the conditions
for co-operation with all sections of the community and between
all sections of the community. Without co-operation, without
responsibility, without restraint, we cannot solve our problems.
No Government can do it alone. We are all in
this together, not just as Australians but as members of
a world community all experiencing times of profound difficulty,
together, and at the same time.
Yet how fortunate we still remain amongst all
the members of the world community. Our immediate problems
are certainly not worse than those of our partners and friends
and, of course, are immeasurably less than those facing most
members of the international community.
Of the measures I announced last night, the
one of most immediate interest to most Australians is, naturally
enough, the cut in personal tax. And this is a substantial cut.
For the family man on $ 100 a week it's just as if he got a
8 per cent wage increase. For the family man on $ 150 a week
it's just as if he got a 5-3/ 4 per cent wage increase. I want
everybody really to understand what we are trying to do. By
these tax cuts, we are guaranteeing you an immediate improvement
in your standard of living a protection against the immediate
rises in prices. But this protection will disappear if wage
demands push costs and prices through the ceiling. We have
provided the chance for you to get ahead of prices. Don't
throw away the opportunity. We must break the vicious circle
of wages chasing prices, and prices chasing wages.
I don't co~ nceal that the next few months will be
quite difficult. The figures won't be good. The measures
we have taken any economic measures take time to take their
effect. But behind the headlines, behind the raw figures,
lies the great unchanging truth of the basic strength of the
Australian economy and I deeply believe the basic strength
of the Australian community. These are national assets which
can't be diminished by temporary fluctuations in the statistics
and the indices. 
-3-
The measures I outlined last night, combined with
the continuing effect of the measures taken in the Budget,
give every ground for confidence that we shall turn the
corner before the middle of next year.
I am not saying, of course, that all our problems
will be solved, but the important thing is to realise that
we are not powerless to control the course of events. No
Australian no section of the Australian community should
fear that he or she will be left unprotected by the Government,
left to despair, left without hope.
These and other measures will work if they are
given a chance to work and that does require co-operation,
particularly from the most powerful sections of the Australian
community, employers and employees. For both those groups
whose interests are mutual the measures I announced give
good grounds for co-operation with each other and with the
elected Australian Government.
These measures are your Government's response
to our present difficulties. But if they are to work, those
who immediately benefit from them must also respond. We are,
for the first time, offering tax cuts in return for restraint.
If that is to work, it calls for genuine co-operation, genuine
restraint. We can meet and beat these problems together
certainly better than any other people in the world. Last night,
I am confident, we made a good start. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO 367
THAALIA zH
( c( 10
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR WHITLAM, THIS EVENING
RELEASED THE TEXT OF HIS LETTER TO MR JUSTICE
WILLIAMS, CHAIRMAN OF THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION
TRIBUNAL, REFERRED TO IN HIS STATEMENT ON
THE ECONOMY.
THE TEXT OF THE LETTER IS ATTACHED.
CANBERRA 13 November 1974. 
PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
12 NC"' 14
My dear Judge, I am writing at this time to convey to you
officially the concern with which the Government regards
the present economic situation, particularly in relation
to private investment and employment.
The Government is now undertaking a number of
measures to deal with this situation, and I am this
evening making a statement in Parliament on the subject.
A copy of this statement is being sent to you for your
information. As you will see, I emphasise the complexity of
the problems confronting us and the fact that rapid
inflation is now accompanied by rising unemployment and
a falling away in private investment on which economic
growth and continued prosperity greatly depend. I also
refer to the particular problem that, in considering
new investment projects, businesses are concerned about
the prospects of maintaining worthwhile returns, not just
in the immediate future, but over the whole life of the
investment concerned, subject to normal market risks.
I therefore undertook to write to you indicating
the Government's view that, in the present economic
circumstances, the Prices Justification Tribunal should
give particular attention to the problems of sustaining
and stimulating an adequate level of private investment
and of maintaining rates of return on capital which will
induce the new investment required to maintain economic
growth and employment.
The comments that I have made are not intended
in any way to reflect on the manner in which the Tribunal
is carrying out its statutory responsibilities. Indeed,
the Government has confidence in the Tribunal's judgement
and responsiveness to the changing economic situation in
/ 2 
2
considering particular prices or price increases, and
has no intention of changing its basic functions. In
particular, the Government appreciates that the Tribunal
has played an important part in curbing inflation and
there can be no doubt that it has been successful in
restraining prices below the level that would otherwise
have applied. While, therefore, it is desirable to make
clear the importance that the Government attaches to
investment and employment matters, it is of course
intended that the Tribunal should continue to act, in
accordance with its statutory responsibilities, to
ensure that prices are not set at levels which are higher
than are properly justifiable and that companies are not
passing on in prices avoidable increases in costs.
Yours sincerely,
t-G
E. G. WHITLAM
The Hon. Mr. Justice L. H. Williams,
Chairman, Prices Justification Tribunal,
Queens Road,
MELBOURNE. VIC. 3004 



AUSTALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 368
14 November, 1974
PLAGUE LOCUSTS
The Prime Minister today released the text of a
letter of appreciation from the Queensland Graingrowers
Association. This follows Mr. Whitlam's announcement on Monday
that the Australian Government would participate on a
dollar for dollar basis in a $ 720,000 scheme for locust
control in Queensland.
The letter reads as follows:
Dear Mr. Whitlam,
On behalf of the Grain Industry in Queensland I wish to
express appreciation for your Government's offer of financial
assistance to aid locust control in Queensland.
The control programme proposed by the Queensland Goverrnent
is a most realistic plan and we feel that it is a good chance
of achieving effective control over our very serious locust
infestations this summer. Your Government's financial
commitment to assist this plan is most welcome and will make
a really constructive control effort possible.
My association looks forward to working with the Queensland
Department of Primary Industries in making the best possible
use of available funds.
The Central Highlands Locust De-. truction Committee and the
Near South West Region Locust Co-ordinating Committee have
asked me to express their thanks also for the significant
assistance effort by your Government.
L. V. Price,
General President,
Queensland Graingrowers Association.
Mr. Whitlam said he was pleased to have such a
response from an organisation so much affected by the locust
problem. 
-2-
He said he was surpresed that the Queensland Premier had not
yet responded to the Australian Government's offer to set up
an Australian Plague Locust Commnission as recommended by the
Australian Agricultural Council.
Mr. Whitlam said that his letter to Mr. Bjelke-
Petersen on the matter had outlined proposed funding for such
a Commission. The Australian Government was prepared to
provide 50% and had suggested that Queensland's share of the
remaining 50% should be only 2
Mr. Whitlam said he could not understand the Queensland
Premier's delay in responding to this initiative which was
clearly of great potential benefit to Queensland's grain
growers. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 3669
14 November
ASSISTANCE TO THE AUSTRALIAN MOTOR INDUSTRY
A new plan to assist and strengthen the Australian
motor industry was announced today by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Whitlam. He said that it was the Government's intention
that the new policy would operate for ten years and would
therefore provide a stable framework within which industry
would confidently plan.
Mr. Whitlam said assistancee would be based on a
company average local content plan of 85%. This would be
supported by a tariff of 35% on complete cars when imports
were less than or equal to 20% of total passenger motor vehicle
registrations and 45% when in excess of 20%. In view of the
existing abnormal rate of imports the higher duties would
apply immediately. A differential of 10% would apply between
imports of cars and unassembled vehicles.
Duties of 25% would generally apply to components
not in c. k. d. packs and minimum rates of duty would apply to
certain specified components re;" erred to in the Commission's
Report. The Prime Minister explained that the duty of
on built up vehicles would remain for a minimum period of 6
months and then would be subject to reduction to previous
levels if and when the 12 month moving average of c. b. u.
imports to total passenger motoy* vehicle registrations fell
to 20% or below. Any subsequent changes in duty woul'd
similarly be on this minimum 6 months basis.
Mr. Whitlam said that commercial motor vehicles
reported on by the Commission in its passenger motor vehicle
report would be accorded the tariff treatment outlined above
passenger motor vehicles. 
-2-
He said that the existing 85% and 95% local
content plans would be phased out over four years and then
replaced by the new plan.. Under this plan local manufacturers
would at the end of the four year period have to achieve 85% local
content on a company average basis on all of their vehicles
manufactured or assembled in Australia to be eligible for by-law
concessions. The actual by-law concessions have yet to be
finally determined by the Government. Provision would be made
for phasing new manufacturers into the plan subject to approval
by the Government. Relevant matters in the consideration of
any such applications would inc1Vdeprational use of resources,
location and complementation.
Mr Whitlam said that to accord with the new vehicle
plan the existing component manufacturing programs involving
over 85% local content requirement would be phased down to
over a maximum period of 4 years and no new programs would
be instituted. " These proposals will develop a stronger long-term
base for the local industry and help safeguard the jobs of
Australian workers," Mr Whitlam said.
" At the same time they will allow the industry to
adjust more easily to basic structural changes essential for
its future growth and viability."
Mr Whitlam said the Government accepted the judgment
of the Industries Assistance Commission, expressed in its recent
report, that the Australian motor industry should be restructured.
It accepted the IAC's judgment that assistance policies of the
last decade had contributed significantly to the present
unsatisfactory state of the industry.
Mr Whitlam said: " The Government has moved to correct
a number of problems associated with past protection policies
by reducing the high 95% local content requirements, moving
away from a multiplicity of plans to a single plan and
changing the plans from a model to a company basis.
" The industry must be able to exploit the advantages
of economies of scale. Special action will be taken to
encourage common sourcing of components to allow this, with
consequent cost savings. In addition, special attention will
be paid to complementation schemes with overseas sources and
markets. " The Government believes these changes will lead to
greater specialization in the production of components, reduce
model proliferation and fragmentation and produce a more
viable industry in the long run. They should also considerably
simplify the present assistance arrangements for the industry." 
The Prime Minister said talks were under way with
Japanese motor producers about the possibility of their further
manufacturing motor vehicles in Australia. Japanese technical
experts would come to Australia soon to carry out feasibility
s tugies. ". While the new tariff arrangement will lead in the
Sshort-term to somewhat higjher prices for imported motor vehicles
it is expected that in the medium-term the new arrangement will
result in a better based local industry with consequent
advantages to local consumers and the economy generally,"
Mr Whitlam said.
" The Government wants necessary changes to proceed in
a manageable way. The present proposals will enable this."
Mr Whitlam said the industry in South Australia and in
other major motor vehicle producing centres would be safeguarded.
Firms and employees in the industry adver~ ly affected by this
decision will be eligible for consideration for-adjustment assistance
under the Structural Adjustment Assistance Scheme subject to
the criteria orovided for in that Scheme. In addition assistance
under the Non-Metropolitan Subsidy Scheme would be available.
The Australian Government gives a high priority to
its programs designed to create a new growth centre in Albury/
Wodonga. ~ ie Government is concerned to ensure that groWth
centres are _ ased on sound economic industries. The Government
is confident that the future operations of Borg-Warner at
Albury/ Wodonga will provide such a basis.
However, the Government recognises that the existing
operations of Borg-Warner could be affected by the introduction
of the new motor vehicle policy. * Therefore the Government is
prelatred to assist Borg-Warner in Albury/ Wodonga for an interim
peri. -2 if necessary in addition to assistance which may be
availaole through the non-metropolitan subsidy scheme, so that
it can cirry out any necessary adjustments to its operations
to ensure continued long-term viability.
The Departments of Urban and Regional Development,
Manufacturing Industry arn. Prime Minister and Cabinet are
ready to co-operate with the company and with Repco Bearing
Company Pty Ltd in Launceston to pr. ovide any necessary
assistance and to help the companies take full advantage of the
economies available under the new policy including the wider
markets in the region. 
-4-
' Ilhe question Lo be investijted of pos: 3. ilbL
Aiu; t ra Li ain C; ov rnmtnz I. itr Le i. pi Lion in aiy new jo Lnl. ert( ltc prceltu
which might eventuate from the new policy.
Further detailsn of the policy will be announced dfter
tvaluation of the possibility of greater participation by tiie
Japanese motor industi-y.
CANBERRA 14 November 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 370
November 1974
REFERENCE TO THE TEXTILES AUTHORITY
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today that
he had sent a reference to the Textiles Authority within the
Industries Assistance Commission covering a wide range of men's,
women's, children's and infants' clothing, hosiery and gloves.
Mr. Whitlam said that this action was being taken as a result of
high and rising levels of imports and an apparent total
availability of such goods on the Australian market substantially
in excess of previous levels.
The reference seeks the advice of the Authority on
whether action should be taken in terms of the GATT Textiles
Arrangement, to which Australia acceded earlier this year, to
restrain imports into Australia. The Authority has also been
asked that if it is found that restraint measures are necessary
and that measures which may be recommended in accordance with
the GATT Textiles Arrangement are unlikely to overcome the
market disruption, what other measures, if any, should be taken
to overcome the disruption. The Authority has been requested
to report within 45 days in relation to certain shirts and
pyjamas and within 75 days in respect of the remainder of the
goods covered by the reference.
The Prime Minister emphasised that the questions of
whether it would be necessary to have negotiations on the goods
in question with exporting countries or take other action would
have to await examination of the recommendations of the Textiles
Authority. Mr. Whitlam said that, altP~ ough it is not clear to the
Government at this stage that action on all goods covered by
this latest reference is necessary, he considered it important
that the Government be able to take the initiative in having
investigations undertaken so that action can be taken promptly
if found necessary. 
-2-
The Prime Minister invited manufacturers and other
interested parties to start preparing submissions now to the
Authority, which would announce arrangements for publichearings
shortly. The Prime Minister also pointed out that should
the need for action emerge from the report of the Textiles
Authority, goods ordered overseas but not cleared for home
consumption at the date of announcement of any action would
be subject to the terms of the action. Importers should
therefore exercise caution in placing orders overseas and in
entering into financial commitments on such orders as it may
not be possible to give special consideration to outstanding
commitments should action be recommended by the Textiles
Authority. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SAUS I AL IA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 372
November, 1974
REFERENCE TO IAC ON ACETYL PRODUCTS
The Prime Minister announced today that he had
forwarded a reference to the Industries Assistance Commission
on acetaldehyde; acetic acid, acetic anhldride vinyl acetate
and moulding compounds of cellulose acetate.
Mr. Whitlam said the reference was complementary
to the reference already held by the Commission on cellulose
acetate flake and the Commission had been empowered to take
evidence on any raw material used in the production of
cellulose acetate flake and vinyl acetate monomer.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIMEL MINISTER'S PRESS STATEMENT TO DRiSPAi-PRES CONFEP E
NOVUIDER 1974
ISHOULD-EXPLAIN W~ HY I INTEND TO TAKE SUCH AN
ACTIVE ROLE IN THIS CAMJ'PAIGN, IDO SO BECAUSE I HAVE KNOWN
AND ADMIRED PERC TUCKER FOR HANY YEARS, KNOW-Hill! AS A
GREATr OULENSLANDER A1ND A GREAT ALISTRALIA1,1 WHO WILL MAIKE
AN EXCELLENT PREMIER AND STA14D UIP FOR THE INT'RESTS OF THIF,
STATE AS EFFECTIVELY AS DON DUNSTAN STAN~ DS FOR THE INTERESTS'
OF SOUTrH AUSTRALIA OR ERIC iE 2C!: FOR TPOSE OF TAS-MANIA,
IDO N07 EXPECT THAT1 WE WILL ALW. AYS ASREE ON THE APPLICATION
OF ALL POLICIES BUT IDO KNOW TH\ Tq CAM I-ALK' TO FACH
ClH'ER, THAT WE RESPECT LACH OTHER AND iHA~ r WE 111I1L SE ABLE
WORK rOGETHER 114 THlE jINTErfESTS OF 7' HI .), ATE.
IDO NOT COME HIRF. 10 DISCUSS FEDEFPAL
ISSUES&amp; THE ISSUES THAT I MIAL DIlSCUSS~ i 71HIS CAMFV--AIGN
ARE STATE I. SSUES4 DO NOT FLELIEVE 714AT U SL' 3WL
BC FOOLED BY THE PREMIERS TACTIC'OF IN'fR0[ DULCiNG COMPLFELY
IRREVELANT ISSUES JN'A S*[ ATE. ELECTION. 0UEEN-SLANDEr'l':' MUST
DECIDE WHE71HER* THEY WANT A STATE GOVFRNUM NT THAT CAN WO) RK,
EFFECTIVELY WqITH THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CO-OPERATE WVITH IT B~ UT NOT NECESSARILY ALWAYS AGREE WITH
IT. AT PRESpia You HAVE IN OUEE_: NSLAN~ D AS THE PREMIER
H~ AS ALREADY 114DICATED IN4 THIS CAMPAIGN--A GOVERNMENT WHICH
CONTINUES TO OBSTRUC7, WHICH REFUSES TO CO-OPEPATE, W[ HCH
ON SOME OCCASIONS EVEN REFUSES TO DISCUSS HAT1EI: S AIND OIN
OT14ERS FAILS TO FULFIL THE ELEMENTARY C01J R T ESY OF
REPLYIN4G 10 CORRESPONDENCE FROM * IHE Aus$ ThALIA?' OVERMEN 
It * b
f
S-2-THE PEOPLE OF OUEENSLAND. MUST DECIDE WHETHER THEY WANT
A CONTINUATrION OF* THIS POLICY OF NON-CO-OPERATION,
OBSTRUCTIOR4 AND INDEED VLICTO. IT IS A* POLICY WHIC; H
I BELI EVE AVREYAFFECTS THE' WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE STATE.. THI s IS' A. STATE ISSUE -NOT A FEDERAL
ISSUE -AND ICOME INTO THIS CAMPAIGN TO SHOW YOU HO1-FAR THE
WELFARE AND DEVELOP'ENT. OF THIS STATE HAVE BEEN IDI
BY THE STAND OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT OF* QUEC-hLAND.
THINGS HAVE . COME -TO A SORRY STATE INDEED
WHEN THE PREMIER ' OF THIS GREAT STATE AND THE FRIt?.-MIIIST: p,
OF. THIS -COUNTRY CANNOT EVEN MELO. 1 TO DISCUSS MAiT; 7 R OF
IMPORTANCE BECAUSE TH RME EUES TO DO SO, TH C
PREMIER REFUSE D TO COME TO A PRIVATE* ROUNC-TAPL DlitNER
WITH MYSE2LF A D ALL THE0O HER F IYE PR EM I Ei ', S TO DI SCUS
* THE PROBLEMIS OF INiFLATION, AND IMiAT TE R S C1 ICE RNI G TH E
CONST. ITUT ION. TH E PREMIER SIMPLY IGNORED A LLETTER ( I. IC
IVWROTE TO HI1M VERY EARLY ' IN OUR ( JOVERNUHUUt Pi-OIi
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN OUR OFFICIALS ON THE GOENET$ PLCES
FOR GROWTH CENTRES AND STABLE LAND PRICES, Auio WHEI IfH
AUSTRAL IAN MINSITER FOR ABORIGINAL. AFFAIRS SOUGH' TO ClO." I
WITH STATE MINISTERS ABOUT THE ' RECOMMENDATIONS. OF A ROYAL.
ComI ss IoN ON ABORIGI NAL. LAND) Ri GHrS, THE 0U E ISL AN D1
MINISTER REFUSED TO EVEN DISCUSS THE MATTER, UNTIL A FEW DAYS'
* AGO, WHEN. I WROTE TO THE PREMIER OFFERING TO ACCEPT
RESP ONSIBILITY FOR THE STATE RAILWAYS AND REMOV0' E THE
FINANCIAL BURDENS THEY IMPOSE ON THE STATE, TEPREMIER
REPLIED NINE MONTHS LATER THAT HE WAS NOT EVEN PREPARED
TO. DISCUSS THE MATTER, AND YET DISCUSSIONS ARE PROCEEDING
ON' A NO COM14ITMENT BASIS WITH OTHER LIBERAL STATE GOVERNMENTS1 
b.
I -3-
TO BE QUITE FRANKI IT SURPRISES 1ME THAT THE
LBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY STATE GOVERNMENT. OF QUEENSLAND FINDS
IDEOLOGICALLY UNACCEPTABLE AND BERATES-IN THE-MOST
VIRULENT TERMS MATTERS WHICH OTHER L! BERAL-COUNTRY PARTY*
STATE GOVERNMENTS* FIND PERFECTLY. ACCLPTAPLE. ' IF THE
OVRMETOF THIS STATE WERE WILLING TO SIGN PRECI* SELY
ri1 W. Mm 44 IE,-CGNT DA/ PpCCi-IL_-7HL= -MC-r T~ A&amp; M A-S _ rH ATWHI1CH
V'VE S. IGNED WITH THE LIBERAL PREMIERS OF NE1' I SOUTH~
WALES AND VICTORIA, THEN THE GROWTHvC ETR N OfSLL EG
VOULD ' BE, A BLE TO PROCEED AS RAPIDLY AS THE GROWTH CENTRE
IS PROCEEDING IN ALBURY-WODONGA. IF THE GOVERNMENT OF
THIS STATE WERE-WILLING TO SIGN THE SAME AGREEIMENTS IN
PRECIS$ ELY -THE SAME TERMS AS' THE L I IERAL GOVERNMENTS IN
NEW. SOUTH WALESp V. ICTORIA AND WESTERi AUSTRALIA, ALL THC
OTHER LIBERAL'COUNTRY' PARTY GOVERNPIENTs IN THIS COUNTRY1
HAVE EXPRESSED A WILLINGNESS TO SIGN OR HAV'E ALREADY
SIGNED OiN LAND COUNCILS, THE14 W'E WOULD BE AB3LE TO ENSURE
THAT HOME PURCHASERS CAN AFFOR. D -THE. PRICE OF LAND,
THESE TWO EXAkMPLES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS STATE REFUSING
TO0 DO IWHAT OTHER* GOVERNMENTS OF THE SAME POLITICAL COLOUR
ARE WILLING TO DO HAVE ALREADY COST QUEENSLAND TENS OF
MILION OFDOLLARS IN FEDERAL GRANTS AND LOANS, M. O
HERE TO ARGUE THE MERITS OF OUR GROWTH CENTRE POLICY OR iD
OUR LAND COMMISSION ' POLICY. THAT IS A MATTER FOR A FE-DERAL."~
ELECTION.-I AM HERE TO SAY THAT QUEENSLANDERS SHOULD NOT
ACCEPT A STATE GOVERNMENT WHICH IS WILLING TO IMPEDE THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE STATE IN THIS WAY. THAT IS PROPERLY
A. MAT. TER FOR A STATE ELECTION. 
c r
T I DO NOT BELIEVE QUEENSLANDERS DESERVE A
GOVERNMENT WHICH, WHATEVER ITS DIFFERENCES OF OPINION
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, REFUSES TO EVEN ANSWER
LETTERS FROM THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA TO THE
PREMIER OF. QUEENSLAND. SUCH UNANSWERED LETTERS CONCERN
A PROPOSAL TO STUDY THE MEANS OF REDUCING ELECTRICITY Li,~ Ti't
S COSTS IN QUEENSLAND; A PROPOSAL TO ASSESS THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT. OF.. BEACH SAND MINING; A REQUEST FOR INFORMATION FAC
S ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF AMENDMENTS TO QUEENSLAND LEGISLATION
FOR ABORIGINES; A REQUEST TO THE GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND
FOR THEIR VIEWS ON MY GOERNMmENT'S PROPOSALS CONCERNING
ABORIGINES. WE OFFERED FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LAND
'. STABILISATION AND GROWTH CENTRES. I 1ROTE IN AUGUST 1973
CONCERNING OUR FI-NANCIAL PROPOSALS FOR THAT YEAR AND AGAINi
IN SEPTEMBER 1974 CONCERNING OUR PROPOSALS ARISING FROM
THE MOST RECENT BUDGET. I HAVE RECEIVED NO REPLY TO THE
FIRST AND THE MOST CURSORY REPLY TO T1E SECOND. AS EARLY
AS DECEMBER 1972, WHEN THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT HAD
BEEN IN OFFICE FOR LESS. THAN TWO WEEKS, I WROTE SEEKING THE
AGREEMENT OF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT FOR THE AUSTRALIAN i
NATIONAL LINE TO OPERATE BETWEEN QUEENSLAND PORTS. IN
SHMAY 1973, THE PREMIER TOLD. ME THAT HE WAS CONSIDERING THE
MATTER. DESPITE SUBSEQUENT LETTERS IN APRIL AND JUNE 1974,
THERE IS NO REPLY.. WROTE SEEKING THE VIEWS OF THE L
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT ON THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN, I
I HAVE RECEIVED NO SUBSTANTIVE REPLY. I WROTE SEEKING THE
VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT ON THE PROPOSAL RELATING TO THE
MUTUAL REFERENCE OF POWERS, WHICH WAS BASICALLY AGREED
UPON AT THE MEETING WITH MYSELF AND THE FIVE PREMI-ERS
SWHICH THE QUEENSLAND PREMIER REFUSED TO ATTEND. ' I
7. 
* 4K. 7A.
I. T
TRICS-LETR WA SiE TIBUAPRL, O TAIS EANDI . AVEO
CONERETEC WAS HEL O INOELUWRTSIO ND SETPJOONCT
THESE REPORTS TO ALL STATE-PREMIERS FOR THEIR COViAENT
TWO MONTHS. AGO. ONLY THE PR EMI1ER OF OUEENSLAND HAS
FAILED TO REPLY Ilf ANY WAY WHATSOLVERI
THIS IS NOT'TH* E WAY THAT RELATIONS BETniEFI4N
AN AUSTRALIAN AND A STATE GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE CONDUCTED.
WHATEVER THEIR POLITICAL PERSUASI'ONS MAY BE.
.7. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 371
November 1974
APPOINTMENTS TO THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
the appointment of the following as full-time members of
the Prices Justification Tribunal:
Mr. K. Elliott
Mr. G. N. Fisher
Mr. P. C. Rodda
Mr. Whitlam said that the Government was reinforcing
the Tribunal at this time because of the increased
responsibilities placed upon it by recent amendments to the
Prices Justification Act and because of the already great
workload on the Tribunal.
In particular, the Tribunal will now be giving
increasing attention to the retail area and the prices of
imported goods. These are complex fields in which detailed
work has to be done and which demand a high degree of
relevant commercial experience.
The new members all have long and senior experience
on the manufacturing or distributive sides of industry.
They will therefore bring with them knowledge and understanding
that will assist the Tribunal in all aspects of its work.
Mr. Fisher is being appointed to the Sydney office
and the other new members will be located in Melbourne.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



S111MCII NOTES FOll THlE PRIME MINISTER
TOOHMUL SHOPPING CENTRE
. GATiURDAY 16 NOVrENIl3Il 1974
FROT~ 1I1 IMGINNING 0O? TIlS CAMPAIGN MR-13JEUKEPETRSN
HS RID TO CON TILE Qw2E~ i"' LAND PEOPLE WITH
SLOGANS ANI) CATCI[ CRIVES. IN IS SLLF-AI'POINTED IZOLE AS
LEADElt 0F TiHE FEDERLAL OPP1OSITION, HE. HAS FORtGOTTEN WHAT A
STATE LLECTION IS ALL ABOUT.
h1IS A VICTIM~ OF HIS OWN OBSESSIONS, ILE IS
OI3SESSEPJ) WITH CANUERRA,~ l HE IS Ol) SE,-3SLD WITH CENTRALIS4l,
HIE IS OB3' ESSED WITH SOCIALIMS, HIE IS OB3SESSED WITH STATE
lZIGHTS. AND) HIS5 OB3SESSIONS . lIAVI! E 13LINDED HIM TO THEi!' NEEDS
OF OPUIINARY PEOPLE.
THERE HAS NEVEIR BEEN A P!?: lENIER SU REMMOTE, FROM THlE
GENUINE CONCEUNS OF THE A'EUPLE't SO OUT OF TOUCH ' WITH BH! EADAND-
BUTTEU IS61UES' 1 AND DAY-TO-DAY REALITIES. HIE WANTS TO
MAiUF, THISj ELECTION A FORUM FOIL SLOGANERIN U AIND PERSONAL
VILIFICATION. IT WON'IT WASH.
IT WON'T WASH 13EjCAUSE T11B I'L. O'LiE AREN'T INTERESTED
IN HI13 BUMY? 1EN AND PAPER TIGER6, IlSNAME-CALLING Alm
CAN-KICKING, TIHE SHADOWS AND) S1hI13OLET113 HE HAS l) ILAGGEi)
INTO TEIS CAMI'AIGNb 
VtI AUIE TIM~ PIIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO GIVE
MONEY OUTRIGHT GRANTS TO TILE STATES FOR URBAN TRANSPORT.
' RIEVIOUS COVMMl. I'ENTS ;' IZOVIDED LOANS FOR COUNTRY HIAILNAY
BINES BUT TILLY ALWAYS REQUIRED TaL STATES TO CONTRIBUTE
EQUAL AMOUNTS TIIMk; ELVESg AND TILE LOlNS HAD TO li R1EPAID
WiTIL INTEIUST. IN CO-OPERATION WITH MY GOVENI'INENT PEUCY TUCKER
CAN PROVIDE A NEW DEAL FOR BRISBANE TRANi'SPORT. UDER OUR
LEGISLATION WE AIE ALLADY tlAKING GIANTS FOI THREEX IMPORTANT
PROJECTS THE ELECTRZIFICATION OF TlI SUBUl'r11AN IL4ILWAY
FROM DAMIRA TO FEUNY GROVE, TlE ClIOSS RMIV-RAIL LINK, AND
AlliDITIONAL TACKS ON TILE NORTHERN CORRIDOR LINE PROM OMA
STRIET TO 1ORTIIGATE. TIllS MX,% XiXX IS 1' AIlTICULAIL' I'A VOURAI. ILE TO
PIJEENSLAND BE12' CAUSE AlRZISBANE WILL GET MiORE FOR PROJECTS
ALREADY A l'IROVED TIIAN ANY CAPITAL OTILER TIA1 SYDNEY.
BRAISBANE WILL GET CONSIDE&gt; AI3JLY iKOltE THAN NEll'LUOURNE AND
VERY MUCH MORE THAN THE;*' o OTHER TILE 6IMALLE. I CAlITALS. ALL
TOLD THLE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE PAYING IORB TILAN
$ 12 I1LLION FOR THESE THREE WORKS THAT IS, TWO-T&amp; IRDS OF
TILE ESTINATD1) TOTAL COST OF MOREd THAN 18 &amp; MILLION.
Mil BJELM -P'ETERSEN AND 1IS M INISTERS HAVE TRIED
TO CLAIM CREDIT FOR THESE 1!, ROJC'TS%;. THEY DID NEXT TO
NOTHING TIlENSELVES AND SCIL1% IIIID LABOM'S ELCTRIFICATION
PLANS BACK IN 1957. TH'Y IIEIJGED AND DITHERED ABOUT
SIGNING OUR U1rBAN TRAN. 3ioURT AGMI'U-FN1T AND THIll COLLEAGUES
IN CAINBEfLUA FORCED US TO l* OETPUONE" OU!? TRANSlORlT BILLS WHEN
THEY BLOCKED SUrPLY. NOW THEY HAVE TfHj E NERVE TO ACCUSE MY
GOVLINElfNT OF DELAY IN PROVIDING FUNDS,
I, I
ii C 
I HIAVE TOO MUCH RESPLCT FOR TflIj' GOOD SENSE AND
GOOD JUDGI! ThENT OF QU ENSLANDMIS TO BELIEVE THIEY WILL FALL
FOR THLE PJHWf" ILIZS' DISTRACTIONS, IT'S TINM Mll 1JELKE-PE. TERSEN
FACED UP TO THE REFAL CONCERINS. OF TILE PEOVLE THEIR EDVJCATIONO
THEIR Jil! ALTHI, THEIR TR. ANSP'ORT, THIuR CITIES. TIIEIR-H1OUSING,
THE PRICE OF LAIND, TILE DEVELOPIMNT OF THEIR STATE6
THESE AUE THE ISSUES ON WH11ICII œ' EC TUCKE R IS
FIGHTING THIS ELECTION. AND IE HAS MY WHOLEHEARTED SUPPORT.
THlE BJELMKE-I'ETER~ iSE'N GOVERMNMENT HAS HELD BACK
THE DEVELOPMENT OF QUEENSLAND BECAUSE Ui? A PETiTY Dl%. SLIIMOIF
CANBERRA. OH-ISSUE AFTER ISSUE, Mt W3ELKE-PETE11SEN
RAS REFUSED) TO. CO.-OPLIRATE bITII US IN PLANS FOR QUEENSLAND IS
DEVELOPMENT. HE HAIS ' SPURED OUR OFFER OF MhASSIVE ASSI37A. INCE TO
MAKCE TOAINSVILLE A GRO%. WTil CENTREV A VIGOROUS3 AND E) U1ANDING
MODERN ClTY. HE HAS REJECTED QUA EFI'ORTS TU SET UP' LAND
COMMISSIONS WHICH WILL SUING DOWN TIHE PRICE OF LAND FOR
HOM" E B3UYERS. LII3EUAL GOVEiLNIIENTS IN UT1IEI : iATiES ARL TAKING
THE-. SL' FUNDS, ' i( ING WITH US AND GETTING UN WITH TIME JOB.
MRlJJLEi'TPSN O11-' 3TIEACY HAS CO0JT Q UEE,: NSLAVD
AT S5O IILLION IN AUSTILALIAN1 CGUViN: li, % l-T AS,-SISTfANCE,
DUIA. ING T1117, ' AST YEAf. WITH EVERY MONTH THLAT VASSES TILE
COST TO TI-12 QUHEN.' iLAXD IPEOrLE 1NCREA6i; S AND THEIR STATE
FALLS FURlTHElR 13U11N1) THE REST OF AU&amp; STILALIA. oe,/, 
TILE QU. LE. N' SLANI) GOVERNPRtNT HAS RE'USED EVE,. N TO
DISCUSS OUR OFFER TU ASSUME HESPONSIBILITY FOR STATE
RAILWAYS AND 111, LIEV15 THlE STATE ( GOVER6NNL1, NT OF TIM; S CMI'TLING
BURDEN ON T1L2Ifl BUDGET3. WE HAVE: OFFEMILD QUEENSLAND A
2-FOR-1 SUBSIDY FO; L AI'' UVED URBAN PUBLIC TRANSIORT PROJE'CTS.
VE HIAVE~ HAD) LITTLE CU-O1' LATION IN THIIS IlNWIMMINT AIvLEAo
Y2.' T NO S; TAiZ~ GOVIiIZNIMZNT HAS A 61LODDIML RECORD
IN URBAN P'UBLIC TIL NS11ORT TH[ AN Ms. I3JELI( E -P'ETERSEN
GOVERNIMENT. TIIERRE IS J3UVE TALK AT TRlE MOMENT AB0U7 NEW CITY
RAIL LINKS 1ND i'A66ENGEiZ TitANS. I GIVE AN AJSURAA' 4C0 THAT
PIX GuVERNMENT WILL 3L E iAL) TO CONSIDER ANY 1JORTHIMhILE
VIZOJE. CT MXkITING AUSTRALIAN GOVERNUENT A.' SI' 31ANCE.
BlUT WHAT 15 THE COUNTRY PARTY-LI) 3ERAL RECORD ON
P~ UBLIC TRANS'Oi2T IN 1957,9 411: 1 THLY CAME TO OFFICE, THEY SCR APPED
THE PRiEVIOUS LA13OR GOVL1RNjM1EIdT' PLANS TO ELECTRIFY THlE
BRISBANE SUBURaAN RAI LWAY SYSTEM.
IN UCT013" ER 1971p bl[~ t ANNOUNCEI) THAT TIMl S; TATEGUVERNM'ENT
AUTIIORISf. D A S TAR*% T OIN TM' CONSTRUCTION OF
THlE MEIVALE 2J; R. 1ILWAY SYSTEM COINNECTING THlE NORTHHIIRN
~ AN~ 1vTUtR 14uu:~: IT11 A NL11 RIVER BRIDGE. TENDEIR 1AV'E
TILL NUT . L~ LT FOR TIS WOURK. 
IN MYA 1972, ; 3EIFORE TH[ E LAST STATE ELECTIONp
SIR GU RDON CHALK SiAID) THI' GOVL-' 1.1[, NT WOULD CO-OUDINATE
AND RATIONALI~ iE ALL FORMS1 OF PUBLIC TRANS3PORT IN i14ISBANhS
UNDER ONE ULGIONAL TIi X" I'OUT AUTHORZITY. THERE WEIME .11wlIS1* S
OF NEW RAILWAY STATIONS AND BUS/ JZAIL INTL1hCAGEJ. THE
SUBU111AN, IL SYSTEMi WAS TO BE ELETRIIIk UND.[ Ii A
P'LAN. THE INLTROPOLI TAN TP.. ANS IT POLICY 0011111TTE
RESI'ONS I3Bl: FOR T1" 11lS C 0= u) NATION ItAS NOT SET. UP' UNTIL
AUGUST 1973. -ALMOST ANOTHIING 1AS B. u" ZN DOINE. A CRAIRMAN
OF THlE METROP. OLITAN TUNANSiIT PROJECT BOARD HAS BEEN
Al'OINTLD BUT WON'T TAIUE, OFFICE UN~ TIL KSXT YEAH.
IT. IS BAD IN1OUGII WHEN A STATE Pi1P'IE 1EUSED
TO CO-OPERAITO WbITil THE NATIONAL OVEUNMENT IN MUE INTMRES-TS
OF HIS STATE, IT IS WORS13 V11314lIE CONTINUES DOING NOTHING
ON IS OWN, THEIi.~ Al TRZUT1 IS THAT 11IRISBANB HAS Of THE
VJORST PUBLIC Tl" NSPORT IN AUSTRALIA. ALL THE. PIMMIL" T?. CAN
OFF,' EU IS IIIGIIER IRA IL FAtE. 51.4 AND IIGIITS9 AS VERC TUCIM-a
SAID IN HIS5 POLICY SI'Et{ C11: " TilE 2UEENSLAND ( iOVE1R'VN'NT
PIZOVIDES JIMTTER WAGOLNS FORl COAL ' T' 1A14 CAM6IAGES FOR PEOUI1 LL'.
IT WAS' IN 13IJ61ANE DJi; I Nc TMU 1972 CAM: P1' AIZiN THAT
I IIEVEALLI) FOR T1. l1 FIRST1 TIi-ji UUR ' PROP1OSALS TO UI'GRADflE
PUBLIC -TRANS1POT IN QUIZ 1' 1AJOIL CITIES, 
WE. ARtE TILE FIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERIMENT TO GIVE
blONLY OUTUIGHT GRANTS TO TIllE STATES FOR URIBAN TDAVrOllT.
PREVIOUS GOV4,' IUMBMNTS ROVII) DED LOANS FOR COUNTRY RAILW~ AY LINES
BUT TUEY ALWAYS REQUIRED THE STATES TO CONTILIBUTE EQUAL AMOUNTS
THIEMI3ELVES, AND THE LOANS HA) TO BE REJ:', PAID WITH INTERPt. ST.
IN CO-l,. 4JPETION WITu MY GOY M4ENTI, I'ERC TUCKER-1 CAN
PROVIDE A NEIWr DEAL FUR ISiU3BANE TIZANS'OaT. UN) I OU4 LEGISLATION
WE A11; ALREA]) Y IAKING GRANTS POlL THIRZE IMPORTANT 1' ROJECTS
THE ELECTRIFICATION OF TIlM SUBURBJAN RZAILLtAY FROM DARRA TO
FERNY UIWVII, TIEl CROSS RIVER RAIL LINK, AND) IDUf lITIONAJL TRACKS
ON TIE NORTHERN CORRIDOR LINEN FROM RObNA STREET TO IOIZTIIGATE.
FIVE FUR4Tll) ER, 1' UOJECTS llAVE-BEEN A'i" RUOVED SINCE T1E1l ZSTlART OF
TIl11 FINACIAL YLA11, INCLUDING ELCTRIFICATION MOMI IiSII'ICI
TO DARlZA. TIllS AlU* 4WfAGE1UtPNT IS PARTICULARLY FAVOURABLE, TO
QUEENSLANJD BI3CAUSE BRISBANE WILL GET MO,= FOR PRIOJE-CTS AL',; rEADY
Ai'l'RUOVJ. D THAN ANY CAPITAL OTHER THAN SYDNIMY. BZISBANE I ILL
GET CONSIDERABLY MORE TMAN MLL, 30UPNE AND VEY ' IUcM 1MorJ:: TIIAN
THE OTHER THREE SMALLER CAPITALS. ALL TOLD TIE AUSTRLIAN
GOVLRNUCMT WILL BE PAYIN4G U1MR THAN lol2 MILLION FOR TIIE
THREE MAJOR WORKS TUAT IS, TWO-TIIUDS OF T120 ESTIIIATELD
TOTAL COST OFNIhOUE TIUN $ 18 MILLION AI) ANONIUTLL 17.29 MILLION
FOR TH SMIALLEU 1' RUJLCTS. A TOTAL UP PEA. IY'S420 -MILLIONO
0# P
III 
THEIR APPROACH TO UR3AN TRANSPORT TYPIFIES THE
HYPOCRISY AND NEGATIVISM OF THEIR WHOLE PROGRAM. LABOR
HAS ACTED; OUR OPPONENTS HAVE STALLED AND COMPLAINED. ONLY
TlIRZOUG11 CO-OPERATION BETWEEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT IN QUEENSLAND
AND MY GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA WILL BRISBANE PEOPLE GET THE
DECENT TRANSPORT SERVICES THEY DESERVE. t * t
.4 I
8 q, 



1-RICES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today the
policies of the Queensland Government were pushing up prices.
" The States have the power to control prices but
Mr. Bjelke-' etorsen refusob to use this power," Mr. Whitlam
said. " lie ca,; ipaigned against our referendum last year to
give the. national government the power to control prices."
" Yet prices in Queensland arerasing faster than in
any other State." " South Australia, whore there is a Labor Government,
has used its powers effectively to check the land price spiral."
" This is something every State can do."
" If the Queensland Government co-operated with us
in setting up a Land Commission, as the three Liberal States
are doing, we could reduce the price of land for the home
buyer." " If the Queensland Government allowed the Australian
National Line to operate between Queensland ports it could cut
shipping freights. " If Mr. B3jolke-Petersen accepted our offer to take
financial responsibility for State railways, we could cut
the cost of rail freights."
" If he co-operated with our plan to reduce electricity
costs in Queensland we could check price rises over a vast
range of goods." " Hie refuse$ to work effectively with officials from
other States in formulating anti-inflationary policies."
" There is a limit to what any Government can do to
check prices in a world-wide inflationary situation, but
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen does nothing."
Brisbane 16 November 1974 



i i, I i h 7/
I ' U A
Jri
a: a I U
SPEECH NOTES FOR THIE PIM MINISTER;, TIE HON. E. G. WIHITLAM, Q. C. M
FOR TIE GREEK COMMUNITY CENTRE, SOUTH IRISBANE
SUNDAY 17 NOVEMBER 1974
1. I SPEAK TO YOU TODAY AS YOUR1 COUNTRYMEN IN GREECE
VOTE IN A DEMOCRATIC ELECTION FOR TIll,,' FIRST ' TIHflE SINCE 1967.
I REJOICE THALT DEIMOCRACY HAS BEE-', N HESTOZD IN THE COUNTRY OF
ITS BIRTH. THE ELECTE GOVERNMPNT OF GMEECE WILL HAVE TIHE
FIRM SUPPORT AND FRIENDSHIP OF AUSTRALIA, ITS GOVERNMENT AND
ITS PEOPLE.
2. I KNO1, THAT INMANY GRES IN AUSTRALIA FEARED FOR
THE POLITICAL STABILITY OF THEIR 11OI-I'AND DURING TILE RULE OF
TIHE COLON[ ELS AND EVEN AFTEIZ, T1IE MILITARY R. EGIME WAS OVERTIIIROWN.
MANY G1' EEKS WH10 FOUND THISlELVES IN AUSTRALIA AS TLii; OR ARY
VISITORS DURING Tl RECENT TU1i6ULENCE IN GREECE HAVE BEE'N
RELUCTANT TO RETURN H1OME UNITIL TIE SITUATION IS CLAIFI1IIIED.
TILE AUSTRALIAN GOVERUNMENT HAS NOT ENVORCUGD THEIR DEPARTURE
AND WILL NOT DO SO. T1hOS; E fllU DO NOT WANT TO RETURN HIOME
INNEI.; DIATELY HAVE HAD TIIEIZi VISAO; EXTZNtJ) E) AND TIllS PRACTICE
WILL CONTINUE FOR TIlE TINE BEINGi TIll MINISTER FOR LABOR AND
IMMIGRATION, MR1C1L YDE CAMEIZON, HAS GIVEN T1llS ASSURANCE TO THE
GREEK COMMIUNITY, AND I AN HAPPY TO ILWEPLAT IT TODAY. / 2 
-2-
3. iANY GREEKS' IN AUSTiRALIA HAVE BEEN DISTURBED BY
THE RECENT EVENTS. IN CYPRUS. AUSTRALIA HAS CONTRIBUTED A
POLICE CONTINGENT TO THE U. N. PEIACE KIEPING FORCE IN CYPIHUS
SINCE ITS INCEPTION ' IN 1964. QUEENSLAND, LIKE EVERY OTHIER11
STATE AND TERRITORY; CONTRIBUTED TO TIAT. FORCE. ONE OF TIlE
FIRST DECISIONS OF MY GOVERNMENT WAS TO IKEE1' TIlE FORCE IN
BEING, THOUGH THE LIBIERAL GOVERlNMENT HAD DECIDED TO PHASE
IT OUT. DURING 1973. IN JANUARY 1973 I WROTE TO T II PRELIERS
OF QUEENSLAND, N. S. W. AND VICTORIA'ASKING THEM TO MAINTAIN
THEIR POLICE CONTINGENTS IN THIE FORCE. SIR ROBERT ASKIN AND
MR HIIAMER AGREED TO DO SO.. -Rn B1ELKEI-PETERSEN WAS TILE ONLY
PRtEiIER TO REFUSE. TIHE FORCE NUiBERED 35 IN JUNE 1974.
LAST VEEK AN AUSTRALIAN SERGEANT WASO KILLED AND ANOTHER
INJURED BY A MINE EXPLOSION DURING SERVICE IN CYPRUS.
' 1 NOTES ON GREEKS IN AUSTRALIA
SOME OF TIlE FIRST GREE'i SETTLERS IN AUSTRALIA W'EI. E
SAILORS WHIIO LEFT THEIR SHIPS DURING TIIE FIRST GOLD RUSH IN
TIlE 1850' S. A NUMBER OF IONIAN GREEKS WHO0 MET AUSTRALIAN
TROOPS DURING THE BOERi WAR EVENTUALLY S:' TTLED IN AUSTRALIA.
MANY LINKS BETVEEN AUSTRALIANS AND GREEKS ESTABLISHED DURING
THE EVACUATION OF GREECE IN-ORLD WAR II ARE STILL REMEMBERED
IN BOTH COUNTRIES. AT TlHE END OF 1973 THERlE V\ ERlE, ABOUT 153,000 GREEKBORN
PEIRSONS IN AUSTRALIA. ABOUT 88; 000 HAD BECOME AUSTRALIAN
CITIZENS SINCE 1945.. / 3 
4
i
-3-
, SIR GEORGE BOVIEN, THE FIRST GOVERNOR OF QUEENSLAND
( 1856-68), SPENT MANY YEARS OF HIS LIFE IN THE IONIAN ISLANDS.
HIS WIFE, DIAMANTINA ROMA, WAS LBORN ON ITHACA. SHE WAS
PARTICULARLY ACTIVE : IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF QUEENSLAND AND IS
REMEMBERED IN THE NAMES OF THE TOWN OF ROMA, THE DIAMANTINA
RIVER AND ITHACA SHIRE.
GEORGE GEORGES, BORN IN DARWIN OF GREEK PARENTS, LS
BEEN AN AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND SINCE
1968. NICHOLAS LAURENITUS 1O110 BECAME A MILLIONAIRE TIIOUGH
REAL ESTATE IIAS LMADE CONSIDERABLE DONATIONS TO CHAIITABLE
OIRGANISATIONS AND GAVE'A LARGE SUNI TO TIIE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
TO ESTABLISH A CHAIR OF . IODERN GII; EK.
MICHAEL KAILIS HAS ESTABLISHIED A CONSIDERIABLE
FORTUNE TIIROUGII IIIS SHIP BUILDING, FISHING AND SEAFOOD
PROCESSING INDUSTRIES IN lrESTER'N AUSTRALIA AND THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY, TIHE GREEK ORT01ODOX CHlURCH IIAS P1OIIED TIE BACKBONE
OF ORGANISED GREEK LIFE IN AUSTRALIA SINCE 1908 AND HAS
. PIROVIDED TIHE FOCUS FOR SOCIAL COHESION.
( FOR BACKGROUND ON MIGIRANTS GEN1ERALLY SEE ATTACHED NOTES ON
ITALIANS.) 



A0 So L!
The 1O-noiLinister today gave details of increased
Azas~ ra'c, overnment e. x-pendi ture in " ueonsland.
I-Ir ~ Jiimwas addressing a crowded luncheon at tho
' Yow ieilbovurne Iotel.
He pointed out that Queensland received ' k" 739 million
from~ thc, t~ ustralian Giovernmecnt during the last finar~ cir-l year.
": ot onliy does i~ xzonsland et much much moire than
she diC œ orn the Libe.-cls in Carnbeymr; she Loscon. iOorably
moro ' c on opulAvion tVacr other A; atues Let nctw," 1 the
i~~ izersvid. . ueo~.~ nd 2ceivoE more than ,38* 1 per liead of
Ypopwti 6on ix.-197' 3-74 compared with -, Y43 per ' head ir. averafe
praynnUs -to v. ll Atos.
Tha,-st year Austra-lia-n Government -ra-nts for p)" Ifmry
anuO Seccon Thary edRucation were 145 per cent on the year,. beforc,
tcrtary ducction was un 165 Per cent, tochnic.-l cuccztion
110 -) or cent, 9 welfare housing 23 per cent, AboriginrA ,, Jwancement
no. al , ox-cenlft. !' Xalth rxnd uelfare, road~ s -nR~ 2 ril
rir~ C. cvcloemcnt in ' ueasiand arc all :-et inf; record -, mouz-bo
AfVor*. i my CGovernme nt. ~ o Liuch fLor the harsh treatment o2
% luceonsland by Canberra," IHr iJhitlam said*
17 Zj-ovem~ jer 1974 



PRE; RiLELEASE
MT. GRAVATT HOSPITAL
The Prime Minister today visited the site which the
Queensland Government has been holding for a hospital at
Mt. Gravatt. Mr Whitlam said that the sorry history of the proposal
for a major teaching hospital complex at Mt Gravatt was yet
another instance of how the Queensland Government's unwillingness
to co-operate'with the Australian Government stopped Queenslanders
from getting the benefits of essential services.
" In the 1973 Budget the Australian Government offered
Queensland $ 250,000 for initial planning for the Mt Gravatt
teaching hospital complex. To date they have spent only
$ ii0,000 and claim that the project has a low priority andw
will not be required before the 1980s," the Prime Minister
said. " Tile Australian Government will pay the whole cost
of the new Griffith University and has offered to-pay the whole
cost of the teaching hospital.
" A teaching hospital ought to be in operation as soon
as possible after the University opens, but so far the Queensland
Government has ignored our offer to fund the major teaching
hospital complex. " Residents of the southern metropolitan area and
of the Gold Coast urgently need access to the comprehensive
medical services that the proposed hospital complex at Mount
Gravatt would provide.
" Meanwhile the most overgrown and overcrowded hospital
complex in Australia, the Royal Brisbane Hospital, has a major
expansion under construction.
" Mr Tooth now proposes a further major expansion in
the inner city area, on the overcrowded mater hospital site,
before proceeding at Mount Gravatt.
" The Australian Government is convinced by the expert
opinions expressed by hospital administrators for years, that
major teaching hospital facilities in Brisbane need decentralising
urgently," he said.
ø 17 November 1974 



Z6coo
PRESS RELEASE
The Prime Minister today continued his campaigning
for State Labor Leader Perc Tucker.
In a crowded schedule, Mr Whitlam attended a Greek
Orthodox Church Service and addressed a gathering at the Greek
Community Centre in South Brisbane. He stressed the Australian
Government's concern at the Cyprus situation, and outlined the
financial and welfare assistance already given by his Government.
Advance Australia Fair signalled his arrival at a
crowded luncheon at the New Melbourne Hotel.
Mr Whitlam reminded the audience of his longstanding
association with Queensland.
" In my concern and affection for Queensland, in my
knowledge of your State and my long-standing association with
it, I yield to no-one, not even Mr Bjelke-Petersen and Sir
Gordon Chalk," he said.
" I came here with no grudge against your Premier,
and for all our disagreements, I bear no lasting animosity
towards his government. I have done my best to work with him
for the good of this State. If I point to failings in his
government's performance I know you will understand I have no
desire to bucket Queensland or its citizens," Mr Whitlam added.
However, he criticised the Premier for not helping
in the fight against inflation.
" As the leader of the national government, I accept
responsibility for the economic management of this country,"
the Prime Minister stated.
" I don't shuffle off that responsibility to Mr Bjelke-
Petersen. At the same time he cannot shuffle off his own
responsibilities to me.
" My own government has used every weapon at its
disposal, every constitutional power it possesses, in the
battle against inflation and unemployment. We will not let
up in that battle.
" Mr Bjelke-Petersen has done nothing. He campaigned
against our referendum to seek greater powers in the fight
against inflation. He refuses to use the powers he already
possesses," Mr Whitlam said.
" If the Queensland Government co-operated with us in
setting up a land commission as the three Liberal States are
doing, we could reduce the price of land for the home buyer.
" If the Queensland Government allowed Australian
National Line ships to operate between Queensland ports it
could cut shipping freights. 
2
" If he co-operated with our plan to reduce electricity
costs in Queensland we could check price rises over a vast
range of goods," Mr lhitlam said.
Queensland's housing policy was a disgrace.
" They have done less than anyone for the people most
in need of housing and even less than Labor did in Queensland
in its last year of office 1956-57. That year Labor built
1900 housing commission homes. Last year Mr Bjelke-Petersen
built only 1400 homes and had almost $ 12 million left over
in unspent housing funds from Canberra, despite a 40% population
increase since Labor was last in office in Queensland."
The Prime Minister concluded his address by pointing
out that Queenslanders received a larger slice of the national
expenditure cake than any other Australians.
Queensland had received $ 739 million last financial
year from the Australian Government. This represented 3382.00
per head of population, compared with $ 343.00 per head average
in the other States.
Mr Whitlam attended a function at Redland Bay Hotel
before driving to Surfers Paradise where he has a press conference
tomorrow morning.
17 November 1974 



C / PP\ US
PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
Australia has made a further contribution'of $ 50,000 to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for relief'of
distress in Cyprus.
This brings its total contribution to $ 100,000.
In addition Qantas is flying free of charge to Cyprus
of emergency relief supplies each week.
The extra $ 50,000 will be spent on canned meat.
More than. two thousand enquiries from the Cypriot community
in Australia have been passed on to the International Committee
of the Red Cross.
An Australian team from the Embassy in Athens has gone to
Cyprus to process applications for migration from those who
are dispossessed. BRISBANE, 17 NOVEMBER, 1974 



SPEECH BY TIE PRIME MINISTER, THE IION. E. G. WIITLAM, Q. C. M. P.,
AT THE NEW IMELBOURNE HOTEL, SOUTH BRISUANE,
SUNDAY 17 NOVEMBER 1974
WHEN I UNDERTOOK THIS CAMPAIGN IN SUPPORT OF
PERC TUCKER AND HIS COLLEAGUES I MADE IT CLEAR THAT I WOULD
BE FIGHTING THE ELECTION PRIMARILY ON STATE ISSUES. I CAME
TO ENDORSE PERC TUCKER'S VIGOROUS AND COMPREHENSIVE POLICIES
FOR SOLVING THE PROBLEMS OF QUEENSLAND AND PROMOTING ITS
DEVELOPMENT. I WANT TO SEE THIS RICH, IIVERSE, EXCITING
STATE MOVE FORWARD CONFIDENTLY* WITI THE REST OF AUSTRALIA.
I WANT TO SEE ITS RESOURCES DEVELOPED SPEEDILY AND
EFFICIENTLY, ITS PRODUCTS SOLD AIBOAD AT THE BEST POSSIBLE
PRICES, ITS ENORMOUS A( RICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL POTENTIAL
DEVELu " D FI , j THE IENEFIT OF ALL ITS CITIZENS, ITS CITIES
I'LANNED TO THE BEST ADVANTAGE, ITS TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
INPROVED, AND ITS PEOPLE PROVIDED WITH TIE BEST EDUCATION,
THE I3EST HEALTH SERVICES, TIHE BEST HOUSING AND THE HIGIIEST
S'TANDARD OF LIVING TIIAT A MODERN INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY CAN
AVi,, iD. IN MY CONCERN AND AFFECTION FOR QUEIENSLAND, IN NY
KNOWLji, OF YOUR STATE AND MY LONG-STANDING ASSOCIATION
WITH IT, I Y'IELD TO NO ONE NOT EVEN MR BJELKE-PETERSEN
OR SIR GORDON CHALK.
I CAME HERE WITI NO GRUDGE AGAINST YOUR PREMIEIR,
AND FOR ALL OUR DISAGREEMENTS, I BEAR NO LASTING ANIMOSITY
TOWARDS HIS GOVERNMENT. I HAVE DONE NY BEST TO WORK VITH
IIIl FOR THEI GOOD OF THIS STATE. IF I POINT TO FAILINGS IN
HIS GOVERNMENT'S PERFORMANCE I KNOW YOU WILL UNDERSTAND I
HAVE NO DESIRE TO BUCKET QUEENSLAND OR ITS CITIZENS. 
L i o
l J" i
-2-
IF IT ERE POSSIBLE TO CONDUCT THIS CAMPAIGN WITHOUT
RECRIMINATION OR BITTERNESS I WOULD GLADLY DO SO. I AM
IAPPY FOR THE FACTS TO SPEAK FOR THEMSELVES. TODAY I SHALL
CONFINE MYSELF TO SOME SIMPLE FACTS. THEY ARE MORE
ELOQUENT THAN ALL TIE SLOGANS AND CATCIICRIES WE HAVE
IEARD FROM THE PREMIER AND HIS SUPPORTERS.
I ASK THE PEOPLE OF QUEENSLAND TO CONSIDER THE
TRUTH ABOUT THEIR STATE, TO LOOK AT THE FACTS CALMLY AND
THIOUGHTFULLY, TO FACE UP TO THEIR IMPLICATIONS.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT INFLATION AND RISING PRICES.
THE FACT IS THAT IN QUEENSLAND PRICES ARE RISING FASTER
TIAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN AUSTRALIA. THAT IS NO ACCIDENT.
IT CAN BE TRACED TO TIE POLICIES AND ATTITUDES OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT, AND I SHALL RETURN TO THAT IN A MOMENT.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT UNEMPLOYMENT. AGAIN, THE
FACT IS THAT IN QUEENSLAND UNEMPLOYMENT HAS RISEN FASTER
OVER TIE PAST YEAR THAN ANYWIIEIE ELSE BY "' AR IN AUSTRALIA.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN OFFERS NO SOLUTIONS; HE CERTAINLY OFFERS
NO COMFORT TO THE UNEMPLOYED. HIS SOLE REACTION IS TO
IDEPRIVE TIEM OF STATE UNEMIPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND SEEK
SCAPEGOATS IN CANBERRA.
AS THE LEADER OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT I ACCEPT
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT OF THIS COUNTRY. 
I DON'T SHUFFLE OFF THAT RESPONSIBILITY ON TO MR BJELKE-PETERSEN.'
AT THE SANE TIME MR BJELKE-PETERSEN CANNOT SHUFFLE OFF HIS
OWN RESPONSIBILITIES ON TO NE. HE KNOWS, AS WE ALL KNOW, THAT
UNEMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION ARE NOW AT CRITICAL LEVELS THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD AND THAT FOR THE FIRST TIME EVERYWHERE, TO AN
UNPRECEDENTED DEGREE, THESE TWO PROBLEMS ARE OCCURRING
SIMULTANEOUSLY.' MY OWN GOVERNMENT HAS USED EVERY WEAPON AT
ITS DISPOSAL, EVERY CONSTITUTIONAL POWER IT POSSESSES, IN THE
BATTLE AGAINST INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT. WE WILL NOT LET UP
IN THAT BATTLE. TIIE FURTHER ECONOMIC MEASURES I ANNOUNCED TIIS
WEcEK IN PARLIAMENT WILL BOOST BUSINESS CONFIDENCE, SAFEGUARD
JOBS AND LAY THE FOUNDATION FOR CO-OPERATION AND RESTRAINT IN
DEALING WITH INFLATIONARY PRESISURES. WHAT HAS MR BJELKE-PETERSEN
DONE? HE HAS DONE NOTHING. HE CAMPAIGNED AGAINST OUR REFERENDUM
TO SEEK GREATER POWERS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION. HE
REFUSES TO USE. THE POWERS HE ALREADY FOSSESSES.
LOOK AT TIE CONTRAST WITH OTHER STATES. IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WHERE THERE IS A LABOR GOVERNMENT, THE STATE
HAS USED ITS POWERS EFFECTIVELY TO CHECK THE LAND PRICE SPIRAL.
THIS IS SOMETHING EVERY STATE CAN DO. IF THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT CO-OPERATED WITH US IN SETTING Ui A LAND COMMISSION,
AS THE THREE LIBERAL STATES ARE DOING, WE COULD REDUCE THE
PRICE OF LAND FOR THE HOME BUYER. IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
ALLOWED THE AUSTRALIAN -NATIONAL LINE TO OPERATE BETWEEN QUEENSLAND
PORTS IT COULD CUT SHIPPING FREIGHTS. / 4 
-4-
IF HE CO-OPERATED WITH OUR PLAN TO REDUCE ELECTRICITY COSTS
IN QUEENSLAND WE COULD CHECK PRICE RISES OVER A VAST
RANGE OF GOODS. HE REFUSES TO WORK EFFECTIVELY WITH
OFFICIALS FROM OTHER STATES IN FORMULATING ANTI-INFLATIONARY
POLICIES. THERE IS A LIMIT TO WHAT ANY GOVERNMENT CAN
DO TO CHECK PRICES IN A WORLD-WIDE INFLATIONARY SITUATION,
BUT MR BJELKE-PETERSEN I REPEAT DOES NOTHING.
LET ME DEAL WITH SOME PARTICULAR ISSUES.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT TRANSPORT. THE SAD FACT
IS THAT BRISBANE HAS THE WORST, THE MOST DELAPIDATED
URBAN TRANSPORT SYSTEM IN AUSTRALIA. MY GOVERNMENT WANTS
TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT. WE HAVE OFFERED ALMOST
MILLION OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS TO ELECTRIFY YOUR
SUL I'BAN-RAILWAYS AND UPGRADE BRISBANE TRANSPORT SERVICES
GENERALLY. NO NATIONAL GOVERNMENT HAS EVER MADE FREE
GRANTS FOR URBAN TRANSPORT BEFORE. PERC TUCKER'S GOVERNMENT
WILL WORK VITH US IN IMPLEMENTING THESE PLANS.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN'S GOVERNMENT WAITED A LONG TIME BEFORE
ACCEPTING OUR PROPOSALS. AS FAR BACK AS 1957 HIS PARTY
SC.:'. PED. THE PREVIOUS LABOR GOVERNMENT'S PLANS FOR
ELECTRIFICkTION. THEY HAVE DONE NOTHING SINCE. IT IS AS
SIMPLE AS THAT. MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT TIE DIFFICULTIES
OF HOUSING. THE FACT IS AGAIN THAT QUEENSLAND'S RECORD
IN WELFARE HOUSING IS TIE WORST IN AUSTRALIA. THEY HAVE
DONE LESS THAN ANYONE FOR TIE PEOPLE MOST IN NEED OF HOUSING,
AND EVEN LESS THAN LABOR DID IN QUEENSLAND IN ITS LAST YEAR
IN OFFICE IN 1956-57. IN THAT YEAR LABOR BIJILT 1900 HOUSING
CONMISSION HOMES. 
LAST YEAR TILE I3JELKCE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT BUILT 1460, YET
HAD ALMOST' $ 12 MILLION UNSPENT IN IIOUSING. FUNDS FROM
CANI3LRRAv DESPITE A 40 PER CENT INCREASE IN POPULATION
SINCE LABOR WAS IN POWER.
bllt BJELK] E-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT THE MEANNESS AND
WICKNEDNESS OF CANBERRA* TIM, FACT IS THAT QUEENSLAND
HLAS RECEIVED MORE 1IlA'l) CASH FROM THE PRESENT NATIONAL LABOR
GOVERMENT THAN IT HAS RECEIVED FROMI ANY PREVIOUS * GOVERNMENT
IN HISTORY. NO AMOUNT OF HEDGING OR QUALIFICATION, NO
TALK OF RESTRICTIONS OR STRINGS OR TILE VALUE OF MONEY,
CAN ALTER TILE FACT THAT WE IIAVI BE-EN OVERWHELMINGLY
GENEROUS. IN THLE LAST FINANCIAL YEAH OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS
TO QUEENSLAND TOTALLED $ 739 MILLION. NOT ONLY DOES
QUEENSLAND GET MUCH, MUCH MORE THAN z1IE DID FROM THlE
LIW11-UALS IN CANBERRA; SHE GETS CONSID) ERABLY PMORE PER HEAD
OF 1PO14' JL % TION THAN OTHER STATES ( JET NOW. QUEENSLAND
RECEIVED MORE THAN 3382 PER HEAD) OF POPULATION IN 1973-74
COMPARIED WITII .1343 P'ER HEAD) IN AVEL.* AGE PAYNENTS TO ALL
STATES. LAST YE,' AR OUR GRANTS FOR'PilIMARY AND SECONDARY
EDUC. ATION WERE UP 145 PER CENT ON THlE YEAR BEFORE, TER'ITIARY
EDUCATION WAS UP 165 PER CENT, TECHNICAL EDUCATION 110 PER
CENT, lve, 77ARE HOUSING 20 PER CENT, A13011IGINAL A]) VANCEIIENT
NEAHLY 30 PER'I CENT. HEIALTHI AND WELFARE, ROADS AND URBAN
AND HEGIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN QUEENSLAND ARE. ALL GETTING
RECORD) AMOUNTS FROM MY GOVERNMENT. e* 1 6 
SO MUCH FOR THE HARSH TREATMENT OF QUEENSLAND BY
THE SOCIALISTS IN CANBERRA. W-HAT OF OUR ATTITUDE TO QUEENSLAND'S
. DEVELOPMENT? YOU HAVE SEEN HOV MR BJELKE-PETERSEN ' REFUSES TO
CO-OPERATE WITH US IN MAKING TOWNSVILLE A REGIONAL GROWTH
CENTRE.-ONE OF THE GREAT FUTURE CITIES OF AUSTRALIA, COMPARABLE
IN SIZE AND IMPORTANCE WITH THE BEST PLANNED CITIES IN THE WORLD.
I HAVE GIVEN MANY INSTANCES IN THIS CAMPAIGN OF HIS FAILURE TO
CO-OPERATE WITH US IN INITIATIVES FOR THE PROGRESS AND ADVANCEMENT
OF YOUR STATE. IN THE PAST TWO YEARS QUEENSLAND HAS MISSED OUT
ON AT LEAST $ 50 MILLION IN FUNDS FROM MY GOVERNMENT BECAUSE OF
THE ATTITUDE OF THE PREMIER. THAT IS THE COST OF MR BJELKEPETEROEN'S
OBSTINACY. THE FACT IS AGAIN UNPALATADLE THAT.
NO STATE IS MORE IN NEED OF BALANCED DEVELOPMENT THAN QUEENSLAND.,
THE DRIFT FROM COUNTRY TOWNS TO* THE CITIES IN THIS STATE HAS
REACHED A RATE UNPARALLELED IN QUEENSLAND'S HISTORY.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN REGARDS THIS TREND AS LESS IMPORTANT THAN
HIS DISLIKE OF THE ELECTED NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
FINALLY, MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS OF THE THREAT TO
DEMOCRACY IN THIS STATE FROM MY GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA. IN
' ONE REMARKABLE PHIIRA3E HE TRIED TO PERSUADE YOU THAT THIS ELECTION
WILL DETERMINE WHETHER QUEENSLAND " CONTINu S TO EXIST". WHAT
IS THE REAL THREAT TO DEMOCRACY IN QUEENSLAND? THE RIGGING
OF ELECTORAL, BOUNDARIES IN THIS STATE IS NOT A THREAT BUT A
FACT OF LIFE. YOU KNOW THE STORY. IT IS A SHAMEFUL ONE.
LAIO0R WON MORE VOTES IN THE 1972 ELECTIONS THAN THE LIBERALS
AND THE COUNTRY PARTY BUT WON FEWER SEATS THAN EITHER OF THEM.
A PREMIER WHO HOLDS OFFICE WITH 19 PER CENT OF THE VOTE IS
HAIRDLY QUALIFIED TO LECTURE ABOUT THREATS TO DEMOCRACY. / 7. 
MY GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MUCH FOR QUEENSLAND AND HAS
OFFERED TO DO MUCH MORE. WITHOUT CO-OPERATION FROM YOUR
GOVERNMENT WE CANNOT ACHIEVE OUR GOALS FOR THE PEOPLE OF
THIS STATE. I HAVE SHOWN YOU THAT THE PROBLEMS YOU FACE ARE
IN MANY CASES WORSE THAN THEY ARE IN THE REST OF AUSTRALIA,
AND THAT YOUR DIFFICULTIES ARE INCREASED BY TIHE NEGLECT, THE
COMPLACENCY, THE PIG-HEADEDNESS OF YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT WHOSE ATTITUDES ARE REJECTED BY
EVERY OTHER STATE GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA INCLUDING THE
LIBERAL STATES OF NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT CLINGS TO OFFICE BY A
FLAGRANTLY UNDEMOCRATIC VOTING SYSTEM.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT WANTONLY FORFEITS $ 50 MILLION
FOR DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT WHOSE RECORD IN MANY FIELDS IS
THE WORST IN AUSTRALIA.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT TOLERATES THE STEEPEST RATE
OF PRICE INCREASES AND THE STEEPEST RISE IN UNEPLOYMENT OF
ANY ST-TE. IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT REFUSES TO DISCUSS, TO TALK,
TO NEGOTIATE, TO CO-OPERATE. 
I TAKE NO PLEASURIE FROM THIS SORRY RECORD. I SUSPECT
THAT IT ALARMS AND DISILLUSIONS MANY OTHER AUSTRALIANS AND
MANY FRIENDS OF OUR COUNTRY ABROAD. I HOPE QUEENSLANDERS WILL
FACE THESE FACTS. ON 7 DECEMBER THEY HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
VOTE FOR A CHANGE OF DIRECTION AND A CHANGE OF HEART. IT WILL
BE A CLEAR CHOICE A CHOICE BETWEEN CO-OPERATION OR CONTINUING
CONFRONTATION, A CHOICE BETWEEN PROGRESS OR CONTINUING
BACKWARDNESS, A CHOICE BETWEEN RATIONALITY OR DOGMATISM, A
CHOICE BETWEEN GOODWILL AND GOOD SENSE OR A CONTINUATION OF
ONE MAN'S HATREDS AND OBSESSIONS, A CHOICE BETWEEN MATURITY AND
ENLIGITENMENT OR THE FORCES OF EXTREMISM AND MALEVOLENCE. FOR
THOSE WITH QUEENSLAND'S BEST INTERESTS AT HEART, FOR THOSE WHO
RESPECT THE ENERGY AND IDEALISM OF HER PEOPLE, IT SHOULD NOT
BE A DIFFICULT CHOICE TO MAKE. I 



PiE i LL2A31E
RURAL LOCAL ROADS
During a visit to Redland Bay, the Prime Minister said
he had been informed that the local Redland Shire Council had
been forced to stop road work on Stradbroke Island by a delay
in the allocation of funds provided by the Australian Government.
To date this financial year, the Australian Government
has provided $ 23.4 million to the Queensland Government for
road construction and maintenance. This represents four months'
allocation of the total amount to be provided to the Queensland
Government for the 1974-75 year.
Queensland has received its instalments in exactly the
same way as the other States. There has been no delay on the
Australian Government's part in the provision of those necessary
funds. Of the $ 23.4 million provided, about $ 5 million has
been for rural local roads. These funds are provided with no
strings attached. How and when it is shared among local
governments is the responsibility of the Queensland Government.
If the Redland 0-hire Council, or any other shire council, has
been starved of funds, it is fairly and squarely the fault of
the Queensland Government.
Mr WllTitlam said that the arbitrary bottleneck created
by the Queensland Government meant a decline in the quality of
rural services, and resulted in council staff being thrown out
of work.
17 November 1974 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
SURFER'S PARADISE
18 NOVEMBER, 1974
PRIME MINISTER: For the benefit of the news persons from the
South, I should introduce you to Mrs. Marian Reed, the candidate
for the Gold Coast State Electorate, and Bill Darcy, the M. L. A.
for Albert. Needless to say, if Queensland's Parliament was
composed on a democratic basis there would be twice as many
members from this area because the electorates are the most
populace in the* State.
One of the refreshing things about visiting Queensland
is that I'm able to read the Queensland papers first, and read
the Southern ones later in the day. I must say that it was
enlightening to read the Sunday Mail yesterday and the Courier
Mail today. A front page box in the Sunday. Mail warned its
readers that Sir Gordon Chalk had admitted wanting to be Premier
instead of Mr. Ejelke-Petersen, his National Party coalition.
partner. What's more he said he'd make a better job of it. This
doesn't surprise me because I've said the same things myself.
Given a choice between the outgoing Premier's obstructionism
and his outgoing Deputy's untried potential for co-operation in
the Askin/ Hamer manner, any Australian Prime Minister would say
it was time for a change. Any sensible Australian Prime Minister
would want that change to be in Perc Tucker's favour. I am
confident that it can be.
It was still interesting to read the interview Sir
Gordon Chalk gave in today's Courier Mail. It just underlined
all those obvious ambitions of the underrepresented Liberals in
the outgoing State Government. And yet, as I said, given a
choice between the two coalition partners I would go for the Liberal
potential for co-operation, rather than the demonstrated Country
Party obstruction. You'll notice that I keep calling it the
Country Party, I can't quite get into the habit of calling it the
National Party. And just when I was getting into the habit over
the weekend, I find that the National Conference of this Party
held in all places in Canberra, the centre itself, decided that it
./ 2 
-2-
was going to be the National Country Party.
And then, of course, they also said some kind thin gs
about their Liberal partners in the various State Parliaments.
Perhaps I might draw your attention to the things which Sir
Gordon Chalk said in the Courier Mail this morning. Sir
Gordon, if he were Premier, would not be so rock-hard about:
Canberra. He says: nWe've got to get round the table with these
fellows and see how-many arguments we can win. We've got a
Labor Government in Canberra, we've got to get rid of it, but
we're stuck with it for the time being. We must have a softer
line with Canberra. We have to live with them." And again: ' I've
never been guilty of criticising my Premier, but what worries me
is that, to him, Canberra can do nothing right. -Therehas got to
be something good in Canberra, it just can't be all that bad.
I'm very opposed to Canberra's political philosophy, but if
Queensland and the Commonwealth are to go ahead.-there has to be
some basis for harmony. How to achieve Queensland harmony with
Canberra, I admit I'm not quite sure, but given the opportunity
I feel I might be able to bring about a better understanding."
Now, I might say a couple of local matters here. You
will have noticed that the Regional Employment Development Scheme
is examining proposals which come from local government bodies
to promote employment locally and to do jobs which will have
enduring value. Last Wednesday, at the weekely meeting of the
ministers concerned, they finalised the proposals which came from
the Gold Coast City Council. The Gold Coast -4t~ l Council had put
in avery great number of proposals and of course they all had to
be examined, but nevertheless, we are now able to go ahead with
nine projects amounting in all to about $ 46,000, and I won't read
them out to you, I think it would suit you best if I handed them
out to you. Now the projects which are preferred are those which
will give a great deal of employment. The emphasis is on
-employment rather than just on materials. The Scheme will be
administered by the Southport office of the Commonwealth
Employment Service.. Excluding supervisory and specialist personnel
all labour requirements will be drawn from persons . elegible for
unemployment benefits. In selecting the labour required, preference
will be given to persons with dependents who have been unemployed
a/ 
-3-
for the longest time. Married persons workin part-ti~ t u on
short-time will not necessarily be disqualified, however, from
employment on projects. All persons employed under the schcm
will be work tested for suitable employment at not less than
monthly intervals and their continued employment on a project
at Australian Government expense will be conditional on there
being no such alternative employment. This will ensure that
projects don't compete for labour with regular employers.
Proposals for projects that may recieve assistance may emminate
from such bodies as Local Government Authorities, Community
Groups, Special Purpose Groups, Business Enterprises, or State
Departments. There's another couple of matters that I might
mention to you. It is unfortunately true that the Gold Coast
area is the least satisfactorily sewered part. in Australia. There's
only 20% of the premises which are sewered, yet it is the most
rapidly growing urban area in Australia. And accordingly it is
one of those areas where a State Government should move quickly
with proposals, because the Australian Government has extended the
whole scheme, the urban sewerage proposals, from the State
capitals to places of the population of the Gold Coast or less.
So that the sooner proposals can be made, by the State Government
and local authorities, the sooner the money can flow. There is
still dispute, of course, as to how to dispose of the effluent.
Now, there can be no question that it is now possible to dispose
of it in the most healthy and satisfactory because the
Australian Government is making that possible.
The concluding thing I want to raise of local interest
is the question of public transport between the Gold Coast and
Brisbane. It is of vourse, now seen to be the folly which we
said it was all along, to discontinue the railway between
Coolangatta and later Southport and Beenlea. I think Sir Gordon
Chalk was the Minister for Transport in 1961 when the line to
Coolangatta was discontinued and in 1964 when the line from
Southport to Beenlea in turn was discontinued. And folly on folly,
of course, they have now sold much of the track. Now the Gold
Coast is easily the largest city in Australia which does not have
/ 4 
-4-
public transport by rail with other places. AnOe as I said
earlier, it is the most rapidly growing area in Australia.
So we would be happy as a Government, Federally, to consul~ t
with the State Government on this proposal. There again,
it is something which the Federal Government cannot do on its
own. The Constitution prevents the Federal Parliament building
any railway without the consent of the State Government. And
accordingly, it does require co-operation with a State
Government before this can be done. But it is very clear, that
this distance, this population is ideal for having public transport.
It can be quicker, safer, and cheaper than public transport by
buses and it also provides an alternative for individuals. if they
prefer to go by public transport instead of driving their own
cars. PRIME MINISTER: Are there any questions you would like to ask me.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, after you finished reading the Courier
mail this morning, did you notice * in the National Press reports
that Sir Charles. Court in Western Australian has written to
mining companies telling them that if they accept financial
help from the Government they could not expect to get mining
leases on or off-shore in Western Australia. Do you have any comment
on that?
PRIME MINISTER: I only know what I saw in the paper and it is very
short. I don't want to, I haven't seen any of the letters that
Sir Charles Court wrote, so I'm rather reluctant to comment about
them. -It is quite an " fliin,. -company wih
interests in Australia has to consider the attitude of the
National , Government, because men, materials, money, coming into
Australia, any materials going out of Australia do so under
arrangements made with the Australian Government. State Governments
do not have any authority in those matters. My Government has,
tight from the outset, set out to. see, two things: that there was
an increasing Australian control over natural resources,
including mining resources, and secondly that there was a propor
return on exports of mineral products from Australia. No Statc'
has benefited more from this policy than Queensland.' Alrnady one
hundred million dollars more has been got for export of minerals 
from Queensland than would have been got under the arrangements
which were in operation before my Government -3licted.
Butt there's been a review of a very great number of these
contracts and that review will mean that about eighteen hundred
million more available for Queensland exports than would have
been got under the arrangements which were there before we came
in.
You mention also off-shore matters, This is a matter before the
High Court . In our view the attitude which Mr. Gorton' s
Government took and which my Governmenthas taken will be upheld
by the Court and this means that matters off-shore will in fact
be'determined by the Australian Government. Up till now, the
rivalry between State Governments in mineral matters-has been
very much to the disadvantage of the people in the industry,
because State Governments were competing with each other to
provide exports at the very best terms for the overseas
companies. They were cutting each others throats. Now the whole
of Australia, including the States concerned, are benefiting
very much more * from the co-ordinated National approach which
my Government has been able to bring in.
QUJESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, Sir, I announce myself ( unclear),
from Gold Coast Mirror. Now, what the Gold Coast has many records,
and one is that it now has the highest proportion of pensioners
living in its population, of any part of Australia, in fact I
think the figure is 23%. Now in view of the fact that many
pensioners are living on savings that they've accumulated throuc. Out
their lifetime may you tell us, Sir, what exactly is the
position concerning the unearned income tax, that was propose-. 1
in your September budget. Is in fact this tax on thrift tobc
proceeded with and become Federal Law, because I feel it woula be
a very bad move and hitting the people who are defenceless an'-,
least able to help themselves in these times of rapidly rising
inflation?
PRIME MINISTER: If the new law was taken in isolation then-, Lnere:.;
might be that consequence for some retired people. But, of
course, this is not the only piece-of legislation. ' Most of these
people would have had no hope of pensions under the arrangement 
-6-
which applied before my Government was elected. My Goverinent
has now made it possible for people who are seventy-five or
mor6 to receive pensions whatever their other income or
property may be. To take an extreme case, a millionaire of
seventy-five, can now get a full-age pension. As from next
April the same will apply to everybody who, is seventy or more,
and then, of course, later on it will be for everybody who is
sixty-five or more. The net result is therefore, that people
of those age groups will get a full pension irrespective of
their incomes or their property. This will be a very great
benefit to everybody who is retired. Furthermore, the age
pension is being increased in its value. When we came in., the
age pension was worth 20% of average weekely earnings; it's now
worth about 24% ' and it's going to be brought up to 25%, so there
can be no question that there will be indexation of pensions.
we are determined that people who are least able to bear the
consequences of inflation,-will be given every assistance to
maintain their standard of living. That obviously includes pensions.
QUESTION: Yes * Sir, with due respect, Sir, I fully appreciate
that situation, but I did ask what is the position of the
proposal to tax, to put an unearned income tax on unearned
income that many pensioners are now living on and will continue
to live on, because life savings have arrived at out of taxed
income. Now, you did say there would be a 10% surcharge, in
effect, on unearned income, which must come from bank deposits and...
PRIME MINISTER: Over' certain income, yes. People don't keep
bank deposits on incomes effected because they don't get anything
for bank deposits, savings bank deposits of those amounts. No,
our attitude is it's a perfectly reasonable attitude that people
shouldn't have to pay so much tax on what they earn, as they
should pay on what they don't earn. But, the proposal is, of
course, going ahead.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, in the press this morning there
was a report to the effect that you said that you were havia,.
just as much trouble as John Gorton in getting the Queenslnz-
Government to update its aboriginal policies. Could you tell
us,, Sir, why you don't put into effect the powers you had under
the 1967 referendum to legislate?
I, 
-7-
PRIME MINSISTER: Well, we are going to do so. We have, of
course, being trying to do these things by negotiation wi-' i. the
States. It's clear that negotiations are useless with the
type of Government Queensland's had up to this stage. We
haven't had to bring in such legislation with respect to any
of the other States. New South Wales, Victoria, and now
Western Australia, no the other order, but all those three Liberal
States have made agreements with the Australian Government with
respect to Aboriginal rights. There has been no difficulty at all,
no legislation was needed therefore, but negotiations have not
succeeded with the Queensland Government. So, I think we might
have to resort to legislation there.
QUESTION: Frank Holmes, ( unclear), Mr. Prime Minister. The
State Government providea the Gold Coast City Council with a
subsidy towards beach restoration as an aid to tourism.
Your Government hasn't ( unclear) this, is it likely to introduce
similiar aid in future?
PRIME MINISTER: There would have to be a very much more persuasive
case than hitherto has been put. The fact is that you can't expect
the taxpayers as a whole to come in and compensate Councils for
their own follies. The beach along here has been eroded because
people have built on sand-dunes. That is not the fault of the
Australian Government.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, your opening comments with Sir Gordc.--
Chalk, in dealing with him up to now, how have you found him as
Deputy Premier and Treasurer?
PRIME MINISTER: In a personal way, he's a very good comnz-. anion
As you'd all know. Nevertheless, he is saddled with the attitude
o~ f the outgoing Premier.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, you hold up Mr. Hamer, Victoria,
as one of the co-operative members. Does it disappoint you that
Mr. Hamer has rejected your application to allow the Evert Royal
Commission to deal directly with Victorian agencies. As I understand
it Mr. Hamer has now written back to you'saying, no the
Commission will have to deal through the Premier.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I thought he was rather defencive about
the matter. As you know hewever, this is not necessarily my .( 8 
-8-
request or my initiative. It was an initiativa taken by'-i.
Parliament, the private members on both sides. I think
mover was a Liberal private member, and the seconder was one
of the Labor private members, and the motion was carried on a
non-Party vote, that there. should be a Royal Commission
composed of, I forget how many it said, but it was to be
several Royal Commissioners. It was not to be a sole Royal
Commission. This was carried last year, I think it was, and
accordingly it's a Parliamentary initiative. Under those
circumstances, the Government should try to carry out what the
Parliament has resolved so it's, but only a Government, of
course can appoint a Royal Commission, only the Government can
advise the Governor-General. So this Royal Commission c omposed . of
Justice Elizabeth Evert, and Archbishop Felix Arnott, and Mrs.
Anne Deveson, has been established by the Government because the
House of Representatives passed the resolution that there should
be such a Royal Commission. In those circumstances, I would have
thought that Premier Hamer could have been a bit more forthcoming.
It~ s not however, a Government matter.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen opened his
Government's campaign at Southport. You are here today, Mr.
Bjelke-Petersen * is back here tomorrow. Therefore the camlpaign
for the seat of Albert appears to have developed into something
of a personality leadership matter. Do you think that mig'It be
reflected in the ballor boxes. Do you hope it wii be?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don't think the resul in Albert will
depend on the particular leaders alone, I suppose that has
some impact, naturally. But, I think it will turn on the member.
Bill Darcy has worked here, his wife has to, for very many years,
and he was a very well known sporting figure and public figure
before he was elected to the Parliament. He did very well, you'll
remember on the old boundaries at a bi-election in 1970, and he
got in at the last general election in-1972. And he's worked
very well for the electorate. I would have no doubt that we'll
retain Albert. His services deserve his return.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, could you tell us why Australia
voted to expell'South Africa from the United Nations?
PRIME MINISTER: Because, South Africa was incorrigible. South 
-9-
Africa had defied the United Nations for years . ci she was
not in the least contrite and in those circ7umstncs, like
nearly everybody else, we voted in the Security Council as
we did. Your not quite correct to say that we voted for
expulsion, because that is not the Security Council's job,
but we did vote in the Security Council, for a recommendation
to the General Assembly which does it.
QUESTION: On that question, Sir, it looks now as though
South Africa is going to resign. It appears very likely. If
that happens and she's no longer a member of the United Nations
would your Government ( unclear) continue reciprocal trade at the
level at which it's been going on?
PRIME MINISTER: We willcarry on trade with South Africa on the
condition that the world itself accepts for that trade. We no
longer officially promote trade with South Africa, as you know,
but a very great number of other countries, significant countries,
still do. And of course it would therefore, be quite ineffective
for Australia, by herself, to just ban trade. But at any rate,
there are no international arrangements for banning trade with
South Africa We are urging companies with headquarters in
Australia, which have subsidiaries in South Africa, to improve
the condition of their African employees. We're following the
p:, actice there of the United States and Britain.
QUESTION: When can we expect pensions to reach 25% of average
weekly earnings and how will yon thienhold th: t re ( unclear)?
PRIME MINISTER: I would expect it to reach that nex-. t yea-, itvery
nearly did when they were put up, I think it was about
24 at the time when they were put up in July, wasn't it.. and i
took effect from August; wasn't it, and they will he main-. ained
there in accordance with the undertaking I gave on behalf of the
Party when it was elected to Government, at six monthly intervals.
Every Spring and Autumn.
QUESTION: Will this be by Government decision or by ( unclear)
indexation, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not sure. / 1O 
QUESTION: Prime Minister, this area has one of the highest
registered levels of unemployment. Do you believe that there
is still a need for further measures to support those recently
announced to reactivate the economy?
PRIME MINISTER: Let me see how these are working. Did you
notice the full-page advertisement by General Motors-Holden
today. I think that is typical of the attitude which business
will now take Get on with the job. I commend it to you.
QUESTION: Mr. Whitlam, there was a report in this morning's
paper by an opposition spokesman that there will be 350,000
unemployed by next February. What's your comments on that?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't comment on that.
QUESTION: Yesterday you said you used every Constitutional power..
PRIME MINISTER: It takes a few months for anything that you do
to have its full effect. We have acted in the ways in which we
think will have, the quickest effect, but there's no doubt that
the general period December, January, February, are those when
traditionally unemployment figures, the number of people seeking
jobs, is greatest.
QUESTION: Sir, does that mean that you should have acted a few
. months earlier?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think anybody knew the figures would be
so bad as they were revealed on Friday week. Nobody.
QUESTION: Not' even Mr. Cameron who says that he was predicting
it at the beginning of this year?
PRIME MINISTER: There were no figures to justify what Mr.
Cameron was saying at that time.
QUESTION: What's going to happen if there is 350,000 unemployed
people... PRIME MINISTER: Well, look let's see... 71l 
-11-
QUESTION: Mr. Whitlam, Sir, last-week Mr. Hawke said the whole
world was heading for tremendous economicrecession. Everyone
is~ entitled to their own view. Do you believe that Australia
with its unrivalved natural resources, in fact Australia, to
coin a phrase, could in fact be the ' white Arabs', but won't
adopt the same tactics, as you've made quite clear. Do you
believe that this continent and this country could well pull
out of any difficulties faster than most countries in the world?
PRIME MINISTER: We're going through a terribly difficult period.
All the countries like us. The most difficult period for forty
years. For more than forty years. And while it's true, as you
say, that Australia has very great natural resources, Australia
is still a very great trading country. It's no-use having all
the cattle and minerals we have if-we can't sell them. And
-you just can't, no trading country can isolate itself, there's very
few countries, there's no developed country whi~ ch is a bigger
trading country than Australia. And accordingly, it's impossible
for us to isolate ourselves from what's happening with the
three great groups with which we have most of our trade,'-Japan,
Unites States and Western Europe. Three-quarters of our trade
is with those three big blocks and they've all got the same
troubles as we-have.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, This may be an unpolitical
question... ( unclear)
PRIME MINISTER: In the event which you speculate abou~ t,
I would be optimistic that the vote in Queensland for the Australian
Labor Party Will be such as to make even MrX. Bjelke-Petersen
realise that there's nothing to be gained by continued
obstruction. That he might as well get into step with all the
Premiers.. I'm not saying that the Liberal Premiers are very fond
of the Australian Government, but at least they are prepared to
co-operate on the basic things which we've initiated. There's
been no trouble, well., there was some delay, but nevertheless,
you now have the necessary framework-of co-operation with the
other Premiers. Take this area where we're meeting n. ow, the
Morton distrc-. When we came in, we said to the Queensland
Government that we were anxious to co-operate with them in 
-12-
developing three regional areas: the Moreton recaion, theritr
region, you know, Capricorn from Rockhampton and so on, and the
Townsville region. We've been unable to make arrangements with
Queensland on any of those three regions. In every other State
we are already far advanced with arrangements, and in many cases,
Albury-Wodonga being the outstanding one, the arrangements have
been put in legislation by the three Parliaments concerned.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, could you tell me if it's a fact
that Commonwealth Police recently had to investigate a note from
the boys of the Southport School which contained a threat to your
life? PRIME MINISTER: I didn't know about it.
QUESTION: Your secretary does.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, he hadn't told me. There-are two things.
Anybody in my position must be getting such threats. I don't
see them. And the other thing is, nobody publicises those
things because it, somebody else will get the bright idea.
Nobody in my position publicises these things.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, there was a demonstration on . Saturday
at. your meeting by unemployed people, and there's another one
outside today. I understand from reports that you can expect the
same tonight. Are these demonstrations helping to ( uncl~ ear) your
mind on questions of unemployment?
PRIME MINISTER: They are very helpful indeed. They came, the
ones up in Brisbane had driven up in buses from the South Co,. st,
the same bus is outside now About unemployment, of cours(',
the amazing thing is that the State Government usced to pay
unemployment benefits. I think there was provision for two and
a half million wasn't there. Now, they've cut them out.
QUESTION: Mr. PriJme Minister, your laughter doesn't indicate
your laughing at unemployment.. your laughing-. at the demonstrators...
PRIME MINISTER: Of course not. I have nothing but contempt
for those people that exploit these particularly where supporters
of a Premier whose discontinued arrangements for unemployment ./ 13 
-13-
benefits which ha-e been made by his State for vcory many years,
as far hack as one can remember. At this tinmc!, of all timies,
he goes and discontinues the arrangements,~ 1 think that'--
contemptible. QUESTION: Prime Minister, this is probably the first timo in
some months that you've mixed so much with ordinarv electors
-iat's riet.: the iaif; ion fiom t'le rt~
h side, ilvitsl o. rJ.. I sed by the d f P9ri. ties. Yu1r
t-. iks to t;, Pc puk;, ic thoughr?
PRIME MINI, ; iER: Well, I just can't copj with tlh,-hospitality
that's be~~ thrust upon me in the places. No, I, as always
I get a veiv cordial reception in Queenslanil, atter all ther s
no Southern politician who knows it so well. Ne-er has en
and I would think that I would be better receivt.-.-1 all ovte. r
Queensland than Mr. rDjelke-Petersen or Sir Gordon Chalk in
some places, either might get a more cordial recoption than I
would. But on average, I'd beat them hands down. 



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW V
BROADCAST 9.3Oam NOVEMBER 18 ON 4BC
BETWEEN HAYDN SARGENT ( HTS:) AND THE PRIME MINISTER.
( Recorded Friday November
HS: Prime Minister, Mr Hawke said last night that he anticipated
that next year would be the worst year the world and Australia
had experienced since the great depression.
PM: I think he's right. I think the figures for the next
few months are going to be quite bad here and in every comparable
country, western Europe, North America, Japan.
HS: He says that he thinks maybe the western world has got
to rethink its attitudes towards production, distribution of
wealth, do you think that that's the way to solve the problem?
PM: I think the western world has to sort out its priorities
much more, there's no doubt about that. It has tak~ en some things
too much for granted, some things at home,* some things in other
parts of the world upon which it depended, such as the oil-producing
countries, but that will take quite some time to do.
But for the next few months, things will be very disappointing,.
in all economies like ours, all countries'like ours.
HS: You say for the next few months yes so I anticipate
you're seeing some kind of a pick-up somewhere along the line.
PM: Yes, I've said that I think we will have turned the corner
by the middle of next year.
HS: What do you think it will have been that will make us turn
the coi. Ac
PM: I believe the biggest single problem we have in Australia,
and just as the biggest single problem in the other countries
too is the cost inflation now. The fact that incomes are rising
even faster than prices. Now the Australian Governement has come
out with a proposal which ought to break that vicious circle of
wages chasing prices and prices chasing wages. We have proposed'
I hat there should be very considerable decreases in taxes, with
the consequence that the take home pay, the net take home pay
for people in general will be considerably higher. These tax
reduct. ions which I announced on behalf of the government last Tuesday
mean that a man, say on $ 100 taxable income, that is, taking away
the deductions that he has for his dependants and for his medical
expenses and so on, would have the equivalent of an 8% increase
in his income. A man on $ 150 taxable income.. would have an increase
of about 6% in his net income. He would take home as much as'he'd
take home as if his wages had increased by 8% and 6% and this will
mean that we believe that the Arbitration Commission can be
persuaded to say that the increase in prices in this December
quarter will have been compensated for by the reduction in taxes.
The Arbitration Commission will therefore, in our argument, say
there is no need to increase awards for-wage and salary earners
to account for increases which occur in prices in the December quarter.
The increases in prices in the December quarter will have been
compensated for by a drop in taxes. That means, thereafter, from
the March quarter onwards, we are asking the Commission to index
wages so that any increase in prices will automatically. produce
an increase in wages.*-
-2-
HS: Now that's good in theory Prime Minister, but what about
the Trade Unions? Those who have already said, we are not
committing ourselves to co-op'erate.
PM: Well,* you quoted Mr Hawke before. Mr Hawke has commuitted
himself to co-operating. And after all, the arguments before
the Arbitration Commission will be put by the ACTU on behalf of
the unions and Mr Hawke is their president and the argument will
also be put by the Australian Council of Salaried and Professional
Associations, ACSPA, and by the Commonwealth Council of Public
Service Organisations, COPSO. This means that the blue collar,
the white collar, the public service unions, will all be putting
an argument. Its true enough, you know how some of the papers
are, if anything comes out, they make phone calls round for
everybody to make a comment. and they publish the comments which
express reservations. But the people who express those reservations,
won't be making submissions to the Commission. They won't be
giving evidence to the Commission. They will be ~ involved in a
collective submission made by the ACTU and ACSPA and CCPSO.
After all the Commission doesn't make up its mind from what it
reads from a selective group of telephone calls. It makes its
mind up on the basis of arguments put to it.. by employers and
employees and governments.
HS: And yet we've seen a number of trade unions that have
been I think to use Jack Egerton's word, irresponsible.,
PM: Yes we have, in the past, I do believe, irresponsibility.
Thanks largely to leaders like Jack Egerton who are prepared to
give a lead they have moderated these excessive claims very
largely in the last few months. Of course the biggest problem
with unemployment in Australia now, the biggest cause of unemployment
is that people are pricing themselves out of jobs. one man's
increase could mean another man's job and what we're doing
will not only give employees as good an increase in their standard
of living as any increase in wages would have given them,. but
it will not involve a payment by an employer. And this means
employers will be encouraged to keep peopl. e, on their payrolls,
and to put more people on their payrolls.
HS: Talking about a man and his job, why the attack on Mr Crean?
PM: I'm blessed if I know! But its just part of the thing,
the speculation, ana if one doesn't respond immediately to every' form
of speculation, one thinks that where there's smoke there's fire.
There's the absurd position yesterday in the House of Representatives,
Mr Snedden said that I was not only going to twop jobs for Mr * Crean
but for Mr John son.. He brought this allegation on in Parliament'.
in the morning rather early, he cut off question time so as to bring
it up-and then he caught a plane to Brisbane and mentioned three
more names. Well of course you can see what the consequence would
be if I say. yes or no to Crean or yes or no to Johnson. Then
next time there's a question time, he asks me to say yes or no
about the next three he's mentioned, the ones -but the damn
funny thing he didn't mention in Parliament all five,
when three hours before he'd mentioned twreAnd of course behind-, the
scenes he's been planting this idea about a whole lot. Well I don't
respond to these things. I have my responsibilities and I'll exercise
them as I see fit.&amp; I C" 
-3-
. HS: Prime Minister a lot of people voted for the Labor Party
on 7 December 1972 and again the 18th May because they believed
the Labor Party had some vigorous, exciting plans. And yet a lot
of people who voted Labor on both those occasions have lost
confidence. Why?
PM: Oh some might have. I also believe however that a great
number have had their confidence confirmed and a lot of others
have decided that we deserve support because we are trying to
carry out what we promised to do. Now we've been very unfortunate
of course because this world-wide movement, almost recession,
has taken place and this makes it very difficult to get on with
all the things which we've promised to do and which we've tried
to do. But there's.. a also a very great deal of obstruction.
There's been obstruction in the Senate quite inexcusable delays
in getting some Bills through. I mean the Trade Practices Bill
should have gone through a year earlier. It would have been of.'
very great benefit to consumers if it had gone through. And
there are many other instances too. And of course, some of the
States have delayed or obstructed, and Queensland, consistently
so, in fact vituperatively so. That is you get the absurd
position that Queensland alone among the States will not co-operate
with some of the things which we promised to try to do and which
the other States are co-operating with us in doing.
HS: I' ve got a press release here from the Premier's Department
and he says and I quote " The Prime Minister was launching into
his usual campaign of stand-over and cries of obstructionism
because somebody stood up to him." Meaning I presume himself..
PM: Wcil of course he would criticise me for what he c~ ijects
to there. The extraordinary thing is however, that not only
the Labor Premiers, but the Liberal Premiers, the three Liberal
Premiers are not objecting to the things to which Mr Bjelke-Petersen
objects. I'll give you a couple of instances. Queensland is the
only State which has not co-operated with us in setting up
a Land Council to acquire and develop and make available at cost,-
land for people who want to build. The Liberal Premiers have all
greed. Again growth centres everybody knows that two Liberal
i.: iers have co-operated with me, Sir Robert Askin and Mr Hamer
in getting ahead with the growth centre in klbury Wodonga. We
sta),!-rl this in January. A973. We wanted to do exactly the same
thing lownsville. But Mr Bjelke-Petersen will not do so.
HS: Does he give a reason?
PM: No he doesn't. As a matter of fact that's one of the
most extraordinary things, thaL he doesn' ' t even answer the letters
very often. I give a couple of instances of this, not only the
letters, you might remember that in September last year there was
a Cori; titutional Convention in Sydney and the Premiers of N. S. W.
and Victoria made a particular suggestion. and I said ' Righto,
I'll take that up, let's discuss it over dinne! r tonight'. So
all the Premiers were asked to have dinner with me in Sydney.
And all of them came, except Mr Bjelke-Petersen. And we agreed,
and Mr Ejelke-Petersen himself agreed, that we should all get
our parliamentary draftsmen to draft an amendment to the Consitituion..
It was to make it more flexible so that there could be references
by the States to the Federal parliament, as qlready happens
but to make it clear that this could be for a certain time or subject. 
I-4-
to certain conditions and the reverse process, that the Federal
Pariament could refer matters for a time or on conditions if it
wished to any or all of the states. And then all these were
drafted and I sent the drafts along to all the premiers. And
' Mr Bjelke-Petersen hasn't responded in any way.
iiS: Have the other Premiers?
PM: Yes they have, they have.
PM: I'll give another instance. There was a special Premiers
conference to discuss inflation last August. We all agreed
that our officials should get together and prepare papers for us
on six matters, and-then we could discuss those after we got
the papers and come to some agreement on them. They were things
like the procedures for government tenderings and wage tribunals
and wage fixation, a great number of things concerning inflation,
which did need us all to pursue the same course.
The reports were sentby me, they were good reports by these
officials, federal and state officials, from all the States
as well as the federal and I sent these all' 2 months ago.
And Mr Bjelke-Petersen hasn't yet replied or acknowledged.
Its no use saying I'm out of step with him everybody's out of
step with him, the other five Premiers too, the two Labor ones
the three Liberal ones, but just forget that. Look at the position
that Mr Gorton was in. When we were first elected in December 72
it very quickly emerged that there were 3 quarrels between us and
they were the same ones there were between Mr Bjelke-Peterson and
John Gorton. They were the Barrier Reef, overseas control of our
natural resources, and aboriginal land rights. Exactly the same
thing. Now he's out of step with Gorton, he's out of step with
Askin and Hamer and Court as well as the Labor Premiers. And
then there are several things which concern Queensland alone.
And he has either not answered or he's just stalled.. He's stalled
now for twenty-three months on the proposal that I made, I mean
our predecessors have made it too, but I raised it when we came
in, that the Australian National Line should be allowed to trade
between Queensland ports, which need more ships and the ships
of course have spare cargo space. Now I'll give you 3 or 4 other
instances, last June these came up, I proposed to him that we
should see if we could reduce-electrici, costs in Queensland, Right
along Queensland's coast, in every provincial city. their electricity
costs around double what they are in the provincial cities in
N. S. W. and Victoria. He hasn't even answeredothe letter. Then
I suggested to him that we should get an environmental impact statement
made on beachsand mining and he hasn't even answered the letter.
And there are a couple of things about aborigines and he hasn't
answered those either. Its rather extraordinary, this is not standovei
I'm not standing over Askin, I'm not standing over Hamer, I'm not
standing over Court. They see advantages. But there must be at
least $ 50 million that would have come to Queensland if they had
accepted offers which have been accepted by other States.
HS: Fair enough point. Mr Bjelke-Petersen of course is fighting
the forthcoming State election on the issue that the people of
Queensland have got to decide between his Government and a Government
which is aligned with the Federal Government. 
PM: Yes the people of Queensland have to decide whether.
-they want an obstructionist Government in their State or a
co-operative one.
HS: Fair enough point. You're going overseas -PM:-yes)
Some people wonder about Prime Ministers, Premiers for that matter,
who go overseas when there seem to
PM: Well last year for instance the Premier was away
from Queensland in more days than I was away from Australia.
HS: Touche. Do you see any particular advantage in going
overseas, particularly when Australia's facing this difficult
time.. PM: There are plenty of people whc can pursue the domestic
policies. And of course, I devote the great bulk of my time to
them. But there are many things which can only be determined At
the level of head of government and . face-to-face. After all,
there are great number of heads of government who now come to
Australia: the Prime Minister of Japan, the Shah of Persia
in the last couple of months, and of couse you remember since we've
been in there've been more people visit Australia, heads of government
or heads of state, than in the previous ten years. Now take the
question of Japan, surely nobody should dispute that I should
visit Japan, as I did a year ago, and as a result, of my government's
contacts with Japan the price that Australia including Queensland
has got for. mineral export is three times what it was.
Now Queensland coal is fetching 3 times the price that it was
getti. ng when we came into office 23 months ago. And this was
becak. of-* the Australian Government's initiatives.
Surely .&amp; ody says that I shouldn't see President Foird, or that
I shouldn'lt go to the United Nations, where some things a-lone can
be solved, that I shouldn't have gone to Japan, as the group of
ministers repaying, the visit that Japanese ministers made a year
before. This is an annual thing. Nobody's going to suggest surely
that I shouldn't go to the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting
These things clearly require my presence and it would be taken amiiss
I believe if I were not to make the visits I mention. And any
other visits I mention have only been over a week two weeks in
S. E. Asia, all the countries there. Well for God's sake, surely
I should visit them. They visit here too. And the other ones I've
made ve been just for 3 or 4 days, over the weekend.
HS: Prira' Minister, you've made reference to the improvement
in the price of coal, getting back to things like attitudes ito
overseas investment and international trade. Why does the Federal
Labor Government Appear to have virtually dhAnged its mind ab * out
say overseas investment in Australia, how much should be investe~ d
how much should be held.
PM: W want to see that we have an Australian control of our
resourcesT Now it doesn't matter so much who owns them but it is
essential that we should exercise control over them. Its not good
enough for big international cdtkpanies to come along and pick off
State governments which don't themselves and the public services
too, one has to confess, don't have sufficient skill to deal with
these things. The big companies with whor. we are dealing are bigger
in their scale of operations-and in-the experts at their disposal,
. than any State government in Australia, inclUding N. S. W And its
6-~ 7 7-* 
-6-
only the Federal Government which has the resources and the
-skills and the status to deal in this way. There's been a great
deal of obstruction, take the uranium things, there's been challenges
in the Courts, and there's been obstruction in the Senate there.
For six months they held up regulations and then disallowed them.
Well when that avenue was closed Mr Connor, Dr Cairns and I got
together with the uranium people and we made a contract. And
B as a result of that we will get a very much better deal for
Australia. For instance, the amount of the royalty for the
export of yellowcake you know, the uranium powder, from Australia
when we came in, the amount of the royalty was We've been'
able to get 50%. Forty times as great!+ And in the process
we have been able to secure by co-operation with the main company
concerned; the erection of a processing plant and thi hmeans we'll
be able to co-operate with the people who discovered uaniumn
They'll get a very good return themselves, they know that, and
whilethey used to join in the general criticism ofeus, they now
say that this is an equitable arrangement, and of course it is.'
Now in some other respects we want to be ensured that the environment
isn't harmed and that aboriginal susceptibilities are not
affronted. Now that's delaying some things with some other companies.-
But the one where there was no objection on the basis of overseas+
control or aboriginal rights or environmental hazards, the arrangements
have been made, very sensible arrangements.
HS: Prime Minister a final question there was no doubt
I think in most people's minds, particularly the minds Of observers
that it was Gough Whitlam who led the Labor P r victory in
1972 and again in May. Is Gough Whitlam stil I7tle gaptain of the
ship though, that's the question in the minds of a lot of people.
PM: Well I would think I am, I would have though that nobody
was doubting that this week. But the main thing I want to emphasise
is there is a good crew for the ship as a whole and some excellent
officers. I think that the ship is well-handled and its in good
shape.
HS: Fair enough. Prime Minister thanks very much. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR A SPEECH AT ST PAUL'S HALL, IPSWICH, 18 NOVEMBERk 1974
1. I am proud to share this platform tonight with
Rex Connor, the Minister for Minerals and Energy. The people
of this city and this State have no greater friend and
benefactor. Labor's policies for the development of our coal,
minerals and other resources are in the best of hands.
Rex Connor's handling of our mineral resources has safeguarded
Australian ownership and vastly increased the returns to
Australian producers from the sale of our exports. His
achievements will ensure. They will be gratefully acknowledged
by millions of Australians today and in generations to come.
2. Queenslanders in particular should examine the
fruits of Labor's policies on-. minerals and energy. The future
of Queenslands coal industry has never looked brighter. Exports
are at a record level, both in volume -and price. The Labor
Government by careful planning and diligent negotiation has
secured fair returns on our mineral exports for the benefit of*
all Australians. We have carefully supervised contract tender
prices. Between January last year and September this year
increases negotiated in the export prices of Queensland coal
total $ 1836 million over the full terms of all coal export
contracts. The value of the increases actually received during
this period is approximately $ 100 million.
3. The facts can no longer be suppressed by the Queensland
Government they are crucial to Queensland's future development
and prosperity. The export controls imposed on black coal
exports from Queensland and New South Wales to Japan, Europe
and elsewhe~ re have been outstandingly successful. Coal exporting
companies are no longer fighting each other and cutting prices.
Above all we have put an end to interstate competition which was
resulting in lower returns to Australia as a whole. It is one
thing for Australia to compete with other countries for markets.
It is absurd for one Australian state to compete with another.
4. Japanese coal buyers. now acce, the value of dealing
with the. Australian coal industry under tne new export controls
system. -They know there is a certainty of supply at a fair
price and that the guarantee of the Australian Government stands
behind Queensland coal producers. As a result of Rex Connor' s
negotiations the Japanese have made known their. requirements
of coking coal an&amp;~ steaming coal up to the year 1980. This
information will enable the Australian Government to plan in
conjunction with Queensland coal producers and other members of
the Australian Coal Association for the further development of
existing mines, increases * in their labour force improvement in
rail transport and harbour coal loading and other shipping
facilities. The visit of Prime Minister Tanaka to Australia
confirmed these arrangements. Australian-Japanese trading
relations are at their highest level of trust, cordiality and
mutual benefit. . A 77-7-1 
-2-
Contrast the benefits that Labor has brought to Queensland
with the benefits Mr Bjelke-Petersen has refused. By refusing
to co-operate in our plans for a growth centre at Townsville, by
refusing to co-operate in our plans for land acquisition to bring
down the price of land, Mr Bjelke-Petersen has thrown away
million in Australian Government assistance to Queensland. Labor's
policies are not only brining in hundreds of millions of extra dollars
in export earnings. At the same time we are giving money to the
States on an unprecendented scale. Queensland has received more
from my Government than it received from any previous Government
in history. Yet Mr Bjelke-Petersen constantly whinges about the
harsh treatment meted out to him by the Labor Government. Last
financial year our total payments to Queensland totalled $ 739
million. Queensland received more than $ 382 per head of population
in 1973-74 compared with $ 343 per head in average payments to all
States. 6. Last year our grants for primary and secondary education
were up 145 per cent on the year before. Tertiary education was
up 165 per cent, technical education 110 per cent, welfare housing
per cent, Aboriginal advancement nearly 30 per cent. Health
and welfare, roads and urban and regional development in Queensland
are all getting record amounts from my Government. We are doing
more for local government than any previous~ government in Canberra.
This year I approved grants totalling $ 56 million to local
government councils throughout Australia. Queensland's share
of these grants is $ 8.9 million. The Ipswich City Council is
receiving $ 364,000 the largest grant for any local council in
Queensland outside Brisbane itself.
7. One area of particular soci * al relevance to Ipswich is the
Austi lian Qovernment's decision to establish a community health
Centre _ n Ipswich. In the last financial year we provided a
total grc.. m of $ 78,719 to get the project off the ground. In
the current financial year 1974-75 the total grant is to be
$ 297,802 $ 258,577 for operating costs and a capital grant
of $ 39,225. That's what you get when you are fortunate enough to
have socially committed men like Bill Hayden and Doug Everingham
z: cting in your best interests in the vital fields of health
a1Ad welfare. You wouldn't get it from Mr Tooth. You didn't
get it from Mr Tooth.
8. 1 know the great hardship suffered by your district
from the fleod disaster earlier this year. All Australia
sympathised with you i. n that terrible experience. My Government
gave prompt and generous assistance for flood relief. We
immediately mobilised Civil Defence and Defence personnel and
resources. Our payments to Queensland, totalling $ 66 million
so far, are the biggest natural disaster outlay ever made by
an Australian Government. Queensland's expenditure on flood
relief from its own resources has amounted to $ 3.7 million.
We created a natural disasters organisation to * absorb
the existing Civil Defence arrangements and deal with the
long-term relief of flood and bushfire devastation. 
-3-
9. We must heed the lessons of the Queensland flood
disaster. Brisbane is a clear example of a city with inadequate
land use, planning and control, especially with respect to flood
plains. Since 1887 floods have occurred eight times in the
lower catchment areas, and as the city and vulnerable surrounding
districts grow, the risk increases. Despite the devastation
in the past, Queensland governments did little to prevent or
prepare for new emergencies. We can be ' sure that flooding
rains will occur again. We must act now to modify their
effects. In April I invited the Premier to submit a state-wide
plan for flood mitigation measures to be considered for
Australian Government assistance. The Premier supplied such
a plan. We have undertaken to consider requests for assistance
for any Queensland flood mitigation project as soon as we receive
full information on the proposed work. We have been prevented
from acting on requests for assistance because the Queensland
Government has not provided the information we need.
In July we asked the Queensland Premier to supply
more detailed information on the projects he had submitted.
We hoped to have a response by October. We are., still waiting.
We have received no detailed proposal at all about the
Bremmer River which is of most vital concern to the people
of Ipswich. Although the Australian Government allocated $ 66 million
for flood relief and restoration in Queensland it looks as though
only about $ 57 million will be spent.
My Government adheres to its goal of full employment.
We are taking action on many fronts to safeguard workers' jobs.
The increase in unemployment in Ipswich in recent months,
pardcicularly in the textile industry, has given us gveat concern.
Of 19k -enple in Ipswich out of work in the clothing and textile
industr.. 160 are receiving structural adjustment assistance
and a further 21 applications are being processed. We have acted
to curb imports of certain finished knitted and woven goods
from South East Asia. On 11 September a further referen~ ce was
sent to the textile authority covering yarns, knitted fabrics and.
towelling. The Government has received this report and is
considering its recommendations. On 26 August the Industries
*-ssistance Commission began public hearings to determine what
widcr as~ istance is required for the clothing, industry.
11. Only last Friday I sent a reference to * the Textiles
Authoriiy' within th~ e Industries Assistance Commission covering
a wide rancj of men' s, women' s, children's, and infant's clothing,
as well as hosiery an~ d gloves.
This action is being taken as a result of high and
rising levels of imports and apparent total availability of such
goods on the Australian market substantially in excess of
previous levels.
The reference seeks the advice of the. Textiles Authority
on whether action should be taken to restrain imports either under
the GATT textile arrangement or, if necessary to advise on any
other measures considered desirable. / 14 
I have asked the Textiles Authority to repo---c-witkhin
days in relation -to certain shirts and pyjamas, and . within.
days -in respect of-the remainder.
I take the opportunity now * to invite manufacturers and
any other interested parties to start preparing submissiLoa_ to
the Textile Authority without delay. The Authority will arrange
to hold public hearings and details of these will shortly be
announced. 12. We have taken many other measures to relieve unemployment.
They are not just short-term palliative measures but far-sighted
schemes to bring help to deprived regions and make our industries
more efficient and resilient. On 23 September we announced a
special scheme of grants to towns outside the main metropolitan
areas, including subsidies to companies and grants to companies
or local bodies for the establishment of viable alternative
production and employment. Ipswich City Council has received
$ 808,000 since the introduction in September of the" Regional
Employment Development Scheme. This will provide new roadside
retaining walls, concrete channelling and footpaths. We have
approved 34 local projects to provide employment in Queensland
under our REDS scheme.
Another 15 have been given provisional approval pending
further discussions with local government bodies. Besides
providing employment, these schemes will bring permanent benefits
to Queensland cities, towns and tourist resorts. In October we
introduced the National Employment and Training System to
develop and rationalise our manpower resources. Since the
introduction of NEAT, 704 people in Queensland have undergone
training and retraining in new jobs. A further 1600 Queensland
applicants are-wai-ting to join the-scheme.'
13. -Never once have we relaxed our efforts to solve our
eco nomic problems problems we share with every comparable
country. Prices in Queensland are rising faster than in any
other State but Mr Bjelke-Petersen does nothing about it. He
campaigned against our referendum seeking powers to deal with
prices and refuses to use-the powers that the States alone possess.
He refuses to co-operate with us in redu,. high electricity
costs in Queensland. He refuses to let ANL ships operate between
Queensland ports,* thus-keepinqg'up -the high cost of freights. He
refuses to discuss our -offer-to take over the'State Railways
and relieve Queensland of this constant and growing burder, on
its budget thus keeping up the cost of railway freights and
fares. 14. Contrast this negative and unco-operative attitude with
the major economic decisions and initiatives I announced last
Tuesday. In my statement to Parliament I said:
' These measures add up to a very sub~ stantial relaxation
of monetary policy. Financial conditions can be
expected to become a good deal easier in the months
ahead than they have been in the recent past. In the
past week the Governor of the Reserve Bank has written
to the banks requesting them to increase appreciably
their rate of new lending and I would expect to see a
prompt response by the banks some savings banks are
already stepping up the rate of their housing loan
approvals.' e7-7.. 
We are increasing the real purchasing value of takehome
pay by cutting income tax. These tax cuts are part of our
plan for the reintroduction of cost of living adjustments for
wage and salary earners. Wage indexation will ensure that the
real wages of employees are protected in the years ahead. In
the transition period the value of wages will be preserved by
the tax cuts.
16. In Queensland the only people whose wages have been
subject to indexation so far are Members of Parliament.
I ask Queenslanders to contrast our support of cost of living
adjustments for all wage and salary earners with the outright
opposition of the Liberal-Country Party to the applications
for wage indexation now before the Arbitration Commission.
This contrast between the Labor Party and the Liberal-Country
parties will be clear for all to see when the Australian
Government representative speaks in support of cost of living
adjustments before the Arbitration Commission and the
Queensland Government representative opposes them. 



Z6G7A
PRESS RELhEASEL 18 November 1974
REGIONAL E1. PLOYvL1, NT DEVE~ LOPM4ENT SCHEME ( REDS)
The Prime Minister today released a list of Gold Coast
projects approved by the REYDS Committee of ministers at their
last meeting in Canberra on 13SNoiember. Mr Whitlam was
holding a press conference at Suri ers Paradise.
The Regional Employment Development Scheme is designed
to improve employment opportunities in areas of high unemployment
by encouraging local initiative in these areas to develop
suitable work programs.
Projects with a high proportion of funds allotted for
wages are generally preferred. Recruitment of labour for
projects under the Scheme will be administered by the localin
this case, SIouthport office of the Commonwealth Employment
Service. . excluding supervisory and specialist personnel, all
labour requirements will be drawn from persons eligible for
unemployment benefits.
In selecting the labour required, preference will be
given to persons with dependents who have been unemployed the
longest. Married persons working part-time or on short time
will not necessarily be disqualified from employment on projects.
All persons employed under the scheme will be " worktested"
for suitable employment at not less than monthly
intervals and their continued employment on a project at
Australian Government expense will be conditional on there being
no such alternative employment.
This will ensure that projects do not compete for labour
with regular employers.
Proposals for projects that may receive assistance
may emanate from such bodies as local government authorities,
community groups, special purpose groups, business enterprises,
or State Departments. They should receive the endorsement of
the appropriate local government authority.
The approved Gold Coast Projects, which will be
administered through the Southport District Employment Office
are: 
-2-
Project Proposed
REDS Grant
Gold Coast City Council Project
1 Sea Wall Construction Stone
pitched Batters, Makina and Imperial
Parade 5,240
Gold Coast City Council Project
2 Sea Wall Construction Stone
pitching, Salerno Street Bridge 5,240
Gold Coast City Council Project
3 Keebra Park Tree Planting
and Stone Steps U 2,010
Gold Coast City Council Project
4 Croquet Lawn, Mallawa Drive,
Soil Fill and Drainage Grass
Sprigging 1,625
Gold Coast City Council Project
MacIntosh Park Stone Wall,
Rock Wall around Lake S15,820
Gold Coast City Council Project
6 Evandale Site Construction
of Stone Wall around Site and drainage 6,215
Gold Coast City Council Project
7 Olympic Pool Stone Pitch Wall 6,100
Gold Coast City Council Project
8 Lookout, Rock Wall Burleigh
Heads 1,550
Gold Coast City Council Project
9 Goodwin Park Pathway 1,975
TOTAL $ 45,775 



3/
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 373
18 November 1974
CRUDE OIL POLICY
The Prime Minister announced that a regulation under
the Prices Justification Act 1973-1974 had been gazetted today
removing the supply of Australian indigenous crude oil from the
application of that Act. The recently announced proposed price
increase by Ampol Exploration Ltd. will thus no longer come
within the jurisdiction of the Prices Justification Tribunal.
The Prime Minister stated that the price applicable
to indigenous crude oil production was determined in October
1968 by the then Government as a part of indigenous crude oil
policy and had been fixed for the period ending 17 September,
1975. It was therefore inappropriate for this matter to be
dealt with under the Prices Justification Act.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER
RIE S
SURF LIPX SAVING CLUB GRANTS SURFEURS PAIAfLISE
18 November 1974
The Prime Minister said today he was concerned to
read of the Gold Coast City Council's decision to restrict
daily patrols of beaches during the peak school holiday
period. He hoped the Council's appeal to the Premier would
succeed. Mr Whitlam was speaking at Surfers Paradise where
he held a pross conference this morning.
Mr Whitlam said that the first ever federal grants
for life saving had been allocated by the Australian Labor
Government. While not involving vast amounts of money, the
current grants represented an important first step towards
growing Australian Government willingness to get involved
in such funding. The previous Liberal/ Country Party Government had
never taken any action In thin area*
Details of the grants for Queensland are as follows;
Arcadia 8 300
Ayr 802
Alexandra Headlands 227
Bribie Island 1,429
Broadbeach 150
Bilinga 252
Burleigh Heads Mowbray Park 1,712
Coolum Beach 248
Coolangatta 315
Currumbin Beach 243
Emu Park 160
Forrest Beach 610
Kirra 997-
Kurrawa 254
Mermaid Beach 277 



27189
PRIMES MAINISTE PRESS STATEMENT
19 November 1974
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, released the following
statement when he left Amberley late last night to return to
Canberra.. He had spent four days of intensive campaigning
for the Queensland State election.
The Bjelke-Petersen Government is cheating Queenslanders
of the benefits of increased Australian Government funds for
education, housing and local government. It is cutting back
its own expenditures in areas where the Australian Government
has given more money.
Not only has the Bjelke-Petersen Government deprived
Queenslanders of $ 50 million in Federal funds by refusing
to co-operate on growth centres and land commissions. It
has effectively deprived Queensland of millions of dollars
worth of extra money for essential community services.
The Queensland Government has shown itself mean and
devious in its financial allocations. The more my Government
is prepared to spend on essential social purposes, the less
Mr Bjelke-Petersen is willing to spend.
The Queensland Government accepted a $ 16,500,000
supplement for education under the Karmel recommendations last
year and then reduced its own expenditure accordingly. This
year, despite a 16.3% increase in Queensland consolidated
revenue, there is an increase of less than half that percentage
in proposed education expenditures. This is happening while
Queensland children are taught in corridors and on verandahs
because of a shortage of classrooms.
This year we approved massive direct grants to local
government totalling $ 56 million throughout Australia, including
just under $ 9 million for Queensland. These grants will enable
local councils to improve essential community services
roads, health centres, recreation facilities.
Yet the Queensland Government has been progressively
reducing the percentage of local authority expenditure which it
provides in subsidies from State revenue. At the same time
the percentage of State Government spending met by money from
the Australian Government has progressively risen.
Since 1956 the percentage of local authority expenditure
met by the State has fallen from 6.23% to 4.94% and the
percentage of State Government spending met by the Commonwealth
has risen from 33.61% to 45.09%. 
-2-
State subsidies on roads were reduced from 20% to
and subsidies on sports field and playground construction
have been cut from 20% to nothing.
While the Queensland Government refuses millions of
dollars from the Australian Government for land acquisition and
development it is planning to cut its own expenditure on land
development by 11%.
Despite greatly increased Federal grants for housing
under my Government, Queensland is actually building fewer
housing commission homes than Labor when it was last in office
in 1957. Despite all the advantages of economic development and
despite financial assistance from Canberra, the State
Government built last year only 1400 homes 500 fewer than
Labor's last total and yet at the same time left unspent
no less than $ 12 million provided in housing funds by the
Australian Government.
The most miserable cut back of all was Mr Bjelke-Petersen' s
decision to scrap the $ 2,350,000 he had budgeted for State
unemployment relief.
When my Government raised unemployment benefits
Mr Bjelke-Petersen responded by abolishing his benefits
altogether. He took it out on men and women who had lost
their jobs. He . took it out on their families.
Who can doubt Percy Tucker's claim that the Queensland
Government has a vested interest in unemployment so it can
attack the Australian Government and pass the buck to Canberra
for all its failures?
The Prime Minister said that the very worst, the most
cynical of all Mr Bjelke-Petersen's dispicable actions was
his deliberate downgrading of the double orphan benefit.
Queensland once gave a $ 12 benefit to orphans. When Labor
came to power in Canberra we initiated a Federal orphan
benefit of $ 10. The combined State and Federal total would
have given orphans a total benefit of $ 22. And that would
have been the least compensation we could given children who
had lost both parents.
But what did the Queensland Premier do?
He immediately reduced the State orphan benefit by a
total of $ 10. He wiped out the effect of the Federal grant.
He reduced the State orphan benefit to a miserly $ 2.
Instead of Orphans getting $ 22, Mr Bjelke-Petersen ensured
that they continued to get only $ 12. Since that despicable,
that heartless act of the Queensland Premier, the Australian
Government has once more increased the orphan benefit by
another $ 5 to
I can only hope that the Queensland Premier's peculiar
sense of non-co-operative miserliness does not prompt him to
repeat his earlier shameful discrimination against Queensland's
orphans. 



127Z
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 375
19 November 1974
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today sent the
following telegram to Mr. Barry Egan, Secretary, Australian
Workers' Union: " I send my congratulations on the decision
by the shop assistant and other members of your
trade union to respond positively to the Government's
proposals relating to pay claims and the scheme for
introducing cost of living adjustments. To your
trade union, and to all union members, I confirm
that the Government regards the recently announced
cut in taxes as a step which instead of a pay
increase will compensate employees for price
increases in the current October-November-December
period. For the following period the Government
will support before the Arbitration-. Commission
an automatic system of cost of living adjustments
beginning with the consumer price index figure for
March 1975. The Government's policy means that
wage and salary earners will have their real
purchasing power protected. In addition, pay
claims based on productivity, technological change
and other special factors can also be advanced by
unions in arbitration. I suggest that this approach
is in the interests of all employees and of the whole
community. Gough Whitlam".
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 374
19 November 1974
MESSAGE TO THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE
HELLENIC REPUBLIC
The Prime Minister today released the text of a
message of congratulations to Mr Karamanlis, following
the Greek elections at the weekend.
" To His Excellency Mr Constantine Karamanlis,
Prime Minister of the Hellenic Republic.
In my message to you of 25 July this year I
congratulated you on your restoration as Prime Minister and
wished you well on your assumption of responsibility for
conducting the affairs of your country. It now gives me the
greatest pleasure to record the delight with which the
Australian people in general, and in particular the very many
men and women in Australia with bonds of family and affection
for Greece, will welcome the manifestation in recent days
of your success in restoring democracy to its birthplace.
You have not only my warmest personal congratulations on your
return to Government, but Greece itself and all political
parties at the recent election deserve our admiration-for
their co-operation in a noble democratic enterprise. I very
much look forward to meeting you in December to pass on to
you personally the hopes of all Australians for success in
the important tasks which face your new Government. E. G. Whitlam"
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



THE MINISTRY
After calling on the Governor-General, who
returned to Canberra today, the Prime Minister announced
that the Deputy Prime Minister, Dr J. F. Cairns, had agreed
to become Treasurer and Mr Frank Crean to become Minister
for Overseas Trade.
Because of the legislation before Parliament for
which they were responsible, the ministers would be sworn
into their new portfolios at the end of the present session.
The announcement was being made at the present
time because the Governor-General felt that this was the
appropriate course in all the circumstances.
21 November 1974 



37
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 376
21 November, 1974
BRISBANE FLOOD MITIGATION
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today that
flood mitigation works in Brisbane had been delayed by the
Queensland Government's failure to co-operate with the
Australian Government.
In a written reply to a question from Senator
K.* Martin ( Queensland), Mr. Whitlam said: " As long ago as
23 March 1973 1 emphasised that the provision of detailed
information was essential to our decision.
" That information has still not been provided by
the Queensland Government.
" As soon as explicit proposals are submitted by the
Queensland Government the Australian Government will be in
a position to take prompt decisions on a case by case basis."
Mr. Whitlam said he shared the concern felt by
many members and senators at the long delay before mitigation
works could be undertaken.
Mr. Whitlam said he first drew attention to the
flood danger in Brisbane when speaking at a civic reception
there on 23 March 1973.
At that time he stated: Brisbane has a special problem with
the flooding caused by cyclonic rains on the Breakfast,
Enoggera, Oxley, and Norman Creeks and Kedron Brook and
urban development in the flood plains of these waterways.
This has been a matter. of concern for the Brisbane City
Council and the State Government.
" Sir Gordon Chalk, while Acting Premier, wrote to me
in December 1972 and asked, among other matters, about
assistance for the City Council for a'flood mitigation
scheme. He said the proposed scheme was under expert
investigation and that when plans were completed it
was intended to ask for Commonwealth financial assistance.
I understand that the report arising from this investigation
was completed in the last week or so. 
-2-
" The Australian Government has not previously taken
part in schemes of precisely this kind...
" Nevertheless, we shall look into the question of
financial assistance. To do so, however, the
Australian Government will need all relevant information,
including the physical and economic facts,
before a decision can be taken.
" My Government is therefore prepared to lend its
expertise and resources to assist in a study of this
matter. We shall be willing to participate at the
official level in a joint working party with officials
of the State and Brisbane City Council to examine the
problem as a whole."
Mr. Whitlam siad that on 16 November 1973 the Premier of
Queensland asked the Australian Government to participate in the
whole flood mitigation scheme for Brisbane on the basis that the
Australian Government should contribute 40% of the cost, the
Queensland Government 40% and the Brisbane City Council 20%. On
9 September 1974 he suggested that the Australian Government
should meet the whole cost of the flood mitigation component of the
proposed Wivenhoe Dam.
Mr. Whitlam said the Premier's requests for assistance had been
closely considered by the Australian Government but they had been
prevented from making any recommendations by the lack of information.
" Information as the type of works, their timing, costs, and
likely benefits is essential to any financial decision by the
Australian Government, he said.
" We have made repeated requests at official level to the
Queensland Government to furnish firm works proposals on which
we could base decisions.
" On 4 July, 1974 the Department of Urban and Regional
Development put to Queensland officials a timetable which envisaged
firm proposals being put to the Australian Government in October.
" A number of proposals have been received in the past few
weeks but they constitute firm proposals in respect of Enoggera/
Breakfast Creek only."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SmMRGo: 6: 30 p. m.
( Brisbane Time)
TRANSCRIPT OF C HANNEL 0 INTERVIEW WITH PRIME MINISTER
BRISBANE, NOVEMBER 22, 1974
INTERVIEWER: Sir, the big, burning issue in Queensland at the
moment is Mr. Crean, which was announced yesterday.
Can I ask you a few questions. When did you take
the decision to relocate Mr. Crean?
PRIME MINISTER Oh, about three or four weeks ago.
INTERVIEWERWhy did the public not know about it till yesterday?
PRIME IN1ISTER 1For t wo reasons. Dr. Cairns was away a week ago and
a week before that and when he got back the Governor-
General was away until yesterday.
INTERVIEWERDr. Cairns was reported as saying he would not
accept the position as Treasurer. What changed
his mind?
PRIME MINISTER He was referring to just after he was elected
' Deputy Leader of the Party., Deputy Prime Minister,
last June. At that time of course, I asked him
if he'd like it, and he wasn't anxious at that time.
INTERVIEWERDo tyou think he'll make a better Treasurer though,
than Mr. Crean?
PRIME MINISTER I appoint people to the jobs that I think they can
do best. Quite obviously, in my view, Dr. Cairns is
the man best able to be Treasurer. Now that's obvious,
surely.
INTERVIE W&amp;. Well, there seems to be a considerable difference of
opinion about that in Caucus.
PRIME MINISTER No, there isn't it's my job to allocate portfolios,
and I would.-have thought that was a-very obvious
question to ask..
IN -RVIEWE? Do you take complete responsibility?
PRIME MINISTER-Of course I do.
INTERVIEWER
PRIME MINISTER
INTERVIEWER What happens if Caucus now, and the ACTU
It won't-It's none of the business of the ACTU
and the Caucus, of course, operates under very well
established rules where it is the Prime Minister's
job to allocate portfolios. I've done my job
according to well-known, well established rules.
It seems to me, Sir, that there are two main
criticisms. One, that this has. taken an awfully
long time... 
PRIME MINISTER I've given you reasons.
INTERVIEWER And thatwas the only reason?
PRIME MINISTER Exactly.
INTERVIEWER Was Mr. Crean aware
PRIME MINISTER I couldn't finalise this matter whiler. Cairns was
away, and then after he was back the Governor-
General was away fdr two or three days. The
Governor-General came back to Canberra yesterday
about midday. I saw him in the afternoon.
INTERVIEWER Was Mr. Crean himself aware of this three weeks ago?
PRIME MINISTER Yes.
INTERVIEWER And he went along with it, at that time?
PRIME MINISTER You've read the announcement.
INTERVIEWER It says here that Mr. Creanin the Financial Review
today
PRIME MINISTER Well, look, I'm not going to comment on other people's
interpretations. If you don't mind, I will not do it.
INTERVIEWER It says he was dismissed..
PRIME MINISTER-I will not discuss other people's interpretations.
You can ask for my interpretation. I've given it
to you. if
INTERVIEWE.. But at this point in time/ you get a very strong
criticism coming forward from the ACTU.....
PRIME MINISTER There will not be. You're asking me to speculate.
1. re hasn't been. There will not be.
INTERVIEWER There are a number of reports of criticisms
PRINE MINISTER They are not accurate reports, obviously.
INTERVIEWER Well Sir, thank you very much. 



* i) A USf K A . I A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 379
22 November 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORTINDUSTRIAL
TRACTORS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Industries Assistance Commission in its report on Industrial
Tractors. The report was released on 13 August 1974.
The Government's decision to implement thf! Commission's
recommendations will mean that crawler tractors will continue
to be dutiable at minimum rates while the General rate for
other types of industri * al tractors will increase from the
present rate of 15 per cent to 20 per cent.
Mr Whitlam said that specified components of industrial
tractors which previously were dutiable at rates different
from those of the tractor unit itself will now attract the rate
of duty of the tractor base.
Mr Whitlam, said that for tractors forming the base for
earthmoving equipment the tractor unit will be duitable at
the appropriate tractor rate, but the earthmoving equipment
portion would be regarded for duty purposes as earthmoving
equipment. Licensing controls currently applying to imports of
used, second hand and disposals equipment will continue.
Mr Whitlam also mentioned that the Commission had
suggested that by-law admission be granted to certain four wheei
drive tractors and tractor chassis fitted with engines, and that
the existing by-law treatment be continued in respect of
transmissions, axles, etc. for industrial tractors. Mr Whitlam
added that as the Government had been advised, since receipt
of the Commission's report, of the recent commencement of
production of certain four wheel drive tractors in Australia,
the by-law power criterion suggested by the Commission for these
tractors could be varied.
A detailed statement bof the Customs tariff chanqes arising
from the Government's decision will be issued by the Minister
for Customs and Excise when arrangements have been finealis:-d
to implement the new duty rates.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



J, AUSTRALIA
PROME BF33NISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 378
22 November 1974
Joint Statement by Mr E. G. Whitlam, Prime Minister,
and Mr Bjelke-Petersen, Premier of Queensland
GREAT BARRIER REEF PETROLEUM DRILLING ROYAL COIMISSIONS
Mr Whitlam and Mr Bjelke-Petersen released today a
summary of the Report of the Great Barrier Reef Petroleum Drilling
Royal Commissions. The Report had previously been presented to the two
Governments on 1 November; however, because of the length of the
Report, 1100 pages, printed copies will not be available until
December. Both Mr Whitlam and Mr Bjelke-Petersen agreed that in
the interim it was in the public interest to make available a summary
of the recommendations contained in the Report.
They stressed that this was a summary only of what was
a long and comprehensive report and that it should be read in this
context; comments on the recommendations would be best delayed until
they could be made on an informed basis, in the context of the whole
Report, when it becomes available.
A copy of the summary is attached.
CAN3BLIRA, -A. C. T. 
GREAT BARRIER REEF PETROLEUM DRIILING ROYAL COMMISSIONS
Background The Commission was appoin ted on 5 May 1970, and an
identical Commission was issued by the Governor of Queensland on
the same date. The three Commissioners were Sir Gordon Wallace
( Chairman), Dr J. E. Smith of Ply mouth,. England, and Mr V. J. Moroney
of Calgary, Canada.
The Commission presented its Report to the Governor-General
and to the Governor of Queensland on 1 November 1974. The Report
is 1098 pages long and it will be early December before the Report
is printed and copies become available.
Following is a summary of the Commission's conclusions on
its five terms of reference, Care should be exercised in using
the summary in view of its abbreviated form in relation to the total
size of the Report.
The Commission examined the " Great Barrier Reef Province"
( GBRP) which is the " Area" as defined in its terms of reference
covering approximately 105,000 square miles. Within the Province
is a reef zone whose total area is about 27,000 square miles.
The total area of all reefs within the Province is between 4,300
and 5,000 square miles.
SUMMARY Term of Reference 1.
Takin&amp; into account existing world technology in relation to
drilling for petroleum and safety precautions relating thereto,
what risk is there of an oil or gas leak in exploratory and
production drilling for petroleum in the Area of the Great
Barrier Reef?
Conclusions In regard to blowouts, which occur through a combination of the
presence of hydrocarbons with either equipment failuro or human
failure or both, if petroleum drilling be permitted within the GBRP 
" 1fOIMMOO3 JAYOHI DHIJLIIHQ[ AUaOHTvq allHMIUH fo
onfls tOT'Qr n iio bE) Jffoqqs Pesw fiolaaimmoD qfiT
: ifj lTo u~ o. rifevoD effJ Xd b9u1raa asw noianimmfoD . sl-iisfibi
Job-ioD i qemw a-effolaalmmoO 99-10f EAdT . E) sb Eif. msa erfz
. BbsnBO oI'L ~ f
) vo eVOJ o0if J oqeR Pfi bq~ ffte8Tiq . niioaifmfoO giiT
TQ d jevoUl I ffo bimlftee. U9 lo ionreo~ e
hfe'icmeoeG yjmss ed 111w J! 1 bnfs -3foi pgns p.
. qldhlinvs. eiooed aEiqoo bc bet
L r
I zj iaal. rmmoo e~ Iaj MXm0 dns e pai
q d bluofic eisO) qofi9iEIa-y ai
flinal bguBiveidds ~ 8 d10 veic
-H BqOi' aill befnmsxe i., s
ni benileb a . oif
J iads ai 9-P les~ o th
* riva efi fnirfiw 11e~ I
aq! tup * joT r
B)
e~ e
ñ fI~ f?.
'-I 
2.
there will be and remain a real but small to very small risk
of such occurrences. As to chronic pollution, if petroleum drilling be permitted
within the GBRP it is almost certain that some measure of chronic
spills would occur ranging from small to substantial.
Term of Reference 2.
What would be the probable effects of such an oil or gas
leak and of the subsequent remedial measures on
the coral reefs themselves;
the coastline;
the ecological and biological aspects of life
in the area?
Conclusions The Commissions' conclusions are reached on the basis of
lengthy scientific evidence put before it on such subjects as the
composition and properties of crude oils, their toxicities and the
important changes in composition and toxicity which occur as the
result of migration and weathering, and consideration of overseas
spills, gas leaks and remedial measures.
In regard to freshly spilled crude ' oil, the Commission
concludes that its effects on corals and on the
many different kinds of organisms living on or.
associated with coral reefs, have not been
sufficiently studied for the direct consequences
of massive and-chronic spills to be predicted with
any degree of confidence or for the indirect
consequences to be predicted at all.
( ii) As to weathered oil, the majority of the Commission
( Dr Smith and Mr Moroney) are of the view that Oil
which has been at sea in the area of the GBRP and
subject to weathering for some 1-1i days will 
probably be depleted of the toxic components originally
present in the freshly spilt crude oil to the point where
it is virtually non-toxic to marine organisms.
The Chairman ( Sir Gordon Wallace) has a dissenting opinion.
He concludes that there is inadequate scientific knowledge
of possible damage of an indirect and long-term nature.
On the basis of evidence given to the Commission, the
Chairman considers that there is imprecision on the toxic
qualities of spilt oil at the various stages of its
weathering through migration and insufficient evidence to
establish how long it takes for the oil to become non-toxic
in the waters and climatic conditions of the GBRP and
indeed whether it is completely harmless even when weathered.
( iii) In regard to gas leaks the Commission concludes there is
little hazard to the marine life of the GBRP save for
possible limited and strictly localised effects.
( iv) On the matter of remedial measures,, only two are considered
to pose significant hazards to organisms of the GBRP, these
being dispersants and sinking agents. The Commission states
these should not be used except in few special circumstances.
Term of Reference 3.
Are there localities within the Area of the Great Barrier
Reef and, if so, what are their geographical limits twherein
the effects of an oil or gas leak would cause so ii le
detriment that drilling there for petroleum might be permitted?
Conclusions All members agree that drilling should not be permitted on
any cay, island or reef or national park or marine park when
declared. However, the majority ( Dr Smith and Mr Moroney) mire of the
opinion that with certain designated buffer zones and subject to the
adoption of the safety precautions ( including contingency planning) 
recommended in the answer to Term of Reference 4 drilling could be
permitted in designated areas. Dr Smith considers that areas at
least fifteen miles east of the outer Barrier would also be permitted
areas. Mr Moroney considers that permitted areas outside or seawards
of the outer Barrier should be governed by relevant buffer zones.
Areas where drilling should be excluded are also designated.
Geographic specification of these areas is necessarily complex and
details are provided in the full Report.
The Chairman's view is that all drilling throughout the GBRP
including the area east of and adjacent to the outer Barrier should
be postponed and be planned and permitted only after the results are
known of both the short and the long-term research recommended in
the Report. He has added, that whilst recognising the force of his
colleagues' views, he considers that of the various permitted drilling
localities recommended by the majority, the Capricorn Channel by
reason of its size and freedom from reefs, islands and cays would
present the least risk of detriment to shores and ecosystems if an
oil leak occurred therein provided a buffer zone of 30 miles were
adopted.
Term of Reference 4.
if exploration or drilling for petroleum in any locality
within the Area of the Great Barrier Reef is permitted,
are existing safety precautions already prescribed or
otherwise laid down for that locality regarded as
adequate and, if not, what conditions should be imposed
before such exploration or drilling could take place?
Conclusions A number of recommendations, suggestions and conclusions are
included in this section. The Commission concludes:
there are no ' existing safety precautions ( already)
prescribed or otherwise laid down" for any locality
within the GBRP whilst certain draft regulations
prepared by Australian and State authorities in 1969
inadequately and insufficiently cover the subject of 
safety precautions.
amendments are required to the parallel legislation of
the Australian and Queensland Governments of 1967 known
as the Petroleum ( Submerged Lands) Acts.
the drafting instructions for a common code of regulations
compiled by Australian Government and State Authorities
in 1969 are inadequate and require extensive review.
its detailed recommendations are designed for the special
conditions of the GBRP and are not in all cases intended
to apply to the whole of the Australian Outer Continental
Shelf.
drilling should not be permitted in a marine or national
park.
Mf there must be fully co-ordinated Australian and State and
Industry contingency plans before any drilling is
permitted with appropriate stockpiling. An approved
industry plan should be a condition precedent to the
grant of permission to drill.
in view of the high cost of remedial measures successful
applicants must give appropriate assurance that they can
meet any financial commitments involved.
that human error has been invariably the sole or a major
contributing cause of all blowouts.
Term of Reference
What are the probable benefits accruing to the State of
Queensland and other parts of the Commonwealth from
exploration or drilling for petroleum in the Area of the
Great Barrier Reef and the extent of those benefits?
Conclusions The Commission states that any answer imust of necessity be
based on assumptions or hypotheses one of the principal ones being 
that drilling would be commercially successful, and various degrees
of success were assumed by the-economists who contributed to the
expert evidence given to the Commission on this term of reference.
The gross benefits will includeaddition
to the national monetary wealth depending on the
size of the discovered reservoirs, the cost of finding and
the proportion of Australian ownership of the explorer and
producer;
lower prices to Australian consumers but this would depend
on a number of contingencies;
increased income tax the quantum of which appears from
various tables compiled on different assumptions;
royalties; self-sufficiency;
industrial development, decentralisation and benefits from
natural gas;
increased technological and scientific knowledge.
The potential disadvantages will beconsumption
of irreplaceable resources;
interference with the environment and its enjoyment by
mankind;
risk of damage to corals and other marine organisms and to
birds; and
hazards to the tourist industry.
Neither the gross benefits nor the potential disadvantages can
be quantified in the former case because of the varying assumptions
which must be made and in the latter because research and experiments
must be carried out before scientific knowledge will be qualified to
assess the effects of oil on corals and other marine life in the GBRP. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PR,-S, CONFERENCE, j-2 IS, N'VMBER 1974
QUESTION: Are you going to make any major announcements here
in Mt Isa?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't have it in mind to make any particular
announcement, any one announcement. The approach that my
Government has to Mt Isa can be seen from the fact that we have
set up a Department of Northern Development. We particularly
want to concentrate on developing this most distant part of
Australia and the first Minister for Northern Development,
Dr Rex Patterson, is a public man who knows the North from
east to west more than any one has ever known it.
There have been quite a number of specific things
that we have been able to do for Mt Isa, for instance, we
have now put through the Parliament it went through the Senate
on Thursday night the Local Government Grants Bill constituting
the first recommendations made by the reconstituted Grants
Commission and Mt Isa City Council will get $ 250,000 within
a fortnight to spend as it sees fit. Cloncurry will get
$ 86,000. My colleague Mr Frank Stewart, the Minister for
Tourism and Recreation, has already I believe announced a grant
of $ 115,000 to a community recreation centre in Mt Isa.
My colleague Mr Bill Hayden, the Minister for
: oial Security, will be opening a regional office of the
De -rtment of Social Security this financial year. There are
par cular difficulties facing the residents of Mt Isa because
of . ie city's isolation. A social worker will be included among
the st of the Social Security office in Mt Isa. It won't
theret r-e dealing just with paym-nts and the assessment of
payments; i ill also have a person trained to give advice.
I think there are 340 aged pensioners in Mt Isa, 133 invalid
pensioners, 123 widow pensioners and 4,000 families receiving
child endowment. I don't think ever in Australia I've been
received by so many babes in arms at an airport. I have at
Rabaul, in Papua New GC: inea, but never in Australia. Mr Hayden's
Deprrtment is also considering an application for a 34-bed
ho,' tal for the care of the aged in Mt Isa.
Now perhaps I can give the Northwest Star details
of th . e afterwards. You aren't going to press until Monday
are you.
QUESTION: This ' 250,000.....
PRIME MINISTER: It is for -he Council to spend as it sees fit.
QUESTION: Has any request been made to you for finance ( unclear)
PRIME MINISTER: That's being considered by the body that the
Australiai and State Governments have all set up. It's being
reviewed by that body the Screening Committee of the National
Water Program and it may be that the Queensland and Australian
Government will be able to make some announcement. There has
been no proposition made by the State Government than the one which 
we accepted in the legislation in 1972 and then again earlier
this year. An agreement was signed between our two Gove, iments
on 11 April this year embodying the only matters which had becn
formally put b the State Government to the Australian Government
up till that time or at all. I also should tell you that there
is. going to be. a legal aid office opened in Mt Isa. In the
overall context Mt Isa will have the great advantage of being
a pivotal point on the National Highways Program. The Australian
Government has alway-had the authority under the Constitution
to build roads to promote trade between the States or access to
the Territories, so we are going to undertake the whole cost
of maintaining and constructing the Flinders and Landsborough
Highway. That means you will at last be certain there is a
decent road available all the time between Mt Isa and Brisbane
and all points south and between Mt Isa and of course, the
Northern Territory. Mr Connor, is very keen to upgrade the railway, which
is now fully extended and he may tell you more about his proposals
for the phosphate deposits for which the railway would have to
be upgraded between Duchess and the Coast.
You not only have copper here and so on but in this
region you also have the very best deposits that Australia has
ever discovered in phosphates, and they're very large items of
import to Australia. These places from which we've been importing
phosphates are running out Nauru, Ocean Island, Christmas Island,
in the Indian Ocean and we have these very great deposits within
Australia, within this region.
QUSTION: The building industries in town are worried about the
lack of housing commission homes which are to be built in the
next year within this city. Are there any commission homes
planned early in 1975 to keep these men who are frightened of
losing in employment?
PRIME MINISTL_. The State Government builds housing commJisuoi.
houses; the Australian Government finds the money for thE
Last June I gave every State Premier a blank cheque to bui,.,
housing commission b-uses. As many houses as the Queensland
Government can let a ntract for will be financed by my Government.
There's no bottleneck far as the Australian Government is
conct-rned. Every house which the Housing Commission can build
in t, ensland will be immediately funded by the Australian
t. That has been the position ever since last June 7.
You are mentioning building too. There is, I don't know the
details f-t -stance schools in Mt Isa, but a year ago the
Australian i iament passed legislation to provide for additional
funds for schoo uildings for 1974/ 75. Queensland to date has
only sought 18% o-the m, -v which the Australian Parliament passed
twelve months ago for GoveL..-nt school buildings. So that
means there is an inense amou: i ) f nioney available for housing
commission homes as many as the StaLe Government can construct
and for school buildings. The Government can have as much money
for those buildings as it has so far spent.
QUESTION: Can I ask Mr Connor a question?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes indeed. I would like you to. This is one
of the mineral capitals of Australian and he's the Czar of
minerals in Australia. 
-3-
QUESTION: Th-.. ee countries have taken measures to boost
maintain the copper price? What will Australia b1-doing ahojc this-
CONNOR: Well the CIPEC countries that's Peru, Chile, Zambia
and Zaire have decided to curtail production by 10%. It's
debatable as to what the net result of it will be. Copper is of
course, is a highly volatile metal in price and its history has
traditionally been one of production in politically unstable
countries. We in Australia have tried to maintain a stable
price and I wouldn't like to hazard a guess as to the ultimate
effect. I don't think it will have much. The trend in copper
has been downwards. Copper at one stage was right up around
$ 2.260 a ton so dear, in fact, that it was pricing itself our
of the market and substitutes were coming in. The position t0lay
is a much more healthy one, providing we can hold the present
price structure.
QUESTION: There's no question of you suggesting that Mt Isa
Mines should cut their production?
CONNOR: I think we can place all that they can produce
immense amounts.
QUESTION: Are you expecting a censure motion in the House on
Monday? PRIME MINISTER: I just have to read what you have to say in
the papers. I don't know.
QL. ' TION: Are you going back for the Parliament on Monday?
PRIIE PINISTER: Yes I'll be going back.
QUESTION: Yr i made a comment a while ago that the petrol sn1 : y
for country .: eas would only affect mining companies and sm.
Do you think this is really true when you ccnsider thai , T
of petrol now costs ll½ more than when the subsidy was i, t".
which is now coming out of the woilking man'.-pocket-
PRIME MINISTER: Th( . rincipal beneficiaries were mining companir
in this city and in Western Australia. In this context I buliev
th; 4orking man in general would be much more assisted iby
ele : ity. As you will appreciate, there are . rr, qreat
numhel of people in this region who don't have Lars a. J1l and
the petr-l subsidy makes no difierence to them. There ctre ve
few indeeu don't use electricity and provincial cities ir
Queensland pa, -re than provincial cities anywhere else in
Australia. Las. Jane I ' rote to the outgoing Premier suggesting
that his Government and Government might co-operate in a str-v
to ascertain the cost Y e1 -tricity in Queens-la:;. i : vinci
cities and in th: State gcne. Ad be Drought dowi. cise:
the average price of the eastern Stares. He hasn't yet answered
the letter.
QUESTION: Has Mr Hawke contacted you about the ajrline sLrik.-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Yes.
QUESTION: Can you tell us anything.... 
PRIME MINISTE: No I don't publicise conversations I ha,.
QUESTION: He apparently was anxious....
PRIME MINISTER: Well that may be but I'm not going to. I never
have and I'm not going to. A very great number of people speak
to me face to face or on the telephone and I do not make a
practice of announcing what we discuss.
QUESTION: Have you spoken to Mr Jones?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Well what do you mean by telephone? No.
QUESTION: Could I ask whether you support the idea of TAA and
Ansett together discussing the wage issue? With the....
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that the domestic pilots ought to
go to Arbitration. I have no sympathy whatever at their
resorting to direct action so promptly as they've become
accustomed to do.
QUESTION: Did they not resort to direct action because the
Government airline and Ansett would not negotiate with them?
PRIME MINISTER: It's for them to say why they resorted to direct
action. The proposition is that they should go to Arbitration.
QUESTION: Yesterday a comment was made by a prominent ALP man
that especially in Queensland, the employers were forcing or
inti. midating the worker into strike action to make it look bad
for the ALP. Do you have any comments on that?
PRIME D NISTER: No, quite frankly I haven't seen the papers.
Where vas this supposed to be said? The other chaps here with
us wou. d ki. i that I don't comment on comments like this. Y
can ask me tu my views but I'm long experienced now; I
that there's nothing in commenting on somebody's summary
selection of somebody else's comment.
QUESTION: I would 1-e to talk about thc National Highway Schem?&amp; te.
The Landsborough Highway is now a national road but the slightcst
amoint of rain closes it. What allocation frow the Highway Scher,.
wil] he Government make for this stretch of road?
PRIME Ii[ NISTER: I haven't got at my fingertips the exa, amiour
There a: national highways in Queensland the one
State bcrde ar Warwick through Brisbane to Cairns and ther: will
be another one om Cairns up to Mt Isa and the Territory border.
We have now accented the sponsibility of maintaining and
constructing those roads. er since the war successive
Australian Govcrnments have -11 hundreds of millions of dollrs;
to State Governments for roads and State Government i
succeeded in producing a national highway scheme. You c; jinot cgo
at every time of the year with certainty between the varous Stc. t,*
Territory -apitals. In those circumstances the Australian Gov. i
has decided to accept the responsibility which it has always
had under the Constitution.
QUESTION: What plans do you have or does the Government have
to improve the statistical information regarding economic changes
which Treasury delivers to the Government? 
PRIME MINISTER: I'll be in a better position to tell yr. within
a week.
QUESTION: There are plans for this....
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but it would be premature for me to mention
them.
QUESTION: Why do yoL say within a week, Prime Mi . ister?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I might be able to tell you that ii, a few
days. I'll issue communique in a few days, probably on that.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, will you answer questions today about
the transfer of Mr Crean from Treasury portfolio?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Do you think that the Premier is taking the ri. jht
line in campaigning on national issues in the State election?
PRIME MINISTER: I welcome the opportunity to expose his lack of
co-operation on national issues. We have decided to accept
responsibility for a national roads scheme because of the failures
for 17 years now of Country Party/ Liberal Government in this
State. It's true that in two years we have been unable to
overcome the deficiencies of 17h years of LCP Government, Federal
and Queensland. We're doing our best. He doesn't like it but there
are other Premiers who don't like it either but they are accepting
-t where they see it is of benefit to their citizens. Other
Pi. tiers realise that there have been shortcomings which have
developad and they swallow their pride and accept our assistance
in (. veicoming those shortcomings. But the Queensland Premier
alone c7-s not do so. I have pointed to the fact that the
Premie h. c -ived his State of at least $ 50 million udcir
schemes whi have been accepted by every other State.
legislation has been passed by the Australian Government
with the support in most cases of the Liberal and Countr'
in both Houses. Sometimes those parties have divided e.
Country Party suppo '-ed the Schools Program; the Liberals opposeit
b-it it went throus,, both Houses. Any schemes we enact apply
to The whole of Australia. They are available on the same con: Li
in c ' ery part of Australia and the other States have accepted
theoL s-hemes, e. g. the scheme for reducing the r -cc of land&amp;,
for bu..-ding in regional centres.
is a situation resented by the Queensland Libera
leader, Sir G. ion ChalTk, the Treasurer, the Deputy Premier. He
would have ente. I into these schemes, the same as any other
Liberal Premier in Austr._ i as well as the Labor leaders in
Australia have already don.
QUESTION: This $ 50 million that Mr Bjelke-Petersen hasn't spent;
how much has this contributed to unemployment? Have you got any
figures on the jobs that may have been provided with increasel
expenditure? 
4 -6-
PRIME MINISTE~ R: No I haven't but very obviously there w,. uld b
a great deal of employment created by the development of growth
centres or laind development schemes. That has been the case in
Monarto in South Australia and Albury-Wodonga and with Bathurst-
Orange. But I would say the big contribution to employment is in
the building industry., i. e. if they would only in this State use
the money which is available for school buildings and welfare
housing. 



PRIMIE M~ IIM
SPEECH NOTES FOR MT.. ISA.
11T. ISA ** NOVEMBER 23
1. THIS IS MY FIRST STAY AS PRIME MINISTER IN
YOUR RICH AND REMARKABLE CITY. FEW CITIES COPE SO
WELL WITH THE PROBLEMS OF ISOLATION$ YOUR PROSPERITY IS
GUARANTEED BY-VAST NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE UNIQUESPIRIT
OF YOUR PEOPLE. AUSTRALIANS EVERYWHERE RESPECT'.
THE VIGOR, THE FORTITUDE, THE STRONG COMMUNAL PRIDEI FOR
WHiICH MT. ISA IS FAMOUS.
2. FROM THE BEGINNING my GOVERNMENT HAS-GIVEN
THE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF NORTHERN,
AUSTRALIA, WE CREATED A DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT.
HEADED BY MY COLLEAGUE REX PATTERSON. WE ESTABLISHED THE
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL. WE ARE UNDERTAKING A
THOROUGH STUDY OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROSPECTS OF THE NOR TH-WEST
OF QUEENS. ND STRETCHING FROM MOUNT ISA TO THE GULF OF
CARPENTARIA A REGION WITH GREAT BEEF AND FISHERIES
POTENTIAL AND RICH IN MINERALS INCLUDING LEAD, ZINC, COPPER,
URANIUM AND PHOSPHATES.' THE STUDY WILL HELP US INTEGRATE ALL
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE REGION, RATIONALISE TRANSPORT
U COSTS AND CO-ORDINATE THE PROVISION OF POWER AND ESSENTIAL
PUBL SERVICES. PROPER DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR WATER RESOURCES
IS ESSENTIAL TO THE FUTUR . E OF MT. ISA. WE HAVE RECOGNISED
THAT NEED. ON 11 APRIL 1" 4 AN AGREEMENT WAS SIGNED BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE OtIEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
FOR A LOAN UP TO $ 2 MILLION TO COVER ADDITIONAL COSTS TO
BUILD THE JULIUS DAM FOR THE MT. ISA. WATER SUPPLY. THE
AGREEMENT WAS IN RESPONSE TO A REQUEST BY THE PREM. IER TO
THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT UNDER THE OLD NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM. 2/ 
2
LEGISLATION AUTHORISING THE LOAN HAS BEEN PASSED BY THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. A FURTHER REQUEST FOR $ 14.8 MILLION TO COVER THE
MT. ISA CITY COUNCIL'S SHARE OF THE COST OF THE DAM IS TO BE
DISCUSSED AT THE NEXT MEETING OF THE SCREENING COMMITTEE OF
THE NATIONAL WATER PROGRAM. I KNOW OF YOUR DEEP CONCERN
ABOUT THIS PROJECT. MR JACK SHEPHERD, THE LABOR CANDIDATE
AND ALD. TONY MCGRADY HAVE MADE STRONG REPRESENTATIONS
TO THE GOVERNMENT ABOUT THE SCHEME. THE GOVERNMENT WILL
DO ALL IT CAN TO SEE THAT DAM IS COMPLETED QUICKLY.
4I. WE WANT TO ENSURE THE PROPER DEVELOPMENT OF
MT. ISA'S MINERAL RESOURCES COPPER, LEAD, ZINC AND
PHOSPHATES. IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT-THESE RESOURCES ARE
EFFICIENTLY TRANSPORTED TO COASTAL PORTS, SMELTERS OR
REFINERIES AND MY COLLEAGUE REX CONNOR IS CONSIDERING
A PROPOSAL TO UPGRADE THE RAILWAY BETWEEN DUCHESS
MILES ' ITH OF PIT. ISA) AND TOWNSVILLE. THE EXISTING LINE
IS BEING V -D TO CAPACITY AND IS SUBJECT TO FLOODING.-
RECONSTRUCTION OF THE LINE SHOULD MAKE POSSIBLE A
SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE-IN PHOSPHATE PRODUCTION. AT PRESENT
AUSTRALIA IMPORTS 2.8 MILLION TONS OF PHOSPHATE A YEAR.
THE 6OVERNMENT BELIEVES PHOSPHATES COULD BECOME ONE OF
OL' MAJOR MINERAL EXPORTS, PERHAPS OUTSTRIPPING LEAD,
COPPL,. AND ZINC. SUCH AN INDUSTRY WILL SUBSTANTIALLY
ASSIST " R BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, INCREASED PHOSPHATE
SUPPLIES WILL ENABLE" US TO BOOST PRODUCTION OF WHEAT
AND OTHER GRAINS. 93/ t 
To FURTHER IMPROVE MT. ISA'S TRANSPORT LINKS.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL HELP BUILD THE LANDSBOROUGH
HIGHWAY FROM MT. ISA TO BRISBANE AS A FULL-SCALE ALL
WEATHER ROAD. THIS ROAD WILL BE PART OF OUR NATIONAL
HIGHWAYS PROGRAM, FOR WHICH WE ARE PROVIDING $ 1.126 MILLION
TO THE STATES OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS. MT. ISA WILL
S THUS BE LINKED EVENTUALLY BY FIRST-CLASS HIGHWAYS TO
BRISBANE, SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE. NO STATE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
ABLE TO BUILD THIS HIGHWAY SYSTEM DESPITE THE MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS THEY HAVE RECEIVED FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
FOR ROADS, MY GOVERNMENT WILL SEE THE JOB IS DONE:. I KNOW
PARTS OF THE EXISTING ROAD FROM MT. ISA TO BRISBANE ARE
-IN BAD REPAIR. As FAR AS POSSIBLE WE WILL GIVE PRIORITY
TO THESE SECTIONS. WE WILL SPEND $ 24 MILLION IN QUEENSLAND ON
NORTHERN BEEF EXPORT ROADS OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS.
IT IS WORTH RECALLING THAT THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT
PROM " D IN 1972 TO MAKE ALL QUEENSLAND STATE HIGHWAYS FULL
BITUMEN OfS BY 1975. THIS WILL NOT BE DONE. THE BITUMEN
SURFACE OF THE FLINDERS HIGHWAY FROM MiT. ISA TO TOWNSVILLE
NOW HAS A TARGET DATE FOR COMPLETION IN 1976.
6. THE LABOR GOVERNMENT WANTS EVERY CITY AND
RFGION TO PROVIDE AMENITIES AND SERVICES TO ITS CITIZENS
CO., F ABLE' WITH THE BEST IN . AUSTRALIA. TO' REDUCE INEQUALITIES
BEThCEN REGIONS WE EMPOWERED THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO
RECOMMEND " ANTS FOR. LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES ON THE BASIS OF
COMPARATIVE NEED. MT. ISA IS RECEIVING $ 250,000 FROM THE
GRANTS COMMISSION AND CLONCURRY $ 86,000. 3114/ 11111 
7. THESE GRANTS ARE HEAVILY IN FAVOUR OF RURAL
AREAS. BRISBANE HAS RECEIVED $ 3.12 A HEAD FROM THE GRANTS
COMMISSION GRANTS, WHILE RURAL AND PROVINCIAL CITIES
AND COUNCILS ARE RECEIVING $ 6.23 A HEAD. THIS GIVES THE
LIE TO ANY CLAIM THAT WE ARE FAVORING URBAN AREAS AT
THE EXPENSE OF THE COUNTRY DWELLER. WE ARE MAKING BIG
GRANTS FOR SPORTING AND RECREATION FACILITIES IN QUEENSLAND
CITIES. MT. ISA IS RECEIVING $ 115,000 FOR A COMMUNITY
RECREATION CENTRE. THIS IS EASILY THE BIGGEST SINGLE
GRANT FOR A QUEENSLAND CITY FOR THIS PURPOSE, TOTAL SPORTING
GRANTS TO QUEENSLAND AMOUNT TO $ 536,200.
8. A REGIONAL OFFICE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
SOCIAL SECURITY WILL BE OPENED AT MT. ISA AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE PROBABLY BEFORE 30 JUNE NEXT YEAR.
THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, MR BILL
HAYDEN, AND HIS DEPARTMENT ARE KEENLY AWARE OF THE
DIFFICULTIES FACING RESIDENTS OF MT. ISA CLAIMING PENSIONS
AND BPNIFEFITS. A SOCIAL WORKER WILL BE INCLUDED AMONG THE
STAFF Ot-TH' MT. ISA OFFICE. THERE ARE 340 AGED PENSIONERS,
133 INVALID PENSIONERS, 123 WIDOW PENSIONERS, AND 3,929
FAMILIES RECEIVING CHILD ENDOWMENT PAYMENTS IN THE AREA.
9. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. IS CONSIDERING AN
APDLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR A 34-BED HOSTEL FOR
THL " RE OF AGED PEOPLE IN MT. ISA. THE APPLICATION IS ON
BEHALF OF THE MT. ISA MEMORIAL GARDEN SETTLEMENT FOR THE AGED.
THE PROP. TO ERECT THE GARDEN SETTLEMENT HAS BEEN HEAVILY
SUPPORTED BY K. ISA MINES AND THE UNIONS. THE ESTIMATED
COST OF THE PROJECT IS +-371,000, DISCUSSIONS ARE TAKING
PLACE BETWEEN THE MEMORIAL GARDEN SETTLEMENT ORGANISATION
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY TO ARRANGE THE
TRANSFER OF HOSTEL BED ENTITLEMENT FROM ANOTHER ORGANISATION
TO ENABLE A GRANT TO BE MA'DE UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOSTEL ACT
WHEN THE RELEVANT LEGISLATION HAS BEEN PASSED. 
ABOUT $ 170,000 HAS BEEN RAISED FOR THE PROJECT
IN THE NT. ISA AREA. THIS IS A TREMENDOUS EFFORT, MR
HAYDEN HAS INSTRUCTED THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY
TO GOVE THE FULLEST POSSIBLE SUPPORT TO THE PROJECT.
MY COLLEAGUE LIONEL MURPHY, THE ATTORNEYGENERAL,
ANNOUNCED YESTERDAY THAT ONE OF TWO NEW REGIONAL
BRANCHES IN QUEENSLAND OF THE LEGAL AID SERVICE WILL
BE AT MT. ISA.
11. ALTHOUGH RURAL ELECTRICITY COSTS IN QUEENSLAND
ARE THE HIGHEST IN ALL THE EASTERN STATES,' THE BJELKEPETERSEN
GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO CO-OPERATE WITH US IN
SEEKING WAYS TO REDUCE THESE COSTS. HIGH ELECTRICITY COSTS
HELP PUSH UP PRICES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
THE BJELKr--PETERSEN GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO USE ITS WIDE
POWERS TO CONTROL PRICES AND RESISTED OUR ATTEMPTS TO
OBTAIN COMMONWEALTH POWER OVER PRICES BY REFERENDUM.
THE PEOPLE OF MT. ISA VOTED YES IN THE PRICES REFERENDUM LAST
YEAR. THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS IGNORED THEIR
EXPRES-9) WISH FOR GOVERNMENT ACTION TO RESTRAIN PRICES.
12. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN OVERWHELMINGLY
GENEROUS TO QUEENSLAND IN ITS FINANCIAL ALLOCATIONS.
QUEENSLAND HAS RECEIVED MORE FROM US THAN IT HAS RECEIVED
FROM ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA, OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS
TO QUFENSLAND IN THE LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WERE $ 739 MILLION
-OR $ 382 PER HEAD COMPARED WITH AVERAGE PAYMENTS TO ALL
STATES 3L5 PER HEAD. 
6
13. I HAVE DRAWN ATTENTION TO MR BJELKE-PETERSEN'S
OBSTINATE REFUSAL TO CO-OPERATE WITH US IN PROJECTS FOR
THE DEVELOPMENT OF QUEENSLAND AND THE BENEFIT OF HER
CITIZENS. HE HAS SPURNED OUR EFFORTS TO MAKE TOWNSVILLE
A GROWTH J. EHE HAS. SPURNED 0UeR--&amp; F-FVNDS FOR LAND
STABILISATION, HE HAS REFUSED TO HOLD DISCUSSIONS ON
OUR OFFER OF FUNDS FOR ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT. MR
BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS THROWN AWAY $ 50 MILLION IN FEDERAL
FUNDS FOR THIS STATE. HIS ATTITUDE IS AT ODDS . WITH
THAT OF ALL THE LIBERAL PREMIERS AND ON MANY ISSUES, SUCH
AS ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS, WITH THE ATTITUDE OF A FORMER
LIBERAL PRIME MINISTER, MR GORTON.
14., QUEENSLAND'S ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES ARE FLAGRANTLY
RIGGED AGAINST LABOR, IT IS NOT JUST BRISBANE VOTERS WHO
ARE DISADVANTAGED BUT PEOPLE IN PROVINCIAL CITIES LIKE
MT. ISA. HERE YOU HAVE 16,002 ELECTORS', THAT IS ALMOST
EXACTLY THE SAME AS THE AVERAGE ENROLMENT IN BRISBANE
SE" TS ( 16,059). You HAVE CONSIDERABLY MORE THAN THE AVERAGE
NUMB-ELECTORS ENROLLED IN ALL PROVIIICIAL CITY SEATS
( 15,510), MUCH MORE THAN THE AVERAGE IN THE COUNTRY ZONE
( 11,215), AND NEARLY TWICE THE AVERAGE NUMBER IN THE
WESTERN AND FPR NORTHERN ZONE fr; ISA PfCf"-;.
ARE PRIME VICTIMS OF 1iR LJELKE-' ETEkSEN'S SCANDALOUS
GERRYMANDERING, 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
AT CAIRNS AND MAREEBA, OLD.
24 NOVEMBER, 1974
1. THERE ARE FEW CITIES WHICH I VISIT MORE OFTENWHETHER
FOR BUSINESS OR PLEASURE THAN CAIRNS. IN
MAY I OPENED YOUR NEW CIVIC CENTRE AND CULTURAL
COMPLEX SYMBOLIC OF THE GROWTH AND PROSPERITY
OF THIS CITY AND YOUR REGION. SINCE THEN WE HAVE
DONE A GREAT DEAL-MORE FOR THE WELFARE AND PROGRESS
OF CAIRNS. WE HAVE MADE A GRANT OF $ 18,750 TOWARDS
YOUR BASKETBALL STADIUM AS PART OF my GOVERNMENT' S
DRIVE TO EXPAND SPORTING AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. WE HAVE APPROVED THE FIRST
DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS
BY AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. UNDER OUR PROPOSALS
CAIRNS CITY COUNCIL IS RECEIVING $ 176,000 AND
MAREEBA IS* RECEIVING $ 180,000 ON THE RECOMMENDATION
OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION. THESE GRANTS ARE GIVEN
WITHOU T INTEREST; THEY NEED NOT BE REPAID. THERE
ARE NO STRINGS ATTACHED. THEY CAN BE SPENT BY THE
LOCAL AUTHORITIES AS THEY SEE FIT TO IMPROVE THE
SERVICES AND AMENITIES AVAILABLE TO THE COMMUNITY.
2. IT IS A GREAT PLEASURE IN THIS CAMPAIGN TO BE SUPPORTING
RAY JONES, THE MEMBER FOR CAIRNS, AND BILL WOOD, THE
MEMBER FOR BARRON RIVER. THEY WILL BE VALUABLE
MEMBERS OF A NEW STATE GOVERNMENT LED BY MY FRIEND
AND COLLEAGUE PERC TUCKER. As SHADOW-MINISTER FOR
TRANSPORT, RAY JONEt WILL COOPERATE' WITH MY GOVERNMENT
TO IMPLEMENT OUR PLANS FOR A COMPREHENSIVE
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS SYSTEM 2 l 
2
3. UNDER LABOR'S PROPOSALS A HIGH-GRADE ALL-WEATHER HIGHWAY WILL
LINK CAIRNS WITH BRISBANE AND EVENTUALLY WITH SYDNEY
AND MELBOURNE. DESPITE OPPOSITION OBSTRUCTION WE HAVE
PASSED THE NECESSARY LEGISLATION TO PROVIDE $ 1,126
MILLION FOR OUR NATIONAL ROADS PROGRAM OVER THE NEXT
4k THREE YEARS. WE ARE THE FIRST NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO
UNDERTAKE THIS ESSENTIAL PROGRAM. NO': STATE GOVERNMENT
HAS HAD THE RESOURCES TO DO IT ALONE. No PREVIOUS
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CARED ENOUGH TO DO IT EVEN THOUGH
THEY HAD THE NECESSARY CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS. WE ARE
USING THOSE POWERS. WE ARE GETTING ON WITH THE JOB.
14. WE WANT TO SEE CAIRNS PROPERLY SERVED BY SHIPS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN, ALONE
AMONG THE PREMIERS, HAS PREVENTED A. N. L. SHIPS OPERATING
BETWEEN PORTS WITHIN HIS OWN STATE. QUEENSLAND CITIES'
H'VE BEEN DENIED AN ESSENTIAL SHIPPING SERVICE SOLELY
BECAUSE OF THE OBSTINACY AND PREJUDICE OF THE OUTGOING
PREMIER, MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN' S ATTITUDE IS NOT SHARED
BY THE AUTHORITIES IN-CAIRNS. MR. BORZI, THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE CAIRNS HARBOUR BOARD, AND A FORMER STATE
CANDIDATE OF THE NATIONAL PARTY ( AS IT IS NOW CALLED)
,) ITD IN HIS 1973-74 ANNUAL REPORT:
" THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE'S WEEKLY CARGO
SERVICES TO AND FROM THE SOUTH BROUGHT
INCREASED TRADE AND REVENUE. UNFORTUNATELY
THE BOARD S SUPPORT OF MOVES TO HAVE A. N. L.
GRANTED THE PRIVILEGE OF CONDUCTING AN INTRASTATE
CARGO SERVICE HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL TO DATE." 
EARLIER TODAY I WAS IN WEIPA, A CITY THAT HAS SUFFERED
AS MUCH AS CAIRNS FROM MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN'S OBSTRUCTIONISM.
WE HAVE SEEN THE FARCICAL SITUATION OF FOREIGN
SHIPS CARRYING BAUXITE FROM WEIPA TO GLADSTONE BECAUSE
AN. L, SHIPS WERE PREVENTED FROM DOING THE JOB.
MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS REFUSED TO COOPERATE WITH US
IN OTHER PROJECTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF QUEENSLAND
AND THE BENEFIT OF HER CITIZENS. HE HAS SPURNED OUR
OFFER OF FUNDS FOR LAND STABILISATION. HE HAS
REFUSED TO HOLD DISCUSSIONS ON OUR OFFER OF FUNDS
FOR ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT. MR. BJ'ELKE-PETERSEN HAS
THROWN AWAY $ 50 MILLION IN FEDERAL FUNDS FOR THIS
STATE, HIS ATTITUDE IS AT ODDS WITH THAT OF ALL THE
LIBERAL PREMIERS AND ON MANY ISSUES, SUCH AS ABORIGINAL
LAND RIGHTS, WITH THE ATTITUDE OF A FORMER LIBERAL
RIME MINISTER, MR. GORTON.
6. ALTHOUGH RURAL ELECTRICITY COSTS : N QUEENSLAND ARE THE
HIGHEST IN ALL THE EASTERN STATES, THE BJELKE-PETERSEN
GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO COOPERATE WITH US IN SEEKING
WAYS TO REDUCE THESE COSTS. HIGH ELECTRICITY COSTS HELP
v,' 4 UP PRICES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
THE BJELKE-PETFRSEN GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO USE ITS WIDE
POWERS TO CONTROL PRICES AND RESISTED OUR ATTEMPTS TO
OBTAIN COMMONWEALTH POWER OVER PRICES BY REFERENDUM. 
6A I1.~ HS~ iIU~ JTO COUP2M. ATE
IN OjR . LLANO F0iZ j" JjIL P -nfALT!', O I. A6lli.
I IiROTE TO ALL ThnS P., iiIIIRb O1-j 1T TL3a
OFFERING A TOTAL GLANT TO ALL ~ TTSW
11ILLI0ON -2O1t Ai~ q 1NTEP-RIl4. PROGiiAM
UP TO JUNE~ 1976. U1SAjD'AOiFL'
$ 160,000 Ill 1974-75 AND Q-700,000 IN
1975-76 TIL; S HIG' 1' ZTh~ h\ FOR, Y
STATE. TIZ OUTGOING PAi,. IL-11.3 NOT Yi'T
TOLD Uo' V512iTHER RE~ WILL ACC-*, PT OU'L OFF2,11
ALL OTHEiR STATE~ S .2XCJ2PT NEW/ SOUTH WALES
HlAVE3 ACCS;*' PTJED IT. 
7. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNZiNT HAS BIEZNOVtWLIdi
GENEROUS T3 QUEENSLAND IN IT; FINANCIAL, ALLOCATIONS.
QUEENISLAND HAS R. iCEIVED XOIcS FRi'i U6~ THA4N IT HIAE
RECEIVED FROM ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMN'T IN CANB3ERRA~.
OUR TOTAL PAYt1iNTS TO 2UEENSLAND IN ' il LAST
FINANCIAL YEAR WERE $ 739 MILLION or, $ 382 PER
HEAD COi. PARED WITH AVEIRA'GE PjAYPENTS TO ALL STATES
OF " o345 PER HEAD.
8. FROM THE BEGINNING MY GOVERNl--ENT HA6S GIVEN4 THE
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THlE DEVELOPL*~ ENT O 0i x~ T1E2RNq
AUSTRAULIA. WE ATED A DEPARTNENT OF 110HTii{; RN
DEVELOPiNL2, NT HEADED BY IMY COLL EklUE REX RATTEiLS OS.
WE ESTAELISHED TIM, NORTHERN DE, 1VELOPPIEN'T COUNCIL.
WE ik1? E Ui. D2EATkKING A THOROUGH STuiJY OF TI. E, D. 2VELOPhi2UNT
PRO. SPECTS OF Thii' NOATH-WEST OIf QUEENSLAiD
STRETCHING FROM MOUNT I6A TO THEI GULF OF = AtPENTEi~ RIA,
WE ARE SPENDING 24 MILLION IN THE NEXT TIIL. EE YEARoS
ON EXPORT BEEF ROADS IN QUEENSLAND.
9. AS PART OF A RICIT AND Ili* PC. TA* 6 ; I AkGLICUJ1TURAt, REGION
C~ $ AND M! ArLZEBAk IAV--BE 4.3' ITTED 2Ke7 vil ~~ ID i
C-OVERNIET's RUR-AL POLICIES. IN OUi L ST BUliGET
OUl. Y ON RURA L AS I ST-NC-T ' JTALLED 0? 488 ILIuN
THERE A NET IN~~ 1IN OUI Al ET TO
AGIRICULTUlLE OF -388 ILI3 EiT-LC'. Th1973-74.
WE ARE SPENDING $ 56 l-ILLiON A" N AddlAj7lz lLT
LABOl-aTOñ lY A PROJE~ CT JF SOjU i1C-Xh MI* i: POr. TANCE-
TO ALL LIVESTOCK IiNDU6TRIES.
WE VL' OPENED UP NEW MARKET6 FOR T'RE, SUGAR I'fL4USTR?.*.
WE AR'-E NZGOTLj. f . NG A LON',*-TERM SUGAR CONTRACT WITH
CHINA WvOiLTH $ 50 i'ILIN AlAiYSIA HX"' ALSO SdHU4N
INTEl! REST IN LCNG-TERM SUGAR SALES WORTH
WE W4ILL CONTINUTE TO SEEK A NEW 1N'jERNATINAL UCAR
AGREE11ENT TO BRING~ EFFECTIVE XARKET MAqAGEINT TO
THE V1O16LD SU\ CAR TRADE. 
WE HAVE RETAINED TiE NITROG EINOUS PiRT-L6ER
SUBSIDY, WORTH i', BOUT $ 13 MILLION A Y2AR, TO
ASSIST SPECIALISE) REGIuNAL G1OWTH, ELU oURE
CONTINUED LOCAL PODUCTION AND TO ! LTA1N A IIIGL;
LEVEL OF SOIL FERTILITY.
11. WE ARE PARTICIPATING ON A DO LAR-FOR-DOLLAR
BASIS WITH QUEENSLAND IN A $ 720,000 PLOGIAN
FOR LOCUST CONTROL IN QUENSLAND.
12, TIE GOVENMENT RECOGNIS] ES THE Ii4PORTANCJi: E OF T"-E
TOBACCO INDUSTily TO YOUR ST. TE AN) T-E IMPORTANCE
OF MAREEBA TO THAT INDUSTRY.* TH, AVERAGE MINII4UN
AESERVE PRICE FOR LEAF OOLD AT AUCTION THIS YEAR
WAS INCREASED BY 36 CENTS TO 288.4 CENTS A KILOGRAM.
THE AVER. AGE PRICE ODTAIN2D AT AUC[ ION IN I-AREE13A
THIS YEAR ffi BEEN 295.13 CENTS. rJ1" GOVENi-MENT
WILL CONSIDER FURTHER PRICEi REVIEWS DURING THE
CUlt ITCY OF TiiiE FIVE-YEAh' TOBACCO ) TABILIIATION
PLAN ' iHICH BEGaN THIS YEAR.
HE M-iARKETING QUOTA FORL 1975 HAS 13ñ. SET AT
15,422,000 kg TIE SAME AS THIS YEAiR.
13. UNDER TH'LE LABOR GOV-R!\ wEi4T YuAVE S17EEN Ti W FIxCLT
SIGNI! 2? ICMLNT POST-Wic'W L i f-i KJY YEAR oi THE
INDEBTE1) NlcJS: S OF RURAL PRODUCEA6. 11%' 1971 THE
BUR. EAU OF AGMiICULT AL SCOiiOL. IC63 FE2O. TEJLT. T; LAT
7,570 AUSTRALIAN FA-iiERS APPLIED ñ Cit ASSISTiai: CE
THE I'iURL RECONbTitUCTION BOAtD. TILTS YEAR
TiL FIGUR E T" DOWN TO 523. 0006/... 
14. IN KEN VkIJTFid, 12M HlAViE T1' Hi . LLEST, BEL'T
INFORMED, h,, OST ACTIVE~ AND IW-iELLIGE11T MNi'I ) TER
EVEZ. APPOINTEDI TO AD1,11NIST. EJEk. Pilil-. . iAY IU~ X
IN CUR REL] iT Glt. S" li4 PAPER ON4 Liw'LL IN: DU'.-TRY
FAW, 4E1RS I1AVl* T1113 BL1-' ST AND iñ iOST CW-i.' H2 1 v 7
F~ OR INFOIU4E1 ( GOV-" RUWMNT PuLICIE6 ON
RUliAL INDUSTRY EVfl DRAiWN UP IN AUSTR~ ALIA.
IN OUR INflULTRIEi ASSIMTANCiE CONNL-. SION AWi
MWEi THE 1iOZ'T .1-, PEIZT AND) EFFICI -INT INSTALU~ LJT
FOR. GUAR~ ANTEEING THIS 6TAEiNGTH A1' ND SiTAID'LITY
OF OU,. * kUR-iL INDUSTftI,, S E~ VER APPOIN-. L" D IN
A,, U; i1* MLLIA. ALL Tlii] 6. SF! T. HIN-S Pil' 3ID31i FI~ dh
O1UNDJS FORc C F EX MM~ FAITH -Il TH-, FU-: Jt 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 380
24 November 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister today released an exchange of
correspondence with the Industries Assistance Commission.
" I have asked the Industries Assistance Commission
to provide to the Government the fullest information about
the social and locational implications of its recommendations.
The Chairman of the Commission intends re-examining reports
as yet undecided by the Government to identify any
supplementary recommendations which might be appropriate in
the current state of the economic cycle" said Mr Whitlam.
" I have also told the Chairman of my wish that more
attention be directed towards a general approach set out
in the Commission's Annual Report for 1973-74, which would
have the effect of avoiding a significant scaling down of
some high cc~ st activities where change would present
intractable social problems."
" The Commission has been asked to take into account
in its recommendations that the Government's structural
adjustment measures and non-metropolitan subsidy scheme
are not designed to meet all the problems, whatever the
stage of the business cycle, which might arise from a
structural change seen as in the national interest by the
Commission." The Prime Minister concluded by saying that the
system of public inquiry and public advice into assistance
measures and the ability of th e Government to use the results
for the national good would be enhanced by these moves.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 


PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 381
November, 1974
GREAT BARRIER REEF
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said in Cairns today that the Australian Government would create a marine park based on the Great Barrier Reef in order to protect the reef from oil drilling.
Mr. Whitlam said the Government was closely studying the recent report of the Wallace Royal Commission into drilling on the reef. The report would go before the Cabinet again. However, because of the': urgent need to protect the reef from despoilation, the Government will now proceed with the creation of the marine park. Drilling would be banned in any area of the park where it was considered harmful to the reef or to the environment as a whole.
"We will take this action to protect an irreplaceable part of Australia's natural heritage," Mr. Whitlam said. "We are determined to safeguard the reef and ensure its survival. We will preserve it both for its intrinsic value and its importance to the tourist industry of Queensland."
Mr. Whitlam said it was essential that the marine park be established in co-operation with the Queensland Government. The Australian Government wanted a Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to administer the park with members appointed jointly by the Australian and Queensland Governments.
Mr. Whitlam said there had been little evidence of Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's willingness to co-operate. Queensland needed a Labor Government to ensure the survival of the reef.
"The Premier did not even bother to reply to my letter of 23 September inviting his Government to co-operate with the Australian Government in the creation of the Authority," he said. "We will, if necessary, go ahead and create the Authority without Queensland."
-2-
Mr. Whitlam recalled that the Wallace Royal Commission had been appointed because of a conflict between Mr. Bjelke-Petersen and a former Liberal Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton. Mr. Gorton believed that Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's Government was not sufficiently aware of environmental issues.
"There is ample evidence to justify Mr. Gorton's view," Mr. Whitlam said. "The Queensland people must face that they are being governed by environmental vandals."
The Labor Party in Queensland had promised in the last election to dedicate national parks over five percent of the State. The amount now was a mere 0.6 percent and this had been achieved only be adding 800,000 hectares in the Simpson Desert. If one excluded the Simpson Desert, Tasmania had as much land dedicated as national park as Queensland. Yet Tasmania had a land area of only 3.9 percent of Queensland's.
Mr. Whitlam said the beautiful Weymouth rainforest was still a pastoral lease and the Iron and McIlwraith ranges were still under threat. In a State with a civilized government such areas would be national parks.
"The Labor Party in Queensland has promised and will implement its promise to dedicate five percent of the State as national park, including the biologically significant areas," Mr. Whitlam said.
"Through our Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service and our grants to the States for nature conservation the Australian Government will be delighted to help achieve this goal. "
The Queensland people have waited since 1969 for the Cooloola National Park to be created. They still don't have it, but it is already clear that when they do get it, it will only be a fraction of the size it should be, and most incredibly of a doughnut shape. It was promised before the last election. It is only because of conservationist and union vigilance that Queensland is even being offered this apology for a park.
"The Queensland Government has also agreed to create a National Park at Cape Cleveland around the Australian Institute of Marine Science. The Australian Government, and the Queensland people are still waiting.
"The Greenvale nickel project is being built at Yabulu and will pollute the sea one mile out with highly toxic ammonium sulphate, nickel and cobalt. The Australian Government has not even been consulted. "Cabinet last Thursday approved the drafting of a Marine Environment Protection Bill. When this is law, we will be looking at such projects very closely."
Mr. Whitlam said the co-called Clean Air and Clean Waters Acts in Queensland were a farce. There had been only one prosecution under the Clean Air Act.
-3-
The Government's treatment of the Bellevue Hotel and The Mansions showed its contempt for the historic buildings of Queensland. In an incredible act of vandalism, Mr. Bjelke Petersen had had all the verandahs ripped off the Bellevue Hotel knowing that this would create an eyesore and hasten the destruction of the building. "We have funds in our National Estate program for histroic buildings," Mr. Whitlam said. "I invite the Queensland Government to apply for the $150,000 needed to save the building."
CANBERRA, A.C.T.



Lm
1,, 4USALIA&amp;
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 383
26 November 1974
SPORTING AND RECREATION GRANTS
The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa, Mr
Gough Whitlam, said today he was delighted that the District
Sporting Complex at Ingleburn was to receive a $ 65,000 grant
from the Australian Government.
The grant was announced last week by the Minister
for Tourism and Recreation, Mr Frank Stewart, as part of
the Australian Government's capital assistance program for
leisure facilities. Mr Whitlam said the total cost of the Ingleburn
project was estimated at $ 135,000, and the $ 65,000 grant
was a clear indication of his Government's willingness to
become associated with the developmient of recreational facilities.
The $ 65,000 will go towards the cost of developing
the Amenities Block and Sports Fields which are included in
the District Sporting Complex.
Mr Whitlam said that New South Wales would receive
$ 560,600 of the total of $ 3,443,916 in the current program of
capital assistance for leisure facilities.
For this financial year the Australian Government has
approved a commitment of $ 11.5 million for this program. Allocation
of these funds will be in three main categories:
community sporting and recreation facilities
and specialist sporting facilities;
art and cultural facilities; and
facilities in proposed Area Improvement
Program Areas.
Mr Whitlam said that grants for projects in the proposed
Area Improvement Program Areas and grants for cultural facilities
would be announced at a later date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MHAINISTE Press Statement No. 384
26 November 1974
NEW COMMUNITY HEALTH PROJECTS
The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa, Mr Cough
Whitlam, today welcomed the new grants for community health
projects in the Western Metropolitan Region of Sydney. These
were announced in Canberra yesterday by the Acting Minister
for Health, Dr Moss Cass.
Mr Whitlam, said that he had always believed that the
health care obtainable everywhere in Australia should be as good
as the health care obtainable anywhere in Australia. ' Too often
in the past there had been inadequate health facilities in the
rapidly developing outer suburban areas of Australia's cities,
and an over-concentration in other areas.
The Australian Government's real commitment to the
improvement of health care facilities was already illustrated
by yesterday's announcement of $ 8,232,148 for community health
projects throughout N. S. W.
Mr Whitlam. said the Western Metropolitan Area would
receive the lion's share of the total grant of $ 8,232,148 for
community health projects in New South Wales.
The largest N. S. W. grant is $ 291,300 for a Community
Nursing Program in Werriwa/ Prospect. These funds have been made
available to recruit, train and employ 50 community nurses in an
expansion of the project.
Several other grants would also boost nursing
programs in the Western suburbs, Mr Whitlam said. Primary Nursing
Centres will receive $ 82,200 for the establishment of Community
Nurse facilities throughout the region. The Macquare Fields Health
Centre will get $ 58,418 to provide accommodation for community nurses
and to establish a health centre base for secondary services.
Specialist Community Nursing in the Western Metropolitan Region
will benefit from a $ 27,644 grant towards the establishment of
a Community Nurse Support service.
Mr Whitlam. said he was glad that proper attention was
finally being paid to the importance of community nursing
programs and to upgrading facilities for nurses. For too long
nurses had been regarded as the poor relations in health care,
despite the fact that they were in closest and most constant
touch with people in need of care. 
Two grants had been announced of particular interest
to women, Mr Whitlam said. A grant of $ 74,100 has been allocated
to establish a Women's Community Health Centre in the Western
Metropolitan Region. This follows the success of the Women's
Community Health Centre in Leichardt which is run by women and for
women. Another grant of $ 41,400 will go towards providing
co-ordinated family planning services in Liverpool, Mt Druitt,
Penrith and Fairfield Health Centres.
Smaller grants will go towards promotipg community
involvement in community health projects in the area and to
establish integrated health education in industry. A grant of
$ 9,525 is to employ a nutritionist working with the health
education team to develop a nutritional education program for
special risk groups in the western suburbs region.
Finally, Mr Whitlam said, $ 34,650 had been recommended
for feasibility studies and the preparation of briefs and
tender documents for a community health centre at Fairfield/
Liverpool. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



A,,&gt; AUSARI IA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 382
26 November 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION ACT: TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE
AUTHORITY INJECTION MOULDING MACHINES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
that he had sent a reference to the Temporary Assistance
Authority on whether it : is necessary that urgent action be
taken to protect the Australian industry in relation to the
importation of injection moulding machines.
Mr. Whitlam said that he was satisfied from
representations made by Johns Consolidated Ltd that a prima
facie case for a reference to the Temporary Assistance
Authority had been established.
Under the Act the Authority is required to report
within 30 days.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



rKAI. IA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 386
27 Noiiember 1974
PAYMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam announced today that
he had advised State Premiers that money allocated under
the Local Government Grants Bill, 1974, was being paid
today to the respective State Treasuries.
This follows the passage of the Bill through both
Houses of Parliament last week. The Governor-General
gave his assent to the Bill yesterday.
Mr Whitlam said that the assistance would be
provided to each State in one lump sum payment. This was
a special measure for 1974/ 75.
Mr Whitlam said he -had asked the State Premiers
for their co-operation in ensuring that these funds were
paid promptly to the respective local government authorities.
The allocations for
announced on 23 August. Councils in each State were
The allocations for Councils in each State are:
New South Wales:
Victoria: Queensland: South Australia:
Western Australia:
Tasmania: $ 21,359,000
$ 14,630,000
$ 8,954,000
$ 4,774,000 959,000
$ 1,669,000
total $ 56,345,000
Canberra. A. C. T. 



jA U). T HA IIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 387
27 November 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REFERENCE
IRON AND STEEL
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced that
he had sent a reference to the Industries Assistance Commission
on the question of assistance needed to support the continued
growth of Australia's iron and steel industry.
Mr Whitlam said that continuity of a soundly based
and efficient iron and steel industry is fundamental to the
Australian economy and that the Government is concerned to
ensure the progressive de~ Yelopment of the industry in
keeping with projected Australian and overseas demand.
Mr Whitlam commented that while alloy steel, high
carbon steel and electrical steel had been reviewed between
1966 and 1968, major developments had since occurred in these
sectors of the industry both within Australia and overseas.
The nature and extent of these developments had led the
Government to call for an interim report on this sector of
the industry. other iron and steel now under reference had
not been reviewed since the 1930' s and the wide reference
will consequently give the opportunity for a much needed
consolidated review of the whole industry.
The Prime Minister concluded that he considered it
desirable that measures for the sound development of the
iron and steel industry be reported on by the Industries
Assistance Commission before reviews already scheduled in
the Tariff Review program in respect of industries using
basi-' c iron and steel, because of the particular importance
t~ o almost all sectors of industry of iron and steel costs.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 385
27 November 1974
PAYMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS
QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam said today that a
cheque for $ 8,954,000 had been paid to the Queensland
Treasury following the Governor-General's assent to the
Local Government Grants Bill.
The sum of $ 8,954,000 represents the total
amfount allocated to Queensland in Federal grants for
local government during 1974/ 75. The Local Government
Grants Bill was passed by the House of Representatives
on 14 November and by the:-Senate on its last sitting
day last week, 21 November.
Mr Whitlam said the cheque had been paid to the
Queensland Treasury today. He explained that as a
special measure for 1974/ 75, the Australian Government
was providing the assistance in one lump sum payment.
Mr Whitlam said he welcomed the Queensland
Premier's assurance that the funds would be distributed
to the respective Local Government authorities as soon
as possible.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



t2sz
i* 3, AUSTRALIA &amp; L PRESS STATEMENT NO. 390
28 November 1974
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
PRICES OF IMPORTED GOODS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlan, announced today
that the Prices Justification Tribunal had begun to conduct
field surveys to check the prices of imported goods on
sale at retail stores.
Mr Whitlam~ said that these prices would be checked
back against the landed prices of goods. These figures
would be supplied by the Department of Customs and Excise.
Where appropriate, discussions would be held with
the companies concerned in relation to any markups considered
to be excessive. Mr Whitlam. said that the membership and staff of
the Tribunal were being expanded to provide for these
operations. A new retail branch had been established, he
said, and a member with specific responsibilities in the
retail area would commence duty on 2 January 1975. In
the meantime, work was going ahead in this area.
Mr Whitlam. recalled that in his Second Reading Speech
on the Prices Justification Bill he had said:
" The Tribunal will employ additional powers,
particularly, but not exclusively, in actively enquiring
into and reporting upon both retail prices and the prices of
imported goods. For these purposes, we shall provide a
modest expansion of the Tribunal's staff and will ensure
that the Tribunal is backed by the collaboration of other
departments and agencies. Steps have already been taken to
this end in conjunction with the Department of Overseas
Trade, the Department of Customs and Excise and the
Australian Bureau of Statistics."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



',, AUSIHA! IA Press Statement No. 389
28 November 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT
NITROGENOUS FERTILISERS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released
the Industries Assistance Commission report on Nitrogenous
Fertilisers. Mr Whitlam said that the Government's decision
on the report will be announced at the earliest
practicable date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 391
28 November 1974
APPOINTMENT TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
The Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam M. P.
announced tonight that the Governor General has appointed
Mr John Casey Taylor as a Commissioner of the Public Service
Board. Mr Taylor is aged 43 years and is currently First
Assistant Secretary in charge of the Protection Policy
Division of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
He is a career public servant having joined the Australian
Public Service in 1953 as a Personnel Cadet. Mr Tay]. or
has served in a variety of Departments including the Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the former Department of
Trade and Industry, the former Tariff Board, and the Public
Service Board. Mr Taylor is a graduate of Melbourne University
and holds the degree of Bachelor of Commerce.
It is expected that Mr Taylor will take up duty
at the Public Service Board on 9 December 1974.
CANBERRA 28 November 1974. 0 



EMBARGO: 4.00 A. M.
THURSDAY 28 NOVEMBER 1974
ijAUSTRA1 IA
PRDME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 388
28 November 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO EUROPE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today that
arrangements were being finalised for him to visit a number of
European countries over a period of five weeks in December and
January. Leaving Australia on 14 December, Mr. Whitlan would visit
Belgium, Britain and Ireland before Christmas, and thereafter he
hoped to visit Malta, Greece, the Netherlands, France, Italy,
Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany.
In Brussels he would call on the European Commission. He proposed
to take the opportunity afforded by overnight stops to and from
Europe to have discussions with the Prime Ministers of Sri Lanka
and Bangladesh. He will also have a brief meeting in Islamabad.
with President Bhutto of Pakistan, on his return flight from
Europe. Recalling that his previously planned visit to Europe
in the past northern summer ( June/ July) had had to be deferred
because of the elections in May, Mr. Whitlam stated that he regarded
the visit as of sufficient importance to be undertaken at the
earliest convenient opportunity. His absence from Australia
would coincide with a period when Parliament was in recess.
The visit would represent a major step forward in
establishing or expanding relationships at the highest level
of Government between Australia and the countries of Europe.
Consultations at the Head of Government level are essential
to the establishment of a basic understanding and framework
within which mutual interests can be identified and pursued.
It is important that the nations of Europe fully appreciate
the development of Australia's foreign policy since 1972,
particularly countries with wqhich Australia has such major trading
relationships and important migration and cultural ties.
The visit will help make up for neglect by previous Governments
and provide opportunities for improved relationships in the future.
Mr. Whitlam said no previous Australian Prime Minister
had paid an official visit to-Italy, Yugoslavia or the Soviet
Union. The last Australian Prime Minister to pay an official
visit to Europe had been Sir Robert Menzies, more than a decade
ago. 
The intervening years had seen developments in Europe
of enormous significance, not only for the Continent itself,
but also for relationships between the major powers and for
countries like Australia which had traditional economic,
commercial and cultural ties with many European countries. It
was not widely appreciated, perhaps, that the European Community
was Australia's second largest market for exports after Japan
and the largest source of Australia's imports. Important
financial and commercial interests had been built~ up between
Australia and Europe. Mr Whitlam noted that his visit to the
European Commission will be the first by an Australian Prime
Minister since the Community's formation.
Western Europe had moved towards a degree of political
and economic integration that made it an entity of major
importance with which Australia needed to develop and deepen
a whole range of contacts. The countries of the Western world,
of which Australia was one, were working to solve unprecedented
economic and financial problems. The Soviet Union, one of the
two Super Powers, was a part of Europe and its policies were of
crucial importance to the development of the continent in peace
and security. Mr Whitlam said he believed a visit by an
Australian Head of Government would give particular stress to
our recognition of the importance Europe had for Australia i~ n an
increasingly interdependent world. Amongst the matters he would
discuss in Europe would be the food and energy situations which
had the widest implications for the achievement of a world
order based on equity and stability.
A particular aspect of his itinerary which would give
him great pleasure, and to which he wished to draw attention,
concerned his visits to countries, other than Britain~ from which
large numbers of migrants had settled in Australia in the postwar
years. These countries included Italy, Greece, Malta and
Yugoslavia. He would make a point in conveying to leaders of
government in these countries Australia's gratitude for the
contribution which their migrants had made to the economic and
cultural development of Australia.
His visit to Greece would be the first by a Head of
Government since the restoration of democracy in that country.
The visits to Moscow and Paris will mean that the
Australian Prime Minister, having previously exchanged views
with the leaders of the United States, Britain and China, will
have met the leaders of the five nuclear powers and permanent
members of the Security Council. In seeking such contacts in
Europe, Mr Whitlam said, he would have as a further objective
to build with the leaders of modern Europe the same close
relationships as he had developed with national leaders in
Asia and North America. 
In summary, Mr. Whitlam said the visits were important
because of Europe's position as Australia's largest trading
partner; its significance as a source of international finance
and its crucial position in the world monetary system; its
advanced technological situation, particularly in emergy matters;
and its significance as a source of migrants and of culture for
Australia. In view of the importance of the visits, Mr. Lionel
Bowen, the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister and Special
Minister of State, will travel with Mr. Whitlam. Mr. Whitlam
will use a Qantas charter aircraft and will be accompanied by
his wife, members of his personal staff and representatives
of government departments with a prime interest in the visit,
including the Secretaries of the Departments of Minerals and
Energy and of Overseas Trade, and Deputy Secretaries of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and of the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet, and a senior Treasury official.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



BRISBANE PRESS CLUB
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISfER
29 NOVEMBER 1974
IN THIS CAMPAIGN, I HAVE DRAWN ATTENTION TO
THE SELFISH AND SHORT-SIGHTED POLICIES OF THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT, QUEENSLAND'S FAILURE TO CO-OPERATE WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DEPRIVED THE STATE OF $ 50 MILLION
IN MUCH-NEEDED FUNDS AND RETARDED ITS DEVELOPMENT. THIS
FAILURE TO CO-OPERATE IS NOT CONFINED TO SPECIFIC PROJECTS
SUCH AS . AND COMMISSIONS AND GROWTH CENTRES, IT IS
REFLECTED IN A GENERAL INDIFFERENCE ON QUEENSLAND'S PAST
TO THE GREAT ECONOMIC PROBLEMS CONFRONTING THE NATION.
Stl'H A PROBLEM IS UNEMPLOYMENT. THE SAD FACT IS THAT
UNEMPLIY: ENT IN QUEENSLAND IS RISING FASTER THAN ANYWHEr
ELSE IN AUSTRALIA. MY GOVERNMENT IS DOING ITS BEST
CHECK UNEMPLOYMENT. MR BJELKl--PETERSEI. IS DOING NOThi. G,
THERE CAN BE NO DOUBT THAT GOVERN;.,. NT EXPENDITURF
IS IMPORTANT IN PROVIDING JOBS. IT IS DIRECTLY IM: ORTANT
THROUGh -iE PEOPLE THE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYS IN THE PLBLIC
SERVICE; IT IS IND -CTLY IMPORTANT BECAUSE OF THE
CONTRACTORS WHO WORK ON MMENT PROJECTS AN: THROUGH
THE EXTRA DEMAND FOR GOODS AND SERVICES CREATED BY ANY
KIND OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE. STATE GOVERNMENTS'
EXPENDITURE IS AS IMPORTANT IN CREATING JOBS AS EXPENDITURE
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. 
QUEENSLANDERS SHOULD ASK THEMSELVES WHY " I1i"
INCREASE IN UNEMPLOYMENT HAS BEEN MOST RAPID IN THIS
STATE. I BELIEVE THE TWO MOST SIGNIFICANT FACTORS ARE
THE FAILURE OF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT TO CO-OPERATE
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE INEFFICIENCY
OF THIS STATE GOVERNMENT IN SPENDING EXTRA MONEY WE
HAVE GIVEN THEM. QUEENSLAND HAS THE WORST UNEMPLOYMENT
IN AUSTRALIA BECAUSE THE QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT IS
UNWILLING OR UNABLE TO SPEND AMOUNTS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS WILLING TO OFFER.
THROUGHOUT THIS CAMPAIGN I HAVE REFERRED TO
TWO AREAS IN WHICH THE QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT,
UNLIKE THEIR COUNTERPARTS IN OTHER STATES WHETHER LIBERAL,
LABOR OR COUNTRY PARTY, HAS REFUSED TO CO-OPERATE WITH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WIL' NOT ALLOW SPECULATORS TO REAP EXCESSIVE LAND
DEVELOP, '. IT PROFITS. WE THEREFORE INSIST ON LAND PRICE
STABILISATION IN OUR PROGRAM FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF
GROWTH CENTRES IN OUR PROGRAM FOR THE ACQUISITION
OF LAND TO BE DEVELOPED BY A JOINT AUSTRALIAN-STATE
" RNMENT COMMISSION AND SOLD AT COST. WE 1ST THAT
LAND SPECULATORS SHOULD NOT PROFIT FROM GOVERNMENT DECISIO
OF THIS OBVTOUSLY THE DECLARATION OF A REGION AS
A GROWTH CENTRE INCRL ' FS LAND PRICES. ,, 13 
-3
S-35
AI. L WE ASK MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TO DO iis ro sir-: : I. LY
TIHE SAME AGREEMENTS, IN PRECISELY TIHE SAME TERMS, AS
THOSE SIGNED BY SIR IOI: RT ASKIN, MR IHAMER AND) ' iR CHARLES
COURT AND ADMINISTERED IN SOME CASES BY COUNTRY PARTY
MINISTERS, NONE OF THESE PEOPLE CAN BE DESCRIBED AS
CENTRALISTS. THEY COULD NOT FIND UNACCEPTABLE CONDITIONS
OR HIDDEN TERMS IN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S OFFER,
THE PREMIERS OF THE OTHER LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY STATES
HAVE ACCEPTED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S ARGUMENT THAT
THESE PROGRAMS SHOULD NOT BE AFFECTED BY LAND SPECULATION
WHICH WOULD INCREASE THE COSTS OF TIHE PROGRAMS AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE AUSFRALIAN TAXPAYER. THE RESULT IS
MILLION LOST TO THIS STATE $ 50 MILLION WHICH EVEN
NOW WOULD BE REFLECTED IN YOUR STATE'S ECONOMY IN THE
FORM OF EXTRA DEMAND FOR GOODS AND SERVICES AND DIRECT
EMPLOYMENT IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY. ONE CANNOT SAY
PRE-TSELY HOW MANY JOBS THIS WOULD MEAN TO QUEENSLAND
BUT THE 7 3URE WOULD BE COUNTED IN THOUSANDS.
MANY OTHER JOBS ARE BEING LOSI" TO OUEENSLA'. D
BECAUSE OF THE INEFFICIENCY OF THE STATE GOVERNMLNT IN
" SPONDING TO OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE. IHERE AR LARGE
NUMBER OF SEPARATE EXPENDITURE AREAS OF THE AUSTRALi
GOVERNMEI WHICH ARE DESIGNED TO TOP UP EXPENDITURES
OF THE STATE GOVERNML TO PROVIDE FURTHER FUNJDS IN
AREAS WHICH ARE THE PRIMAR, , i;"' NSIBILITY OF S,' TE
GOVERNMENTS. To SPEND MONEY ON SUCH PROGRAMS THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MUST RELY ON THE ADMINISTRATION
AND THE PLANNING OF EACH STATE GOVERNMENT. ,/ 4 
4
BEFORE WE CAN COMMIT SUCH FUNDS TO QUIJEENSLAND, THE
QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT MUST FIRST DRAW UP PLANS
FOR NEW PROJECTS AND BE PREPARED TO IMPLEMENT THEM AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
LET ME GIVE ONE EXAMPLE. IN JUNE OF THIS
YEAR I GAVE ALL STATE GOVERNMENTS A BLANK CHEQUE ON
WELFARE HOUSING. I SAID THEN, AND I REPEAT IT NOW,
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE ANY AMOUNTS
FOR WELFARE HOUSING THAT THE STATES ARE ABLE TO SPEND.
WE HAVE HONOURED THAT UNDERTAKING AND ONLY THIS MONTH
WE ALLOCATED A FURTHER $ 8 MILLION FOR QUEENSLAND FOR
THIS PURPOSE WHEN THEY SHOWED THEY HAD THE. PLANS
READY AND COULD SPEND THE MONEY. THIS YEAR $ 35.4 MILLION
WILL BE SPENT IN QUEENSLAND UNDER THE COMMONWEALTH STATE
HOUSING GRANT. THIS COMPARES WITH AN AMOUNT PAID LAST
YE. R OF $ 17.4 MILLION.
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IS
WORSE IN QUEENSLAND THAN IN ANv OTHER S" ATE, IT SHOb,.
NOT EXIST, AND IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT WERE READY
TO SPEND FURTHER FUNDS ON WELFARE HOUSING iT ' UULD inT
EXIST. THERE IS NO REASON WHY FURTHER FUND-ANNG"; zE
SPENi TYEAR, EXCEPT THAT THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMU: T
IS NOT PREPIED TO Sø END THEM. IT DOES NOT H:.' VE THE
PLANS TO ACCEPT THE AUS, AI TA , OVERNMENT'S BL. C.-: rUE, 
OTHER STATES DO. IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA LAST YEAR, WE lNT
$ 32.75 MILLION UNDER THIS AGREEMENT AND FOR THIS FINANCIAL
YEAR WE WILL SPEND $ 45.36 MILLION. THAT IS, FOR THE
TWO YEARS OF THIS AGREEMENT SOUTH AUSTRALIA WITH A
POPULATION TWO-THIRDS THAT OF QUEENSLAND IS ABLE TO
ACCEPT AND SPEND MORE THAN $ 35 MILLION MORE THAN
QUEENSLAND, IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT WERE AS
EFFICIENT AS IT SHOULD BE, THE $ 88 MILLION SPENT IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA SHOULD CONSTITUTE ONLY TWO-THIRDS OF
THE AMOUNT SPENT IN QUEENSLAND DURING THESE TWO YEARS.
FOR THESE TWO YEARS, QUEENSLAND SHOULD HAVE RECEIVED
OVER $ 80 MILLION 11ORE THAN IT RECEIVED IN HOUSING GRANTS
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THERE WOULD BE NO
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IF THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT HOUSING AUTHORITIES WERE AS EFFECTIVE AS
THOSE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
THE COMPARISON I HAVE MADE IN WELFARE HOUSING
CAN BE REPEATED AGAIN AND AGAIN, IN CONTRAST WITH TF
SOUTH AUSTRALI. A GOVERNMENT, THE QUEENS_.\ ND GOVERNMENT
IS APPARENTLY UNABLE TO SPENDAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IONEY TO THE SAME DEGREE THAT SOUTH AUSTRAL;-CAN,
PtRTICULARLY IN THE NEW PROGRAMS THAT WE HAVE INTRO2UCED,
S/ 6 
-6-
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE HAS GOT OFF LIE GRCLD
MORE SLOWLY THAN THAT IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND THIS DEPENDS
COMPLETELY ON THE ABILITY OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT TO
PREPARE PLANS AND ADMINISTER PROJECTS. AREAS IN WHICH
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN SPEND MORE OR ABOUT THE
SAME AMOUNT AS THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT INCLUDE HOSPITALS,
COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRES, DENTAL HEALTH SCHEMES, MENTAL
HEALTH SCHEMES, HOMES AND HOSTELS FOR AGED PERSONS,
TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT
THERE HAS BEEN A MASSIVE INJECTION OF AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FUNDS FOR THE BUILDING OF SCHOOLS. BY
NOVEMBER 18 SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAD REQUESTED 32% OF ITS
ALLOCATION FOR THE YEARS 1974-75 BUT QUEENSLAND HAD
REQUESTED ONLY 18% THE LOWEST OF ANY STATE IN AUSTRALIA,
IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAD REQUESTED THE SAME
PROP -' rON OF EDUCATION GRANTS AS THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN.
GOVERNMEN. AS ALREADY REQUESTED IT WOULD HAVE RECEIVED
IN EXCESS OF $ 3 MILLION MORE FOR SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION,
BECAUSE OF ITS INi,_. ILITY TO DO SO, ITS INABILITY TO PLAN
Ar'D ADMINISTER ITS PROJECTS AS EFFICIENTLY AS THE SOUTH
AL TR'LIAN GOVERNMENT, THESE FURTHER FUNDS WIt' -3T
BE SPENT. SCHOOLS WHICH MIGHT HAVE OPENED AT THE
BEGINNING Or THE FIRST SCHOOL TERM NEXT YEAR WIIL NOT
BE ABLE TO OPEN, IF Th. -UNDS HAD BEEN SPENT, UNEMPLOYMENT
IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IN UL-LL AND IN THE DIFV7CULI
MONTHS AHEAD WOULD HAVE BEEN CONSIDERABLY LESS, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR CLERMONT AND EMERALD, QLD.
29 NOVEMBER 1974
1. IWAS LAST IN EMERALD -THIS RICH AND BEAUTIFUL REGION OF
CENTRAL WESTERN QUEENSLAND IN THE EARLY 1960' s. I REMEMBER
FONDLY THE HOSPITALITY OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS DISTRICT. LAST
WEEK THE NATIONAL PARTY SENT ME A TELEGRAM TELLING ME TO CANCEL
MY VISIT. I REPLIED PROMPTLY AND IN NO UNCERTAIN TERMS. I WILL
NOT BE DETERRED FROM MEETING AND DISCUSSING MATTERS OF IMPORTANCE
WITH QUEENSLANDERS BECAUSE OF A HANDFUL OF ROWDY DEMONSTRATORS
ORGANISED BY THE NATIONAL PARTY. THE HOOLIGANISM, THE ROWDINESS,
THE DOWNRIGHT OBSCENITY OF A FEW HOOLIGANS IS QUITE FOREIGN TO
QUEENSLAND. IT IS REJECTED BY THE VAST MAJORITY OF DECENT
PEOPLE OF THIS STATE.
2. I WELCOME THE OPPORTUNITY TO LEARN MORE ABOUT YOUR DISTRICT, YOUR
LOCAL NEEDS AND PROBLEMS. A CAMPAIGN IS A GOOD TIME TO GET A
MESSAGE AS WELL AS GIVING A MESSAGE. IT AMAZES ME THAT WE HEAR
SO MUCH SCARE TALK AND NONSENSE FROM MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN ABOUT
CENTRALISM, . OUR POLICIES ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT GIVE THE LIE TO"
THIS TALK. WE ARE DOING MORE TO HELP LOCAL COUNCILS UPGRADE
THEIR SERVICES AND AMENITIES THAN ANY GOVERNMENT BEFORE US.
THIS YEAR, ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION, WE
APPROVED DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA
TOTALLING % 56.3 MILLION. QUEENSLAND' S SHARE IS $ 8.9 MILLION.
EmERALD is RECEiviNG $ 92,000. No FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS EVER
GIVEN DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BEFORE. AND THAT MONEY
CAN BE SPENT IN ANY WAY THE LOCAL COUNCILS WISH.
712 3 AIj1A4~ dL 7L 7 t0&amp; L4 ' Y .1s2 
REMEMBER WHAT OUR OPPONENTS USED TO SAY BEFORE WE AMENDED THE
GRANTS COMMISSION ACT TO MAKE THESE GRANTS POSSIBLE: CANBERRA
WOULD BE TAKING OVER LOCAL COUNCILS AND CONTROLLING THEIR
PURSE STRINGS. CANBERRA'S TENTACLES WOULD BE REACHING INTO
EVERY SHIRE AND MUNICIPALITY IN AUSTRALIA. YOU CAN SEE NOW
WHAT NONSENSE THAT WAS. OUR GRANTS ARE DIRECT, INTEREST-FREE$
NON-REPAYABLE. THERE ARE NO STRINGS ATTACHED TO THE WAY THE
MONEY IS USED.
3. OUR GENEROSITY TO QUEENSLAND IS NOT CONFINED TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
DESPITE ALL THE BLEATS AND PROTESTS FROM'YOUR OUTGOING PREMIER
WE HAVE GIVEN MORE MONEY TO THE STATE THAN ANY PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS TO QUEENSLAND LAST YEAR WERE
$ 739 MILLION $ 382 PER HEAD OF POPULATION COMPARED WITH AVERAGE
PAYMENTS TO ALL STATES OF $ 34-5 PER HEAD. ANY BRAKE ON QUEENSLANDS
DEVELOPMENT IS NOT DUE TO US. IT IS DUE TO YOUR PREMIER.
HE HAS TURNED DOWN $ 50 MILLION IN FEDERAL FUNDS FOR GROWTH CENTRES
AND LAND STABILISATION. AND HE SPENDS THE MONEY WE GIVE HIM
MORE SLOWLY AND SPARINGLY THAN ANY OTHER STATE. WE CAN MAKE
MONEY AVAILABLE BUT WE CAN'IT SPEND IT ON OUR OWN. WE NEED THE
CO-OPERATION OF THE STATE.
1. WE HAVE GIVEN THE STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE FOR WELFARE
HOUSING. ONLY THIS MONTH WE ALLOCATED A FURTHER $ 8 MILLION TO
QUEENSLAND IN ADDITION TO OUR EARLIER RECORD ALLOCATIONS WHEN
THEY SHOWED THEY HAD THEIR PLANS READY AND COULD SPEND THE MONEY.
THERE IS NO REASON WHY FURTHER FUNDS CANNOT BE SPENT THIS YEAR,
EXCEPT THAT THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT IS NOT PREPARED TO SPEND
THEM. SOUTH AUSTRALIA-WITH TWO-THIRDS YOU R POPULATION IS
SPENDING AT LEAST $ 35 MILLION MORE ON HOUSING THAN QUEENSLAND IS
MANAGING TO SPEND. ,3 
-3-
THIS ATTITUDE IS COSTING THE JOBS OF BUILDING WORKERS. IT IS
HOLDING BACK YOUR STATE.
MR,. BJELKE-PETERSEN REPEATEDLY TELLS US THAT HE WON'T TAKE OUR
MONEY, I KNOW HE'S ARELIGIOUS MAN BUT HE IS CARRYING RELIGION
TOO FAR WHEN HE TAKES A VOW OF POVERTY ON BEHALF OF QUEENSLAND.
6. WHEN YOUR CANDIDATE JIM TURNER INVITED ME TO VISIT YOUR DISTRICT
IT WAS BEFORE THIS ELECTION WAS ANNOUNCED HE TOLD ME SOMETHING I
OF YOUR PROBLEMS AS A COMPARATIVELY ISOLATED AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
THERE IS, FOR EXAMPLE, THE PROBLEM OF HIGH TELEPHONE COSTS
AND DELAYS. MY COLLEAGUE REG BISHOP, THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL, IS
CONSIDERING A PROPOSAL FROM PERC TUCKER FOR A RADIO TELEPHONE
SUBSCRIBER NETWORK LINKED TO THE NATIONAL TELEPHONE SYSTEM, YOU
CAN BE SURE THAT IF THIS SCHEME IS TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE WE WILL
GIVE IT CLOSE ATTENTION, OUR EXPERTS WILL LOOK AT IT AND SEE
IF IT OFFERS SOME ANSWERS TO THE NEEDS OF ISOLATED TELEPHONE
SUBSCRIBERS.
7. WE ARE PARTICIPATING ON A DOLLAR-FOR -DOLLAR BASIS WITH QUEENSLAND
IN A $ 720,000 PROGRAM FOR LOCUST CONTROL. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN
TRIED TO MISREPRESENT OUR ATTITUDE TO THIS PROBLEM BY TELLING THE
PEOPLE OF QUEENSLAND WE WERE RESTRICTING OUR AID TO ONLY ONE
TYPE OF LOCUST. I GAVE THE LIE TO THAT ALLEGATION. OUR FUNDS
WILL HELP ERADICATE ANY SORT OF LOCUST WHICH DAMAGES AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION. I WAS GLAD TO HAVE A LETTER RECENTLY FROM MR. L. V.
PRICE, PRESIDENT OF THE QUEENSLAND GRAINGROWERS' ASSOCIATION,
EXPRESSING HIS APPRECIATION OF OUR OFFER TO ASSIST QUEENSLAND'S
LOCUST ERADICATION PROGRAM, 
HE WROTE: " YOUR GOVERNMENT'S FINANCIAL COMMITMENT TO ASSIST THIS
PLAN IS MOST WELCOME AND WILL MAK; E A REALLY CONSTRUCTIVE CONTROL
EFFORT POSSIBLE.,
8. WE ARE STEPPING UP BEEF ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN QUEENSLAND. IN THE
NEXT THREE YEARS WE WILL BE SPENDING $ 24 MILLION ON BEEF EXPORT
ROADS IN NORTHERN AUSTRALIA. FEDERAL LIBERAL-COUNTRY GOVERNMENTS
GROSSLY NEGLECTED BEEF ROADS, WE ARE UPGRADING THE BEEF ROAD
BETWEEN CLERMONT AND CHARTERS TOWERS. THIS IMPORTANT ROAD
CONNECTS THE CATTLE BREEDING AREAS IN QUEENSLAND WITH THE FATTENING
COUNTRY OF THE BRIGALOW AND THE CENTRAL WEST. WE MADE A SPECIAL
GRANT OF $ 3 MILLION TO ALLOW THE BITUMEN TO PROCEED SOUTH AS FAR
AS MOUNT DOUGLAS. THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT IS DOING NOTHING
TO IMPROVE THE ROAD.
ON 30 AUGUST 1973, MY COLLEAGUE REX PATTERSON WROTE TO COUNCILLOR
TURNER OF THE BELYANDO SHIRE COUNCIL: " ON THE SUBJECT OF THE
CHARTERS TOWERS-CLERMONT ROAD, I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT I AM AWARE OF
ITS IMPROTANCE TO THE BEEF INDUSTRY AS WELL AS FOR A NUMBER OF
OTHER PRUPOSES SUCH AS PROVIDING THE RESIDENTS OF THE AREA WITH
A MUCH NEEDED IMPROVED LINKING ROAD AND AS AN AID TO TOURIST
INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT. As I MENTIONED, THE CHARTERS-TOWERS
CLERMONT ROAD IS RECEIVING CLOSE CONSIDERATIONIN THE INVESTIGATIONS
NOW IN PROGRESS FOR A POSSIBLE EXTENSION OF THE BEEF ROADS
SCHEME BEYOND 30 JUNE 1974,"
OUR EXTRA GRANT WAS THE RESULT OF THAT EXTENTION OF THE BEEF
ROADS SCHEME. 
9. ALTHOUGH RURAL ELECTRICITY COSTS IN QUEENSLAND ARE THE HIGHEST
IN ALL THE EASTERN STATES, THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED T(
CO-OPERATE WITH US IN SEEKING WAYS TO REDUCE THESE COSTS. HIGH
ELECTRICITY COSTS HELP PUSH UP PRICES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF GOODS
AND SERVICES. THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO USE
ITS WIDE POWERS TO CONTROL PRICES AND RESISTED OUR ATTEMPTS TO
OBTAIN COMMONWEALTH POWER OVER PRICES BY REFERENDUM.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS REFUSED TO CO-OOPERATE IN OUR PLANS FOR
A SOIL CONSERVATION PROGRAM. IWROTE TO ALL THE PREMIERS ON
17 SEPTEMBER OFFERING A TOTAL GRANT TO ALL STATES OF $ 2.5 MILLION
FOR AN INTERIM PROGRAM FOR UP TO JUNE 1976. QUEENSLAND WAS
OFFERED $ 160,000 IN 1974-75 AND $ 700,000 IN 1975-76 -THE
HIGHEST AMOUNTS FOR ANY STATE. THE OUTGOING PREMIER HAS NOT
YET TOLD US WHETHER HE WILL ACCEPTOUR OFFER.
11, UNDER THE LABOR GOVERNMENT WE HAVE SEEN THE FIRST SIGNIFICANT
POST-WAR FALL FOR MANY YEARS IN THE INDEBTEDNESS OF RURAL
PRODUCERS. IN 1971 THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS
REPORTED THAT 7,570 AUSTRALIAN FARMERS APPLIED FOR ASSISTANCE
FROMiTHE RURAL RECONSTRUCTION BOARD. THIS YEAR THE FIGURE IS
DOWN To 523.
12. OUR DtCISION; Y TO ESTABLISH AN ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY AT A COST
OF $ 56 MILLION WILL HELP THE LOCAL BEEF INDUSTRY AND ALL
LIVESTOCK INDUSTRIES IN AUSTRALIA, ./ 6 
-6-
13. THE FITZROY REGION HERE IN CENTRAL WESTERN QUEENSLAND WAS ONE
OF THREE AREAS IN QUEENSLAND WHICH WE PROPOSED AS REGIONAL
GROWTH CENTRES IN OUR ELECTION CAMPAIGN IN 1972. MR. BJLEKEPETERSEN
HAS BLOCKED OUR INITIAL PLANS TO DEVELOP TOWNSVILLE AS A
GROWTH CENTRE.
i14. WE ARE AWARE OF THE SPECIAL-. EDUCATIONAL PROBLEMS OF ISOLATED
CHILDREN IN REGIONS SUCH AS YOURS, WE INTRODUCED A SPECIAL
SCHEME LAST YEAR TO HELP THESE CHILDREN. THIS YEAR WE HAVE
BUDGETED TO SPEND $ 11.5 MILLION THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. INCLUDING
$ 3.3 MILLION ON QUEENSLAND FOR THIS PURPOSE. WE ARE ELPING
2964l QUEENSLAND FAMILIES, AND 41899 QUEENSLAND cHiLDREN, wiTH OUR
ISOLATED CHILDREN'IS EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM THIS YEAR. 



QUESTIONS BRISBANE PRESS CLUB FRIDAY 29 NOVT'', E 1 7
Q ' irto use one of your own phrases, is the melia
giving Labor a fair go taki ng into account that some of your
colleagues have accused the media of indulging in Labor
bashing0
1HITLAM el I I've not made tha* allegation. I do agree
that editorially we do not of course get as fair a go as the
Liberals and the Country Party or the National Party. I've
made no general allegation about that at 4all and I suppose
I am one of that mi nority of the population that reads
editorials at all.
Q Bime Minister could you c.: mment on the announcement
today by Mr Lewis The NSW Premier elect that the QLD and NSW
Governments propose a council of state governments to
coordinate a campaign for state rights.
PM Yes, I was fascinated by this I gather they
are goin to establish a central body to crush centralism.
No whatever there may be about the way the Federal 2arl. is
elected however unequal electorates may be in the Federal
Parliamennt they are not nearly as unequal as they are in every
mainland b -te parliament and I do not believe th't the people
of Aust. wouñ d accept that the state parlia, ents are as
democratic as the Federal Parliament. The Federal Par'. iar.
could be more deiocratic if the electoral systeom vas applied
more , qually as for instance it is in the United States. But
the I-Etates are a blot on Australian democacy the wiy they
are .'. eced. You now in this city and in every rincial
city in the State votes are worth only 2/ 3rds sometimes (_, Iy
1/ 3rd of L other votes are worth in othe-pvarts of the itnt
And the most distant^ ii this State, Mt Isa, has on of the
largest enrolments in the bigger than most of the
electorates in 3risbane. So wl. 4+ comes to lettin,; the peo-pi'
decide what sort of government they will hive I do* n't believe
the people would prefer for one minute the state parliaments
of this country to the Federal Parliament. Despi. e all the
faults of the Fedecal Parliament m it's much closer to the people,
it represents more accurately the views of the people, than any
w~ 
of the mainland parliaments. Furthermore I eliv . hat the Statesand
this State is a conspicuous example showed tiemselvcs unable
to look after Australian resources, showed themselves unable to
innkxazkfr provide opportunities for their citizens. You only have
to, look at ( what my Govt, my Ministershave been able to achieve
as regards exports. Three times as much is now being recei ved
for every ton of coal af exported from QLD than was the case when
we came into power. This wasn't done by your state govt., it wasn't
done by any other state govt. It was done by a national govt.
at last doing what national govts in every other part of the world
i doing. I mentioned coal, but the same applies to every other
natural resource which we export. At last you have a national govt
which does lookk after these things. The state govts alsways had
the power to do it ., ut they would fall over backwards in crawling
to powerful companies overseas companies too! Overseas companies
have no respect for that. But they will cooperate with a govt.
such as mine which also looks after the nation's interests. Not
only coal but also iron ore, uranium and natural gas. All the things
which are our greatest assets after our skiled population are getting
a very much better rturn than any state govt was able to get for them.
And when you look round at the places where most people live in this
c , try what hai been, public tranport or sewerage if I may
mention it at table or any of the things-schools and honlth centres
that new suburbs that new growth centres need. What had been done
before we ' ide it possible for s mething to be done about itl i
don't believt people will give anything but a 3ronx cheer for thi
very belated initiative a central body to crush the cent. im.
Q the PM aware that according to latest Dept of Labour
figures Tasmania in fact has the highest unemployment in Aust.
And ' 11 the PM explain why umemployd fr,' m throi -' it Aust are
coming to QLD to fill the large number of job vacancies here thus
creating ' naccurate unemployment picture in QLD quite contrary
to the situatiu. as outlined by the PM a few minut s ago.
P. M. It is true that is quite a number of vc. ung a
in the far south and the far north of the state.-the ' old Coast an'
the Tableland Kuranda and so on. That is true but tj,: y are on"
pockets. I believe I accurately stated the situation that isyou
hive the opportunity to create a very great deal of employment in
QLD if you only accept the offers which other govts Labor and Liberal-
/ 3
i 
-3-
have seen fit to accept.
Q Two years on Monday you came to power amid I would st. y
high hopes even in QLD of a new visionary govt for Aust. Many of
your voters are obviously now upset by high unemployment in all
states, inflation, and high interest rates. As the man who gave us
that new vision for Aust will you please tell us and the voters
what you feel has gone wrong and how you feel about it personally.'
P. M. r am naturally very disappointed indeed that these
circumstances have arisen. I know and everyone who takes the least
interest in it knows that it is not an Australian phenomenon alone
There is no country in the Western world which does not have very
much worse inflation than it ha: d two years ago. Certainly Australia
has. AsixatiaR The same as every other ' estern. country. And this
is of course a great disappointment a great frustration. And no
one of course iS very popular because of it. But I am satisfied
that the peo'ple whenever there is an election of the House of
Representatives will realize that we at least have some positive
programs. , ie hove achieved a very great , umber of them and our
opponents aire doing nothing but nitpicking. They are narks. They
are thoroughly negative. I'here is no program that our opponents
have put up which bears in any way upon these things which affect
Australir % xxnaharand all othe r countries. Now there are-some
people iho ' ij-k that it muight be possible to insulate us fro
rest of the world. You can't do that in Australia. ar,
great trading country. We are the twelfth largest tradi uI VOL ry
overall in the world, and proportionately I doub. if there is anothe
country which engages so much i overseas ra. 1 as Australia. Nou
in ,1', ose circmst. nces it is impossible for us to ' ve to ourselv,
That _ s e are all infecting eachotherif you linii , wt. These vii ' o
of unemployment and inflation. I am satisfied that we fe
taken steps, -teps which have the earliest effect ossib. Le-L,
there is not way t at you will get an emmediate effect_, but we hitsken
tsteps which will hav.. he earliest effect pos: ible ' nd I 1.
have every confidence that by tn ' le of next year re i.
been able to reverse quite markedly the unemployment situation and
even the inflation situation. a " 4 
-4-
Q As a democrat Sir, and as a d. oclu' Jy ecl d
Prime Ministee With a majority far greater than Bjelk-orseiins
sd is ever Llikely to be, you have taken a nyimb. of ans for
which you have a mandate at the last election and the previous
election on/ tari u Ss wich many people have admlired you for
and admird your courage for taking against the views of some other
pressures groups and lobbies. Would you agree that no lobby, not
even a trade union lobby, represented by Mr Hawle, has the right to
dictate to the Government what it should or should not do.
IP. M. I agree with you conpleely there. No lobby should
dictate or I believe will dictate to us. You've mentioned tariffs
in particular. One of the remarkable things is the way tha. t trad( e
unionists in some industries cooper te readily with employers and
they are not always australian employers to ncrew the public
That ' it is amazing how trade unionists who are comsumers, in very
great numbersand employers who are marginal consumers get together
to make the Australian public Kxxnxy pay very. much more for their
goods. This is an extraorglinarily difficultto be economically
rational in protection or tariff matters because there is a long
standing feeling in Australia ever since the Depression that high
tafiffs are the way to make numberous jobs. Tariffs a4' cct some
industries and not others. They affect some com! panies and not ot er
compa:,. es in the one industry. For instance no-one in Holdens or
Fords cqi. -eally blame tariffs, but at Leylands they did. The-i. re
all producing the same sort of thing. Now if the tariffs wc
responsible for one company having trouble you would thii
would also be respo! sibl. for othc cn:. ipani s h! ving: the a,-e trel,
But there wasn't the same trouble. The 9reat thiing that we have
be-r in mind is that a country thLit has gre t natural ;.-esouces awe
rid a country which h s a sma ll but highly , ialifi. i and
healtity, literate numerate population ought to conicentra on i
strength u it is quite foolish for us to spend very :. ich n
on some produ which we can get of good quality just as
quality cheaper from , ee as. There are man.; more things of
course which we ought to coi: -toe, on which we c .1 pr , uce
efficiently and cheaply than any peoile outside and ' here we c:
compete with other countries. Some people in the trade unions, n
less than among employers, are doing their very best to scre tihe
consumer. Now it is very easy for trade unionists to speak up and
they have in Mr IIawke a very effective spokesman. And some employers
sometimes have 4 very effective spokesmen. But unfortunately 
consumers do not have effec.. ive spo , esmen. You ' t ot, c-, r: Jumers
to get together and put their case. Now the publjc as a
result of that. Having said that i must concede tinat it is
extraordinarily difficult to say to eeople who are being laid
off at Leylands that they should view with equanimity a few thousand
cars coming fully built up on the wharves three miles away. You
can't expect people to accept that situation and we have acted to
correct it because the igports doubled in one year. '' ell you h-ve
got to moderate that sort of thin;. Nevertheless the long thing
which we have to bear in mind in Australia is that we need to use
our human skills in relation to our natural resources to -roduce
what we need ourselves and to sell what we can compete in selling
in other countries. That is the best way for us to be prosperous.
It is quite absurd for us to be making as many refrigerators, as
many motor cars, as many TV sets as say the United States or
West Germany. is uite a. surd that we should produce as many
models of those things, We are getting no better models but we are
paying twice as much.
Q As you have personally and vigorously participated in
the State election campaign would you see the result as a;
ind; cation of the electoral popularity of your government's policies
in 11d. and also do you think your Federal onionents might use the
electioi result and that of the recent N. T. polls to precipitate
a genelal ," ection next rear.
P. M. I will very naturally comparing +. he percent of
votes cast for the L-hor I'arty, the Liberal iarty an. i the National
Party in Qld on Saturday week wiLh the percentage of votes cast
on May last. Obviously I will be lookin;; g t! t. t t: is i.-
not I eral election it is a state election. at -t does gi
me the oportunity to put rirjht rouga Qld the record strFai. ht.
frankly it ot possible for me to devote my time to vyr
Premier might lil. e out against my Governmorent day and day out.
I mean I have some dea of articulate and coherent the iremier
is, but frankly I haven't got 2 rd of oublic re',.. li
that I assume ts 64yt r know their master's voice and use one of
there biblical things I suppose you can see the hand of Jacob in toe
paw Esau. I mean I am not one of those political lea err who ithoroughly
familiar ;, ith the i6d Testament. I r: member some of it.
If I were to take time to answer every-thing about my Government / 6 
-6-
which is said by all the Prer. iers or just the Old ., utgoing .' eiier
I would have i-o time for any other work. But since I ha-i) een
invited to participate in this campaign on all sides, I thoughtright,
this gives mle the opportunity to put the facts as I have
today and to make the comparisons as I have today And of course
I will be watching very well the percentages that are cast. Now this
is a state election, and I believe that in Percy Tucker there is
a very effective and agressive political leader. I have known him
a long, time and I am satisfied that we will do very well here.
Let me quote what the percentages were the last state elections.
We got six percent more than the other two combined and the Nati: onel
it was called the Country Party then was just over
My Party always gets 30o more votes in this state then the National
Party does. You have also asked what eshwhat the effeci, would be
on the Federal opposition. One of the reasons why the Federal
opposition particularly the Liber-ls every now and then say there
should , e an election, is because a p . son o-f Mr Snedden clearly
believes th: t this a very good insurance to say ' well look ti'ere
may be -: an election in three months you can't drop me now. Now
the Country Party to its credit always wants an election federally,
o cause it realizeA that its only hop of preserving its undue
irilucnce in the Parliament whatever Government is in power, whether
it Liberal iP'i or a Labor P. M. is to preserve an unfair electoral
systern. ; o its of course wanting Lo have an election to make it all
cor fused. And the Liberals or : t least the Snedden Liber
If you win by one vote that'. stili , inning sn' it! T e
constantly saying ' don't rock the t now we naay h vo to lal'nch
li , re may be an election'. The only thing is that lasi. ay the'
nT suggested that if there was an even Senat. th t w-shoul:
tiher down if they won. They never said i. an eon
and we in the House of Io.. resentatives that they I h
another elec n. They never sought they never got
use the Senate to have elections for . he House of . epreseo
alone. They wercthe firsL oi l ito do it. I I ulr' tiby
learnt their lesson and of courst.. of the tri.. u es . h; t
paid to the most magnificent o' the Liberals in this -tate is tl'
fact th . t he opposed it. 



NOTI. S H1OR 1ilLI-PRIME MINISIER
/ MAkYbUkUUGI, LD.
3 NUVLIIULI 19i71
J WL IIAVL AI'PRUVLJD rIL FIRST DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE BY
AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS,
FOR THE FIRST TIME AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS READY TO
IIELP LOCAL COUNCILS DELVELOP THEIR SERVICES AND AMENITIES
FOR THE PEOPLE. MARYBOROUGH CITYCUNIL IS RECEIVING
$ 130,000 ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE GRANTS COMMIIDN.,
LOCAL COUNCILS THROUGHOUT QUEENSLAND ARE RECEIVING
MILLION. THESE GRANTS ARE GIVEN WITHOUT INTEREST;
THEY NEED NOT BE REPAID. THERE ARE NOi STRINGS ATTACHED,
THEY CAN BE SPENT BY THE LOCAL COUNCILS AS THEY SEE. FIT.
THEY ARE MADE ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF AN EXPERT INDEPENDENT
BODY. THEY INVOLVE NO POLITICAL PATRONAGE OR FAVOURITISM,
THE DJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS LAWAYS RESISTED
ATTEMPTS TO INVOLVE THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN THE WELFARE
OF LOCAL COUNCILS AND REGIONS. IF THEIR EFFORTS HAD BEEN
SUCCESSFUL MARYBOROUGH TODAY WOULD BE $ 130,000 WORSE OFF
AND COUNCIL RATESWULD BE MUCH MORE LIKELY TO RISE
FURTHER.
2. UNDER LABOR'S PROPOSALS A HIGH-GRADE ALL-WEATHER HIGHWAY
WILL LINK MARYBOROUGH WITH BRISBANE AND EVENTUALLY WITH
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE. DESPITE OPPOSITION OBSTRUCTION
WE HAVE PASSED THE NECESSARY LEGISLATION TO PROVIDE
$ i1,126 MILLION FOR OUR NATIONAL ROADS PROGRAM OVER THE NEXT
THREE YEARS, a / 2 
WI-. ARE THE F-IRST NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 10 UNDERTAKE THIS
L5. LN11AL I'PUGRAM, NO SIATI GOVERNMLNI HAS HAD THE
1; iiU Jl! CI. i I 0 I1 AI. ONI NO I'LIVlOUS Fl.) ERAL GOVERNMINT
CARLD ENOUGH TO DO IT EVEN THOUGH THEY HAD THE
NECESSARY CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS.
WE WANT TO SEE-MARYBOROUGH-PROPERLY SERVED BY SHIPS OF
IlE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN, ALONE
AMONG THE PREMIERS HAS PREVENTED A. NL. SHIPS OPERATING
BETWEEN PORTS WITHIN HIS OWN STATE. QUEENSLAND CITIES
HAVE BEEN DENIED AN ESSENTIAL SHIPPING SERVICE SOLELY
BECAUSE OF THE OBSTINACY AND PREJUDICE OF THE OUTGOING
PREMIER. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN'S ATTITUDE IS NOT SHARED
BY THE AUTHORITIES IN OTHER COASTAL PORTS. MR. BORZI,
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE CAIRNS HARBOUR BOARD, AND A FORMER
STATE CANDIDATE OF THE NATIONAL PARTY, SAID IN HIS
1973-74 ANNUAL REPORT:
" THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE'S WEEKLY CARGO
SERVICES TO AND FROM THE SOUTH BROUGHT INCREASED
TRADE AND REVENUE. UNFORTUNATELY THE BOARD'S
SUPPORT OF MOVES TO HAVE A. N. L. GRANTED THE
PRIVILEGE OF CONDUCTING AN INTRA-STATE CARGO
SERVICE HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL TO DATE." 
-3-
Ll, THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO
CO-OPERATE IN OUR EFFORTS TO MAINTAIN THE WALKERS LTD.
SHIPYARD IN MARYBOROUGH, WHEN WALKERS ANNOUNCED THEIR
DECISION TO CEASE SHIPBUILDING WE IMMEDIATELY SOUGHT
WAYS OF KEEPING THE INDUSTRY GOING. ON 24 APRIL I
INVITED WALKERS LTD. AND THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT TO
JOIN WITH US ON A 50-50 BASIS TO ESTABLISH A NEW SHIPBUILDING
AND ENGINEERING WORKS AT MARYBOROUGH AND
REHABILITATE WALKER'S EXISTING FACILITIES WHILE THE NEW
YARD WAS BEING BUILT. MY COLLEAGUE, CHARLIE JONES, THE
MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT, VISITED MARYBOROUGH TO SEEK WAYS
OF KEEPING THE YARD OPEN. HE OFFERED TO GO IT ALONE
IF THE OTHER PARTIES REFUSED TO CO-OPERATE. WALKERS
REFUSED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S OFFER TO LEASE THE
YARD AS A GOING CONCERN. THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
REJECTED OUR OFFER TO TAKE A HALF SHARE IN REHABILITATING
THE YARD AND DEVELOPING A NEW SHIPBUILDING AND ENGINEERING
WORKS. THE WORKFORCE HAS NOW DISPERSED AND MUCH OF THE
EQUIPMENT HAS BEEN SOLD. MARYBOROUGH HAS : BEEN DEPRIVED
OF THIS THRIVING AND IMPORTANT INDUSTRY LARGELY BECAUSE OF
THE ATTITUDE OF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. ,/ 4 
LIINDUSTRIAL
ACTIVITY IN MARYBOROUGH IS AT A LOW EBB
BECAUSE THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS FAILED TO ATTRACT
INIIW IIJ: i) UI RI I U 1111 l iN, MAIRY'( ROUGIRI ( S INPUSTRIAL
rITATEi IS VIiTAU'AI. LY UNUSEI. D YE. T THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
REJECTS OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WHICH WOULD STIMULATE EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS CONFIDENCE.
lMUNCY I-ROVIDI) ED BY THE / AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS SPENT
MORE SLOWLY AND SPARINGLY BY QUEENSLAND THAN BY ANY OTHER
STATE. So FAR THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS SPENT ONLY
18% OF THE MONEY AVAILABLE IN CAPITAL GRANTS FOR EDUCATION
IN 1974 AND 1975. IT IS BUILDING FEWER HOUSING COMMISSION
HOMES THAN ANY OTHER STATE DESPITE OUR OFFER OF A VIRTUAL
BLANK CHEQUE FOR WELFARE HOUSING CONSTRUCTION, ONLY Ai
STATE LABOR GOVERNMENT LED BY PERC TUCKER AND WORKING IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN DEVELOP
" IARYBOROUGH'S FULL POTENTIAL AS AN INDUSTRIAL CITY. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR AUSTRALIAN HARDCOURT TENNIS CHAMPIONSHIPS
AT GYMPIE
NOVEMBER 1974
1. THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN MANY INITIATIVES IN TOURISM
AND RECREATION TO WIDEN AUSTRALIANS' LEISURE OPPORTUNITIES.
IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS 120 GRANTS TOTALLING $ 4 MILLION
HAVE BEEN MADE TO SPORTING AND RECREATION PROJECTS IN ALL
STATES. QUEENSLAND CITIES AND TOWNS HAVE RECEIVED
$ 536,200. HERE IN GYMPIE WE ARE SPENDING $ 23,000 ON A
SPORTS RESERVE,
2. TENNIS HAS HAD A REMARKABLE RESURGENCE OF POPULARITY IN
RECENT YEARS. THIS IS LARGELY DUE TO SKILLED PROMOTION
AND THE GREAT FREQUENCY OF OPEN TOURNAMENTS IN WHICH THE
WORLD'I S BEST PLAYERS COMPETE. OLD-FASHIONED DISTINCTIONS
BETWEEN AMATEUR AND PROFESSIONAL PLAYERS HAVE BEEN
REMOVED, MAKING THE GAME MORE EXCITING, MORE COMPETITIVE
AND MORE SPECTACULAR,
3. AUSTRALIA HAS ALWAYS BEEN ONE OF THE WORLD'S TOP TENNIS
NATIONS. WE WANT OUR YOUNGER PLAYERS TO DEVELOP THEIR
SKILLS AND ENJOY THE GAME IN THE BEST POSSIBLE CONDITIONS.
BY GIVING PEOPLE MORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR SPORT WE HOPE TO
ENCOURAGE HIGHER STANDARDS OF PLAY AND BUILD A HEALTHIER
NATION. 



EMBARGO: 8.00 PM
INTERVIEW WITH PRIME MINISTER BY FOUR CORNERS ( AA' 11TO3ADI1
NOVEMBER 1974
HOGAN: Prime Minister, after two years in office, what single
act or piece of legislation do you think is the Labor Governments
probdest achievement?
PRIME MINISTER: The two pieces, I would think, would be the
Grants Commission which has made it possible to do things for
the Capitals and the big provincial cities, and the Schools
Commission, which has given people a good start at school.
HOGAN: On the other hand, what do you think are Labor's
biggest disappointments and failures?
PRIME MINISTER: The fact that we have come to office at a
time of world-wide inflation.
HOGAN: Why is that disappointing to you?
PRIME MINISTER: It was something that nobody expected to be so
serious and it is something where, of course, every country
like us all the trading countries, all the industrialised
countries, the-whole of: the world is embroiled at the one time;
all with the same problems and all infecting each other.
HOGAN: Is there any need though, for Australia'Is rate of
inflation to be as high as it is?
PRIME MINISTER: It's probably inevitable. Everybody has COPPedIit.
I mean, two years ago there wasn't a single western country
which would have expected to have the problems of inflation
and Lnemployment which every one of them is experienrinqj tow.
HOGAN: YL we are, say, ahead of tvest Germany, aren't in the
inflation rc.-e and we are not, like they are, dependent on
imported oil or minerals, where to a certain extent we are
self-sufficient in those areas. Could we hope that ouinflation
rate could be made to be :-little lower, do ,,' ou
think by government n'anagement?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope we can get it down. We are trying evcry.
meai., we have; we examine what every other country is doing.
West ' Zermany's unemployment, of course, is much w, -se D~ ii-s
about twice as bad as ours in percentage termTS. _. eir inflatio.:
is not as bad as ours. But there again, two years ago i.-i
West Germc--y. the unemployment and inflation that they ha" 1
would have absolutely incredible and in-tolerable. ' Chat
we all have it.
HOGAN: Would it be fair to say though, that inflation has to
a certain extent robbed the average Australian of t1l. benafifor
the alleged benefits of the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: of some of the benefits, but nevertheless the
average incomes in Australia have gone up much more in the las'
two years the years that we have been in than have prices.
The incomes have gone up over those two years, I think, by
about 7 per cent more than the prices. So on balance, people
are all better off in Australia but not as much better off as
we had hoped. That is, just going on incomes and prices. 
But where we have made a very great difference is in provi li
things free, at public expense, for everybody. Govui: nacr
services have Lb-een very greatly improved as a resuli of t wc
have done.
HOGAN: Has that in itself been a cause of the inflation do
you think?
PRIME MINISTER: Only infinitesimally. It might have had some,
but the point is that if we had done none of those things, if we
had abandoned all our proposals for making better use of our
resources or better opportunities for our citizens, we would still
have had a rate of inflation which, a couple of years ago, would
have been regarded as incredible and intolerable. It is no
solution, say, to just postpone our program.
HOGAN: Yet it would seem that many people in Australia today
think that the rate is incredible and intolerable. A poll this
week, for example, suggested that 7 out of every 10 Australians
don't think you have been effective in controlling inflation.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, we haven't been able to keep it down as
we would have liked. But what I think Australians in general
realise is that there in no Head of Government no government
anywhere in the western world which has what we would have
regarded in the past as a tolerable record in this regard;
all of us.
HOGAN: You have made some Cabinet changes in recent weeks or
they are to take place shortly.
PRIMt. MINISTER: One, I have made one change in over a year.
HOGAN: 2. fairly important one. Do you think that this change,
the rep];, ' ent of Mr Crean by Dr Cairns would have a dramatic
effect on ii. lation or by cutting the rate of inflation?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't say that anything has a c
No, I don't say that, and I don't wc., c to givw any imprcss.
that what has been happening in Australia can he uickly cuc:
or can be cured in isolation. We are too big a t'ding country
proportionally we are one of the most dependent of all countries
on t;, ade we just can't isolate ourselves. T1.: e won'" h,
anyt. i , g dramatic but I do believe that there w. 1-' ae an
improv. mc t.
HOGAN: i{ a-you any cause now to regret; the h-ndli: 2g of E C:
reshuffle, ti,. lismissal of Mr Crean from the Treasury?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Do ynu mind if I use my terms: exchanging
the portfolios that Dr Cait.. f and Mr Crean had. T would h-e
liked it to have happened more quickly but the news . tckc: r out
when Dr Cairns was overseas and thej . vhen he came bac, tkL.
proprieties dictated that I should discuss it with the Gr. vernor
General, and he was in Tasmania for a couple of days, so T couldn't.
do that.
HOGAN: Was it not possible in that period and it was a very
long period while the leaks continued that Mr Crean may go: were
you yourself responsible for any of those leaks? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: None whatever and no-one associated with
There was no atom of benefit for iiie in those leaks occu--ng.
None whatever.
HOGAN: Do you think that Mr Crean was treated badly by the
affair?
PRIME MINISTER: I think the media were quite cruel to him.
HOGAN: In a sense, though, could you have taken the pressure
off by making some sort of statement in that long period....
PRIME MINISTER: No, I will not do it. I will not respond to
questions whether somebody is going to have some appointment or
if I am going to make changes. Once I yield on that I will
be asked every day whether somebody is going to have another
position. HOGAN: Do you think it appears in restrospect that Mr Crean
has taken the blame for the management of the economy which
perhaps should have been shared by the entire Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, any blame that there is, any credit
that there is, is shared by us all. And Mr Crean must accept it:
any blame, his share; he is entitled to credit, any credit.
There is no suggestion whatever that Mr Crean has not acted as
the Government decided.
HOGAN: Will you yourself now be taking a more active role in
control of the economy? There is some speculation that you
have been sitting back, letting other ministers have a stronger
say in the economy than yourself.
PRIME Y". VTSTER: I'll be more directly involved, yes.
HOGAN: In h-t way?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll be more fully and regularly brief ed
I have taken steps to see that statistics and ii. dices ares
comprehensively compiled and more promptly analysed.
HOGAN: After two years in Government do you think Lhat it is
a ki: late to be making those changes, could yoai have n ot seen
that arlier?
PRIME AINISTER: In retrospect that is right. Nevertheics
our stat.. -~ al information, our assessments, have not b,', en
adequate in tralia. You can blame us for the last tuo ye'
You can'tC blame for 25 years before that.
HOGAN: But we can blame you for the last two years?
PRIME MINISTER: In retrospect, obviously. It could have been
done quicker: Mr McMahon is now saying that too. But he didn't
do it when he was Prime Minister. We are all wiser now.
HOGAN: One thing that the Cabinet exchange highlights was perhaps
the difficulty you have in selecting ministers. Would you like
to see any change in the system whereby the Labor Party elects
its Cabinet? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: No, none whatever. I suport , his system -nd
I continue to support it. I believe that the best way get
harmony in a political party is for all members of thr olitical
party to have their say in determining who will nold cf7ice in it.
I've always supported that and I will continue to support it.
HOGAN: Does it mean that perhaps there are young and able men
in the Labor Party who you aren't able to elect to Cabinet because
of the Caucus decision as to how Cabinet is elected?
PRIME MINISTER: Maybe. I don't, on the other hand, suggest that
any political leader should be able to make his own personal
and maybe capricious choice. I have influence in these things,
naturally, but I am happy with the system. I don't want anybody
to have the impression that I would change that system. I would
not change that system. I believe that the whole of the Party
that is all the Labor members of Parliament, the Caucus should
have an equal say in determining who will be the Ministers and
that the leader the Prime Minister should have the
responsibilities of saying what portfolio each Minister should
have. HOGAN: Prime Minister the level of unemployment in Australia is
now at its highest since the depression. Is that tolerable under
a Labor Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't think it is tolerable under any
government and we have taken steps to reverse that.
HOGAN: Is the situation going to get worse before it gets better?
' RIME MINISTER: In the next couple of months it will probably get
wo e. This is, of course, the time of the year when the
nuiler of people seeking jobs is always the greatest. So the
figure, will not look good.
HOGAN; h, uch worse could it get?
' PRIME MINISTER: I won't speculate.
HOGAN: Could it
PRIME MINISTER: The statistics frankly are not cJoc-enough ñ or
me to speculate. The statistics tlat can. e o; it thtree weeks ago
cEL' tit everybody by surprise, everybody. Now may b, a
def.ø icy in the statistics.
HOGAN: '" at can be rectified, do you think?
PRIME MINISTEi. I hope so. I am certainly haviig this exaxm-Li
The statistics avi; 1a!,. ' o the Government, the official
. statistics in matters lix. inemployment and liquidity, h; ve
been adequate and I am taki. I-to see that tl e
are improved. About four weeks a. ook similar &amp;: tac
that statistics on imports were improved.
HOGAN: Are you worried about the reaction of the trade union
movement to the unemployment situation? Mr Hawke . this week L. is
been saying that he will be speaking to you next week about the
need for stronger measures to prevent unemployment. 
PRIME MTNISTER: I regard the rEac: iun of the tradu uuio;' Lo
unemployment as completely predict&amp; ble and completecy p. . er.
Some of the suggestions that the trade union moveraent makes
or some sections of it, I believe, are ill-founde,:.
HOGAN: Could unemployment bring down the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: It could bring down any government. There is
no Government in the Western world which is secure; none whatever.
HOGAN: Are you worried that it could bring down your Government?
PRIME MINISTER: I have to be worried about this but I am quite
satisfied that at an election I would win.
HOGAN: Do you see your change in tariff policy or import quotas
as likely to affect the unemployment situation?
PRIME MINISTER: They have a marginal effect. They have more than
a marginal effect in some industries. But it is nonsense to
suggest that the unemployment in Australia has been caused by
our more rational approach to protection. That might have affected
some industries, but it is garbage to say that it has been
responsible for the unemployment. Some trade unionists have said
this; some of them, worse still, have said it in collaboration
with employers, including overseas companies. Their attitude
they are entitled to express it but it is my duty to correct
them when they exaggerate or distort the position. The unemployment
in Australia is primarily due now to the fact that people are
pricing themselves out of jobs.
HOGAN: They are pricing themselves out of jobs.
PRIME M: NISTER: Yes, the people can't afford employers can't
afford employ people at the rate of increase in wages whJ,'-
is taking this year.
HOGAN: Well this is perhaps something that The trade uni
movement might be expected to take: an active role in in
restraint. Do you s-' e the need for wage restraint?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly I do.
HOCA Are you getting all the co-operation that ln-i eei from
the t. ad! unions in that area?
PRIME MINY-TPR: We are getting a great deal of co-operac-ion
and this is, course,. one of the things which we regularly
discuss. Any mL. tings that I have with Mr Hawke are always
well publicised. I have -etings with a very great number of
people too; they aren't p. cised. But obviously this is
something which Mr Hawke and -r and some othi--fic&gt;.
from time to time, of the ACTU discu s with me and seniior colñ ø s
and we believe that we are likely to secure restraint. The way
we are doing it, of course, is by putting to the Arbitration
Commission that it should take into account the very great tax
reductions which we aremkin._ and that it should regard those
tax deductions as compensation for any increase in prices, in
the present quarter. 
-6-
HOGAN: And yet only this week it would appear from newF~ aper
reports that you personally approved an increase of 24 per cent
in pilots' salaries.
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't. The attitude that I support is that
employers, including TAA, should be able to pass on to their
customers any increases due to increases in salaries which have
been made in Industrial Awards. Now anything that employers,
including TAA, pay above awards, they have to take out of their
profits. HOGAN: But was that not a inflationary settlement, an increase
of 24 per cent?
PRIME MINISTER: I think so. I don't think TAA should have done
it but I don't believe that a Government or any Minister can
effectively take over the day-to-day running of something such
as TAA or Qantas or the Commonwealth Bank: any of these
Government enterprises.
HOGAN: Are you in effect saying that you are powerless to stop
., inflationary wage increases like that?
PRIME MINISTER: We have taken action by submissions to the Prices
Justification Tribunal to ask them not to approve price increases
which are due to over-award wage settlements and my Minister
for Transport, Mr Jones, has made it plain that TAA and Ansett
cannot pass on to people flying by air the settlements which
they have made in excess of what Mr Justice Coldham awarded.
S HOAN: To take another area, Prime Minister, and that's the
rural sector of the economy. The man on the land claims that
he is being deprived socially and economically by the Labor
Govern t. Have you any sympathy with that point of view?
PRIME MINIS. 7_: The point of view is incorrect. The way t,
some people distort what the Government has done, I car,
many people in the country having th. at view. The fact i.
there is better hope now for most people whc live in tht.. Lr.
and most of them lie in country towns than * Wr, Defore. Life
in country towns will be very much ow'e varied and attractive
thai it has ever been this century, as a resullt of initoaLives
by i Government. Now what we have d'one is, , e rnted t) s,
tha. V'-. re governments give assistance through i -:, ar. ion
or thioagh subsidies for primary production, naC-t that 2: sis,.&gt;-
goes * o the people who need it most. Secondly, we wantri ;-o
ensure , here primary producers produce more than Austra'
themselves ca.. consume, they are able to rely on long-term t
agreements with other cr-lntries. There has never been a govern'.
which has achieved so ma. trade agreements with other countr-c..
as my Government.
HOGAN: We have talked about the worker, we have talked dbout
the man on the land, what about the businessman? What . as he
got to thank Labor for for the last two years?
PRIME MINISTER: He knows that the Government operates very much
more openly than previous Governments. That if he wants some
benefit from a Government, then he can make out a case and it will
ibe looked at and the reasons given. There is no behind-the-door or 
-7-
under-the-counter deals. We have stated our principles, we have
established bodies to report on all these things. And business
people have shown their respect at least for the way we have gone
about things.
HOGAN: If not enthusiasm?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right. But there have never been so
many businessmen who have been willing to advise a Federal
Government, as there have been willing to advise my Government.
And they have been willing to do it because they realise that
whether they agree with us or not, whether their views which we
have sought are palatable to us or not, those views will be
made public and the public will know what the advice is. And
. usually, usually we accept that advice.
HOGAN: Are you aware of real hostility from the business
community to the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I imagine that I would know most of the
important, responsible businessmen in Australia and I think
they realise that they can express their views to me and I
will welcome those views and our personal relations are perfectly
cordial. Now what I would like to put is that you can't quote
any substantial experienced responsible business leader, any
managing director or chairman of directors of any substantial
enterprise, any general manager or chairman of directors....
HOGAN: Perhaps the Chairman of Ampol would disagree with you
about the operation of the Prices Justification Tribunal?
PRIME AINISTER: I don't remember him saying anything about it.
But I v. iJ be dining with him tonight. I have known him for
many year-', I respect him and as far as I can see, he respects
me. But have very good relations. The fact is, you don't
get expeiiehi -d or substantial leaders of the business commrunity.
directors of c .? anies, general managers of companies who have
gone on public record in criticism of my Government.
HOGAN: Turning to the immediate evens of tniz week, Prime ster,
we have seen a struggi.. for the leadership of the Liberal Party.
Would you have preferred to have seen Mr Fraser win that battle?
PRIM! INISTER: It doesn't help any of the caindida. es and
Mr Sne and Mr Fraser are not the only candidate, for the
leadersh. of the Liberal Party if I say whom L * ould like tc
see there. There are some people whom I would like to set . herc
from the na. L oolitical point of view, ones that wouldn'. coev
successfully, s_ with fije. There are others
HOGAN: Do you think Mr Se. competes successfully with you?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't th: But there are rth s
who I would like to see there in the contingency of a c'anqe ol
Government. It doesn't help. I have on one or two occasions
in the past suggested whom I thought to be the best alternatives
on that side of politics and it embarrasses the people I have
named and of course, they feel bound to react to disprove it or
to disprove my kind words.
HOGAN: You have been in power now for two years, will you still
have the same job in two years? 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: I believe so.
HOGAN: We will have to wait to see what the electors have to
say about that.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, they might not have the opportunity in two
years. I expect two and a half years and I think they will
re-elect me.
HOGAN: Thank you Prime Minister.
I C 



PRIME MINISTER'S 3KZ LABOR HOUR BROADCAST
( Recorded 28 November 1974 for replay 1 December 1974)
Two years ago tonight, Labor was poised for its
first Federal election victory in 23 years. It was a moment
of great optimism, great promise and high hope for all of
us in the party and the movement. Those hopes have been
fulfilled. A great record of achievement stands behind us.
And despite our difficulties, despite world-wide economic
problems, our hopes are still high.
As you know, we are contending with the twin
problems of inflation and unemployment which afflict every
industrial Western * country. For the first time we are fighting
both these problems at once. We are carrying on the fight
with every available weapon, every measure at our disposal,
every constitutional power we possess. We've had very little
help or co-operation from our opponents in the Senate or
elsewhere. But I ask you to remember this: Australiansare
everywhere better off than they were before Labor came in.
Average weekly earnings, allowing for inflation, have increased
in real purchasing power by 3.2 per cent in the year to June
1973 and by a further 3.9 per cent in the year to June 1974.
That's a gain of more than seven per cent in real living
standards under a Labor Government.
Throughout the year we have taken a wide range of
economic decisions. We no. longer regard the Budget as our
sole instrument of economic policy. We have been much more
resourceful, much more flexible in our approach. only three
weeks ago I announced a new series of measures to stimulate
the economy and reduce unemployment. We have made cuts in
taxation which, together with those in the Budget, will be
worth $ 1200 million. And those tax cuts are based on a
brand new scale designed to benefit the families most in need,
the people most neglected in the past.
At the same time we have pressed ahead with our great
program of social reform and innovation. Our opponents have
done their best to obstruct that program. You'll remember
that last April they took the extreme step of blocking
supply in the Senate cutting off our money. So we went to
the people: and the people endorsed our program for the
second time. You returned us to office. You put us back
on the job. Already we have put many historic measures through
Parliament. We have extended-the educational program we
launched last year into the new area of technical education.
We will be spending $ 100 million on technical and further education
in the next two years.
We have set up our Petroleum and Minerals Authority
to help keep the ownership and control of our vast natural
resources in Australian hands.
We have opened the way for ordinary Australians to
participate in our economic development through the A. I. D. C.
and the National Investment Fund. 
-2-
We have given pensioners the biggest increase
on record. We've got our child care program underway.
We've got our health insurance legislation through
an historic Joint Sitting of Parliament.
We've tackled the vexed and difficult question of
wage indexation to protect workers against inflation.
We've brought in historic legislation against
restrictive trade practices to ban price fixing and protect
consumers. We've introduced our National Compensation Scheme
to safeguard every working man and woman against injury or
sickness, however caused.
We've won new markets for our goods overseas and
vastly increased our returns from the sale of our coal
and iron ore. This year saw the opening of the first Australian
Government Community Health Centre here in Victoria.
It is one of 356 new health centres and other projects approved
under Labor's community health and mental health programs.
We are the first. Australian Government to recognise
the needs of local councils. we approved grants this year
of $ 56 million to help councils throughout Australia improve
their services-and amenities.
We have launched our plans for a vast national highway
system and have set aside $ 1200 million for this purpose over
the next three years.
These are a few of the major initiatives we have
taken this year in fulfilment of our program a program twice
approved by the people. I am proud of all we have done. Our
overriding purpose is to widen the opportunities and raise the
living standards of every Australian. In 1974 we have come a
long way towards achieving our goals. It has not been easy for
US. It has not been easy for you. I look to all Australians,
to all sections of the community and especially to Labor's
traditional supporters for co-operation in carrying forward
our great task in the years to come. 



MIDNIGHT, SUNDAY 1ST DECEMBER 1974
Radio 2SM Interview with Prime Minister,
Mr Gough Whitlam
Interviewer: Stephen Brouwer
This interview may be used with proper accreditation
EMBARGO: 
" Mr. Prime Minister now that t wo year's have gone by, the obviuaL,
question is have they been comuipletely satisfying for you.
Not completelyl but 0but hli, ir; iy.
If you had the time over again what things would you do differently.
Oh, I am not sure. I could not identify what I would do
differently. I would have liked many things to have been done
more quickly, or completely.
Would you like to name a few?
What immediately occurs to me, of course, those things where
we have been held up in the Parliament; or those things where we
have been held up by State Governments not co-operating with us.
There were many things, of course, which were held up by the Senate:
some which are still being held up by the Senate. There are also
a great number of things where the State Governments were slow
to co-operate and where time was lost, but in general,
everywhere really, except Queensland that's now been overcome.
If you lose Office, or when you retire from Parliament, what would
you personally like to be remembered for?
There have been two main things at least that ie have been able
to do. One is that we have C ,1. rU Lihmt Fhopl.
have a better opportunity in life righi i , I.. L Atse1.; V, have
done that through the Schools Commission. The other is that we
will have done things to ensure that people have better opportunities
in life wherever they are living, and we are doing that through
our programms for cities, capital cities, provincial cities. I
suppose the principle instrument of this is the Grants Commission.
So the Schools Commission and the Grants Commission are the two
big things which we'll be remembered for, but there is a whole
host cf other matters too, of course, but you asked me, I think,
for te wo big ones.
What about ; ou personally?
T had quite a bit to do with both those, of course, but -r
also the general impression that our country has abroad and kihe; t
we are doing in the World, and there, there has been a
transformation during the two years we have been in Office. You
af1} ed me personally, I have been very much involved in all that.
If you lost Office, what would Gough Whitlam do?
He woule relax and enjoy it.
As. Oh, doing nothing. I worked a long time and very hard.
have been in Parliament 22 ,/ e-irs this month. I have been
Prime Minister twc, years this im and they've been very
active years.
You'd retire to the Back Bench, or leave polidcs. 
I am not r-ally making any plans. I am 58, and I * ppose I
have a few years as Prime Minister yet.
Well you have reached the highest position in Australia. Have
Syou got any further personal ambition?
None whatever. Australia has been good to me.. I have worked
hard according to my'lights' for Australia. Nothing else I
should want or expect.
So for you the Prime Ministership is it.
Well, of course.
Well, can I ask you if you felt much personal distress about
the sacking of Mr. Crean.
Well, let me make it plain. I don't accept the word sacking.
Mr. Crean and Doctor Cairns exchanged port folios. There can bc
no shame for Mr. Crean to take a department of which Dr. Cairns
had been the minister for two years, including six months as
Deputy Prime Minister. There is no shame for a minister to take
over a department from the Deputy Prime Minister.
Well can I ask you if you felt much personal distress about the
reshuffle. Mr. Crean liked being Treasurer.
Yes, he did, but as I say there can be ' no skin off his nose'.
if the Deputy Prime Minister is willing to be Treasurer then it is
the Deputy Prime Minister's duty to take the position of Treasurer.
The Deputy Prime Minister for nine years after Menzies was restored
was Sir Arthur Fadden, and he was Treasurer throughout that time.
The. for the following 11 years under Mnzies and the leader of the
Co iiL. Party, the deputy Prime Minister Mr. McEwen didn't want
the joi-So the deputy leader of the Liberal Party had and
that was . ic. Holt. Then when Mr. Holt died the next T
was the New deputy leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. M . ic
I beg your pardon Mr. McMahor, the new deputy leae. E
Liberal Party took over as Treasurer whe-Mr. HIolt Pr
Minister. So for 20 years under a predecessors you had tne
the dputy prime minister or the deputy leaders of the Liberal
' arty holding the position of Treasurer. Dr. CL.-ns was'n.
axious to take the job when he became deputy -) rime ? ini , cr
L. on because of the prominence that ever knei th. 4
he was accepting in economic matters I asked . iim to 7econsi
matt -nd he accepted. Now it is quite wr:. ag, I ' n't
the Lion of sacking of Mr. Crean. The fact wa
a senior ma.. was willing to take that port fo) io, and Mr.
took the port folio previously had been held by his Sc
that is a perfectly p. L, r and normal procedure.
So for you it was a political and there waL.' t cfn' p
distress about the changes.
I didn't like the way all the speculation, and a lot of it
of course was completely false. You know there were thi. nms said
which were quite untrue, which the least checking would have
revealed to be untrue. There was a story in the paper 
that Mrs. Crean and I had some disagreement no basis for
it whatsoever. There was also a flash on one television
chain that Mr. Crean's son had said something. Mr. Crean's
son had never been contacted by any television station. Now
these were very reckless, and cruel, and I said obscene
things to go on. They were fabrications no attempt whatever
was made to check them, and of course some people in the Media,
and I hope you don't mind me saying, make these stories up with
confidence, knowing that the people concerned are not going
to refute them. I am going to dignify this sought of
speculation.
And this was the aspect that did distress you throughout the
whole issue.
P. M: -, Ies I was of course not at all pleased that a leak came out4
what was likely to happen, and it occurred when Dr. Cairns
was overseas from the First to the Fifteenth of November, and
in those circumstances nothing could be done about it. When
Dr. Cairns returned the propriety was to inform the Governor
General of what I had in mind, and he was not in Canberra
he was interstate for two or three days.-When l-returned I
saw him that afternoon, and I made the announcement with
his approval.
Was making the change a hard decision to make?
P. M: Yes, but I think it was a necessary decision.
re there any other changes you would like to see in your
stry?
Well -Lnere again I am bound to adhere to the polic A
have always followed. If there are any changes a L
over a year since tha~ ewere the men c iccrned are IL
to hear. ', Tow I will not iespond tc qu -stions ,. aeuii, 2r
are any changc
Will you personally be doing more on th.-economic front n,
I will be more regularly and fully 9 --Lnde fmeno: r
I have taken steps to see that Government departn-Lts a
ag " ies collect more relevant statistics,. anci u,-t tI
analyz. them more quickly. The unfortunate thing is t!
many quiL. important statistics which have -ot been
comprehensively cc -cted or promptly analysed.
Prime Minister I have u what you cons~. der -o
greatest achievement what Uo you consider to be the grccte2:
mistake. Well naturally I am not going to readily respond to a qu~ stion
like that. I haven't thought about it. The great difficulty
we have had of course is that we have come to office at a time
of very great economic difficulty unemployment and inflation
in all the countries of our type throughout the World 
all the western countries; all the industrialised trading
countries in the world are beset by those two problems, and
we infect each other, we just can't live to ourselves.
Well I interviewed Dr. Cairns the other day and he said because
of the economic conditions in the pipe line Labor
could not have won at a worst time. Do you agree?
Yes I think that's right. Although I also accept the fact
that if you are in the business of politics you must try
to win whenever there is an election. It was certainly an
unfortunate time to come to Office. It would have been very
much better if we had won three years before in 1969. The
Liberals at that time still had a new lease of lif-e because
Mr. Gorton had only had about less than two years in Office,
and there was still the feeling that he was entitled to have
a fair go.
Well, probably appropriate on the second anniversary anO your
second anniversary as Prime Minister of asking you what do
you consider to be your greatest asset.
In what Way?
Your greatest personal asset.
I suppose I have had an exceptionally long opportunity to study
issues affecting the federal government in Australia, or
affecting Australia in the World; and I was very diligent
throughout those 20 years I was in opposition to equip
myself to understand those domestic and international issues.
Prcf-bly you could say that I have been better prepared
fc: L. job than any Prime Minister has been.
It wouldn't be fair if I didn't ask you what do you c
to be your greatest fault.
M: There again you ion't expect me reaadily to answer questn., s
like that. My ' j. eatest disadvantage I suppose is that
I -caiae. to this post rather older than would be ideal
but that is unfortunately something which be.: ts
11 heads of Government in the Western World We bcc., me
Pri: ne Minister or President and I am not saying I want
to be President. I will have to make that qualific ion
at th--tage, but there are systems where the head -f go
is called ? resident. People in general become prime mii
or president at the qreater age than they wou. d for instanc_
be appointed as head a government department or as head
a business enterprise.
At what stage in your life do you think would have been an
appropriate time for you to come to the prime minis,-, rship. 
10 years I suppose.
Can I ask you, who would you prefer as Leader of the
Opposition? I :-em very happy with the present leader of the Opposition.
Prime Minister I am not asking you to justify your overseas
trip, but with the criticism did you ever consider cancelling io?
No I never considered cancelling it. It is always easy
to criticise or even ridicule overseas trips. The fact is
every overseas trip I have made has been necessary and has
been successful, and there is no trip that I have made
that people have criticised as having been unnecessary once
it took place they have, in fact, been beneficial, but there
has been no visit by a senior minister to Europe since the change
of government two years ago. I visited Westminister,
Windsor, and the Vatican, but that was a very brief visit for
various constitutional reasons concerning the British government
and the monarchy. There has been no visit to the Common
Market; there has been no visit to the Soviet Union;
there has been no visit to any of the migrant countries;
and this has been a very great omission up until now I was
to go in. the middle of the year, but of course the double
dissolution occurred at that time and delayed it all. There
are pressing issues to be discussed. After ail people
shouldn't in Europe or in Australia get any impression that
Astralias cultural links, historical links, econoic links,
Europe are less important than they were or/ ling
Do.: , ec1, and if a Head of government visits a country re
is no ., bt the way the wholeldministration of that r
is galvanized into action the way attention is g
to the country from which the visitor comes. We -LIly
have done that on the occasion of the isits by heads c
government or -ads of state to this country. You only
have to look an-everybody can see how much the government
directed attention to relevant issues when ihe p.' ime minis'
of Japan or the Shah of Iran vi:'. ted h * 1i, there have
c" er countries. There have never been sc -p visit,
t_ Australia. There have been as many Ln Lhe iaTh
as -here have been in the previous twenty. We now
impo.. '-in the World, but there has not been an o fici;
visit by prime minister to Europe since 1. -9.
three immec. ate pr, -1-cessors never visited t. iere, and thet:
have been some coun. s which have never had a prime mini.
visit them, for instan. It-r1v. They h,-v nev -r h;
an official visit by an Aus, an prime minis,-r, d. es-.
fact that the presidrnt of Italy was prepared to \' isit here.
Many people ridicule these things, but the fact is that the.. u
are many things which can only be determined on the top
and I have some experience in this; more in fact that ran. y
head of government that this country has had. My duty takes
me there. Of course I'll enjoy it, but there are very many
things which can only be determined at my level or instituted
at my level, particularly in the Common Market. 
6
S. B. The ridicule and the criticism must annoy you.
P. M: No I expect it. After all I have been politics for
22 years. 12 years ago it would have annoyed me. It would
have driven'me aound the bend. Now I know it goes with the job.
In this job you take the good with the bad. Now this is the
criticism, I accept it, but I am not going to be deterred from
doing what I think has to be done and what only can be done
by the head of the Australian government because there can
be some criticism. These are very strenuous visits which I
make. Prime Minister, thank you very much. 
S. B What do you t.: 01kcJof your internati. iaj iih, ige in relation
to the aboriginal situation?
I think everywhere around the Wor-ld now L LX'r. Lt 1.1' 1a/ i1
that Australia has a government which is determined
to give better opportunities for aborigines in their own
country. Almost you can say a Government which is prepared
to emancipate the aborigine;.
Well I think it was yesterday a book was launched by a
black British sociologist, Chris Mullard, who described
Australia as the second most racist country in the World.
P. M: I cannot condone Australias record in this matter, but
at least the present Australian Government, my Government,
is trying to do something about it. The opening was made
when theReferendum was carried in 1967 which removed the
barriers in the Australian constitution to action by the
Australian government on be'lalf of the Australian aborigines,
but unfortunately until we came in there had been no
administrative or legislative action taken by the Holt, or
Gorton, or McMahon Govern. c-ens which couldn't have been taken
before that Referendum was carried. Now we are taking
that administrative action and since, particularly in
Queensland, the administrative action has been frustrated
by the State government we will be taking the legislative
action. See every other state has made arrangements with
my government concerning aboriginal affairs. Every other
state Labor, Liberal, but in Queensland that's not proved
possible; so now there will be legislative action and the
result in the 1967 Referendum entitles us to take that action.
In fact, we would say obliges us to take that action. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OPENING OF THE ARTHUR DIBDIN COMPLEX
BRISBANE CRICKET GROUND 1 DECEMBER 1974
1. Whenever I perform functions of this kind a few
unkind people accuse me of grandstanding. No one can say I
have neglected sport during my visits to Queensland. Only
yesterday I was at the Australian hardcourt tennis championships
in Gympie. Two weeks ago I visited an Australian Rules Club
in Brisbane. This is one of the biggest crowds I have drawn
during my election campaign. Of course it's a completely nonpolitical
occasion. If it was as lively as some of the meetings
I've addressed, your Premier would be declaring a State of
Emergency. 2. I was delighted to accept the invitation from Clem
Jones. He has revealed some unusual talents lately. Last May
I asked him to run for the Federal Parliament but the people
of Brisbane preferred him to play on his home ground. I always
accept the umpire's decision.
3. Unfortunately I don't get to cricket matches as
often as I should. My distinguished predecessor Sir Robert
Menzies was a great lover of the game. I don't know whether he
ever actually played cricket, but he used to watch it at
Lords whenever he went to London, which was quite often.
He had a longer innings in politics than anyone, so perhaps
there is a lesson somewhere. A Prime Minister should either
follow cricket or go overseas. If he does both it is very hard
to get him out.
4. This ground was the scene of a test match that has
come to be known as the greatest game of cricket ever played.
It was the tied test between Australia and the West Indies in
1960. I wish we had such close results in Queensland elections.
At all events, there is not a cricketer or a lover of the game
in the world who has not heard of the Brisbane Cricket Ground.
Such a ground deserves the very best facilities for players and
spectators. You are getting such facilities in this Arthur Dibdin
complex. They will be a lot better than those at many other
leading grounds in Australia, including the S. C. G. where conditions
are still appalling. My Government has done a lot for sport. We are the
first Federal Government to assume a responsibility in this area
and make direct and regular grants to sporting bodies. We
have given more than $ 500,000 in Queensland for sporting projects.
We have at last dragged sport into politics, or politics into
sport, and I am proud that we have.
6. Brisbane City Council is campaigning strongly to make
Brisbane the venue of the 1982 Commonwealth Games. That will be
decided at Monreal in 1976. Brisbane is already planning the
facilities which could allow it to stage the Games. Sites have
been chosen and work has started * on the athletics complex. I am
glad to announce that the Australian Government through the
Department of Tourism and Recreation, will contribute $ 250,000 to
the cost of the running track. That is in addition to the
$ 500,000 we have given.
7. I hav e pleasure in declaring open the Arthur Dibdin
complex at the Brisbane Cricket Ground. 



SKL( H AT OUR LADY OF NF RCY (' 01. I l
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON. E. G. WHITLAM, MY.,
ON DECEMBER i, 1974.
YOUR EMINENCE, SISTER PAULINE, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS,
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN AND, ESPECIALLY, GIRLS.
YOU WILL PROBABLY KNOW THAT I HAVE RETURNED
FROM CAMPAIGNING IN QUEENSLAND IN ORDER TO KEEP A LONG
STANDING PROMISE TO MY COLLEAGUE RAY THORBURN, M. P. FOR
COOK, IT WAS VERY TEMPTING TO STAY NQRTH OF THE
BRISBANE LINE, ESPECIALLY AS TODAY IS THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE WORLD'S FIsrT LABOR GOVERNMENT, A QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT, HELD UNDER A TREE AT BARCALDINE ON THE TROPIC
OF CAPRICORN. I AM NOTHING IF NOT ALIVE TO THE LURE OF
ANNIVERSARIES. THEY PROVIDE SPLENDID OPPORTUNITIES FOR
SAYING ALL THOSE THINGS THERE IS NORMALLY LITTLE CALL FOR
SAYING. TODAY, OF COURSE, IS A VERY SPECIAL DAY FOR
OUR LADY OF MERCY COLLEGE. I AM SURE IT WILL ENTER YOUR
ANNALS AS A SPECIAL ANNIVERSARY ALONG WITH MORE SANCTIFIED
FEAST DAYS. AT THE SAME TIME, TODAY IS A VERY SPECIAL
DAY FOR ME. 
IT IS TWO YEARS TODAY SINCE MY LAST DAY AS
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT.
IT IS TWO YEARS TOMORROW SINCE THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
RETURNED MY PARTY To GOVERNMENT THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN
LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 23 YEARS. IN THE LAST FEW DAYS
I HAVE INDULGED IN SOME NOSTALGIA IN VARIOUS RADIO AND
TELEVISION INTERVIEWS. IN EACH INTERVIEW AND I
SHOULD NOTE IN PARTICULAR AT THIS GATHERING THE ONEI
GAVE To 2SMl ST MARY'S IN SYDNEY I WAS ASKED WHAT
ICONSIDERED OUR GREATEST ACHIEVEMENT IN THOSE TWO
SHORT BUT VERY FULL YEARS. IN EACH ANSWER I REPLIED
UNHESITATINGLY: EDUCATION. IHAD BECOME THE MEMBER OF
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES FOR THIS DISTRICT 25 YEARS
AGO. IN MY FIRST YEAR IN PARLIAMENT I TWICE URGED THAT
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAVE TO TAKE THE SAME
DEGREE OI INTEREST IN SCHOOL EDUCATION AS IT WAS ALREADY
TAKING IN UNIVERSITY EDUCATION.
SO IT IS MOST APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD OPT OUT
OF A POLITICAL CAMPAIGN TO COME HERE TODAY IN ORDER TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE OPENING AND DEDICATION OF YOUR NEW
LIBRARY BLOCK. THIS IS A TANGIBLE ILLUSTRATION OF MY
BELIEF THAT LABOR'IS OUTSTANDING MONUMENT WILL PROVE TO BE
WHAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO, WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED, IN THE
EDUCATIONAL FIELD. . t3/, 
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN ANY QUALIFICATION ABOUT
my GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION.
IN MY POLICY SPEECH IN NOVEMBER 1972. JUST
TWO YEARS AGO, I PROMISED THAT EDUCATION WOULD B E THE
MOST RAPIDLY GROWING SECTOR OF PUBLIC SPENDING UNDER A
LABOR GOVERNMENT. I SAID THEN: " EDUCATION SHOULD
BE THE GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR THE PROMOTION OF EQUALITY."
WE SAW EDUCATION AS THE PRIMARY INSTRUME NT FOR IMPROVING
THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR OUR PEOPLE AND PROMOTING EQUALITY
OF OPPORTUNITY FOR OUR CHILDREN. WE PROPOSED A NEW
CHARTER FOR THE CHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA.
WITHIN A YEAR THAT CHARTER HAD BEEN PROCLAIMED,
ITS MAI-N PROMISES ENACTED, ITS ESSENTIAL FUNDS PROVIDED.-
ITS INSTITUTIONAL FORMS ESTABLISHED. ITS GREAT AND
LASTING BENEFITS CONTINUE TO FLOW TO THE CHILDREN OF
AUSTRALIA, ALL OVER AUSTRALIA.
MY OWN EXTENSIVE TRAVELLING THROUGH THE LENGTH
AND BREADTH OF QUEENSLAND IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS HAS
CONFIRMED ME IN MY RESOLUTION THAT CHILDREN EVERYWHAERE
IN AUSTRALIA ARE ENTITLED TO, AND SHOULD RECEIVE, AS
EXCELLENT AN EDUCATION AS CHILDREN AN{ YWHERE IN AUSTRALIA. 
IF YOU GO TO SCHOOL AT BURRANEER YOU SHOULD HAVE THE
SAME GOOD OPPORTUNITIES AS IF YOU GO TO SCHOOL IN
BRISBANE OR AT BURNIE IN TASMANIA OR AT BRIDGETOWN IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA. IF PARENTS'ARE OBLIGED TO MOVE
INTERSTATE TO PURSUE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, THEY
SHOULD NOT HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT THE QUALITY OF
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY AVAILABLE FOR THEIR SCHOOL
CHILDREN, IAM QUITE SURE THAT THE GREAT CATHOLIC
TEACHING ORDERS WHICH HAVE DONE SO MUCH TO PROMOTE
SCHOOLING IN THIS GREAT BUT STILL YOUNG COUNTRY OF OURS
WOULD HAVE NO QUARREL WITH my GOVERNMENT' S DESIRE. TO
PROMOTE THE INTERESTS OF THE CHILD IN RELATION TO THE
TOTAL COMMUNITY. THE DEDICATED NUNS AND BROTHERS WHO
LEFT ALL THAT WAS DEAR TO THEM IN IRELAND IN ORDER TO'
UNDERTAKE THE LONG INHOSPITABLE VOYAGE TO SMALL PARISH
SCHOOLS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA WERE VERY'REAL EXPONENTS
OF THE DESIRE TO GIVE PEOPLE AND ESPECIALLY THE
CHILDREN IN THEI" R CARE A PROPER CHANCE IN LIFE.
.85/. 9 
ONLY TWO WEEKS AGO I HAD THE VERY REAL PRIVILEGE
OF ATTENDING A DINNER IN MELBOURNE IN HONOUR OF THAT CITY' S
NEW CATHOLIC ARCHBISHOP. DR FRANK LITTLE. AN IMPRESSIVE
AND CHARMING MAN, ARCHBISHOP LITTLE WAS, AMONGST OTHER
MORE OBVIOUSLY EXALTED TITLES, PARISH PRIEST OF ST MONICA'S
IN THE MELBOURNE SUBURB OF MOONEE PONDS WHEN HE WAS
APPOINTED ARCHBISHOP OF MELBOURNE. HE HAD ATTENDED
ST MONICA'S SCHOOL AS A CHILD IN THAT PARISH. LIKE SO
MANY OF THE HIERARCHY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA.-
HE HAS A VERY REAL APPRECIATION OF THE PROBLEMS WHICH HAVE
FACED THE PAROCHIAL SCHOOLS IN THE PAST AND OF THEIR
VERY REAL NEEDS IN TRYING TO COPE WITH THE DEMANDS PLACED
ON THEM BY EXPANDING SCHOOL POPULATIONS AT A TIME* OF
INCREASING SOPHISTICATION IN THE TECHNOLOGY OF EDUCATION.
THE SAME PROBLEMS ARE AFFLICTING CATHOLIC
SECONDARY SCHOOLS. OUR LAD OF MERCY COLLEGE HAS A TOTAL
ENROLMENT OF 496 GIRLS, ENCOMPASSING THE YEARS FROM FORM I
TO SCHOOL CERTIFICATE. I UNDERSTAND THAT WHAT WOULD BE
AND 6TH FORMS ARE EFFECTIVELY COMBINED AT DE LA SALLE
AND THIS IS A SENSIBLE WAY OF ACCOMMODATING THE FINAL YEARS
OF SECONDARY EDUCATION. BUT INCREASING COSTS MAKE THE
PROSPECT OF RUNNING A SECONDARY SCHOOL OF ANY SIZE SOMETHING
LESS THAN A SUNDAY-SCHOOL PICNIC. WE RECOGNISE THIS AND
HAVE TAKEN SPECIAL MEASURES TO HELP. 116/ 1 
61
IWAS, THEREFORE, DELIGHTED TO READ
ARCHBISHOP CARROLL'S RECENT REMARKS PAYING TRIBUTE
TO THAT ASPECT OF OUR APPROACH TO EDUCATION. HE
WAS SPEAKING AT THE OPENING OF A NEW SCHOOL LIBRARY
IN MARRICKVILLE, STRANGE HOW ATTRACTIVE LIBRARIES
ARE TO US ALL, AND HOW LOQUACIOUS THEY MAKE ARCHBISHOPS
AND PRIME MINISTERS ALIKE.
ARCHBISHOP CARROLL SAID: " UN DER THE MANY
PRESSURES OF THE POST-WAR YEARS, CATHOLIC SCHOOLS HAVE
BEEN THREATENED WITH WHOLESALE CLOSURE DUE TO MOUNTING
FINANCIAL PROBLEMS.
" HOWEVER, WE ARE BOTH PLEASED AND PROUD TO
RECORD THAT SUCCESSIVE GOVERNMENTS, STATE AND FEDERAL,
HAVE ENABLED NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS TO SURVIVE AND
PROSPER BY MAKING AVAILABLE GRANTS, FIRST FOR RECURRENT
COSTS, THEN FOR CAPITAL, NOW ALSO FOR MANY SPECIAL
PROGRAMS, SUCH A\ S FOR DISADVANTAGED AREAS, FOR TEACHER
DEVELOPMENT, FOR LIBRARIES..
A WEEK BEFORE, THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY REPORTED
ON THE MOST RECENT MEETING OF THE NATIONAL CATHOLIC
EDUCATION COUNCIL i@ 71e 
THE COUNCIL WAS KIND ENOUGH TO ADOPT THE
FOLLOWING RESOLUTIONS:-" THE NCEC ACKNOWLEDGES AND APPRECIATES THE
ACTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN MAKING
SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS IN THE 1974 BUDGET, THEREBY
INCREASING EDUCATIONAL FUNDS FOR 1974 AND 1975 TO
OFFSET THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION ON THE VALUE OF'GRANT S
PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED, AND
" THE NCEC IS PLEASED TO SEE THAT THE
AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS COMMISSION' S REPORT TO THE MINISTER
FOR EDUCATION, SUPPLEMENTARY FUNDS FOR PROGRAMS
ADMINISTERED BY THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, WHICH FOLLOWS
LINES RECOMMENDED BY THE NCEC AND OTHER INTERESTED
BODIES, WAS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT."
NATURALLY, I AM DELIGHTED TO LEARN THAT OUR
EDUCATION PROGRAM HAS SUCH RESPONSIBLE ENDORSEMENT
FROM THE NATIONAL CATHOLIC EDUCATION COUNCIL.
BUT I WOULD BE LESS THAN FAIR TO THE COUNCIL
AND THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY IF I DID NOT ALSO REFER TO
ANOTHER COUNCIL RESOLUTION FROM THE SAME CANBERRA
MEETING. 
THE COUNCIL REGRETTED THAT THE AMOUNT
ALLOWABLE IN CALCULATING INCOME FAX AS A DEDUCTION
FROM INCOME FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES WAS " tABRUPTLY
AND SEVERELY DIMINISHED"
THE COUNCIL BELIEVED THAT THIS ACTIONWOULD
HAVE A SIGNIFICANT ADVERSE EFFECT ON THE
FINANCIAL CONDITION OF PARENTS WHO MAINTAIN CHILDREN
IN NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS, PARTICULARLY-AT THE
SECONDARY LEVEL. THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY ALSO STATED IN AN EDITORIAL
IN THE SAME ISSUE:
" MR. WHITLAM'S DECISION NOT TO RESTORE THE
STUDENT TAX CONCESSION MAY BE THE MOST DISASTROUS HEHAS
EVER MADE. s
" No MATTER WHAT CLAIMS ARE MADE THAT INDEPENDENT
SCHOOLS NOW RECEIVE ' STATE-AID', THE MERE FACT OF
REDUCING THE TAX DEDUCTION HAS DEPRIVED THOSE SCHOOLS
OF SOME FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND INSTEAD OF BRINGING
THEIR PUPULS TO EQUITY WITH THOSE AT STATE SCHOOLS, IS
TAKING THEM BACK TO OLD TIMES."/ 1 19/, 
9.
TH E EDITORIAL GOES ON TO SAY THAT THE DECISION
IS DISASTROUS TO PARENT TAX-PAYERS AND ItTHAT IT IS
DISASTROUS ON PRINCIPLE BECAUSE IT RESTORES THE OLD
PRACTICE OF DISCRIMINATION IN EDUCATION, TAXATION JUSTICE
AND CITIZENSHIP RIGHTS."
HARSH WORDS INDEED ABOUT AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WHICH HAS DONE MORE THAN* ANY OTHER AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN HISTORY TO DO AWAY WITH DISCRIMINATION IN
ALL -ITS GUISES, TO ADHERE TO THE PRINCIPLE OF TAXATION
JUSTICE AND TO ENCOURAGE EVERYONE TO EXERCISE HIS OR
HER RIGHTS AS A PERSON, CITIZEN OR OTHERWISE.
Now, I CAN UNDERSTAND WHY MANY OF YOU ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT my GOVERNMENT'S DECISION THAT THE FIGURE I
SHOULD COME DOWN FROM $ 40OO PER YEAR MAXIMUM DEDUCTION
TO $ 150 A YEAR MAXIMUM DEDUCTION. BUT I REFUTE
ABSOLUTELY THE SUGGESTION OF THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY EDITORIAL
THAT IT REPR" ESENTS A RETURN TO THE BAD OLD DAYS.
NOTHING COULD BE FURTHER FROM THE TRUTH. IWELCOME
THE OPPORTUNITY TO EXPLAIN THAT DECISION TO YOU TODAY. 
TO EXPLAIN PROPERLY, I MUST TAKE YOU BACK
TO THE EARLY YEARS OF THE MENZIES REIGN WHEN THE
DEDUCTION WAS FIRST INTRODUCED. IN 1952/ 53, THE
DEDUCTION WAS $ 100 WHICH WAS A NOT INCONSIDERABLE
AMOUNT OF MONEY THE YEAR THE QUEEN WAS CROWNED, THE
YEAR MENZIES PROCLAIMED HER QUEEN OF AUSTRALI A, THE
YEAR THEY CONQUERED EVEREST. BUT THAT WAS ALSO A
TIME WHEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON EDUCATION
IN THE STATES WAS NON-EXISTENT. IT WAS VERY MUCH
LATER INDEED THAT MENZIES TO HIS ETERNAL CREDIT
FIRST GAVE COMMONWEALTH MONEY, THROUGH GRANTS, TO
THE UNIVERSITIES. IT WAS EVEN BEFORE STATE AID.
THE VERY LEAST THEY COULD DO WAS INSTITUTE A TAXATION
DEDUCTION FOR SCHOOL EXPENDITURE,
IN 1952/ 53 SCHOOLS OTHER THAN THE FEW RICHI
WELL-ENDOWED PRIVATE SCHOOLS, MOST OF THEM NON-CATHOLIC,
WERE REALLY NOT THE KIND OF PLACE WHERE* A THINKING
PARENT OF TODAY WOULD WAN[ HIS OR HER CHILD) REN TO
SPEND WHAT ARE ALWAYS PAINTED AS THE HAPPIEST DAYS OF
OUR LIVES. .11/. 
WE HAD, MOST OF USI GONE TO SCHO OL AND LEFT
SCHOOL WITHOUT MUCH COMPLAINT. WE HAD NOT BEEN LED
TO EXPECT ANYTHING BETTER, SO WE DIDN'IT. IF IT WAS
GOOD ENOUGH FOR OUR PARENTS IT WAS GOOD ENOUGH FOR
US, IF IT WAS GOOD ENOUGH FOR US THERE WAS NO
REASON WHY IT SHOULDN'IT BE GOOD ENOUGH FOR OUR
CHILDREN. SOME PARENTS WERE ABLE TO AFFORD TO PAY
TO MAKE IT BETTER; SOME WERE NOT, AND THAT WAS JUST
BAD LUCK FOR THE CHILDREN.
FORTUNATELY, ALL THAT HAS CHANGED, CHANGED
UTTERLY. AND I AM PROUD INDEED THAT ONE OF THE MAIN
REASONS FOR THAT CHANGE IS THE OVERWHELMING BELIEF OF
my GOVERNMENT THAT IT IS ONLY THROUGH EQUALISING THE
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES OF AIL CHILDREN IN AUSTRALIA
THAT WE CAN FULFIL OUR OBLIGATIONS TO ANY. CHILD IN
AUSTRALIA. IKNOW THIS AUDIENCE TODAY WILL SYMPATHISE
WITH THAT CONTENTION. I K( NOW YOU WILL NOT BEGRUDGE
WHAT WE ARE GI\ VING IN BENEFITS TO CHILDREN LIVING IN
ISOLATED AREAS OF AUSTRALIA, THE QUEENSLAND SITUATION
HAS REMINDED ME VERY FORCIBLY OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THAT
NEW EDUCATIONAL BENEFIT WE INTRODUCED LAST YEAR. 
12.
LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WE SPENT OVER $ 8 MILLION TO HELP
OVER 13.. 000 FAMILIES OR 19,000 INDIVIDUAL CHILDREN
IN ISOLATED AREAS WHO UNTIL NOW HAVE SUFFERED
CONSIDERABLE DEPRIVATION BECAUSE OF THE INADEQUACY
OF FURTHER EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES IN THEIR AREAS.
IKNOW YOU WILL NOT BEGRUDGE WHAT WE ARE DOING AT
LAST TO IMPROVE EDUCATION FOR ABORIGINAL CHILDREN.-
FOR MIGRANT CHILDREN,. FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, FOR
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN WHER EVER, WHOEVER,. THEY MIGHT
HAPPEN TO BE. AND IN CASE YOU ARE WONDERING,. I AM NOT
REALLY GETTING OFF THE TRACK. THE POINT I AM TRYING
TO MAKE IS THAT MY GOVERNMENT IS DOING FAR MORE FOR
INDIVIDUAL AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLCHILDREN THAN ANYONE
MIGHT HAVE DREAMED OF.
AND THAT'S NOT 1-O MENTION OUR CAPITAL
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM,. OR RECURRENT GRANTS,. OR LIBRARY
AND SCIENCE GRANTS,. ALL OF WHICH ARE AVAILABLE AND
HAVE BEEN TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
WHAT IT ALL ADDS UP TO IS AN ESTIMATED $ 1,535 MILLION
EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT1
THIS YEAR. AN INCREASE OF 344L PER CE 4T ON THE LAST
FULL YEAR OF THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT
WHICH SPENT A THEN RECORD OF $ 346 MILLION ON EDUCATION
IN 1971/ 72, It71I 
13.
DIRECT EXPENDITURE ON NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
HAS RISEN FROM $ 39 MILLION IN 1971/ 72 TO AN ESTIMATED
$ 126 MILLION IN 1974/ 75 A RISE OF 223 PER CENT.
So LET ME RETURN TO MY GOVERNMENT'S
DECISION TO REDUCE THE MAXIMUM TAXATION DEDUCTION FROM
$ 400 PER PUPIL TO $ 150 PER PUPIL, IT WAS A DECISION
THAT WAS NOT TAKEN LIGHTLY NOR WANTONLY, IT WAS A
SOUND ECONOMIC DECISION ALBEIT AN UNPOPULAR ONE. No
GOVERNMENT THAT CUTS CONCESSIONS CAN EXPECT TO BE
CHEERED IN THE STREETS, OR, IN THIS CASE, IN THE CHURCH
SCHOOLS. IT WAS A DECISION TAKEN INLINE WITH MY
GOVERNMENT'S GENERAL POLICY OF CUTTING OUT DISGUISED
SUBSIDIES. WHICH IS WHAT THIS WAS.
IN SIMPLE FACT, TREASURY FIGURES INDICATE
THAT* TAX-PAYERS ON HIGHER INCOMES SAVE MlORE THAN THOSE
ON LOWER INCOMES AS A RESULT OF THE PROGRESSIVE TAX
RATE SCALE. IN 1971/ 72 THE GREAT MAJORITY OF TAX-PAYERS
WHOSE CHILDREN ATTENDED GOVERNMENT AND PAROCHIAL
SHCOOLS DID NOT NORMALLY CLAIM AMOUNTS OF MORE THAN
$ 150 P. A. FOR EACH STUDENT CHILD. .1LI/. I.. 
141
THE AVERAGE DEDUCTION DID NOT REACH $ 150
UNTIL NET INCOME REACHED $ 9,000. IT CANNOT
REASONABLY BE ASSUMED THAT PEOPLE EARNING $ 9,000
IN 1974/ 75 WOULD SPEND MORE ON AVERAGE THAN $ 150
PER CHILD. My GOVERNMENT DECIDED THAT A CUT-OFF
FIGURE OF $ 150 REPRESENTED A REASONABLE-COMPROMISE.
THE STATISTICS DEMONSTRATE THAT THE HIGHER'
A TAX-PAYERS'IS INCOME, THE MORE LIKELY HE IS TO CLAIM
LARGER DEDUCTIONS FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES.
THE PRESENT TAXATION SCALES ENSURE THAT
WHERE TWO TAXPAYERS CLAIM THE SAME DEDUCTION, THE
TAX-PAYER WITH THE HIGHER INCOME GAINS THE GREATER
BENEF-IT. THE SYSTEM PRODUCES THE SITUATION THAT THE
RICHER THE PARENT, THE MORE DOLLARS HE IS LIKELY TO
CLAIM AND THE MOR~ E HE GETS BACK OUT OF EACH DOLLAR
HE CLAIMS. 
iL
I-HIAS NEVER I3LEN LXP" ECTLfD THAT CONCESSIONAL
C( 0V: F LLIL-I id ) 1 URE OF A PERSONAL OR DOMESTIC
NATUJRE. REAL-ISE THAT SOME PEOPLE H1.! E C ( l TO
Yie.~: r THEN AS A RIGHT, BUT THEY ARE NO MiORE THAN
T/ AX CONCE'SSIONS, INUTENDED TO T'AIKE SOME LURDEN FRWi~ l
TAX -PAYlffEf T-lE' ARE NOT IMNiLUTABLE rHOI GM TI EIR
THE 1fE0DrMU C$ L-TDI( Oi( UT O 1iU: UI LL RESULT
A N 1' 0d IN A FUI. L. YEAR OF ' O MMII I NLLVENU'L[-
TliX'T'S NOT REALLY A GRi. AT DEAL. OUT OF OUR' TOTAL
0F. KT 1 3Ur IT DOES MEAIN Ti-AT O iT il I OW HAS EJEFN
r virC fi AC2-i:/ L FUNY' ING -F
L1DUCAIION AT ALL LEVELS. IT IS PART OF THIS YEAR'S
PCCRDil EXPENDITURE OF .$ 1535 MILLION, AND THIS
MILLION WAS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT WHEN WE WERE
DRAWING UP THIS YEAR' S BUDGET, I REMIND YOU AGAIN
THAT MY GOVTRrINEN1' S DIRECT EXPENDITURE ON
Ixi GOVERNrI1ENr SCHOO1-S THIS YEAR WILL BE $ 1.26 MILLION
At-1 INCREASE OF 223 PER CENT ON THAT OF 1971/ 72 WHEN
THE $ 400 DEDUCTION WOTH $ 30 MILLION APPLIED.
I DON'T EXPECT THAT I HAVE CONVERTED YOU,
BUT I HAVE READ YOU A LITANY OF SOME OF OUR
ACI-IIEVEMENTS IN EDUCATION, OF WHICH IAM LINASHAMEDLY
PROUD. 
16.
ISPOKE EARLIER OF INEQUALITIES.
THE KARMEL COMMITTEE REPORT COMMENTED ON
THE INEQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY FOR GIRLS.-tI
AND IN JULY THIS YEAR IT WAS DECIDED TO UNDERTAKE
A SPECIAL STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL CHANGE ON
THE EDUCATIONAL NEEDS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS. THIS I
WIDE RANGING STUDY WILL COVER SUCH AREAS AS
ACHIEVEMENT, VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE, PARENT AND TEACHER
ATTITUDES, TEACHER TRAINING, BEFORE AND AFTER SCHOOLI
CARE, AND ANY OTHER MATTERS AFFECTING THE EDUCATION
OF WOMEN AND GIRLS A FINAL REPORT WILL RECOMMEND
IROGRAM4S AND CHANGES TO CORRECT THE PRESENT IMBALANC'r
WHICH HAS RESTRICTED THE CAREERS AND
TO WOMEN AND GIRLS.
My GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT GIRLS SHOULD II
BE ENCOURAGED TO CONSIDER THE WHOLE RANGE OF OCCUPAT ; IS
N TO THEM. THEY SHOULD BE MAZ-c AWARE OF THlE
POSSIB3ILITIES AND MEANS OF ACHIEVING OL-Cu...
AND NOT MERELY INFORMED OF THE BARRIERS IN THEIR'~.
GROWING FAMILIARITY WITH THE RANGE OF IDEAS
, JND1IN FORMATION AVAILABLE THROUGH YOUR NEW LIBRARY IS
ONCL-DISCOVERING THE POSSIBILITIES OPEN TO YOU.
1. 171. 
171
A RECENT EVALUATION REPORT ON OUR LIBRARIES
PROGRAM SUGGESTED THAT NEW FACILITIES WERE ENCOURAGING
NEW PATTERNS OF TEACHING AND LEARNING. a
THiE REPORT STATED THAT " THESE NEW PATTERNS
INCL. UDE MORE INDIVIDUALISATION OF INSTRUCTION,. MORE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE LEARNERS TO PARTICIPATE IN THEIR
EDUCATION, TO BE ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT IT AND ' ro BE MORE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR OWN PROGRESS."
THAT AUGURS WEL. L FOR THIS NEW LIBRARY AND
THE CONTRIBUTION IT CAN MAKE TO THE LIFE OF THE
SCHOOL. IAM QUITE SURE THAT ALL OF YOU -SIST
PALINE, STAFF AND GIRLS W'IL L ENJOY DISCOVERING
AND REAPING THE BENEFITS OFTHIS NEW LEARNING CENTRE
WITHIN OUR LDY OF MIERCY COLLEGE. I
( Rj'a) 



OIJlL~ TSLJ\ NID CAIiPAI Gil1
YL Ak S A( JO AOMrl, u " NAsL-Wi AN S 1L iE A
l TWOYC -ARkS AGO, WI S i-RAL. A'W",
Lf' 2/ WTDoNl A GRE-AT1 NEWV COUR31E OF RIEF-CR0 ANID PIHI ICFIVA
IHAS O-%) rlU GH-TII CER LIVING STANDAR\ DS AND WI DER OPPUR U NI TIES
FOR OUP' PEOPLL, FOR -1110 YEARS, OUEENSLNANRS HAVE J3BJF 1TED
FRoMN GUl R PROGRAlM;! lS FOR W!** iriiEP EDUCATI01N, i'ETTER ROA. 1S " ND
HE1-ALTH SERYIIC-S, 1E4TER CiTIES AVID 13ETT l* ER CAR'E OF TI-II.
LHV 1 R ONIN E NT AT T1E S AM F T I il E QUEENSLAND ER S HAVE I'E1FJ'l ISIISSIIJ
OUT ON rill FULL FRU ITS 01 LABOR ' S POLICIES, THEY HAVE ' 3EEN
DL'PR IVED OF ADVANTAGES WHI ICH ALL OTHER AUSTRALIAIlS: HAVil
RliCE: V\ E D Thi-EY HAVE BELiI SUBJECTED TO AN ) VVNCESS'CANT
B" k\ l'iR E OF MI SRIPRESENTAT I ON ABOUT MY GOVERNIElNT AiDJ uITS
[' OL IC IES I CAnEVH,' E RE To SET TIHE RECORD STRAIGHT. I
BI. 1 EVE I HAVE SUCCEEDED. I HAVF ASKED QUEENSLANDERS -T
FACE THE FACTS ABOUT THE I3JELKE--ET'ERSEI\ N GOVERNMENT AND)
DC ID17 WHETHER TIHEY CAN FFORD TO WAISTE ANOTHER TIN1E I'EY ARS
FALLING BEHIND THE NST OF ALI sTR . LiA.
T JEE GOVERNMENT IS GUI LTY ON
FOUR COUNTS, FIRST, BY FrI! G TO CO-OPERATE WITIH OUR INiTI A'ITV E3
IT HAS HELD BACK TFHE DEVELOPPM1EINr OF THh STATE A1ND DIEPRIVED
QUEE: NSLANDERS AN'D THEIR FAMILIES OF: $ v5U MILLION IN FUNDS FOR
ESSE7NTIAL PROJECTS. II 
-2-
FOR REASONS OF SHEER DOGMA AND IDEOLOGY, IT HAS REJECTED
OUR OFFER TO MAKE TOWNSVILLEI A BIGGER AND MORE PROSPEROUS
C I'Y. IT HAS RE JFCIED OUR OFFORF F FEDERAL FUNDS TO
STABILISE LAND PRICES FOR THE HOME BUYER WE HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO CO-OPERATE WITH EVERY LIBERAL PREMIER IN SIMILAR
PL\ NS IN OTIHER STATES, ONLY MR, BJELKE--PETERSENI, BLINDED
BY HIS OBSESSIONS, BL. INKER ED BY HIS PATHOLOGICAL HATRED OF
AN ELECTED LABOR GOVERNMENT, REFUSES TO PLAY BALL.
SECONDLY, THE QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT HAS
REFUSED TO MAKE PROPER USE OF THE FUNDS WE HAVE MADE
AVAILABLE FOR EDUCATION, HOUSING AND OTHER PRUPOSES.
QUEENSLAND HAS BEEN DRAGGING THE CHAIN WHILE EVERY OTHER
STATE HAS MOVED AHEAD. IN OUR LAST BUDGET WE GAVE THE
STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF
WELFARE HOUSING. YET QUEENSLAND IS BUILDING FEWER HOUSING
COMMISSION HOMES THAN ANY OIHER STATE. THEY ARE BUILDING
FEWER THAN THE LAST QUEENSLAND LABOR GOVERNMENT IN ITS LAST
YEAR OF OFFICE IN 1956-57. ' WE HAVE GIVEN RECORD AMOUNTS
FOR EDUCATION. YET QUEENSLAND HAS SPENT ONLY 18% OF THE
CAPITAL FUNDS WE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE FOR EDUCATION IN
1973 AND .197-1.
THI-RDLY, THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS WANTONLY
OBSTRUCTED OUR EFFORTS TO DEAL WITH TIE GREAT ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS FACING AUSTRALIA AND ALL OTHER WESTERN COUNTRIES.
PRICES IN QUEENSLAND HAVE RISEN FASTER IN THE LAST TWELVE
MONTHS THAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN AUSTRALIA. ,/ 3 
I I I I I I, I yl.' W I I I I 1( 1 -A1 Il I ' l HA N IN H
OilA IIl l. N I.: lEHN! IJULNWINS MUST ASK * FITEMSELVES WHIY THIS
I S LAST YLCAR MR13 [ TE S NS) R11-UE TO JOIN 1' i II AN)
L ' I UI PIJ[ H-LR UR S AT A IN NE / 01ISC LI SS THE WS-1 OF POWFPEHS
( Vi 1, l ICLOS III-. CAM PA NIG ED,: A ) G AINST OUR El-FORTS TO' [-CUIkE
TI IL * S! POWS [ WONTFHORil AUSTALAI H GOV ERNIN'iE. HE RLvu SES
1o UJ' S III EUCOUBTEDU Pow0i'ovu S i-ij s GCy ER NIMIETN IH AS TO CO NTROL
1R 1 SWIEN E NEC ESSSARY. IHREE FUSES TO MAKE USE 0F1: UND S
IFRION IY GOVE. R ENT WHICH WOULD GIVE A BOOJST.-TO MANY
01JLEFPSLAND I NDUSTRIES AND CREAT'E lORE JOBS.
FournrIiLY, MR BJELKPETERSEN INSULTS THE
ITi'LL-IGENCE OF THE OUEENSLAND PEOPLE DY' IjS 013SESSON1
hI N1 ISSUES THAT ARE AT 13EST TRIVIAL AN]) AT WORST FIGMENTS
OF IS OWN r: EVERED IIIAGINATIONO. HE RAVES AEOUT CEIiTRA.. ISM,
FIE RANTS ABOUT STATE RIGI-ITS. HE SEETHES ABOUT SOCIALISM,
HE IS MAUDLIN ABOUT THE MONARCHY. HE IS PREOCCUPIED WITI-I
THE Pn iVY COUNCIL, IT IS A PITY HLj'DOES NOT BRING His
UNDOUB'TED ENERG IES TO BEAR ON THE REAL. NEEDS AND CONICERNS
OF THE PEOPLE THE DOIIN--TO-EAR* ITH ISSUES OF HOUSING, IH EALTH,
W/\ 0LS EDUCATION, ROADS THE TRUE ISSUES IN THIS ELECTION
WH, 1-1ICH PENC lUCKER AND T-IE LABOR TEAM HAVE I-ROUGHT CONSTANTLY
BEFORE1 TE PEOPLE. HE HAS REFUSE) TO TALKHIE AS REFUSED
TO LISTEN, HE HAS REFUSED EVEN 1O ANSWER LETTERS, i i 
IY7 LASi 1N OF FIs iC. E -ri L F Li-ji-RAL LA~ BOR
GuNy .1.3 N HA/ S D0111-Gl-'-Ari v1iiIu : ol THiIS ST ATE,. WE HAVE
VRIIL A I. Y( kNIN'l ( Aj IN OUR F INANC IAL PAYMENT'S. OUR~
I IC I 1 2 1IA V I fH.: tL iTIDF Pl 11 JR 1-; T 00U E 1I$ SLA ND Fk OM I TS
COAL . WLE HAVE OEPL1,111 UP NEW l'IARI( L'I'S FOR
( JII. LNS.. H) SULGAR, 14FE HAVIV EMBARKIED UN4 OUR? PLANS ORA
HAT IONAL H1-1 IWAY SYSTEM L. INK ING AL-L THE M'AJ OR C IT IES AS
FAR AS CAIRNS WITH SYD HEY AND MELBOURNE. WE ARE ESTAB. L. ISI-IING
A P-L-AGUE LOCUST C01IAH) 11SSION WHOSE TASK WILL BE rO ELIM11NATE
THiIS SCOURGE ONCE AN4D FOR ALL-1 IN OUR FLOOD RELIEF
PROGR/ TIS WE HAVE MADE THE LARGEST OUTLAYS EVER GRANTED I-OR
THIlEk FLI EU OF A NATURAL. D I SASTER FOR THE F IRST TIME wE ARE
iAlI2NG DIRECTc-F-EDE. RAL GRANTS -1O LOCAL GOVERN MENT BODIES
NEAL~ Y $ 9 MI1LLI ON TO( QUEENSL1AIID ALONE. WE ARE SPEND ING
$ 211 MI LL ION ON BEEF ROAD) S I N THE NIXT THREE YEARS. WE AR E
PROTECTING niL-Gu-' AT BA\ RRIFER REEF FROM OIL DRILLING. WE
ARE[-UPGRAD. INl-, G YOUR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND ATTACKING
' IC SHORTCOMINGS IN YOUR SCHOOL. S AND HOSPITAL SERVICES.
THE BJELKE-P:-ETLRJsLN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN KEPT IN
OFF ICE BY A FLAGRANT ELECTORAL GERRYI" LANDER WHICH U ISCRI1111 ATES
AS MUCH AGAI NST PROV INCIlAL C IT IES SUCH As Towtjsv ILLE AND
1,1OUNT ISA AS IT DOES AGAINFST BR ISBANE. I N MANY STATE
E. LECTORATES * IN QUEENSLANID THERE AVR. E TWICE AS MANY VOTERS AS
THERE ARE iN OTHER ELECTORATES.. SOME I: EOPLE's VOTES ARE WiORTH
HALF AS MUCH AS OTHER PEOPLE'IS VOTES. ALL AUSTRA\ LIANS, ALL
D01OCIRATS, WILL CONDEMN11 THIS SYSTEM FOR ITS AFFRONT TO NATURAL
JUSTICE AN4D TIl-lE VIOLENCE-IT D. OES TO OUR COUNTRY'IS REPUTATION,
QUEENSLANDERS MUST ASK THEMSELVES WHETHER THEY CAN ALLOW SUCH
A SYSTEM TO0 DEPRIVE THEM OF REAL MATER IAL GAINS AND SET BACK THE
PROGRESSAND DEVELOPMEN'T OF THEIR STATE$ 
V
I DO NOT CLAIM THAT WE HAVE TlHE ANSWERS TO EVERY
PROBLEM. I DO CLAIM THAT WE HAVE MORE CHANCE OF SOLVING
PROBLEMS IF WE WORK TOGETHER, IF WE PREFER CO-OPERATION TO
CONFLICT. QUEENSLAND CANNOT LIVE IN ISOLATION, SIHE CANNOT
PROSPER IF SHE REtMAINS AT ODDS WITH THE REST OF A USRALIA.
SHE CANNOT FULFIL HER UNDOLUBTFD DESTINY HER LIMITLESS
PROMISE. iF SHE REMAINS THE ODD STATE OUT
1 NOVEMBER 1974 



66
A PRIME MINISTER
MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRAjIA
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P., P
FOR THE 50th ANNIVERSARY ISSUE OF
THE U. S. " SATURDAY REVIEW"
DECEMBER, 1974
CONTRIBUTION FOR THE " INVENTOR11 OF HOPE"
( BY GOUGA WHITLAM, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA)
Bertrand Russell once described himself as a cheerful
pessimis',,. and if I may adapt the phrase of so illustrious a
man, -I should call myself a sanguine optimist. It is not,
difficult to be optimistic about Australia. With her moderately
small population, basically sound economy and vast natural
resources, her prospects are considerably brighter than average,
though there is a danger that these blessings, combined with
isolation,. may make her heedless of other nations' misfortunes.
We must resist that tendency, not simply on grounds of morality,
but because the survival of humanity and civilized democracy
will require from all nations an unprecedented measure of
international cooperation. The opportunity for such cooperation
exists in the United Nations. There is as yet no substitute
for it and there is a-good chance that it will survive as a
workable and practical forum.
There are three other things on which I base my hopes.
I base them on science, or rather on the scientific method, which
is our ultimate defence against dogma and mysticism. I base
them on the idealism of youth, of a generation which has already
rejected war and which displays a greater capacity for love
and human tolerance than any before it. And I base them on
man's instinctive common sense, his natural will to survive,
which has carried him through crises in the past and will do so.
again. 



INTERVIEW WITH MR AND MRS WHITLAM ON WBQ8 MARYBO:, OUGH
FOR REPLAY " A CURRENT AFFAIR" 2 DECEMBER 1974
QUESTION: Since I last interviewed you, your title has changed,
you haven't you're still tall and gorgeous. What's so great
about being Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: It's the opportunity to do things or try to do
the things that you were dreaming about doing before you got
the job.
QUESTION: But some of the things have been more or less trial
and error haven't they?
PRIME MINISTER: There's a hell of a lot of things you can't do
because circumstances change. It's more difficult to do them
but on the other hand there has been an immense number of things
that you can get the satisfaction of at last having seen done,
or got done in your country.
QUESTION: Mrs Whitlam any political decisions of the Prime Minister
that you've disagreed with?
MRS WHITLAM: Inevitably.
QUESTION: Do you tell him?
MRS WHITLAM: Sometimes.
QUESTION: Who has last say?
MRS WEITLAM: Naturally he does. He is the Prime Minister. He's
the political person. I'm not, as I hasten to tell you and
everyb -v else.
QUESTION: , ny do you think you're so good for each other?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we've had to make do with each oth for
over 32 years now. ( Mrs Whitlam: Thanks very much.)
QUESTION: What attracted you to each other at first?
KR WHITLAM: It would be indelicate of me to say.
PRIML MINISTER: I suppose it was reassuring for me all those years
ago to find somebody who was much the same height and also who
had plenL-nf confidence and go and so on.
QUESTION: Still got plenty of confidence and gc?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, yes, yes.
QUESTION: What do you like doing together?
MRS WHITLAM: We don't get much opportunity to do anything together.
QUESTION: When do you have the opportunity?
MRS WHITLAM: We like going to concerts, listening to music.
PRIME MINISTER: Getting away to places like Hervey Bay. 
-2-
MRS WHITLAM: Sitting in the sun.
QUESTION: What don't you like doing together?
PRIME MINISTER: You don't take time off to think. There is a
very great number of things that you're doing because you should
be doing them and some of them you like and some of them I suppose
you wouldn't bother to do that goes with the job. But you
don't really stop to say ' Do I like this or not?' You're involved,
it's part of the job and you obviously like the job. If you
set out in this life, this is the best job in it.
QUESTION: There seems to be so many problems in the press like
' Whitlam: Problems Mount'....
PRIME MINISTER: I saw that in yesterday afternoon's Brisbane
paper. QUESTION: I'm wondering if battling with the Premier is a
breeze compared to the problems in Canberra. Is it?
PRIME MINISTER: That heading I noticed in the Brisbane paper
yesterday. It's just a beat-up of something that was in one of
the papers that morning. I mean its just a beat-up there's
nothing to it.
QUESTION: But is it better being up here battling with the
Premier?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh I don't know. There are a number of things
that can only be done in Australia since we have a Federal system
it the Federal Government and the State Governments co-operate. I
fr,. nkly think we aren't, here, but in every other State we are.
QUESIOi, We've had a few political handouts in the last few
months hei " rom the Federal Government?
PRIME MINISTER: And you would have had many more, as el . aer
State has, if you had taken them.
QUESTION: But a lo; of these political handouts come at election
time. PR. MINISTER: No, no.
QUESTION: Not just your party
PRIME MINIb.' R: For instance, we were elected two yea:: s ak.
Monday and at , hat time nobody expected that thc : e would btelection
for three year after that. Now in fact there was or
six months ago. Now any . andouts, as you call them, which ar(
taking place this year would 1-ive been done I s i-i 7-
of an election because you ordinaL_ õ expect to bt: r. rur J
and we have a good majority in the House of Represe.. atives and
of course, we still have. One would not expect there to be anot'
election for another 2 years in the House of Representative-, sG
what you say are handouts are part of a continuing program and
the program is in acts of Parliament or in reports which we've
sought and which we've published. They've not just becn in
anticipation of an election and we shouldn't. be having one for
another 2 years. i. 
QUESTION: Wt. are having one here.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh a State one.
QJESTION: I feel Mr Perc Tucker has been slightly overshadowed
because all the big guns and the big stars have been coming
up from Canberra. Do you think he's going to be lost in the
glitter of it all?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't know how much attention is being
given to various people things often get mesmerised or
concentrated in this way. But what you're talking about, you know,
handouts which are part of programs are being run in other
States too, and they're not having elections. There are a lot
of things that should be being handed out here which are not
being accepted.
QUESTION: I'm sure you would be grossly disappointed if I
didn't mention your relationship with Mr Hawke.?
PRIME MINISTER. ' yes.
QUESTION: What have you disagreed about most strongly?
PRIME MINISTER: There was, I suppose, the Prices/ Incomes Referendum
a year ago. That was actually the only one I can think of where
there was a substantial difference of opinion.
QUESTION: What have you agreed on?
Phi E MINISTER: Naturally enough I am very often in contact
wirh Mr Hawku. I suppose usually a week wouldn't go past,
certainly not a fortnightwhere we didn't have a conversation
face -o -ce or on the telephone, but this is to be expected.
Now there lways a lot of publicity given to any conversa
I have with Mr Hawke but I'm regularly conversing, co. re
with a very great number of people in Australia as you w d
expect. QUESTION: You're so vocal about your meetings, I. er that
he is going to see you at the week end?...
PIT ? 7 MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Exactly how is it when you do get together? fDoes
come in -" ring like a bull or do you sit down and have a ch,
PRIME MINISTER. Oh no, ' ue know each other very ' ell. It is i
there's always a great C-il of publicity if he calls on me. N
other people would call c -i on the same day and not y'et the
same publicity at all. No, 1 publicise the . ieeti-. gs T
have with anybody nor i ta -ct Leca-ise un'.-dIy
watch anybody calling at rny offii: : ini iarliament Housc or at the
Lodge in Canberra or Kirribilli anybody can watch bat they
don't notice. Recently in Sydney there was a group ( f peopl.
calling in the morning to discuss the uranium developm k-nts
in -h i) o1 i T ritor'-; thr-people who were out . t tne
gate to filEi. h 1w ent didn't identify who
these people were. It would have been the biggest story imaginable
if they'd identified them. That day these people didn't announce 
that they'd come; I didn't announce that they'd come but
Ministers concerned were all present and nobody dropp,-2!.
what it was. And the next time. in fact, was quitc a lac_.. sessitoi
at the Lodge in Canberra and the following day we announced it
to everybody's surprise. So it is true that you hear a great
deal about meetings or conversations I have with Mr Hawke,
because they're well publicised. But my job inevitably means
that I'm talking to a lot of people all the time, pretty well
every day of the week.
QUESTlON: Also well publicised are your tours and in two weeks
you'll be off on another overseas tour and there's been criticisml
about the fact that you are overseas when you should be at home
say your visit to the U. S. when the econamy was falling apar-t
say when you visited Indonesia and we had the floods in Queensland.
When do you consider you were in the wrong place at th. wrong
time? PRIME MINISTER: The fact is there are some things that can only
be done on behalf of a country by the Head of Government of that
country and there's not a single visit I've made overs'eas that
people would say was not justified. You see, obviouslv. I sh,. ull
visit the U. S. or t-he U. N. or Britain or Japan or Europe or
Indonesia or New Z: c . land or get togaether with the heads of
other countries it -he British Corlamnealth. Now, that is myjob
to do it. I should do it. It's very easy to criticise some
Head of GovernmTent for not being in a particula. L place at a
particular timae. ff onec acceptc&amp; J-all those cirticisms you'd
never budcje you'd be s' : yirkg ' hWill atiat's he doing lip
ir, Queensland in a State election?' e
QUELTION: I teol sure they are.
PRIME MINISTER: At the same time, my Goverment's objects are
quite c-' ralto this campaign. This is the only Governi. t in
Australia r' ch hasn't co-operated withi my Gov_-rn-, uent and
is a very ma~ terial theme to the campaign.
QUESTION: in this area 1 don't ti-ink x: eally terrn .,) r-. ied
about what t'arty i is. It's going to be " he rmn far a.
we're concerned and we kn~ ow the lo-' al andidat:. So 1 can' t
see that you're going to: aftezt ouc decoi* Lion !, ec-( al-. sc in a countrit
is so important that th man i rig',-
PRI_ That may be, but. nevertheles-, iiu
centL of pe:; ple certainly 80 per cont , uld -' ote
accoic 9olitLical party. i ion'It think there's : h d( k
about that. I tflin its quiLtu aji dlpropriate thing if peopl
want to ' 1. inow ,7 -Ll-meafrer th-.. z celect will votr or Peak.
of us would be if i7, roc t meithb. rs of politi
parties. None of us. u. one member CQuc-ns. L iC
Parliament is in without be4--a -member of a Part,,,, In the T
of fepresentativos it is yszars . years since th. -e w: -3 E
whLo d.. drn't belong to a poiitical pa., ty. So it's t. L. that
membership of a pc. irical party would make all ti~ e di-forenceperhaps
20 per cc-nt of their J~ ote ccenia be 1,, er..-oyaI. ano. 80 pe ' r~ t
would be uependenit on their being members of a pc'litical party.
QUESTION: Wh-t do yo-u think of independents?
MRS WHITLAM: You are not indepeiclknt if you are connected with
a political party at all. That is a deceit that is often practised. 
PRIME MINISTt.': There are some issues on which our Par. I and in
fact dii Varics Allow~ members to vote its they wish on some
social issues but in general what makes the parliamentary
system work is the party system. This is the way it works in
US., N. Z. there's nothing to be apologetic about or
ashamed about. Nobody can afford to stand for Parliament unless
he is a member of a political party even a very rich man
couldn't afford it, would not get elected to Parliament, unless
he also had the support of a political party. A very good man or
a very rich man might make the difference where things were close.
QUESTION: Mr Nixon said " I've always thought that politics was
much harder for the wives than it is for men. They can fight
the battles whilee the wives suffer on the sidelines." Have
you ever had to suffer, Mrs Whitlam?
MRS WHITLAM: Quite often.
QUESTION: When? How?
MRS WHITLAM: I'm not going to say, or give instances. There are
many occasions on which I and other wives have been hurt by the
actions well, not so much by the actions as the reactions to
actions of our husbands or our Parties.
QUESTION: What do you think the perfect politEicians wife
should be?
MRS WHITLAM: I think she should just be a wife. I don't think
she should be any different than other wives. If she has a goal
in ilife she should be left to pursue that goal. If she has not,
shi shjuld be left alone also. She shouldn't be plagued because
she dc.! sn't want to do anything. She shouldn't be plagued
becau,. -he does want to do something.
QUESTION: -think you said in your diary that you were si
of people talking about how much money you got and I dor kwhether
it was really that or the fact that they were cr. (. sing
the fact that you have jobs, positions and they would have liked
to see you doing " goody goody" work.
MRS WHITLAM: I do what you call ' goody goody work' as well. B..
yi) i can't do that all the time.
PRIME MINISTER: You see the thing is that a poiiticanr, wife 1I
do an i----nse amount of work for which she's not paid can"~
be paid. -instancq, my wife goes to an immense number of
functions in electorate which I can't go to r w because rcf
I'm more tied up than E and if Margaret goes ~ o some functi.;
elsewhere in Australia, L. c doesn't get paid. Sure, she gets
her fare-paid, but if she stavp overnight she has to pay her
accommodation. She gets no aii. r-e for that. 11olic,
wife is a full time job for which he alone is paid.
QUESTION: Getting back to your electorate, do you think its a
disadvantage to have a Prime Minster as a representative?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's compensated for by the fact that
having a Prime Minister for your local member is likely to bring about
more weight for what he says. You can't say that a thing should
be done just because a Prime minister asks for it to be done. 
-6-
It ought to be done because it should be done, whoever asks.
Nevertheless, I suppose it is a fact that if the Prime Minister
asks a Department to look into a particular matter, the Department
is more likely to jump to-it than if a private member asks about
it. So its compensated for. The matters you take up are
likely to have more punch behind them. You were worrying about the
lot of a politician's wife. The thing that worries me more,
probably, is that the kids cop it. Now you quoted that heading
there in an afternoon paper. Well, afternoon papers are not
terribly serious publications but nevertheless you're likely to
have some hoarding~ on the streets. Now if your children are young
and we still have a daughter who's only 20 if she sees some
of these things, she's likely to have a clutch at the heart
and say " Oh, what's this." They cop it much more.
QUESTION: What qualities have you tried to instill in your
children?
MRS WHITLAM: I think the qualities I admire most in children are
obedience and politeness.
QUESTION: Have they ever let you down?
PRIME MINISTER: On both scores. No, they're good kids. They've
been very satisfactory. But they' re independent persons.
MRS WHITLAM: But they were well disciplined weren't they?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, we were tough.
QUESTION: Do you believe in the occasional smack?
MRS WKITLAM: Oh certainly. I was always the one who had
to do L. smacking, though, because he wasn't there.
PRIME MINIS~ rR: When I was home I took the brunt of that.
run to you as a court of appeal, sort of thing.
QUESTION: Mrs Whitlam is your television program " With Margaret
Whitlam" finished yet?
MRS WHITLAM: Yes for this season it has.
QUE. Is it a sore point with you?
MRS WH7T'NM: What do you mean? I enjoyed it; it was fun.
QUESTION: We_ you very disappointed about the ratings and -L.
fact that they removed y-' i from a prime time?
MRS WHITLAM: The ratings situaition was very unfair. That was
unfair. I was disappointed in attitude. I wa.-very please,
with the way the program went.
PRIME MINISTER: Did they show it up here?
QUESTION: No.
PRIME MINISTER: You should have.
QUESTION: Why? 
-7-
MRS WHITLAM: Why no;.?
PRIME MINISTER: It was great.
QUESTION: Did you watch it?
PRIME MINISTER: It was easier after 10 I think, but I wouldn't have been
home to see it more than once. No, I've seen it a couple of t. imes.
I think it turned out very well.
QUESTION: What would you rather see her as: an interviewer or
an interviewee?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, both, both. I mean, she's got a lot of
experience now. She's a human person, so either way.
QUESTION: You mentioned in the press that you'd learnt a lot
during the program?
MRS WHITLAM: Certainly, because I knew nothing about the workings
of a program like that and I like to know how its done and I'd
know how to approach it another time. And/ alsoI'd know what
to be wary of on your side of the clipboard.
QUESTION: Are you passing hints on to Mr Whitlam?
MRS WHITLAM: No, no, he's my mentor.
QUESTION: What would you really like to be good at?
MRS WHITLAM: Oh, I don't know, do you mean I or we?
QUESTION: Both.
MRS WHIP-AM: Something new or something old?
PRIME MINIS17it: I think we're all right at what we're doing.
QUESTION: You wouldn't like to be a champion knitter?
MRS WHITLAM: I am.
QUESTION: Nothing else like that?
PRIR._ ' 11NISTER: She's an excellent knitter. She really is.
QUESTION: I think you mentioned that last time you were here.
MI WHTTLAM: Wll, you Must have asked me.
QUESTION: I was asking a. it who chooses clothes and who had the
greatest say. With yourwhole livesjis there anything you'd like to
change?
MRS WHITLAM: Past or present?
QUESTION: Past.
MRS WHITLAM: I suppose you wish there were things you hadn't done
and things that you wish you'd had time to do. Overall I think
I'd really wish for moreto do it all in. 
-8-
QUESTION: Politicans are a cartoonist's delight. Have you ever
kept any of their masterpieces?
MRS WHITLAM: I wouldn't say they were always masterpieces.
QUESTION: Which ones appeal to your sense of humour?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh there are dozens. But the funniest are always
those about other people.
MRS WHITLAM: The thing about cartoons is that they date so. You
know, you keep them for a couple of years thinking they're absolutely
marvellous and then you wonder what it was all about.
QUESTION: Have you heard any good jokes about yourself lately?
People do use your name for a joke. Do they tell it to your
face?
MRS WHITLAM: It depends what jokes you're talking about. Tell us
one now.
QUESTION: No, I'm not good with jokes, I can't remember them.
PRIME MINISTER: A lot of jokes, I now find, people attach my name
to a terrific number of jokes I can remember being used about
Billy McMahon and Bob Menzies. I can't say they fit to me
the jokes they told about John Gortin. But particularly the ones
about Menzies and McMahon. When you're been in politics for a
fair time they crop up again. Whether you like it or not it happens,
so there's no use complaining. It doesn't really worry me.
QUESTION: What never ceases to amaze you about Mr Whitlam?
MRS WHITLAM ( unclear)
QUESTION: What never ceases to amaze you about Mrs Whitli
PRIME MINISTER: " Custom never stales her infinite variety".
MRS WHITLAM: i say!
QUES'" ION: What do you think Mc. z ' qhitlam looks good in?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not particularly good at describing these
things.
QUESTION: Have:.' t you ever said ' That's the be:; t thing I've
ever seen you in. Wear it dress again.'
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not vex2 . t describing materials or
colours. I remember for instance, _ wout 10 years ago I'd
brought her back some Thai silk maybe blue Thai silk and it made
up superbly. On a formal occasion she would stand out very
elegantly. Well I suppose you've caught me. I just don! t think
very often of this sort of thing.
MRS WHITLAM: He mentions it at the time and then forgets. He's
generally more impressed by women in evening dress than in
any other dress. 
Q -9-
PRIME MINISTER: Yes that would ie so. If I've cihosen something,
naturally enough I'd notice it bo.'' use I'v sometimes brought
back things.
QUESTION: Is there anything he's brought back you thought was
absolutely ghastly.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't overdo it. If she doesn't like it, then
that's alright as far as I'm concerned.
MRS WHITLAM: They just go to the bottom of the pile of things
to be made up, that's all.
QUESTION: After elections these days, they usually play a
song appropriate to the occasion. Mrs Whitlam what song title
would you choose for your husband?
MRS WHITLAM: I'm not anticipating him going out, anyway, and
requiring a song.
QUESTION: I don't mean it to be a swan song. Just something
like, " You're just too good to be true" or " Baby face" or
something. PRIME MINISTER: Oh no, forget that!
MRS WHITLAM: Actually the titles of pop songs these days don't
always indicate the contents.
QUESTION: Have you got a song that means something to both of
you. Advance Australia Fair?
MRS WHITLAM: No, I'm afraid we don't. Perhaps the love theme
from " Tr'ristan and Isolde" the love duet....
PRIME MINIL'Fq: Or at our age, " Never on Sunday"!
QUESTION: What are your Christmas plans? You will be overseas
won't you?
PRIME MINISTER: We'll be in London for Christmas.
QUESTION: What would be your best Christmas preseint?
MRS 2LAM: Actually the best Christmas pr ; s-. cL xiolid b to
have everyone together, which is just about the most impossible
thing fo-. ir family because there are four children who are not
all over the .: orld now, but who always seem to be and they are
here. PRIME MINISTER: The first time they were all together for 10 years
was at Easter last year in We went over to see Mr Heath
and the Queen about some Constitutñ orn.-l things and they all
happened to be there at the one time. The first time for 10 years.
Not that they're so old. The eldeit is only
MRS WHITLAM: Only!
QUESTION: What would be a beaut Christmas present for you then. 
PRIME MINISTEP: I don't know. You throw me so much with these
questions you ask.
QUESTION: You don't need a new razor or something like that?
MRS WHITLAM: He always needs a new razor.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, yes.
QUESTION: I do hope it is a most enjoyable and happy time for
you for the festive season, and that politics are not too much
of a problem during that time for you and my very sincere thanks
to you, Mrs Whitlam and Mr Whitlam for appearing on the program. 



NOTEI; S FR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR DIAMOND VALLEY A. LP, IARBECIF
2 D) ECEMBiER 19741
J. I'/ IIAf BETTlIE PLACE TO CILLHIRATE LABHOR'S (&gt; REAT VICTORY TWO
YEARS AGO THAN HElIRE IN DIAMOND VALLE: Y, ONIL OF TillE ECI IVE
SEATS IN OUR DRIVL [ OR I'UowIR. LABOR WOULD STILL HAVE WON IN
1972 WITHOUT ITS GAINS IN DIAMOND VALLEY, HOLT, CASEY AND
LATROBE. IT WOULD STILL HAVE WON IN 19/ L WITHOUT ITS EXTRA
GAINS IN ISAACS AND HENTY. THOSE SEATS, HOWEVER, PROVIDED
THE SUBSTANCE OF OUR MAJORITY, IN 1972 AND AGAIN IN 1974,
ITIS A PLEASANT IRONY THAT WE HAVE TWICE SECURED OUR NATIONAL
MAJORITY THROUGH OUR VOTES IN THE VERY STATE THAT DENIED US
GOVERNMENT FOR SO LONG. IN OUR VICTORY IN 1972 A GENERATION
OF BITTERNESS AND DIVISION WAS PUT BEHIND US , lA
NEW ERA OF HOPE AND CONFIDENCE FOR OUR PARTY, FOR OUR
COUNTRY, WAS BORN. OUR POPULAR BASE IN THIS CITY, AND THIS
STATE, tS NEVER BEEN STRONGER.
2. I MUST SAY THAT I WOULD RATHER BE IN DIA. OND VALLEY THAN MR.
SNEDDEN'S VALLEY. BETTER THIS VALLEY THAN DEATH VALLEY,
;' iD THERE IS NOTHING LIKE A BARBECUE TO RALLY OUR SUPPORTERS
THEY MAY NOT WALK OVER HOT COALS BUT AT LEAST THEY CAN
GRILL In-: R STEAKS OVER THEM., I AM GLAD OF MR. SNEDDEN'S
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT THAT THE HOTTER REGIONS OF THE HEREAFTER ARE
RESERVED FOR HIS PARTY. dIHFM lABOR MEN WALK THROUGH THE
VALLEY OF DEATH I HOPE THEY'LL GO UP INSTEAD OF DOWN.
s 
3. ONE OF THE GREAT BLNI-ITS OF uUR SUCCFSS IN THIS iAKl 0;
i. l. OUKINEL IIA') iLI-N III1-ADDI) TII N ( OF MANY Y) IJNG AND TALI. N II I)
NEW MEMBERS TO OUR RANKS;, DAVID McKI'NZlII, TONY . AMB, PIACE
MATHEWS, MAX OLDMLADUW, JOAN CHILD, GARElII CLAYTON THIY
ARE ALL FIRST-RATE MLMBIRk';, IXCELLENT AC( UIJI'IIf I1ONS TO THE
PARTY AND THE PARLIAMENT, THEY HAVE PARTICIPATED IN TIIE
DEBATES AND DECISIONS THAT MADE POSSIBLE LABOR'S GREAT
ACIIIEVEMENIS DURING I l I A'; IT WO YEARS,
II, IHOSE YEARS HAVE BEEN DIFFICULT, AS YOU KNOW. IN THE LAST
12 MONTHS, ESPECIALLY, WE HAVE FACED IMMENSELY
COMPLEX ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. IT HAS BEEN A TEST OF OUR
NERVE, OUR FAITH, OUR INGENUITY, WE HAVE HAD TO CONTEND
WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT THAT
AFFL. ICT EVERY WESTERN COUNTRY. WE HAVE HAD TO FIGHT BOTH
THOSE PROBLEMS AT THE SAME TIME, AND WE ARE CARRYING ON THE
FIGHT WITh E'ERY AVAILABLE WEAPON, EVERY CONSTITUTIONAL
POWER WE POSSESS. IF YOU COMPARE OUR PERFORMANCE WITH
OTHERS AROUND THE '" ORLD I THINK YOU '. ILL Fi. D THAT WE ARE
DOIN. G BETTER THAN PRACTICALLY ANY OTHER COUNTRY IN THE
F ' T AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT AND WE ARE HOLDING 0" OWN IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION. HAVE TAKEN ACTION ON r,, iY
FRONTS. W RE READY. TO TAKE FURTHER ACTION WHENEVER IT
IS NEEDED, / 3 
YUJ WOULDN'F BE IILIMAN IF YOU WEl RE NOT õ IHtE' IMES DISPIRITED
AND DISHEARTENED BY THE FRUSTRATIONS OF THE PAST YEAR. I
SYMPATHISE WITH YOU. I SHARE YOUR FEELINGS. YOU COULDN'T
BE HUMAN IF YOU WERE NOT SOMETIMES DISMAYED BY THE BARRAGE
OF PROPAGANDA AGAINST US, BY THE MISREPRESENTATION, BY THE
MALICE, THE OBSTRUCTION OF OUR OPPONENTS, BY THE OMISSIONS
AND DISTORTIONS OF THE MEDIA, BY THE INCESSANT ATTACKS ON
THE GOVERNMENT FROM VESTED INTERESTS WHETHER ITS REG
ANSETT, BJELKE-PETERSEN, THE DOCTORS, THE WEALTHY PRIVATE
SCHOOLS, OR WHOEVER ELSE IT MAY BE WITH A GRUDGE AGAINST
US, THERE MUST BE TIMES WHEN YOU HAVE ASKED YOURSELVES:
ISN'T THERE SOMETHING THE GOVERNMENT HAS DONE TO BE PROUD
OF? ISN'T THERE SOMETHING THAT WILL GIVE THE LIE TO THESE
AYTTACKS? THE TRUTH IS THAT WE HAVE A GREAT STORY TO TELL,
A FI'F RECORD TO OUR CREDIT. I SHALL GIVE YOU SOME
DETAILS f-IT SHORTLY. BUT THERE IS ONE FACT I ASK YOU
TO REMEMBER: FOR ALL THE MOANINq AND GROANING, THE
DOOM-TALK AND GLG,.. M-TALK OF OUR OPPONENS, AU3TRALIAN' 3 ARE
EVERYWHERE BETTER OFF TODAY THAN THEY BEFORE LABOR
C IN. THE REAL PURCHASING POWER OF AVERAGF TEKLY
EARNINGS, ALLOWING FOR INFLATION, INCREASED BY 3 2% ti THE
YEAR TO Jui,. 1973 AND BY A FURTHER 3.9 IN THF YEAR TO
JUNE 1974 THAT'S A -N OF MORE THAN SEVEN PERCENT IN
REAL LIVING STANDARDS UNDER R GOVERNMENT, ,/ t 
6. J D) ON'T SUGGEST THAT OJR ACHIEVEMENTS SHOULD BE MEASURED
IN MONETARY GAINS ALONE. INDEED, THE PURPOSE OF THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT, ITS CENTRAL AMBITION, HAS BEEN TO OFFSET
THE IMPORTANCE OF WAGES, OF TAKE-HOME PAY, AS THE SOLE
DETERMINATION OF A FAMILY ' S STANDARD OF LIVING, nUR
POLICIES ARE DESIGNED TO IMPROVE THOSE ESSENTIAL
INGREDIENTS OF A CIVILIZED LIFE THAT ONLY GOVERNMENTS
CAN PROVIDE A DECENr EDUCATION, PROPER IIEALTH CARE, ROADS,
URBAN TRANSPORT, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, CITIES FIT TO
LIVE IN. To NEGLECT THESE THINGS IS TO UNDERMINE'THE IRUE
BASIS OF PROSPERITY, THE CONDITIONS THAT MAKE FOR GENUINE
SOCIAL ORDER, GENUINE SECURITY, AND GENUINE FULFILMENT FOR
EVERY CITIZEN, WHATEVER HIS PRIVATE MEANS, nUR AIM
HAS BEEN TO WIDEN AND EQUALISE OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIANS
lil EVERY FIELD WHERE GOVERNMENT ACTION PLAYS A PART. So
ALL rHi. YEAR WE HAVE PRESSED AHEAD WITH OUR GREAT PROGRAM
OF SOCIAL REFORM AND INNOVATION, WE HAVE NEVER ABANDOt-
THAT PROGRAM OR WATERED IT DOWN SUIT OUR OPPONENTS, j
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA HAVE TWICE ENDORSED IT, THEY HAVE TWICE
E[ VCTED US TO CARRY IT OUT, WE WILL GO AHEAD WITH IT. IT
WILL , AKE TIME. IT WILL TAKE PATIENCE. AND 1, J THE FACE OF
OBSTRU.-" P TACTICS AND DELAYS IT WILL TAKE DETERMINATION.
BUT WE WILL 6L_ ON WITH THE JOB YOU ELECTED US .0 DOS 
7. 1 HAVE PREPARED A LIST OF SOME OF OUR PRINCIPAL
ACHIEVEMENTS IN 1974. I SHALL READ TO YOU THE HIGHLIGHTS
AS MANY OF THEM AS YOU HAVE TIME TO HEAR. I HAVE BROUGHT
COPIES OF THIS LIST AND YOU ARE WELCOME TO TAKE THEM
AWAY TONIGHT. LATER THIS WEEK I SHALL BE TABLING IN
THE PARLIAMENT AN EVEN LONGER AND MORE COMPREHENSIVE ACCOUNT
OF OUR ACHIEVEMENTS, IT IS ON THIS RECORD THAT WE ASK TO BE
JUDGED. ON THIS RECORD WE ARE PROUD TO BE JUDGED BY
YOU, OUR SUPPORTERS, AND BY FUTURE GENERATIONS, A LABOR
GOVERNMENT IS AN ACTIVE GOVERNMENT OR IT IS NOTHING, A
LABOR GOVERNMENT IS A REFORMING GOVERNMENT OR'. lT IS NOTHING.
8, THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN LABOR NEEDED A GREATER
UNITY, GREATER SOLIDARITY, GREATER EFFORT. THE BITTER
DIVISIONS AND FRUSTRATIONS AMONG OUR OPPONENTS DO NOT ALLOW
US TO iEL. OURGUARD. THE YEAR AHEAD WILL TEST OUR NERVE
AND OUR SPIRIT AS NEVER BEFORE, WE WILL BE VULNERABLE TO
PANIC TALK,. TO SCARE TACTICS, TO TF. HYSTERIA OF OUR
OPPONENTS. WE WILL BE VULNERABLE TC A CERTAIN IMPATIENCE
AND ,. EWILDERMENT AMONG OUR OWN SUPPORTERS. WE WIL. L WIN
THROUuFH IF WE STICK TOGETHER, IN THE SHOf', T TE. Rii ( OU HAVE
A GUARAITL-OF OUR DETERMINATION TO PROTECT THE WEAK, THE
DISADVANTAGED AI'L,_ THE LOWER PAID AGAINST THE EFFECTS OF
TEMPORARY ECONOMIC AND SOCi. HARDSH! P, IN THE LONG TERM
YOU HAVE A GOVERNMENT PLEDGED TO RAISE OUR SOCIAL AND LIVING
STANDARDS, WIDEN THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE, AND
BUILD A PROUD REPUTATION FOR AUSTRALIA AS ONE OF THE MOST
JUST AND ENLIGHTENED SOCIETIES,
h I t 



iiY
Channel 9 News. ( Acknowledgement is requested).
Interview with the Prime Minister.
Reeves; In general terms, how would you rate the governments
performance, over the last two years. Bet ter than you thought.
Whitlam; We have been a very active government. I think we have done
more legislatively and adminstratively in our two years
than our predecosors did in their last 20 years. Of course we have
had ourt frustrations. We would havu likud to havu donu more. But
nevertheless, we in fact are achiving a very great deal of what
we promised.
Reeves. Is there any area of personal satisfaction to you.
Whitlam,' I suppose I would be partocularly pleased at the different
standing that this country has in the world. We were embroiled still,
long after most countries had ceased to be, in this cold war
attitude. Secondly, we had been pointed into a corner in our
region, the same way that Souhh Africa has been in the continent of
Africa. We were seen as a racaist enclave. Now, we have rid ourselves
of those two objectionable situations, the cold war and the racist
attitude. But on top of that we have con ributed very postively to
new programs around the world, human rights, disarmament and trade.
This has given me vory much satisfaction naturally.
Reeves. Foreign affairs is still': obviously, avery great love
of yours.
Whitlam; Oh. yes. Naturally. I think Australia" as a somewhat
isolated country, and a very large trading coun ry, must always be
very much aware of relations between her and other countries.
Reeves. Have any of your Ministers ferformend particularly well
anyone you would like to single out.
Whitlam@' Thisz is always an intidious thhng to answer.
There are many Ministers who were well known before we beome a
government, and who were therefore expected to do well. And they
have. But there were several others who were not so well known
before we became a government. I suppose I could identify some
of them. Fred Daly, as leader of the House of Representatives,
has been suparb Lionel Bowen as the Minister asuisting me,
Ken Wredidt, as Minister for Agriculture and Rex Connor as Ministed
foi Minerals and Energy. All of these have done superbly''' People
were not aware of them two years ago, but they are very great and
effective public figures now.
Reeves. Perhaps an unfair question, but how do you think
you have pefformed as Prime Minister.
Whitlam. This is much more difficult for me to say, but
I would guess , hat most people would concede that I would be the
best available, shall I say.
Reeves. In terms of Prime Ministers over the years. How do you think
you would rate with people like Curtin and Menzies.
Whitlam. I would rather be compared with people like Deakin, by
way of achievements, and Curtin. Menzies, of course, was a superb
tactician and practitioner. But believe the Prime Ministers who
have been most effective in contiibuting to AustraLia has beer.
Deakin and Curtin.
Reeves. Looking to the future, 
S 2.
Reeves. Looking to the future, what are your governments main aims
f% r the next 12 months.
Whitlam. We want to continue these programs, and I suppose our
programs fall into two principal categories. One is that there should
be equality of opportunity as far as goveilments can achieve that, and
adcondly, there should be a general enrichment of the quality of
life. What we have wanted to do is to see that what governments have
to do, should be available everywhere in Australia, irrespective of
what people do and irrespective of where they live. We want to see
that everybody shares in the benefits of those programs which
governments, these days, have to initiate and accomplish.
Reeves. o things like inflation and unemployment come as a shock
to you.
Whitlam. Yes, they have. There is no question that unemployment
and inflation are much worse in Australia than anybody expected.
They are throughout the western world. There is not a country with
which we deal that is not hit to a completely unexpected, and
unpredictable extent by these two problems, concurrent problems of
unemployment and inflation. Every country in Western Europe and
the United States, Canadau and Japan and New Zealand, all are suffering
it. We are all infecting each other. We happen to be the countries
whih are most developed in the world, which do most of the trade
in tthe world. We just cant insulate ourselves, none of us-
Reeves. Yesterday, the Party's Federal Secretary, David Coomb, said
that, looking towards the future, some members of the Party were
disullusioned and disinterested in the future of the Labor gover. ment.
Have you felt this as well.
Whitlam. I suppose some of the initial exhilaration has faded. But
I believe that qhen people, who are Labor supporters, Labor members,
come to relfect on what we have done, and the way we have overcome
difficulties at home and abroado and weze were dealing with some of
those abroad which have their inevitable effect on us, but also
domesticly we have been beset by difficulties that nobady previous
government has ever had. There has never been an. opposition which has
been so cantankerous and negative. There has never been a federal
gover ment which has come in for so much abuse,' constant abuse by
so many state governments' But when you looki, despite all this,
we have achieved immense things. Education. health, the facilities
in our citids, the capital and provincial cities, the overseas trade
agreements, we have made an immense improvement in the structure
within which governments have to operate in this country.
Reeves. Could I suggest that some of the abuse has come from members
of en your own Party' or members outside the Parliament.
Whitla. This would be so. I mean, you are a very skilled practitiioner
in the media, and you know if anybody in government says something, the
technique is to go aroun4 and solicit opinions from people who might
not ia be attracted to what it has done. Of course, you can always get
off the cuff criticisms from people. I am sure there are quite a lot
of favorable responses, but they are not publicised" So, it is a fair
enough tednique, but we are all familiar with it.
Reeves. Do you think there are too many nervous nellies belly aching
in the Party about things which the government has not done, or
which people think should have been done.
Whitlam: Yes, there is quite an amount of this. But this is
understandable in politics. The people to whom you so kindly and
gently refer are very often those who have sought office in the 



7
OPEdING REMARKS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE lION, E. G. WIIITLAM,
Q, C, o FOR CHANNEL 7, MELBOURNE, SECOND ANNIVERSARY PROGRAM
( kI coiwED 2 DLCEMIER 1.9711 FOR fQ'LAY 9,30 P. M. ON 2 IECEMIsER 1974
IN MELBOIRIE, SYDNFY, I1RISBANE, ADELJAIDE)
I AM HAPPY TO TEL. YOU SOMETHING OF WHAT THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT HAS ACHIEVED SINCE WE CAME TO OFFICE JUST TWO
YEARS AGO TODAY. WE'VE HAD GREAT PROBLEMS, AS YOU KNOW
EVERY COUNTRY IN THE WESTERN WORLD HAS SHARED THOSE PROBLEMS
BUT A GREAT RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT STANDS BEHIND US. AND
DESPITE OUR DIFFICULTIES, DESPITE THESE WORLD-WIDE ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS, OUR HOPES ARE STILL HIGH. WE HAVE IMPORTANT PLANS
FOR THE YEAR AHEAD.
As YOU KNOW, WE ARE CONTENDING WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS
OF INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT. No WESTERN COUNTRY HAS
ESCAPED THESE PROBLEMS NOT ONE. FOR THE FIRST TIME WE
ARE FIGHTING BOTH PROBLEMS AT ONCE. WE ARE CARRYING ON THE
FIGHT WITH EVERY AVAILABLE WEAPON, EVERY MEASURE AT OUR
DISPOSAL, EVERY CONSTITUTIONAL POWER WE POSSESS. WE'VE HAD
VERY LITTLE HELP OR CO-OPERATION FROM OUR OPPONENTS IN THE
SENATE OR ELSEWHERE. BUT I ASK YOU TO REMEMBER THIS:
AUSTRALIANS ARE EVERYWHERE BETTER OFF THAN THEY WERE BEFORE
LABOR CAME IN. AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, ALLOWING FOR INFLATION,
HAVE INCREASED IN REAL PURCHASING POWER BY 3,2 PER CENT IN
THE YEAR TO JUNE 1973 AND BY A FURTHER 3.9 PER CENT IN THE
YEAR TO JUNE 1974. 
-2-
THAT'S A GAIN OF MORE THAN SEVEN PER CENT IN REAL LIVING
STANDARDS UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT, THE LIBERALS DID NOTHING
TO SAFEGUARD EMPLOYEES THE GREAT BULK OF THE PEOPLE
FROM THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND WE HAVE AND WE'LL DO MORE,
THE LIBERALS DID NOTHING TO PROTECT PEOPLE FROM THE EFFECTS
OF UNEMPLOYMENT, WE HAVE AND WILL WE DO MORE, OUR
RETRAINING SCHEME IS JUST ONE EXAMPLE OF WHAT AN ACTIVE,
COMPASSIONATE GOVERNMENT CAN DO, AND REMEMBER-THIS ABOUT
UNEMPLOYMENT: OUR PREDECESSORS, THE LIBERALS, CREATED
UNEMPLOYMENT AS A DELIBERATE ACT OF POLICY, WE HAVE-NEVER
CREATED IT DELIBERATELY, IT HAS COME ABOUT BECAUSE WE HAVE
HAD TO TAKE ACTION TO DEAL WITH THE WORLD-WIDE INFLATIONARY
CRISIS, AND WE ARE DETERMINED TO REDRESS THE HARDSHIP
JUST AS SOON AS WE CAN. THROUGHOUT THE YEAR WE HAVE TAKEN A
WIDE RANGE OF ECONOMIC DECISIONS, WE NO LONGER REGARD THE
BUDGET AS OUR SOLE INSTRUMENT OF ECONOMIC POLICY, WE HAVE
BEEN MUCH MORE RESOURCEFUL, MUCH MORE FLEXIBLE IN OUR APPROACH,
ONLY THREE WEEKS AGO I ANNOUNCED A NEW SERIES OF MEASURES
TO STIMULATE THE ECONOMY AND REDUCE UNEMPLOYMENT, WE HAVE
MADE CUTS IN TAXATION WHICH, TOGETHER WITH THOSE IN THE
BUDGET, WILL BE WORTH $ 1200 MILLION, AND THOSE TAX CUTS
ARE BASED ON A NEW TAX SCALE DESIGNED TO BENEFIT THE
FAMILIES MOST IN NEED, THE PEOPLE MOST NEGLECTED IN THE PAST,
,/ 3 L 
-3-
AT THE SAME TIME WE HAVE PRESSED AHEAD WITH OUR
GREAT PROGRAM OF SOCIAL REFORM AND INNOVATION. OUR OPPONENTS
HAVE DONE THEIR BEST TO OBSTRUCT THAT PROGRAM BECAUSE
THLY HAVE NO WORTHWHILE PROGRAM 0O: THEIR OWN. YOU'LL RLMFMBERi
THAT LAST APRIL THEY TOOK THE EXTREME STEP OF BLOCKING SUPPLY
IN THE SENATE CUTTING OFF OUR MONEY. SO WE WENT TO THE
PEOPLE: AND THE PEOPLE ENDORSED OUR PROGRAM FOR THE
SECOND TIME. YOU RETURNED US TO OFFICE, YOU PUT US BACK
ON THE JOB, ALREADY WE HAVE PUT MANY HISTORIC MEASURES THROUGH
PARLIAMENT. WE HAVE EXTENDED THE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM WE
LAUNCHED LAST YEAR INTO THE NEW AREA OF TECHNICAL EDUCATION.
WE WILL BE SPENDING $ 100 MILLION ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER
EDUCATION IN THE NEXT TWO YEARS.
WE HAVE SET UP OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY
TO HELP KEEP THE OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR VAST NATURAL
RESOURCES IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS.
WE HAVE OPENED THE WAY FOR ORDINARY AUSTRALIANS
TO PARTICIPATE IN OUR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THROUGH THE
A. I. D. C. AND THE NATIONAL INVESTMENT FUND.
WE HAVE GIVEN PENSIONERS THE BIGGEST INCREASE
ON RECORD. WE'VE GOT OUR CHILD CARE PROGRAM UNDERWAY. 11/ 4 
-4-
WE'VE GOT OUR HEALTH INSURANCE LEGISLATION THROUGH
AN HISTORIC JOINT SITTING OF PARITAMENT.
WE'VE TACKLED IIIL VEXED AND DIFFICULT QUESTION OF
WAGE INDEXATION TO PROTECT WORKERS AGAINST INFLATION.
WE'VE BROUGHT IN HISTORIC LEGISLATION AGAINST
RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES TO BAN PRICE FIXING AND
PROTECT CONSUMERS. WE'VE INTRODUCED OUR NATIONAL COMPENSATION SCHEME
TO SAFEGUARD EVERY WORKING MAN AND WOMAN AGAINST INJURY
OR SICKNESS, HOWEVER CAUSED.
WE'VE WON NEW MARKETS FOR OUR GOODS OVERSEAS
AND VASTLY INCREASED THE RETURNS FROM THE SALE OF OUR
COAL AND IRON ORE.
THIS YEAR SAW THE OPENING OF THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE HERE IN VICTORIA, IT IS
ONE OF 356 NEW HEALTH CENTRES AND OTHER PROJECTS APPROVED
UNDER LABOR'S COMMUNITY HEALTH AND MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.
WE ARE THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
RECOGNISE THE NEEDS OF LOCAL COUNCILS. WE APPROVED GRANTS
THIS YEAR OF $ 56 MILLION TO HELP COUNCILS THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA IMPROVE THEIR SERVICES AND AMENITIES. 
WE HAVE LAUNCHED OUR PLANS FOR A VAST NATIONAL
HIGHWAY SYSTEM AND HAVE SET ASIDE $ 1200 MILLION FOR THIS
PURPOSE OVER THE NEXT TIHIREE YEARS,
THESE ARE A FEW OF THE MAJOR INITIATIVES WE
HAVE TAKEN THIS YEAR IN FULFILMENT OF OUR PROGRAM A
PROGRAM TWICE APPROVED BY THE PEOPLE, I AM PROUD OF ALL
WE HAVE DONE, OUR OVERRIDING PURPOSE IS TO WIDEN THE
OPPORTUNITIES AND RAISE THE LIVING STANDARDS OF EVERY
AUSTRALIAN, IN 1974 WE HAVE COME A LONG WAY TOWARDS
ACHIEVING OUR GOALS, IT HAS NOT BEEN EASY FOR US. IT
HAS NOT BEEN EASY FOR YOU, I HAVE TO TELL YOU FRANKLY
THAT 1975 WILL BE ANOTHER DIFFICULT YEAR ON THE ECONOMIC
FRONT, I HAVE MADE NO SCRET OF THAT, THE FIGURES WON'T LOOK
GOOD FOR A WHILE, BUT I AM CONFIDENT THERE WILL BE AN
IMPROVEMENT LATER IN THE YEAR AS OUR MEASURES TAKE EFFECT,
ALWAYS KEEP IN MIND THE SOLID, SECURE THINGS THAT MATTER IN
THE LONG RUN OUR GREAT NATURAL RESOURCES, OUR BUOYANT
OVERSEAS TRADE, OUR BASICALLY STRONG ECONOMY, OUR EDUCATED
LITERATE, RESOURCEFUL PEOPLE, WITH THOSE THINGS BEHIND
US WE CAN GET OVER OUR DIFFICULTIES AND GET ON WITH THE JOB
OF MAKING THIS COUNTRY MORE PROSPEROUS, MORE JUST, MORE
ENLIGHTENED, MORE EFFICIENT, I LOOK TO ALL AUSTRALIANSI TO
ALL SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY AND ESPECIALLY TO LABOR'S
TRADITIONAL SUPPORTERS FOR CO-OPERATION IN CARRYING
FORWARD OUR GREAT TASK IN THE YEARS TO COME, 



PRIME MINISTER 3 DECEMBER 1974
MT GRAVATT HOSPITAL
The Prime Minister said in Canberra tonight
that consideration was being given to the possibility
of moving the proposed Mt Gravatt Hospital to a site
at Cooper's Plains.
Mr Whitlam said that the Joint Hospitals
Works Council for Queensland had discussed this matter
at its last meeting on 19 November.
This followed the Queensland Premier's rejection
of a proposal that the Australian Government take over
responsibility for the Mt Gravatt Hospital project to speed
up its construction. . Mr Whitlam said that the Under Secretary of
the Queensland Department of Health had agreed to inspect
the Cooper's Plains site with a view to making a
recommendation to the Queensland Minister for Health
on the suitability and feasibility of that site for the
proposed hospital. Mr Whitlam said consideration was also being
given to a Queensland proposal to rebuild the Mater
Hospital on its present site in South Brisbane. He said
that discussions were currently taking place between
the Queensland Health Department, the Board of the Mater
Hospital and the Hospitals and Health Services Commission.
They would assess the possibility of splitting available
funds to finance some limited rebuilding on the Site at
South Brisbane as well as the construction of a new
150-200 bed hospital at Inala.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



I 0.
PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 3 DECEMBER 1974
Gentlemen, are there any questions?
QUESTION: Will the Federal G rnment appeal against the decision
on Public Service wage increa-e by Mr Taylor?
PRIME MINISTER: The decision of Mr Taylor is under consideration.
That is all I can say at this stage.
QUESTION: By Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: It is under consideration.
QUESTION: What percentage would you regard in the Queensland
elections as the cut-off point which you consider Labor to be
holding ground or gaining ground or losing ground?
PRIME MINISTER: I have got nothing to say on that.
QUESTION: Under what circumstances would the next elections
come for the Ministry? Do you have any plans for something
preceding the Senate half term might that be the occasion,
or do you not su~ e this happening until the next house election?
PRIME MINISTER: The normal time is after there is another
election for the House of Representatives.
QUESTION: Do you see nothing coming ahead of that?
PRIME MINISTER: I know of no steps.
QUESTION: Last week Dr Cairns said that he believed the Government's
first and most important job now must be to look at a possible
reduction in the level of indirect taxes. Do you share the
Deputy Prime Minister's view that the economy needs further
stimulus and, in particular, do-you think that indirect taxes
should have top priority in this area?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe Dr Cairns'said that indirect taxes
would have top priority. I certainly don't believe that they
should. To reduce the Consumer Price Index by one percentage
point would require -a reduction in indirect taxation, Federal
and State, averaged over Australia equally of $ 400 million.
I believe there are very much more effective ways of coping with
the twin problems of inflation and unemployment than by reducing
indirect tax. The form of indirect tax which would produce
the biggest puc-duction in the Consumer Price Index would be in
respect of liquor which is both State and Federal and tobacco
which is Federal and also in some States a State tax as well.
I don't really believe that it is socially or economically necessary
to promote the consumption of liquor and tobacco.
QUESTION Last week the House of Representatives voted to defer
consideration of-the Family Law Bill until next February and a
number' of Labor Party members voted this way in the House.... 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: And a great number were absent.
QUESTION:* And a great number were absent. But, taking account
of the number who voted the way they did, does this now suggest
that perhaps the Labor Party is as conservative a force as the
Opposition parties in the Senate which were able to put the
bill through there?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that a majority of the members of the
Labor Party in the House of Representatives a considerable
majority of the members of the Labor Party in the House of
Representatives will support this admirable bill.
QUESTION: Do you believe there is enough members of the House
of Representatives will support it to get the bill through in
its present form?
PRIME MINISTER: I certainly hope so. But every member of all
three parties in the House of Representatives is, I believe,
free to vote as he sees fit on this bill. That is the case with
the Australian Labor Party, I believe it is the case with the
Liberal Party and the Country Party or the National Party or
whatever it is called. I would hope that a majority of members
of all parties would support this bill.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, are you satisfied that you have
the departmental resources to back up your statedi attempt to
inrolve yourself more in economic decision-making? If not, what
plans do you have to change the structure of your department
to help you play that role more effectively?
PRIME Mi. rSTER: The structure of any department is not-the
responsibii'y of the Minister, it is the responsibility of
the Permanent Head. The Minister can make recommendations to
the Cabinet concerning the appointment of Permanent HeaO
when positions of Permanent Heads are vacant but the Minister
does not decide thc-structure of any dcpartinent and that applies
to the Prime M4ini~ t, L wi -h teo~ ~ his department top.
QUL TTC1N: Can you expand on whether your Permanent Head has any
plans Ind has he discussed them with you?
PRIME Jy1.1.__ TER: No I can't expand on that.
QUESTION: Do you know of any plans or would you ny plans
to try and recommit that dlecision of last Thursday to d&amp; fer the
consideration of the Family Law Bill to next year?
PRIME MINISTER: I know of no plan. Do any of you? Let me know
if you do.
QUESTION: Would you support any moves to recommit that decision?
PRIME MINISTER: If a vote came to recommit that decision I would
support it. But I-don't know of any moves to do so.
QUESTION: Do you expect the Foreign Affairs and Defence
Committee to report on the Omega base before the Federal Conference? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
QUESTION: What will happen
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
QUESTION: What would happen if you don't get the report before
the Federal Conference then in view of the big row at the last
Conference on this issue?
PRIME MINISTER: There wasn't a big row at the last Conference on
this issue. -The Conference supported the idea that there should
be an inquiry into the whole issue by the Parliamentary Committee,
the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee, and I think that was
supported on all sides. I don't know when the committee will
report.
QUESTION: Will you be speaking to us again in this form before
you go overseas, and....
PRIME MINISTER: I hope so next Tuesday. I am not quite sure
whether the House of Representatives will be sitting but it looks
as if it won't be and I would hope to be having this pleasant
colloquy at that time.
QUESTION: If you don't sir, perhaps you could tell us a little
of what you expect of this trip and do you consider Russia to be
thehighlight-of the journey and what things you might be raising
with the Russians? Will it include the problem of the Jewish
emigration? PRIME MINISTER: I have got nothing to add to questions I have
alreLdy canswered on this subject, including the one you mentioned.
I answered a question on that on TV 22 hours ago. I am sorry
I haven't been able to have these conferences the last f'-w we
but I had the advantage of the company of many of you t! la.. L
three weekends in Queensland north, south, centre, west.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, if you don't appeal against Mr Taylor's
decision what does this mean for your policy on wage restraint?
The flow-on effects will be quite considerable to the private
white-collar sector?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't make that assumption at all. Incidc. ntally,
some of th.-reporting and the headlines ci; this subject seem to L~ e
very much astray. Th'is is the first time, I hclleve, that
Mr Taylor or his predecessors have granted I-ntage
increases. For instanc, the percentage increase whic, hu ,_ Lo
to the people on the smallest incomes were 25 per cent. Tiñ. ' rc.
he granted to those on the hic' was 13 per cent which is qui.
a change as far as the Public Service Arbitrator is concerned.
QUESTION: On the dreaded trip again.
PRIME MINISTER: Aren't you coming?
QUESTION: I hope so. During the election campaign you addressed
members of the Jewish community at a breakfast in Melbourne and
you were reported as saying then that you hoped to include Israel
in the itinerary for the trip. 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't think I said that. I did not say that.
I believe I said that I expected to be the first Australian Prime
Minister to visit Israel. I am, of course, the only political
1' eader in the Australian Parliament present or past who has
ever visited Israel. I have visited if four times. I hope to
visit Israel and, of course, also Egypt and Lebanon.
QUESTION: On this trip Prime linister or at another time?
PRIME MINISTER: No, there was never any suggestion on this trip.
The statement to which you refer was last May, just before the
elections and at that time it was expected I would visit Europe
but not the Middle East in June, and that European visit has been
postponed to this Christmas/ New Year period.
QUESTION: Sir, the Senate has just defeated your Broadcasting
and Television legislation by 27 to 25. Do you regard this as
significant defeat?
PRIME MINISTER: Let me consider the implications.
QUESTION: Last weekend in Brisbane you defended cons imer interests
and said that some trade unions and employers were scrf'wing the
public. Are you prepared to back up these wo ' rds with action and.
oppose any move within the Labor Party to increase tariffs or
duties on imported goods?
PRIME MINISTER: I will look at all these matters on their merit.
The attitude I take to protection, the assistance to some industries,
impositions on consumers in respect of the products of those
-'-industries, should be well-known. But as far as I am concerned
an'y decisi-ons should be reached after considering the point of
view seeking the point of view of all people concerned, and
I don't believe that the only points of view that ziiould be
cnsidered are those of the employers and employees in
' IKrticular industries. I believe the consumer also hias to be
-' c6nsidered.
QUESTION: I refer to the Broadcasting Act which precludes
television and radio from being broadcast or televised from
midnight on the Wednesday preceding any election Federal or
State. Has Cabinet at any stage considered amending that law?
PRIME MINISTER: There has been some discussion but there has
been no decision. And there hasn't been any recent discussions
either. I
QUESTION: How do you now see the role of the Public Service and,
in particular, the Treasury after some of the things that have been
said last week and after the reports that were in the papers this
morning that yo! ire going to set up a new non-Public Service
decision advisory body around you, and after Dr Cairns decision
not. to appoint his personal private secretary from the Treasury
telf. Does this mean that the Government now regards the
. f~ sury in particular and the Public Service in general as
liable, that you are trying to set up alternative decision-
~~ ing bodies or can we expect to see a change back towards the
Jaditional pattern later in the course of this Government. 
PRIME MINISTER: You have asked me several questions. I can't
pretend that I can remember them. I will therefore not try to
give precise answers to them. All that I have done in this matter
is to see that the three senior Ministers confer with me and
with the Permanent Heads of my Department and of the Treasury and
of the Department of Minerals and Energy and the Reserve Bank
at regular intervals. This is not a decision-making body, it's
a consultative body but I have not appointed and it doesn't
fall to me to appoint any of the other bodies to which you refer.
Nothing that I have done in this respect would be designed
or likely to downgrade or oust Treasury. It should assist in the
prompt and comprehensive examination, at the highest level of
government, of all economic, statistics and indices.
QUESTION: Over the last few days you have had quite a deal to
say about the problems and achievements of the Whitlam Labor
Government over the past two years. Sir, could I ask you what
would you like to say on December 2, 1975 in terms of the
achievements of your Government? What do you see as the problems'
in the next 12 months, what are you hoping the results will be?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that within the next 12 months we will
see still more of our programs and the institutions we propose
in operation. A year ago many of these institutions were still
fledgelings the Cities Commission, the Grants Commission, the
Schools Commission, the Prices Justification Tribunal, the Industries
Assistance Commission. They are all now very effective
institutions.* Now in the last twelve months we have set up many
other bodies for instance, the Trade Commission. And I have no
doubt that in twelve months time we will see the benefit of that
body of the various pieces of legislation under the Australian
Parliiment's taxation and corporations jurisdiction and we
will al.: see'the benefit of many of the local bodies which we
are estabji hing such as legal aid offices and community health
centres. I believe that in twelve months time, right around t-e
country, you will see the effective demonstrations of t! program
which I have outlined over the last two years.
QUESTION: And the problems sir?
PRIME MINISTER: The problems will be of the same kind but less in
deiree than at the moment.
QUESTrION: Sir, within that twelve months would you see a
reducti'-in interest rates possibility?
PRIME MINISTER: A very distinct possibility. t~ -, av a
probability. QUESTION: Recently in a telcv i q4on interview you endorsed thri-
Caucus system as an integral element in the Federal Parliamnzlu. Ly
Labor Party.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: T am wondering if you could give us your views on members
of the Caucus initiating broad economic policies. What would
happen.... 
-6-
PRIME MINISTER: The Caucus system, the Standing Orders of the
Caucus, don't provide for that. There are committees which the
Caucus elect~ s and they make recommendations on matters within
their jurisdiction if they wish and they are considered by the
Cabinet and then put to the full Caucus.
QUESTION: Do you support that idea of a Caucus committee
initiating economic policies?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it can initiate certain ideas but quite
obviously the executive which is elected wholly by the Caucus
must be the prime initiating body. I don't mind where ideas come
from I welcome them. There has been some error by some Caucus
committees in presuming to review decisions which have been
made under the Caucus Standing Orders by committee and by Cabinet
itself.
QUESTION: Following up to your answer to Mr Begg's question, to
what extent would you hope to see the interest rate reduction
and when?
PRIME MINISTER: I haje got no more to say on that.
QUESTION: Prime Minister you mentioned the. IAC as one of the
achievements of the last 12 months. Are you concerned now at the
rather sarcastic manner in which the IAC is being referred to
by some political leaders and do you think this might reduce
its effectiveness?
PRIME' MINISTER: No. I believe the quality of the appointments
we made to the IAC and the statutory obligations of the IACG
will s r-Tive any such sarcastic comments. The critics of the IAC,
I fin, -i't'stand up in general to the IAC itself. r haven't
got very ML-sympathy for those people who criticise the IAC
when either they have given evidence to the IAC, which the lAC
has found deficient, or when they have not given evidenc( t all.
I think people in assessing the views of critics of the IAC should
examine the motive., and the performance of those critics. There
was a recent case where a State department made a submission on
a r-atter which had been reported on by the IAC and there were
alz some outside consultants whom my own department asked to
rel-on this same matter. I must say that the State departmenlL
and outside consultants didn't stand up very well to what the
TAC Eaid.
QUESTION: made a few remarks about the Pub] i' Service wage
increase which eft us rather up in the air. Yu, it
being reconsidcored. Ca, -ou tell us how?
PRIME MINISTER: i said it i, 1-ir considered.
QUESTION: Well it is being considered. Can you tell us how?
PRIME MINISTER: It is under consideration I think I said.
No I won't elaborate.
QUESTION: Can you tell us whether you are happy with it. Do you
think it will da-mage the case which the Government is about to
put to the.... 
7--
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I won't state any views on those either.
QUESTION: Would you like to 1, ave power to select yourself
for portion of the Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I've been asked this question so often
and I have always given the same reply. I support the idea of a
Government party electing the ministers. I have always said that
and, I believe you know I have always said that. I believe the
other system which applied under our predecessors was one of the
reasons for our predecessors crumbling.
QUESTION: I did say portion though, I never said....
PRIME MINISTER: No, well I have been asked that to. I don't
appreciate your asking me questions which then promote me to
take up a didactic attitude towards you. But, the fact is that
I support the present system wholly. I always have and I have
always said so. 



J4 AUSTHALIA Press Statement No. 392
3 December 1974
TEXTILES AUTHORITY REPORT YARNS, KNITTED FABICS AND
TOWELLING
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that, following consideration of a report by the Textiles
Authority within the Industries Assistance Commission, the
Government had decided to introduce tariff quotas on imported
acrylic apparel yarns, knitted or crocheted fabrics of
man-made fibres and terry towels. Mr Whitlam stated that the
Textiles Authority had found that imports in these areas were
causing market disruption. Mr Whitlam also released the
Authority's report and an exchange of correspondence between
the Standing Interdepartmental Committee on Assistance to
Industries and the Commission.
. Mr Whitlam said that the Government did not
consider it appropriate to attempt to negotiate voluntary restraints
on the basis recommended by the Authority. Therefore the
Government had decided to accept the Authority's alternative
recommendation that other means such as tariff quotas be used
to achieve a similar measure of assistance to the domestic
industry. Mr Whitlam said that the tariff quotas which were
being introduced consistently with Australia's rights and
obligations under the GATT would remain in effect for the next
12 months and that this form of assistance would be reviewed
within that period. Mr Whitlam. said that he would be sending a reference
to the Industries Assistance Commission for inquiry and report
on the long-term assistance requirements of the sectors of the
Australian industry concerned.
Mr Whitlam added that tariff quotas would apply to
all imports of the products concerned cleared for home consumption
after the date of this announcement. The policy aspects of the
administration of the tariff quotas will be the responsibility of
the Minister for Manufacturing Industry who will announce detailed
arrangements in the near future. Copies of the Textiles Authority's
report and related correspondence are now available.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



12
-Ii" Us THALIA~ 3 December 1974
QUEENSLAND HOSPITAL GRANTS
Following a question to Dr Everingham in the
House of Representatives today, the Prime Minister has
released details of new Australian Government grants
to ease Queensland's hospital problems.
Mr Whitlam said he had written to Mr Bjelke-
Petersen on 30 November giving details of decisions
arising out of the most recent meeting of the Joint
Hospitals Works Council for Queensland.
The Queensland Minister for Health has been
advised that an initial. Australian Government Grant
of $ 5.151 million has been made available for the
approved hospital program in Queensland for 1974/ 75.
Mr Whitlam said that of this sum, $ 2.678 million
was for hospital projects already being planned or
constructed. Among projects that could be assisted are
Stage II of the Cairns Hospital, construction of a
medical and services block at Rockhampton, extensions
to Mt Isa Hospital and new obstetric facilities at
Mt Gravatt as the first stage of a new teaching hospital.
A grant of $ 200,000 towards construction of a new
dental hospital in South Brisbane has been included for
this financial year. This does not include $ 14,000
for Sandgate Medical and Dental Clinic which is not in
the hospital grounds.
Mr Whitlam said that $ 1.023 million would be
provided towards psychiatric services. A main feature
would be accommodation for intellectually handicapped
persons at the Rockhampton-and Baillie Henderson ( Toowoomba)
Hospitals and Basil Stafford Training Centre at Brisbane.
Mr Whitlam said that many Queensland hospitals
were in need of substantial upgrading and re-equipping, and
$ 520,000 had been allocated for major equi pment purposes and
$ 400,000 would go towards ward refurbishing.
General hospital projects under construction such
as a new ward block at Southport Hospital and new outpatient
facilities at Chermside will benefit from the remaining funds. 



INTERNATIONAL WOMENTS YEAR:
Priorities and Considerations
Statement prepared for the information
of the Parliament and tabled by the
Honorable E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
Prime Minister.
4 December 1974 
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
It is a basic human right that neither women nor
men should be excluded in law or in fact from the political,
social, economic or cultural life of their country.
This Government has long recognised that
discrimination against women is incompatible with human
dignity and the well-being of society.
For the first time in the history of Australia,
a national government has made a conscious.-and genuine attempt
to overcome the decades of neglect from which womnen have
suffered, to give to women and to men the ability to freely
choose that way of life best suited to them individually.
International Women's Year 1975 will provide an
opportunity to stand back and assess what has already been
achieved a4 well as enabling the initiation of further
programs based on a deep commitment to -these basic human
rights.
Background On 18 December 1972 the United Nations General
Assembly adopted the following resolution ( 3010 ( XXVII))
proclaiming 1975 as International Women's Year: 
2
The General Assembly,
Considering that twenty-five years have elapsed
since the first session of the Commission on the Status
of Women was held at Lake Success, New York, from 10 to
24 February 1947, and that this is a period which makes
it possible to take stock of the positive results obtained,
Bearing in mind the aims and principles of the
Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution
2263 ( XXII) of 7 November 1967,
Recognizing the effectiveness of. the work done by
the Commission on the Status of Women in the twenty-five
years since its establishment, and the important
contribution which women have made to the social,
political, economic and cultural life of their countries,
Considering that it is necessary to strengthen
universal recognition of the principle of the equality
of men and women, de jure and de facto, and that both
legal and social measures have to be taken by Member
States which have not yet done so to ensure the
implementation of women's rights,
Recalling that its resolution 2626 ( XXV) of 24
October 1970, containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, includes among the goals and objectives of 
-3
the Decade the encouragement of the full integration
of women in the total development effort,
Drawing attention to the general objectives and
minimum targets to be attained in the course of the*
Second United Nations Development Decade, as defined
by the Commission on the Status of Women and adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 2716 ( XXV)
of 15 December 1970,
Considering that, with those ends in view, the
proclamation of an international women's year would
serve to intensify the action required to advance the
status of women,
1. Proclaims the year 1975 International Women's Year;
2. Decides to devote this year to intensified action:
To promote equality between men and women;
To ensure the full integration of women in the
total development effort, especially by emphasizing
women's responsibility and important role in economic,
social and cultural development at the national, regional
and international levels, particularly during the Second
United Nations Development Decade;
1( c) To recognize the importance of women's increasing
contribution to the development of friendly relations and
co-operation among States and to the strengthening of
world peace; 
-4
3. Invites all Member States and all interested
organizations to take steps to ensure the full
realization of the rights of women and their advancement
on the basis of the Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women;
4. Inr1A" iite Govelrnmnsta have * not y et'doie so
to ratify as soon as possible Convention ( No. 100)
concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers
for Work of Equal Value, adopted by the International
Labour Organisation in 1951;
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in
consultation with Member States, specialized agencies
and . interested non-governmental organizations, within
the limits of existing resources, a draft programme for
the International Women's Year and to submit it to the
Commission on the Status of Women at its twenty-fifth
session in 1974.0
This resolution stresses the need to promote
equality between women and men and to ensure the full
integration of women in the total development effort. it
invites member governments and interested organisations to
take steps to ensure that appropriate measures be taken to
abolish sexually discriminatory laws, customs and practices;
to educato public opinion; to eradicate prejudiced ideas
concerning the inferiority of women; to ensure equal access
to education and equality of opportunity and earnings in the
workforce. 
aawl" O* hnn ami w
h . oh UI ' W w V. i. A ~ r k301'' U J 7 Z. 0 1 2 ic o
Q. 
5
The Australian Prime Minister, in a statement to
mark International Women's Day on 8 March 1974, announced
that the Government was preparing an official program for
International Women's Year. The Prime Minister paid tribute
to the work of women's groups throughout Australia in seeking
to use International Women's Day and International Women's
Year to draw attention to the achievements of women and to
the need for continued efforts to remove discrimination
against women. On 24 July 1974 the Prime Minister announced in
the House of Representatives that a National Advisory Committee
would be established composed of individuals from the community
whose differing backgrounds could assist the Government in
the formulation of a program for the year. He went on to say
that the Government had already established a Secretariat
withii, the Department of the Special Minister of State an.
that an Interdepartmental Advisory Committee would b ior d
whose task it would be to develop and co-ordinate the activitico3
of government departments and agencies.
The Prime Minister himself has taken ministerial
responsihility foK the year, assisted by tne Special Miris-er
of State in his role as Minister Assisting tne PL_
In the same statement the Prime Minister also
announced that the Premiers of each State had been approached
and that he confidently expected that both state and local
governments would be glad to participate in this program. ./ 6 
6
In the Budget Speech on 17 September 1974 the
Treasurer announced that two million dollars had been set
aside for International Women's Year activities in the
financial year 1974-75.
National Advisory Committee
The members of the National Advisory Committee for
International Women's Year were announced on 11 September 1974.
They were selected to ensure a blend and balance
between skills and interests in the total group. The Prime
Minister invited on to this Committee individuals with
differing backgrounds, differing experiences and differing
expertise rather than using the more traditional method of
seeking a representative from different organisations or
sections of the community. The hope was that by bringing
together people with practical experience the gap between
understanding a problem and finding ways of lessening it could
begin to be bridged.
Ms Elizabeth Reid, the Prime Minister's Adviser on
matters relating to the welfare of women, was appointed
convener of the Committee; its other members are:
Ms Shirley Castley child welfare officer in Tasmania
Mr Barry Egan trade unionist
Ms Irene Greenwood lifetime fighter for women's rights
in Western Australia
Ms Ruby Hammond member of various South Australian
aboriginal committees ./ 7 
7
Ms Jeanette Hungerford
Ms Caroline Jones
Mr James Oswin
Ms Maria Pozos
Ms Ruth Ross
Ms Diana Waite
Mrs Margaret Whitlam Queensland occupational therapist
extensive media experience
Secretary, Department of the Media
active amongst migrant women in
Victoria physiotherapist, active in many
voluntary and women's groups in
the Wollongong area
experience in problems of women in
remote areasi particularly the North
West of Australia
journalist and former social worker.
It is not the role of the National Advisory Committee
to impose upon the women of Australia a predetermined program.
It is their hope that all women in Australia will speak out
their ' h'ughts, their needs, their worries, their hopes and
their dreams for the future. It will be the women o lustialia,
be they Aboriginal or newcomers, young or old, English speaking
or non English speaking, married or unmarried and so on, who
will determine Australia's program for this year.
In his speech at the inaugural meeting of the National
Advisory Committee 11 September 1974, the Prime L said:
" One of the regular and often unnoticed
activities of the United Nations is its designation
of International Years for the purpose of drawing
attention to matters of human significance. For 
-8
instance, in the past decade there have been
proclaimed such years as
International Co-operation Year ( 1965)
International Year for Human Rights ( 1968)
International Education Year ( 1970)
International Year to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination ( 1971)
World Population Year ( 1974)
In the past, in Australia, these Years have
been celebrated within the community through the
activities of various organisations,. but rarely
have governments taken these Years seriously
enough to plan far-reaching and imaginative programs
aimed at achieving the objectives of the Year.
* My Government has decided that there is much
more that can be done, at a national level, to
assist and co-ordinate the celebration of these
Years. The struggle for universal human rights is
a protracted and perhaps an unending struggle.
International Women's Year is considered to be
especially important in that the Government is
determined that its actions and philosophies
adopted in the international forum be matched
with those pursued at home. In the United Nations,
Australia is becoming known as an outspoken
contender for basic human rights. We acknowledge a / 9 
9
that we have a continuing obligation to do all
in our power to promote respect for human rights.
To my mind, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights is one of the most significant and
enlightened achievements of the United Nations,
and it is from this fundamental commitment to
the dignity of people that 1975 was unanimously
proclaimed on 18 December 1972 by the United
Nations General Assembly to be International
Women's Year.
It is worth considering the fact that it
was thought necessary to nominate a year for all
nations to make a concentrated effort towards
ensuring that women enjoy the dignity of basic
i,. iman rights, that they are integrated into
society and that there is a recognition of the
importance of their contribution to society.
It is worth considering this fact because
it is a sobering thought that women throughout
L. world have to be granted an uptirtunity to
be heard. The formation of a National Advisory Committee,
and this its inaugural meeting, is an insurance ./ 1o 
10
that Australia will face the responsibility that
this year places upon us.
It is my hope that you will be able to
marshall, co-ordinate and encourage the dedication,
energy and enthusiasm of organisations and
women within the community, and that in addition
you will provide a national direction to this
activity so that 1975 is not only a year of
significance in itself but that it will have
made a lasting contribution towards reducing the
prejudices and lack of opportunity from which
women suffer. It is also my hope that this year
will ensure a lasting recognition of the great
contribution that women have made, and continue
to make, to Australian society.
Government legislation can only achieve so
much and I shall not pretend to you that any
Government can achieve immediately for Australian
women the revolution required to allow them to
ievelop fully as individuals.
For instance it must be said that, even if
we were to remove all ti&gt; inequalities of opportunity
and of status, it still would not be enough. We
have to attack the social inequalities/ the hidden S./ 11 
11
and usually unarticulated assumptions which
affect women not only in employment but in the
whole range of their opportunities in life.
This is not just a matter for governments
and for action by governments it is a matter
of changing community attitudes and uprooting
community prejudices, and in so far as this
requires a re-education of the commuInity then
clearly governments alone cannot be expected to
do the whole job.
You are probably aware of what we have done.
One of the purposes of the Human Rights Bill was
to permit Australia to ratify the Convention on
the Political Rights of Women, which was adopted
by the United Nations in 1952 and came into foice
in July 1954. Australia is not a party to the
Convention on the Political Rights of Women as
there is still legislation in two States, South
Australia and Tasmania, that does not yet fully
conform with the requirements of that Convention.
The Convention provides that women shall be
entitled to hold public office at Australian and
State level on equal terms with men, without any
discrimination. Action has already been taken
to amend Australian legislation relating to the ./ 12 
12
Public Service to remove provisions that offend
against this Convention. It is expected that
Australia will ratify or accede to that Convention
after these defects have been overcome, either
as a result of the proposed Human Rights Act or
by the enactment of specific legislation on the
subject.* My Government has already established a
National Committee on Discrimination in Employment
and Occupation. Other actions taken by the
Government in the area of women's employment
include: Successful intervention in December
1972 in proceedings before the
Australian Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission to have established the
principle of equal pay for work of
equal Value. Consultations with
State Governments have led to most
States agreeing to this principle.
The two governments are now amending the legislation.
Australia, therefore, will deposit an instrument
of accession to the Convention on the Political
Rights of Women with the United Nations on the
December 1974, the 26th anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In Geneva
on the same day Australia will ratify the International
Labour Organization Convention No. 100,
The Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951. ./ 13 
13
The provision of training opportunities
for women wishing to enter or re-enter
the labour force after a period of
domestic responsibility.
This coming year will also see the beginning
of the implementation of the Government's new
program for the care and education of young children.
In no other country in the world has such an
ambitious program been attempted. This program
recognises the need for educational, health and
welfare components in child care; it recognises
the need for these same services for children
whether they be looked after at home or elsewhere.
It will break down the traditional distinctions
between occasional care and regular care, between
Are-school education and child minding. All
children whether they be looked after at home or
elsewhere will have access to local centres designed
to take care of their educational, health,
psychological and other needs. The implementation
of this program will place Australia amongst those
c, ntries most genuinely concerned with welfare of
the young. Furthermore, the Schools Commission has
established a committee to look into the relation / 14 
14
between social change and the education of women
and girls. Recommendations from this committee
will be included in the report to be presented
to Parliament in the course of next year. Its
terms of reference are far-reaching and its task
a difficult one, for not only must it pinpoint
those areas of education within which women are
disadvantaged, but it must also make specific
recommendations for future action.
Many other Government departments have
programs planned for the coming year.
In the field of women's health, the first,
and basic, initiative taken by the Government has
been the establishment of the Leichhardt Women's
Community Health Centre in Sydney. The aim of'
this centre is to meet a need expressed by women
for a health service staffed by women directed
solely towards the special health needs of women.
This is a significant initiative of a completely
new dimension deriving directly from the Australian
Government's broad policy perspectives and the
Community Health Program will be actively developed
to give it priority. 4 
Gi-eater participation by women at il levels
of health care planning, delivery and administration
is being actively promoted and this policy is
providing women with increasing opportuuiities cf
influencing the direction which health care i
taking in the community.
In the field of Aboriginal health, Aboriginal
women arc being involved to an increasing degree
in the delivery of health care to their own people.
The initiative of my Government which may
have the most far-reaching consequences is the
establishment of a Royal Commission into Human
Relationships. It is the task of this Commission
to investigate the stresses that society places
" non relationships between people, in what ways
inadequate housing, insufficient money, too many
or too few children, the vajlabilJty or otherwise
of contracentive counselling and the adequacy of
medical care affect people and their r&amp;.~ t[ on
This Commission has been asked to present regular
i. ' Prim reports and hence will also c: Q'-ibute to
the success of the coming year.
We must however acknowledge that the inequality
of women's position in society is deeply embedded not
just in the institutions but also in the psychology / 16
1; 5 
16
of the society. In this respect those women's
organisations are correct which say that the first
and fundamental step towards freedom is awareness
by women themselves of their real inequality, of
the extent of their social, political, economic
and cultural discrimination and deprivation.
I have mentioned the general responsibility
that the National Advisory Committee has for
developing themes and programs for the year which
will be of benefit to all women in Australia,
whatever their education, their cultural background,
their economic status, their occupation, their
beliefs or their way of life. In so doing you
also have the opportunity to tackle this basic
problem of embedded attitudes, not only by
encouraging the growth of community activity in
areas affecting women but also by giving a
significant boost to the level of cwareness amongst
women and men of the extent of these problems.
It is for this reason and because of our
coimmitment to, change in this area tnai my
Government is determined that sufficient time
and funds be availo j] to achieve these ends
and it is also for this reason that much time
and thought went into the membership of the
National Advisory Committee. We wanted, and we / 17 
17
have, a group of people whose unique expertise
and experience is deeply grounded in their
understanding of and demonstrated commitment to
Australian women, their present and their future."
Objectives In light of this brief the National Advisory
Committee at this inaugural meeting formulated the overall
objectives of International Women's Year for Australia as:
We live in a changing society and women are now
being offered a unique opportunity to contribute
to influencing the course of the changes which are
taking place, the ultimate goal being a society
based on the dignity of women, men and children.
A framework was developed to be followed in Australia during
1975 and, hopefully, beyond. It involves a three part approach:
Change of attitudes
Institutional changes may no-be beneficial
unless based on real and thorough-going
attitudinal changes in the society. This
involves not only the way men see women but
also how women see themselves. Clearly there
is a need for an educative process of some
considerable dimension directed towards
examining and reassessing the beliefs that
society holds about the capacities,* potential ./ 18 
18
and life patterns of women and giLis. As
well as directing attention to adults there
needs to be a special and concerted approach
to the attitude formation of children and
young people.
( ii) Areas of discrimination and suffering
There needs to be an identification of areas
of discrimination against women in our society
and a concerted attempt to solve the problems
this creates or at least point the direction
which possible solutions may take. Moreover
there needs to be a recognition of the special
problems facing women as women and a sympathetic
and enlightened attempt to overcome them. For
women to take their place in society on a basis
* of dignity and equality as human beings w6 must
remove discriminations made against them
of their traditional sex/ propertv function
Moreo7er we must go beyond this to recognise
the special needs of women with a view to meeting
these needs and overcoming the I-. icEps, thereb.
enabling a full and free opr..-Hni. ty for
individual expression.
( iii) Creative aspects
The year is seen not merely as designed to
overcome disabilities but also as emphasising
and giving opportunity to the creative aspects / 19 
19
of women in
human race.
be a joyous
which bring their uniqueness within the
It is intended that the year
one and that celebrations occur
out these aspects.
The Program Within this framework the Committee is seeking
during 1975 to have initiated and encouraged activities such
as the continued establishment of a network of
community centres to respond to women's problems
and encourtahgee ir activities
and encourage their activities
health, rehabilitation, crisis
e. g. health, peri-natal, etc.
Sshelter/ refuge
crisis counselling
post-rape assistance
( ii) developmental/ creative
containing for example
collections ( books, magazines, documents,
films, videotapes etc.)
. study facilities ( reaair.. rooms, audiovisual
equipment)
Sfacili: ies for meetings and discussion gri.-
workshops creche
Sreferral service on legal matters, employment
and other social problems 
20
sponsoring of research projects, e. g.:
male/ female stereotypes
* effect of current education system and
texts on children
* effect of literary stereotypes on the
development of women's self image
* reflection in language of male perspectives
( ii) the isolation of women
( iii) victimology, including rape situations
( iv) formal and informal barriers to women's full
participation in existing socio-political
institutions e. g. political parties, churches, local
government, etc.
undertaking an education program aimed at en,
men and women
e. g. films, including TV films
" radio programs
" pamphlets/ booklets
" lectures
convening woJ--shops, seiginars, conf-renceF znuA
discussion groups covering regions beyond the
capital cities ./ 21 
21
festivals/ cultural activities focussing on women
e. g. . special celebrations for International
Women's Day in 1975
* sponsoring festivals, exhibitions and
performances
* sponsoring theatre productions
* sponsoring festivals
International -hosting of a U. N. inter-regional seminar entitled
The Communication of Attitudes: Women, the Arts
and the Media
-development of strategies for the integration
of women into international plans for economic
development
Activities Consistent with the principles accepted by the
United Nations for International Women's Year it was also
decided that Australia adopt its own symbol embodying its
particular objectives.
The Committee has sought the views of a wide range
of individuals and organisations. Letters pointing out the
importance of the year and calling for suggestions for themes
and activities were sent to all women's groups, both young and
old, ethnic organisations, professional organisations, ./ 22 
22
educational institutions, trade unions, business organisations,
art galleries, music schools, and so on.
The initial response to the public. sing of
International Women's Year has been a steady tiickle, fast
turning into a flood, of submissions requesting funds or
correspondence seeking information on closing dates or the
sorts of projects to be funded. The costed submissions so
far received total around $ 3.5 million, but the bulk of
submissions are still to come or to be costed.
Many of the submissions received are for projects
that fall within the responsibility of existing government
departments or other institutions. It is not a proper
function of the National Advisory Committee to be an alternative
funding agency for projects which the responsible departments
or a:, ncies do not wish to handle or which fall through e
bureaucratic grid because the nature of the project
clearly within the province ) f any one department of
Alternative funding will only push women's problems into th'.
cracks and spaces between existing departrf ts and institr
, c would be far better and have much more far-reaching
conse,.-" nces to attempt to change the d ides of peop
within these institntions rather than to byao,
is a way of attempting to ensure that our ob3)-ivw.: coI.-
after 1975. / 23 A 
23
The National Advisory Committee will act as a focus
for the demands that are coming in from women all over
Australia, channel these demands into the appropriate
departments, argue the need, the facts and the pro's and
con's with the departments and act as a catalyst for action.
Simultaneously, it can perform an educative role for the
women or groups who have sent in submissions by, for example,
informing them which government departments and authorities,
state and local governments or other institutions have the
responsibility for their projects and of progress and impedimehts.
Unless women gain political education and expertise
their ability to bring about the changes they want will not
be increased. This latter must be an important task for the
Year. * The sorts of projects which lie within the
responsibility of existing institutions are, for exa-iD!-. ld
care centres, women's health centres, women's refuges,, iamily
planning clinics, sex education programs, retraining schemes,
legal aid, distressed housing, adult education, English
1 t. iguage courses, rape crisis centres, intc. Lpreters for nc
Engl*-h speaking people, town planninr-, pensions, consumre&gt;
standards, counselling centres, sport, voca-L..
and so on. Such projects must be an integral part of any
government planning if governments are to respond to the ./ 24 
24
needs of the community as a whcle. They require a colmmitment
to ongoing funding running costs and the like. This is a
commitment that the National Advisory Committee is not in a
position to give. Its direct funding must primarily be
restricted either to once only funding or to commitments that
can be fulfilled within its life span.
Women must be given more freedom within their
chosen life patterns and more freedom in choosing alternative
life patterns. They are at present bound in networks of
limitations affecting their whole lives, bound by the range
of possibilities open to them, by their immediate situations.
The funds which are available to the National Advisory Committee
must go towards activities that will help re-form or form anew
the way things are in such a way as to re-affirm basic human
values: sensitivity to people's needs, thoughtfulness, space
and t. ra-e to develop one's potential, support and encourag( ent
rather than competition. Our primary purpose must bE 1-o c
attitudes, to give the world little shove in the righdirection.
Some Considerations The question the lives of wi-. LA. women and how
many will be eased by a project must be the
asked. As choices will h-a~ re to be made between proposals
are certain considerations which must be taken into account:
that in the course of the year we must reach
most if not all women either through projects
potentially of benefit to all women or through 
projects which specifically relate to
areas of distress, suffering or discrimination
that no group of women should advance or gain
benefits at the expense of any other women or
group of women
that the proposal must be able to be implemented
in the present social, political and economic
climate
Not only those sectors of society which are
articulate that is, able to write submissions, approach
governments, etc. should benefit by the Year.
There are further considerations which are also
important: that the proposal must increase the possibilities
of individual change and growth
( ii) that it must help women to gain self reliance,
self confidence, self pride ai. d independence
( iii) that wherever possible and relevant it should
increase women's knowledge of the structure of
the existing institutions and increase their
political awareness ./ 26 
26
( iv) that whilst it is important to build a women's
culture this should encompass and be accessible
to all.
However, there must be an awareness that not all
proposals, no matter how initially attractive, will be to the
benefit of women or indeed of society in general. Thus, for
example, the fight for protective legislation for women:
although this legislation in the short term may have been
beneficial, in the long term it has worked to the disadvantage
of women in the workforce and ensured the continuation of
unequal employment opportunities. These, in turn, have ensured
the continuing existence of low paid, low status jobs which
inevitably become women's jobs.
Hence, each proposal must be carefully considered,
the aavantages argued and the harmful effects weighed. At
the same time, it must also be recognised that differ"-t wo n
or groups of women will have different ways of working to
achieve our objectives.
There is, however, another important consideration.
Whatev-. life women choose for themselves it is essential
that the value of this life be neither undermined rt,, vorlooked.
It is essential that women have a sense of self pride and of
independence. Government handouts or " gifts" do not necessarily
instil this. Thus funding should be on a percentage basis, / 27 
27
with, wherever possible, the rest of the funds obtained from
other institutions or raised by the women themselves. The
former will bring other authorities to recognise the needs of
women and accept responsibility for them. These activities
can also increase women's confidence in their ability to
achieve the changes they want and provide opportunities to
develop new skills and gain more knowledge.
The Committee intends to concentrate on funding
projects which will change people's attitudes, force them to
question and re-think their assumptions, beliefs, prejudices..
and opinions about women, their " proper" roles and their
capacities and force them to become aware of their attitudes
and responses.
Priorities trhere are certain areas which affect or potentially
affect every girl and woman in our society, whatever brr
education, her cultural background, her economic status, her
beliefs, her occupation or her way of life. These are:
health and welfare
child care
* education work creativity general community attitudes ./ 28 
28
There are many projects which fall under the first
five which are the responsibility of existing government
departments or instrumentalities. However ( with the possible
exception of child care, for which a totally integrated and
all-embracing $ 75 million initial program is under way) there
are many other important projects for which International
Women's Year funds could be used and which would help people
gain more information about existing services or programs,
would help women to gain the self-confidence, information and
knowledge necessary to lessen areas of distress, discrimination
or suffering. Some or all of these projects, e. g. the provision
of extensive support services for migrant women, will, hopefully,
as they educate the community, begin to challenge the accepted
attitudes and myths which are prevalent in our society. Not
only the projects funded by International Women's Year will
have this impact. Those projects which are the resl sib ty
of existing Government departments, once integrated within
their administrative responsibility, will provide the broad
base of support, self-confidence and security which, in the
past, has been largely lacking for women, and without which
any specific moves aimed at attitudinal change ( such as
International Womer's Year) would fail.
In many instances, projects will fall within more
than one of the areas singled out above. Further, specifying
these areas is not meant to exclude any other area of need that
is known to exist or which comes to light in the course of our
activities. / 29 
29
These areas have been singled out in orderto
give direction to our initial decisions on activities and
funding. It is our belief that when interpreted broadly
education as a life long process; health as including the
problems of isolation and breakdown of attitudes of women
to their bodies and doctors to women; work including that
done at home as well as in the paid workforce that these
are the areas that affect, at some time in their life, all
women. Obviously there must be priorities within these
areas and certain activities will be funded initially. The
considerations which will guide these decisions have been
set out above. Projects funded must not only be in line
with our objectives but, whenever appropriate, must ensure
that every effort is made to involve or reach all the
immedi. ateiy relevant sectors of the community and, where
appropriate, must maximise the possibility of contir ' ng
and increasing benefits arising out of it. This latter can
be achieved, for example, by including in the project the
teaching of the skills necessary for this to occur or by
recording successful projects in such a way that other groups
can ñ;. arn from the experience and carry the project out
elsewhere. The former point about involvemet nt
because there are many people in our society who whilst bei; iv
interested may be reluctant to participate because of, for
example, the unfamiliarity of the surroundings, feeling of
inadequacy particularly where skills are involved, lack of
self confidence, a disparity between the languages, culture, 
30
socio-economic levels, etc., of the organisers and the
community or many other factors.
As well as the specific community assumptions and
attitudes which lie behind and aggravate many of the problems
in these areas there are also more general community attitudes
which show up in the way women are spoken about or ignored,
depicted in comic strips, advertisements and books, omitted
from history and other areas of research, stifled in their
creative potential, encouraged to be dependent or irresponsible,
assumed to be unreliable in the paid workforce or assumed to
have an easy life at home.
These attitudes too must be challenged and re-examined.
To do this properly there is a need to have much more information,
facts and statistics available and to stimulate much more
research not just into the gaps in our knowledge but also into
the determinants and consequences of changes in wome ' s st . us
and roles. There will be a publicity campaign and in this as
in all activities for the year every care must be taken about
the , L rs used. To claim that the money spent on educating
girls is waL; ted if they only become receptioi. t
on the awfulness of housework is to insult and humiliate c] us.-
women who are receptionists or who earn a living by cleaning
up the messes of other human beings. To argue that all women
should be in the workforce is not only to turn a blind eye to
/ 31 
31-
the problems and suspect values of the present workforce but
is to induce feelings of guilt and inadequacy in those women
who may have chosen to ( and are able to) live a different
life style. To keep on and on about the exhaustion, the
frustration and the limitations of being at home with young
children may merely increase these feelings without offering
any solution: to offer congratulations on doing a highly
skilled, complex and, at times, impossibly difficult job may
begin to place value on a task which up until now has been
both economically and socially undervalued.
Funding The $ 2 million which has been set aside for the
1974/ 75 financial year is to be spent in the following ways:
direct funding of groups or individuals
financing of special activities by departments
administrative costs and the costs of those
activities which the Committee itself organises
and carries out.
Since the main thrust of our activities is towards
attitudinal change ' ere will be significant expenkv.~ Lrc -) r
such things as a newsletter, a research task force, publicity,
the convening of conferences, workshops, seminars, the
employment of consultants and of community catalysts. / 32 
32-
Whilst the setting of a closing date or dates might
make the administrative burden easier, it is clearly preferable
that submissions be able to continue to come in as needs arise
or are recognised and also that submissions be not hastily
written or ill-conceived because of the stricture of an early
closing date. Moreover continual funding allows the reviewing
of priorities and decisions in the light of experience as the
year progresses. It will also enable submissions not originally
funded because of a lower priority to be later reconsidered.
In summary then the strategy for funding will becontinuous
funding with initial funding being
according to priorities in the areas outlined
above
( ii) continuous review of priorities and contin~ ous
assessment of the worthwhileness of funded
activities
( iii) reassessment of submissions in light of ( ii).
This strategy enables immediate funding, particulr',
of p. _-sals requiring early attention, t,. d also allows. i
progressive receipt1k examination and decisio. is u
There is a need to ensure proper stewardship of
Government monies. There is also a need to ensure the
technical competence of an applicant to receive a grant and
to ensure that any project funded is carried out in the best 
-6 33
possible way. Hence it i: proposed that ai-seriously
considered applicants be interviewed by CommiLLee members,
members of the Secretariat or other appropriate persons.
Conclusion The above are the priorities and considerations
which will guide the Government's activities and decisions
during the coming year.
The program which will arise out of them will
inevitably reflect our concern that each member of our
society be allowed the freedom necessary to develop within
and participate in that society. 



1jjAUSYKAL1A~
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 395
4 December 1974
LEGAL ADVISER TO THE DEPARTMENT OF
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that Mr E. Lauterpacht, of the University of Cambridge
had accepted an appointment with the Australian Government
to wprk as Legal Adviser to the Department of Foreign
Affairs. Mr Lauterpacht had been engaged by the Attorney-
General and he would be seconded to the Department of
Foreign Affairs. The Prime Minister said that Mr Lauterpacht was
a distinguished international lawyer. He had been closely
associated with the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-
General as one of the Australian Government's counsel in
the Nuclear Tests Case in the International Coiir' of Justice.
The appointment would strengthen the legal
services available to the Government in the field of public
international law and would enable greater specialist
attention to be given to this branch of the law which is
assuming more and more importance for all countries, and
not least for Australia.
Arrangements had been agreed upon regarding the matterp
in the field of public internation~ al law for which Mr Lauterpacht
and the Department of Foreign Affairs would primarily be
responsible and those that would continue to be primarily
the responsibility of the Solicitor-General and the Attorney-
General' s Department.
Mr Lauterpacht's engagement is for a term of three
years. He has been given leave of absence by the University
of Cambridge for this period.
Mr Lauterpacht is 46 years of age. He is married.
He has two children.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER_] PflJEc ST. AT: MkENL NO. 394
4 !) uctombor 1974
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
The Prime Minister today tabled in the House of
Representatives a statement prepared for the information
of the Parliament on International Women's Year 1975.
This statement indicates the priorities and
considerations proposed for determining the direction of
the Government's program and is intended to stimulate
discussion both within the Parliament and in the community.
The Prime Minister said that costed submissions
so far received total around $ 3.5 million. Some of the
submissions were in respect of projects which fall within
the responsibility of existing government departments or
other institutions. In such cases the National Advisory
Committee would not act as an alternative funding agency
but as a catalyst for positive response from these departments
and agencies. The Prime Minister added that on the advice
of the Committee the Government would be making direct grants
in respect of other projects; these grants would be made
progressively throughout the Year and he expected to be able
to announce the first set of grants within the next week.
These grants would reflect the areas of greatest need as
determined by the Committee. However submissions not initially
funded would be kept under continuous review during the Year.
Since December 1972 this Government more than any
previous national government in the history of Australia
has made a conscious and genuine attempt to overcome the
decades of neglect from which women have suffered, to give
to women and to men the ability to freely choose that way
of life best suited to them individually.
International Women's Year 1975 provides an
opportunity to stand back and assess what has already been
achieved as well as enabling the initiation of further
programs based on our deep commitment to basic human rights.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JAUST I IA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 393
4 December 1974
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION ACT
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY
MOTOR VEHICLE TYRES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that he had sent a reference to the Temporary Assistance
Authority on whether it is necessary that urgent action
be taken to protect the Australian industry in relation
to the importation of motor vehicle tyres.
Mr Whitlam said that the reference followed
representations made by the Australian Tyre Manufacturers'
Association concerning injury to the tyre industry caused
by import competition. Under the Act the Authority is required to report
within 30 days.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIHE MINISTER
CITIZEN MI1LITARY FORCES ASSOCIATION__ LU'-CII 4I I) LCLMBER, 94
CITIZEN MILITARY FORCES HAVE PLAYED A LONG, HONOURABLE
AND IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE DEFENCE OF AUSTRALIA, WHILE THE 14ATURE
OF THE ROLE OF THE RESERVE FORCES MAY BE SEEN TO alHANGE OVER
THE YEARS, THERE IS NO DOUBTING THE CONTINUING SIGNIFICANCE
OF THESE FORCES. iHE ARMY RESERVE, OR CHF AS IT USED TO BE
KNOWN,, IS A VITAL PART OF AUSTRALIA'S GROUND FORCE CAPABILITY.
IT FORMS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE BASIS OF EXPANSION OF THE
WHOLE ARMY SHOULD THE NEED ARISE.
THE GOVERNMENT' S. APPROACH TO THE NEEDS AND
STRUCTURING OF THE RESERVE IS BASED ON ITS RECOGNITION OF
THE VITAL ROLE WHICH IT PLAYS. WE WERE NOT SATISFIED THAT THE
RESERVE FORCES HAD BEEN PROPERLY TREATED BY PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENTS. THE MORALE OF THE CMF SUFFERED BADLY FROM THE
WAY IT WAS TREATED AS A DUMPING GROUND FOR CONSCRIPTS, OR
A HAVEN FOR MEN WANTING TO AVOID CONSCRIPTION, MEN WHO HAD
JOINED THE CNF AND INDICATED THEIR WILLINGNESS TO SERVE
OVERSEAS IF NECESSARY IN DEFENCE OF THEIR COUNTRY FOUND
THEIR SERVICES WERE NOT SOUGHT. OR WANTED.
My GOVERNMENT ABOLIS HED CONSCRIPTION AND SET
ABOUT MAKING SERVICE IN THE ARMED FORCES MORE ATTRACTIVE
TO VOLUNTEERS. LAST YEAR, AS PART OF ITS EFFORTS TO REVITALISE
DEFENCE, THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED TO HAVE A COMPLETE REVIEW
OF THE ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF THE RESERVE, THE MINISTER 
-2-
FOR DEFENCE, MR P) ARNARD, COMMISSIONED THE FIRST-EVER
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY INTO THE CMF. THE COMMITTEE WAS LED
BY DR T. B. MILLAR AND ITS REPORT WAS TABLED IN PARLIAMENT
ON APRIL 4 THIS YEAR.
AT THE TIME MR BARNARD TABLED THE REPORT, HE
LEFT NO DOUBT OF THIS GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION TO REVITALISE
THE ARMY RESERVE. HE INDICATED THEN, AND ON SEVERAL OTHER
OCCASIONS SINCE, THAT HE FULLY SUPPORTED THE BROAD
RESTRUCTURING OF THE CMF RECOMMENDED BY THE CMF COMMITTEE
OF INQUIRY. As PART OF THE NORMAL PROCESS OF PROTECTING
NATIONAL SECURITY WE NEED TO MAINTAIN SOME REGULAR FORCES
CAPABLE OF BEING IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE, AND THESE NEED TO
BE BACKED UP BY RESERVE FORCES WHICH CAN BE BROUGHT TO A
STATE OF READINESS IN A REASONABLY SHORT TIME. THE
RESERVES MUST BE INTEGRATED WITH THE REGULARS, WITHOUT
MAJOR RE-ARRANGEMENT AS IN THE PAST. REGULAR AND RESERVE
COMPONENTS ARE TO BE WELDED INTO A " TOTAL FORCE" THE
AUSTRALIAN ARMY. THE ARMY RESERVE, TOGETHER WITH THE
REGULAR ARMY WILL PROVIDE A VIABLE BASE FOR AN EXPANSION OF
THE AUSTRALIAN ARMY SHOULD THIS BE NECESSARY IN THE FUTURE.
WE WILL HAVE A REGULAR COMPONENT ANT) A RESERVE COMPONENT
WORKING TOGETIILPR ON A RASIS AS NTFAR TO EQUALITY AND
PARTNERSHIP AS THEIR RESPECTIVE CIRCUMSTANCES WILL ALLOW. 
-3-
TO GIVE EFFECT TO THI1S POLICY, THE ARMY RESERVE
IS TO BE INTEGRATED INTO THE FUNCTIONAL COMMAND ORGANISATION
OF THE REGULAR ARMY. IN ADDITION, ARMY RESERVE OFFICERS ARE
TO BE APPOINTED As ASSISTANT COMMANDERS To FIELD FORCE
COMMAND, LOGISTICS COMMAND AND TRAINING COMMAND. IN FACT,
THE ASSISTANT COMMANDER TRAINING COMMAND HAS ALREADY ASSUMED
OFFICE. THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO APPROVED THAT RESERVE
SOLDIERS WEAR COMPARABLE UNIFORM WITH THAT WORN By REGULAR
SOLDIERS. IN GENERAL, THE CMF AT PRESENT CAN ONLY BE USED IN
TIME OF WAR OR IN THE EVENT OF A DECLARED DEFENCE EMERGENCY.
MR BARNARD HAS, ON A NUMB ER OF OCCASIONS, STATED WITHOUT
RESERVATION THAT THE BROAD ROLE ENVISAGED FOR THE ARMY
RESERVE, WILL MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR EMPLOYMENT OF THE RESERVE
IN SITUATIONS SHORT OF A DEFENCE EMERGENCY, IN CIVIL
EMERGENCIES OR TO PROVIDE OTHER ASSISTANCE TO CIVIL AUTHORITIES
AND ORGANISATIONS. LEGISLATION MUST BE ENACTED TO GIVE FULL
EFFECT TO THIS ROLE AND THE ARMY AND THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
ARE STILL EXAMINING THE MANY COMPLEX ISSUES INVOLVED IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF LEGISLATION.
WHEN THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE TABLED THE MILLAR
REPORT IN PARLIAMENT HE SUPPORTED THE BROAD RESTRUCTURING
OF THE FORCES WHICH IT PROPOSED. CLEARLY THE GOVERNMENT ' S
INTENTION IS TO ADVANCE THE ARMY RESERVE, AND IT HAS ALREADY
IMPLEMENTED SOME OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE COMMITTEE.
14/ 1 
MAJOR RECOMMENDATIONS APPROVED SINCE 14 APRIL
1974 INCLUDE:-THE APPOINTMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL A. C. MURCHISON
AS INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY RESERVE ( IN
ADDITION TO HIS APPOINTMENT AS CITIZEN MILITARY
FORCES MEMBER). ON HIS RETIREMENT ON 27 OCTOBER
HE WAS REPLACED BY MAJOR GENERAL J. M. MACDONALD.
THE ARMY RESERVE BRANCH IN ARMY OFFICE HAS BEEN
RAISED AND MAJOR GENERAL B. A. MCDONALD HAS
BEEN APPOINTED AS CHIEF OF THE ARMY RESERVE,
THE RESERVE BRANCH HAS BEEN CHARGED WITH THE
PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY OF REPRESENTING ARMY
RESERVE INTERESTS AND WILL DIRECT ALL ASPECTS OF
THE RE-ORGANISATION AND OVERSEE ITS IMPLEMENTATION.
THE BRANCH HAS A STATUS EQUAL TO ALL OTHER BRANCHES
AT ARMY OFFICE.
RECRUITING ADVERTISEMENTS ARE ALREADY USING THE
NEW TITLE " ARMY RESERVE". THERE IS, OF COURSE,
THE NEED FOR LEGAL CHANGE TO GIVE FULL EFFECT TO
THIS NEW TITLE.
A CHANGE IN THlE CLOTHING ENTITLEMENTS FOR THE
ARMY RESERVE HAS NOW BEEN APPROVED. THIS NOW
PUTS THE ARMY RESERVE ON A COMPARABLE BASIS WITH
THE REGULAR ARMY. 
MR BARNARD REFERRED THE QUESTION OF PAY FOR THE
RESERVES OF ALL THE SERVICES TO THE COMMITTEE OF REFERENCE
FOR DEFENCE FORCE PAY, AN INDEPENDENT BODY UNDER THE
JUDICIAL CHAIRMANSHIP OF MR JUSTICE COLDHAM, A RECOMMENDATION
HAS NOT YET BEEN RECEIVED FROM THE COMMITTEE OF REFERENCE
THOUGH IT IS EXPECTED SHORTLY, HOWEVER, AS A MEANS OF
IMMEDIATELY IMPROVING THE RESERVE CONDITIONS SALARIES WERE
INCREASED BY 12 PER CENT AS FROM 1 JULY 1974,
THE MILLAR REPORT ACKNOWLEDGED THE RECENT WIDENING
OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN MEMBERS TO SERVE IN THE RESERVE AND
RECOMMENDED FURTHER RELAXATION OF RESTRICTIONS AS CIRCUMSTANCES
ALLOWED. STEPS HAVE ALREADY BEEN TAKEN BY THE ARMY IN THIS
DIRECTION INCLUDING:-THE RESTRICTION OF ENLISTMENT OF WOMEN WITH
DEPENDENT CHILDREN HAS BEEN REMOVED,
THE RECOMMENDATION THAT AGE LIMITATIONS ON
ENLISTMENTS, DISCHARGE, AND COMMISSIONING
FOR WOMEN SHOULD BE THE SAME AS FOR MEN WILL
BE IMPLEMENTED AS SOON AS CHANGES TO STATUTORY
REGULATIONS CAN BE MADE, FOR INSTANCE, THE
MINIMUM AGE FOR COMMISSIONED RANK WILL BE
18 YEARS ( CURRENTLY IT IS 21 YEARS FOR WOMEN,
18 FOR MEN), 
-6-
APPROVAL HAS BEEN GIVEN FOR WOMEN TO USE
FIREARMS ON A VOLUNTARY BASIS SUBJECT TO THE
APPROVAL OF THEIR HEAD OF CORPS. AN ARMY
TRAINING INSTRUCTION IS CURRENTLY IN PRINT
AUTHORISING THIS MATTER.
EARLY NEXT YEAR WE EXPECT TO MAKE A DECISION ON
THE MILLAR COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREFERENTIAL
HOUSING LOANS FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMY RESERVE WHO SERVE SIX
YEARS OR MORE. THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO THE MAINTENANCE
OF AN ALL VOLUNTEER ARMY. IT RECOGNISES THAT TO BE EFFECTIVE
SUCH A FORCE MUST HAVE HIGH MORALE, HIGH DEGREE OF MOTIVATION
AND SUITABLE CONDITIONS OF SERVICE. IT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S
INTENTION TO ACHIEVE THIS BY ALL THE MEANS AT ITS DISPOSAL.
IBELIEVE THAT A GREAT MAJORITY OF EMPLOYERS ARE
PATRIOTIC AND PUBLIC-SPIRITED. I APPEAL TO THEM TO ADOPT
AND PROMULGATE POLICIES WHICH WILL BE HELPFUL TO THE ARMY
RESERVE AND THE NATION. IN PARTICULAR AN EMPLOYEE WILL
REQUIRE HIS EMPLOYER'IS PERMISSION TO ATTEND THE ANNUAL CAMP
WHICH IS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE YEARLY TRAINING CYCLE.
HOPEFULLY, EMPLOYERS WILL WISH TO FOLLOW THE GOVERNMENT'S
POLICY WHICH IS, TO GRANT EMPLOYEES LEAVE WITH PAY TO ATTEND
ANNUAL CAMPS. WE WANT TO SEE A RESERVE BACKED BY THE COMMUNITY
OF WHICH IT IS PART AND WHICH IT IS DESIGNED TO SUPPORT AND
PROTECT. 



JAUSTRALIA~ g Press Statement No. 396
December 1974
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR BRISBANE FLOOD MITIGATION
WORKS
The Australian Government has approved up to
$ 1 million for the first stage of a flood mitigation
measures program in Brisbane this financial year.
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam announced this is Canberra
today. Assistance of $ 800,000 will be provided for works
on the Enoggera/ Breakfast Creek, and $ 200,000 for
assistance towards an early warning program and flood
mitigation and evacuation measures on the Brisbane Creek.
The Enoggera/ Breakfast Creek works will involve
the first stage of the reconstruction of the Enoggera
Dam and associated dredging works for the lower reaches
of the Breakfast Creek.
" If we are to protect people in future from
floods of the kind Brisbane has suffered in the past
couple of summers, we must take a comprehensive approach
to the problem," Mr Whitlam said.
" This must include an examination of land use
controls, of flood monitoring and of evacuation
techniques and equipment, as well as physical works on
dams and drainage.
" The Brisbane flood disasters of 1972 and 1974
showed that the city lacks an adequate system of flood
plain management. " As I said in Brisbane on 21 November, we have
made repeated requests at official level to the
Queensland Government to furnish firm works proposals
on which we could base decisions regarding further
mitigation projects.
" This is why it is possible to go ahead with
only the Enoggera/ Breakfast Creek works at this stage.
It also explains why no other major works can be
announced at this stage, and particularly why no major
physical works can be carried out before the coming
wet season." 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P,.
AT KNOX GRAMMAR SCHOOL SPEECH NIGHT
DECEMBER, 1974 UY
IT IS NOT WITHOUT SIGNIFICANCE AND NOT WITHOUT
A CERTAIN IRONY THAT THE JUBILEE OF KNOX AND THE SECOND
ANNIVERSARY OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT ARE BEING OBSERVED IN THE
SAME WEEK. I AM PROBABLY THE ONLY PERSON IN AUSTRALIA WHO j
HAS ATTENDED BOTH CELEBRATIONS AND DERIVED KEEN PERSONAL
SATISFACTION FROM EACH. I MUST CONFESS THAT THE ATMOSPHERE
IN DIAMOND VALLEY ON MONDAY NIGHT WAS A TRIFLE MORE RAPTUROUS
THAN IT IS IN WAHROONGA, BUT LET ME NOT BE STINTING IN MY
GRATITUDE'. THERE IS NO OTHER FORUM WHERE I CAN ACHIEVE SO
LARGE AND CIVIL AN AUDIENCE ON THE DEEP NORTH SHORE AS I CAN
AT KNOX ON SPEECH . NIGHT. THIS IS EASILY THE BEST MEETING I
HAVE ADDRESSED IN THE ELECTORATE OF BRADFIELD$
IT IS'A VERY GREAT HONOUR AND A VERY GREAT
PLEASURE TO BE BACK AMONG YOU. NEEDLESS TO SAY, THE SCHOOL
HAS CHANGED A GOOD DEAL SINCE I WAS HERE. THE BUILDINGS
AND GROUNDS'ARE MORE RESPLENDENT THAN EVER. THE UNIFORM I
AM WEARING TONIGHT IS SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT FROM THE ONE I
REMEMBER. 2/ 
KNOX HAS JOINED' THE SELECT BAND OF SCHOOLS WHOSE
SOLD BOYS INCLUDE A PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA. SOME OF
YOU MAY THINK THAT IN AN IDEAL WORLD THAT HONOUR MIGHT HAVE
FALLEN MORE FITTINGLY ON ONE OF THE OTHER OLD BOYS WHO HAVE
MADE THEIR MARK AT KNOX AND THEIR FORTUNES IN POLITICS
IAN SINCLAIR, JOHN FULLER, JiM FORBES. BUT I WAS DETERMINED
THAT NONE OF THEM WOULD BEAT ME TO IT, FOR MANY YEARS I
NURTURED AN OVERWHELMING AMBITION I WAS RESOLVED TO BE
THE FIRST KNOX BOY TO LIVE AT THE LODGE. WHAT BETTER WAY
TO BRING HONOUR TO THE SCHOOL? FIFTY YEARS AGO, , WHEN I CAME
HERE, NO ONE DREAMED I WOULD ONE DAY BE PRIME MINISTER.
IF ANYONE HAD KNOWN I WOULD BE A LABOR PRIME MINISTER THEY
MIGHT NEVER HAD LET ME IN.: LABOR MEN RARELY WENT TO
KNOX THEY. PREFERRED THE SCHOOL. OF HARD KNOX.
I SUPPOSE WHEN I FINALLY MADE IT THERE WERE SOME
MISGIVINGS IN THE A. L. P. AND NOT A FEW MISGIVINGS HERE.
YET LOOKING BACK, THERE HAVE BEEN SOME REMARKABLE PARALLELS
' IN OUR FORTUNES AND ACHIEVEMENTS. KNOX AND THE LABOR
PARTY HAVE BOTH TURNED OUT A FAIR QUOTA OF JUDGES, DIPLOMATS,
AND HIGH GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS EVEN PRIME MINISTERS. WHEN
A VACANCY OCCURRED ON THE HIGH COURT LAST YEAR IT WAS
OBVIOUS TO ME THAT MR. JUSTICE JACOBS HAD EXACTLY THE RIGHT
BACKGROUND. SOME OF MY AMBASSADORIAL APPOINTMENTS ARE QUITE
WELL KNOWN. PERHAPS I CAN CONFIDE TO THIS AUDIENCE THAT MR.
ROB LAURIE, WHO ACCOMPANIED ME HERE TONIGHT, WILL TAKE UP
A POSTING AS HEAD OF ONE OF OUR ASIAN MISSIONS NEXT YEAR. MR.
LAURIE LEFT KNOX IN 1953. MY PRESS SECRETARY LEFT IN 1951,
I 
S T . y
I UNDERSTAND THAT IN THE PAST YEAR KNOX AND THE A, L. P. HAVE
BOTH HAD BUILDING APPEALS, IT WOULD NOT SURPRISE ME IF ONE
OR TWO BUSINESSMEN HAD GIVEN SOMETHING TO BOTH OF US. AND OF
COURSE WE HAVE DONE GREAT THINGS TOGETHER FOR EDUCATION.
EDUCATION HAS BEEN OUR COMMON GOAL THOUGH OPINIONS MAY DIFFER
ABOUT OUR RESPECTIVE ACHIEVEMENTS,
DESPITE MY EARLY SCHOOLING AT KNOX I HAVE NEVER
BEEN A SIMPLE PRESBYTERIAN. THE MOST CELEBRATED
PRESBYTERIAN TO HOLD THIS OFFICE ATTENDED A METHODIST SCHOOL
IN MELBOURNE. IT IS STILL GOING STRONG. I BEGAN MY
EDUCATION AT TWO ANGLICAN SCHOOLS IN SYDNEY. THEY HAVE
BOTH CLOSED DOWN. ONE OF THEM WAS MOWBRAY HOUSE. IN THE
LAST TERM OF 1922, I ATTENDED THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND GIRLS'
GRAMMAR SCHOOL AT CHATSWOOD. IT WAS MY FIRST CONTACT WITH
THE " MONSTROUS REGIMEN OF WOMEN" WHOSE INFLUENCE JOHN KNOX
DEPLORED WITH SUCH VEHEMENCE. I HAVE OFTEN WONDERED HOW
KNOX WOULD HAVE FARED IF HE HAD SET ABOUT REFORMING THE A. L. P.
INSTEAD OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND. HE WAS'A RATHER
SUBVERSIVE CHARACTER. HE WENT SO FAR AS TO ADVOCATE RESISTANCE
TO THE ESTABLISHED CIVIL ORDER IF NECESSARY BY FORCE.
HE WAS A BEARDED REVOLUTIONARY, GIVEN TO HARANGUING PUBLIC
MEETINGS. HE FELT THOROUGHLY DISAFFECTED WITH THE " SYSTEM".
HE DISPARAGED'THE MONARCHY. IF. HE HAD BEEN ALIVE TODAY HE
WOULD HAVE MARCHED IN MORATORIUMS AND SUPPORTED THE PEACE
MOVEMENT, I DOUBT IF HIS CHILDREN WOULD HAVE GONE TO THIS SCHOOL.
4 
A*. IN THE LITURGY HE DEVISED FOR THE CHURCH ONE IS
STRUCK BY CERTAIN CONTEMPORARY PARALLELS. KNOX BELIEVED
THAT MINISTERS SHOULD BE ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE BUT APPOINTED*
BY THEIR MINISTERIAL BRETHREN. THAT IS MORE OR LESS. HOW WE
RUN THE CAUCUS.-HE BELIEVED THAT FINAL AUTHORLTY IN THE
CHURCH SHOULD LIE WITH A GENERAL ASSEMBLY CONTAINING ELDERS
. AND MINISTERS, THAT IS RATHER LIKE OUR FEDERAL CONFERENCE,.."':
SO YOU CAN SEE THE SOURCES OF OUR INSPIRATION. YOU CAN SEE
WHY I'VE COME TO YOUR SPEECH NIGHT. IN THE LABOR PARTY WE.
OWE AS MUCH TO KNOX THE MAN AS WE DO TO KNOX THE SCHOOL. HE'*
ALSO HELb EXEMPLARY VIEWS ON EDUCATION. J. S. MCEWEN, WHO
WROTE A STUDY OF KNox's RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, POINTS OUT THAT
IN THE BOOK OF DISCIPLINE KNOX OUTLINED A MOST ELABORATE'
EDUCATIONAL SCHEME FROM PARISH SCHOOL UP TO UNIVERSITY,
COMPULSORY IN ITS EARLY STAGES FOR ALL AND FREE TO THE POOR$
WITH EQUAL OPPORTUNITY OF ADVANCEMENT FOR THE SON OF' PEASANT
AND OF. PEER." 4, I&amp; THOSE WORDS ARE NOT MINE BUT I SHOULD-BE
QUITE HAPPY TO SEE THEM IN OUR PARTY PLATFORM.
IT IS TYPICAL OF KNOX THAT HE GAVE NO THOUGHT TO
THE DAGHITER. S OF PEASANT OR PEER. IN THESE ENLIGHTENED DAYS
WE PROVIDE GIRLS WITH INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS THAT ARE JUST: AS
EFFICIENT, JUST AS RESPECTED, ' JUST AS WELL ENDOWED AS THOSE
FOR BOYS. IWAS ASTONISHED THE OTHER DAY TO FIND A BOOK
WRITTEN BY THE FORMER HEADMISTRESS OF SUCH A SCHOOL. IT
WOULD BE UNFAIR TO MENTION THE NAME OF THE SCHOOL OR THE
NAME OF THE AUTHOR, BUT THE BOOK WAS CALLED ' INDISCRETIONS
OF A HEADMISTRESS". " I WAS CONNED BY THE TITLE. ,1 
: t
t W-4-MANY PEOPLE BROWSING THROUGH THE PAPERBACKS AT AIRPORT
BOOKSTALLS MUST HAVE BEEN DISAPPOINTED WHEN THEY READ IT.
I DO NOT MEAN TO. DISPARAGE THE BOOK. ITS CONTENTS WERE
PIOUS AND ENTIRELY ADMIRABLE. IT WAS THE TITLE THAT GOT
IF
ME IN. IT OCCURRED TOME THAT/ THE KARMEL REPQRT HAD
BORNE HALF SO SUGGESTIVE A TITLE IT WOULD HAVE ACHIEVED
A MUCH WIDER CIRCULATION, IF NOT A WIDER ACCEPTANCE.
NOW I KNOW THE KARMEL REPORT IS A SORE POINT WITH 4
SOME OF. YOU, BUT I SHOULD LIKE TO TOUCH ON IT BRIEFLY. I
HAVE DONE MY HOMEWORK, AND I NOTICED AN EDITORIAL ON KARMEL
IN THE " KNOX GRAMMARIAN" OF JUNE THIS YEAR. IT WELCOMED
THE REPLACEMENT OF OLD FASHIONED " ROTE LEARNING" BY MODERN
CONCEPTS OF TEACHING. IT DEPLORED THE FACT THAT THIS
TRANSITION WAS PROCEEDING TOO SLOWLY, AND THAT THE NECESSARY
ATMOSPHERE OF DISCOVERY AND ADVENTURE IN THE CLASSROOM WAS
BREAKING DOWN. IT WENT ON TO SAY: " THE BLAME FOR THIS
STAGNATION IN EDUCATION CAN BE GIVEN WHOLLY TO THE POLICY
MAKERS WHO FIND CHANGE INTOLERABLE. THE KARMEL REPORT IS
OF COURSE, THE BEST EXAMPLE OF THIS. THEY FOUND THAT PRIVATE
SCHOOLS WERE TOO FAR AHEAD OF STATE SCHOOLS IN IDEAS AND
APPLICATIONS. TE WAY THEY STIFLED OR HALTED THESE
' RADICAL' EXPENSIVE IDEAS WAS TO CUT OUT FUNDS TO THESE
SCHOOLS. NOW THEY WANT TO STANDARDIZE EDUCATION ON THE
SAME MEDIOCRE LEVEL." CONCEPTS~ I~~ ~~~ E~ L RDTEFC OFTAHHN, T TI il 
I MUST SAY THIS IS THE FIRST TIME I HAVE BEEN
ACCUSED OF FINDING CHANGE INTOLERABLE. As ONE WHO HAD A
LOT TO DO WITH PROFESSOR KARMEL'S APPOINTMENT AND THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, I CANNOT ALLOW THAT
ACCUSATION TO PASS.:-ONE CAN ARGUE ABOUT THE MERITS OF MODERN
EDUCATIONAL THEORY BUT I DON'T THINK ONE CAN ARGUE ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF MONEY TO EDUCATION$. THE SCOTS, TO THEIR GREAT..-.'
CREDIT, HAVE NEVER HAD ANY DOUBT ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF-'
MONEY. WEALTH DOES NOT NECESSARILY MAKE FOR A GOOD-SCHOOL
BUT POVERTY ASSUREDLY MAKES FOR A BAD ONE. OUR POLICIES ON
EDUCATION ARE NOT INTENDED TO " STANDARDIZE EDUCATION ON THE
SAME'MEDIOCRE LEVEL". THEY ARE INTENDED TO RAISE ALL
SCHOOLS TO THE HIGHEST LEVEL. I-ACCEPT THAT IT MAY NOTALWAYS
BE POSSIBLE TO DO THIS. I ACCEPT THAT THERE WILL PROBABLY
ALWAYS BE SOME SCHOOLS NOT NECESSARILY PRIVATE SCHOOLS
THAT ARE BETTER THAN OTHERS. No AMOUNT OF PLANNING Oft
FUNDING CAN OFFSET THE EFFECTS OF, SAY, INCOMPETENT MANAGEMENT,
DISHARMONY'AMONG STAFF# OR A LACK OF MORALE OR ESPRIT
DE CORPS.
A 
THESE THINGS ARE INTANGIBLE AND VERY LARGELY
FORTUITOUS. IT IS NOT DIFFICULT TO ACCEPT, HOWEVER, THAT
MATERIAL DEPRIVATION CAN BE OVERCOME WITH ADDITIONAL FUNDS.
IF A SCHOOL IS DISADVANTAGED, IF IT IS POOR, WE CAN HELP
RAISE ITS STANDARDS. BY PROVIDING THE BUILDINGS, THE
EQUIPMENT, THE BOOKS, THE SALARIED STAFF THAT IT NEEDS.
LONG BEFORE WE CAME TO OFFICE IT WAS MANIFESTLY'CLEAR
THAT MANY SCHOOLS LACKED FUNDS FOR BASIC NECESSITIES.
SOME WERE IN GREATER NEED THAN OTHERS. I SHOULD HAVE
THOUGHT IT A VERY SIMPLE AND OBVIOUS PRINCIPLE IT WOULD
NOT BE PUTTING IT TOO HIGHLY TO SAY A CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLE
THAT THE MOST DEPRIVED CHILDREN SHOULD HAVE THE FIRST
CALL ON OUR HELP. WE DECIDED THAT THE SCHOOLS MOST IN
NEED SHOULD BENEFIT MOST FROM ADDITIONAL FEDERAL FUNDS.
WE DECIDED THAT THESE NEEDS COULD BEST BE ASSESSED BY
AN EXPERT, IMPARTIAL, INDEPENDENT INQUIRY. WE SET UP
THAT INQUIRY. WE MADE PUBLIC ITS REPORT. WE ACTED
ON THAT REPORT. IT WAS NOT JUST A QUESTION OF REDISTRIBUTING
EXISTING FUNDS. IT WAS A MATTER OF CHANNELLING VASTLY
AUGMENTED FUNDS TO THE SCHOOLS THAT NEEDED THEM. THERE
WAS NEVER ANY QUESTION OF LEVELLING DOWN. OUR AIM IS
TO RAISE ALL STANDARDS. WE ARE DETERMINED THAT THE BEST
EDUCATION AVAILABLE ANYWHERE IN AUSTRALIA SHOULD BE
AVAILABLE EVERYWHERE IN AUSTRALIA. / 8
LIIII~ 
' 2 AC ~ 4.4
IHAVE NEVER DOUBTED THAT OUR REFORMS IN EDUCATION
HAVE BEEN THE PROUDEST ACHIEVEMENT OF my GOVERNMENT. WE
ARE SPENDING FOUR TIMES AS MUCH AS OUR PREDECESSORS ON
EDUCATION.-WE HAVE ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, AND HAVE ABOLISHED FEES. FOR THE..
FIRST TIME WE ARE* GIVING ASS ISTANCE TO TEACHERS COLLEGES
AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERS'I COLLEGES ON THE SAME BASIS AS
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION: WE ARE
GIVING MUCH MORE GENEROUS ALLOWANCES TO STUDENTS AND
HAVE MORE THAN TREBLED THE NUMBER OF TEACHING SCHOLARSHIPS$..
WE ARE TACKLING THE NEW AREA OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER,
EDUCATION. ISHOULD LIKE TO THINK THAT THE MOST ENDURING
RESULT OF OUR POLICIES ON EDUCATION HAS BEEN TO RAISE
THE COMMUNITY'I S LE VEL OF EXPECTATION. WE HAVE-SET OUR
SIGHTS HIGHER.. TH* E WHOLE DEBATE. ON EDUCATION HAS MOVED
TO A HIGHER PLANE, FREE OF DOGMA1 FREE OF PREJUDICE, FREE
OF SECTARIANISM$ -THERE IS NO LONGER ANY QUESTION ABOUT
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR EDUCATION;~
IN THE CASE OF TERTIARY EDUCATION IT IS ACCEPTED
ABSOLUTELY. THERE IS NO LONGER ANY DEBATE ABOUT ' STATE
AID'. THERE'IS NO LONGER ANY ARGUMENT ABOUT THE
SCHOOLS COMMISSION, THE HISTORIC INCREASE IN EDUCATION
EXPENDITURE WAS UNIVERSALLY ACCEPTED AND WELCOMED,. EVEN
BY THOSE WHO DISPUTE THE WAY THOSE FUNDS HAVE BEEN
ALLOCATED. ' A 
INITIATED BY^ LABOR OT N 9 I TTHE., V.* ; N,. 57
IT HAS TAKEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS NEARLY
SIR KEITH MURRAY'S COMMITTEEREPORTED THE NEEDS
100 YEARS TO ESTABLISH THE PRINCIPLE THAT EDUCATION IS r.
A NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY. MORE THAN 30 YEARS HAVE
PASSED SINCE THE FIRST STEPS IN THIS PR WERE SBYTER
INITIATED BY A LABOR GOVERNMENT. IN 1957, WITH THE
UNIVERSITIES OVERLOADED AND E E OINODNE PCEONMDMEONNWTE ALTH
SFUNDS SIR KEITH MURRAY'S COMMITTEE REPORTED ON THE NEEDS
OF UNIVERSITIES AND IN 1959 A NEW UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION
WAS ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE. THEREAFTERI UNIVERSITIES.
BENEFITED FROM SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASED FUNDS AND WERE
ON A REGULAR AND RATIONAL ASSESSMENT OF THEIR NEEDS.
WHAT WE ARE NOW DOING FOR PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
IS PRECISELY WHAT SIR ROBERT MENZIES A GOOD PRESBYTERIAN
DID FOR UNIVERSITIES. IN 1
FIFTY YEARS AGO THE ROLE OF INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
WAS MUCH MORE DISTINCTIVE THAN IT IS TODAY. WHEN I WAS
AT KNOX IT WAS MORE OR LESS ACCEPTED THAT THE MAJORITY
WHO ENTERED SUCH SCHOOLS WOULD FINISH THEIR SECONDARY
EDUCATION AND, IF POSSIBLE, MATRICULATE. IT WAS UNDERSTOOD
AND NO ONE RESENTED THE FACT THAT SCHOOLS LIKE KNOX
OFFERED THE QUICKEST AND SUREST ACCESS TO THE
PROFESSIONS AND THE HIGHER MANAGERIAL AND EXECUTIVE
OCCUPATIONS THAT WAS A PERFECILY RESPECTABLE AIM
IT IS STILL YOUR AIM BUT IT IS NO LONGER ONE THAT
YOU HOLD EXCLUSIVELY IN 1924,. I CAME TO KNOX,
PER CENT OF ALL CHILDREN IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN
NEW SOUTH WALES WERE AT GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS, 
f
4 4J,
, i r..
Z
YET OF ALL THOSE WHO WENT-TO THE LEAVING AND THROUGH
THE LEAVING IN 1924 ONLY 57 PER CENT CAME FROM
GOVERNMENT, SCHOOLS., THE REST WERE EVENLY DIVIDED BETWEEN
ROMAN CATHOLIC AND. ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT SCHOOLS. A
I.
* 1*
THE ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT SCHOOLS PLACED
MUCH GREATER STRESS ON CLASSICAL EDUCATION IN THOSE DAYS.
BACK IN 1924, 126 CHILDREN FROM ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT
SCHOOLS . PASSED LATIN AT THE LEAVING ALMOST AS MANY AS
PASSED FROM GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS ( 144). YET GOVERNMENT
SCHOOLS HAD 20 TIMES AS MANY CHILDREN AS SCHOOLS LIKE
KNOX. LATIN WAS'MORE POPULAR WITH PRIVATE . CHOOLS.
MORE THAN HALF THE PUPILS AT ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT
SCHOOLS WHO PASSED THE LEAVING IN 1924 ALSO PASSED IN
LATIN ( 126 OUT OF 210). LAST YEAR MORE THAN 32,000
CHILDREN SAT FOR THE HIGHER SCHOOL CERTIFICATE IN NEW SOUTH
WALES; 446 PASSED IN LATIN.. So ALTHOUGH LATIN IS
STUDIED BY A MUCH SMALLER PROPORTION OF THE SCHOOL
POPULATION TODAY, WE ARE ACTUALLY PRODUCING MORE LATIN
SCHOLARS. THAT IS SOME CONSOLATION FOR SOMEONE LIKE
MYSELF WITH A CERTAIN PREJUDICE IN FAVOUR OF CLASSICAL
LANGUAGES. I I./ i1 
9-7 YOU MAY SOMETIMES BE TEMPTED TO IMAGINE THAT
my GOVERNMENT IS INDIFFERENT OR EVEN HOSTILE TO INDEPENDENT
SCHOOLS. THAT IS NOT SO. IAGREE THAT WARE MOSTCONCERNED
WITH THE NEEDS OF THE LESS FORTUNATE-SCHOOLS.
BUT IT WOULD BE IRRATIONAL TO CONCLUDE THAT THIS
* CONCERNo URGENT AND VALID AS IT IS, BLINDS US
TO THE QUALITIES OF SCHOOLS SUCH AS YOURS OR MAKES US ANY
LESS MINDFUL OF YOUR CONTRIBUTION TO THE EDUCATIONAL
NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY. YOU HAVE GREAT TRADITIONS.
YOU HAVE'A GREAT RECORD OF-ACHIEVEMENT. YOU ADHERE'TO
STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE AND A SET OF CORPORATE AND
INDIVIDUAL VALUES THAT ARE WORTH PRESERVING.
BY HARD WORK, BY GREAT EFFORT AND PATIENCE AND MUCH
SACRIFICE YOU HAVE CREATED A SCHOOL OF THE VERY
HIGHEST QUALITY, IN A SETTING OF GREAT BEAUTY. THERE
IS AT KNOX AND SCHOOLS LIKE IT A VERY PALPABLE SPIRIT
OF DEDICATION, OF STRIVING, OF TOTAL COMMITMENT TO
THE WELFARE OF EVERY CHILD. / 12 
-THESE THINGS ARE ENVIABLE. IT WOULD BE ABSURD AND MEANSPIRITED
TO DESPISE THEM. HOPE THEY WILL SERVE AS
EXAMPLES TO THOSE OF US WHO SEEK TO BRING TO ALL
CHILDREN THE BENEFITS OF THE BEST POSSIBLE EDUCATIONA
PROVIDED IN THE BEST POSSIBLE SURROUNDINGS BY THE BEST
POSSIBLE TEACHERS, AND GUIDED BY THE MOST HUMANE AND
ENLIGHTENED PRINCIPLES OF SCHOLARSHIP AND DISCIPLINE.
ICONGRATULATE ALL THE PRIZEWINNERS TONIGHT. I CONGRATULATE
KNOX, ITS COUNCIL, ITS HEADMASTER, ITS STAFF AND ITS
BOYS 0CM THEIR JUBILEE. I WISH YOU THE VERY BEST OF
GOOD FORYLUNE INh~-9' 



1 . W
NO DATE
M 152 5 December, 1974
LIMITATION OF STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE ARMS
The Prime Minister and Acting Foreign Minister,
Mr Whitlam, said today that he welcomed the joint statement
by President Ford and Mr Brezhnev on the limitation of
strategic offensive arms issued at the conclusion of their
recent talks at Vladivostock. The two leaders had reaffirmed
their intention to conclude a further ten-year agreement on
the limitation of strate-ic offensive arms.
Mr Whitlam said that all governments should agree
with President Ford and Mr Brezhnev that a long-term agreement
on this question would be a sipnific-nt contribution
to improving relations between the United States and the
Soviet Union, to reducing the danger of war, and to the
enhancing of world peace.
The joint statement said that the two leaders
agreed that further negotiations, which would resume in
Geneva next month, would incorporate relevant provisions
of the interim SALT agreement concluded in 1972, and provide
for a new agreement to run from October 1977 to 1985. Both
sides would be entitled to have a certain agreed aggregate
number of land and sea-based missiles equipped with multiple
independently targetted warheads ( MIRVs).
The Prime Minister said this agreement regarding
future negotiations was a significant and heartening
result of the first meeting between President e'ord and
Mr Brezhnev. He welcomed the comment of the US Secretary
of State, Dr Henry Kissinger that the agreement " marks the
breakthrough witl the SALT negotiations that we have sought
to achieve in recent years".
The Frime Minister zecalled that during his own
address to the United Nations General Assembly on
September, he had spoken of the special obligations which
the might of the superpowers imposed upon them, and had
said that other countries were entitled to ask the superpowers
to move forward to a stage of complete detente where
their tremendous power can be used jointly to the betterment
of the whole of civilisation. A 
The Prime Minister said all reasonable persons
must realise that there would be very many great problems
to be resolved in the long negotiations which would be
held between the US and the Soviet Union towards the
conclusion of a new ten-year agreement, but that it was
heartening to learn that President Ford and Mr Brezhnev
had concluded that favourable prospects existed for the
completion of the work on the proposed new agreement in
1975. The subjects to be discussed were very complex
and highly technical, and they bore on the vital security
of two super powers and thus, directly or indirectly, on
the security of all othcr countries in the world.
The Prime Minister said he hoped that this
welcome development between the two super powers would be
followed by action by the US and the Soviet Union and by
the other nuclear powers and countries of advanced technology
towards strengthening the NPT, and thus working for
the containment and reduction of nuclear weapons, and to
endeavour to ensure that nuclear energy, with its tremendous
potential, was directed towards peaceful uses. 



N HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
5 DECEMBER 1974
A YEAR AGO I REPORTED TO THE PARLIAMENTrI ON THE GOVERNMENT
S FIRST YEAR IN OFFICE. IT WAS A YEAR OF FAR-REACHING
REFORM, OF UNPRECEDENTED ACHIEVEMENT, OF-LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY
SURPASSING ALL RECORDS. IENDED MY SPEECH WITH THESE WORDS:
" AM CONFIDENT'THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, WHE-N NEXT THEY
ARE ASKED TO CHOOSE BETWEEN THE ALTERNATIVES BEFORE THEM, WILL
ENDORSE OUR RECORD AND RENEW OUR MANDATE..
THE PEOPLE DID SO. IN-APRIL THIS YEARo FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA'S NATIONAL PARLIAMENT, THE
" OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE REFUSED SUPPLY TO THE ELECTED
GOVERNMENT. THEY FORCED AN ELECTION BY V-IOLATING AN ESTABLISHEDACCEPTED
CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLE. SENATORS ELECTED' 3k YEARS
AND 6 YEARS BEFORE THE GOVERNMENT IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES$
SENATORS WHO HAD ALREADY BLOCKED ESSENTIAL PARTS OF OUR LEGISLATIVE
PROGRAM, FORCED US TO THE POLLS HALFWAY THROUGH OUR TERM.
WE ACCEPTED THEIR CHALLENGE. WE WENT TO THE PEOPLE
AND THE PEOPLE RETURNED US TO OFFICE. ON 18 MAY, AUSTRALIANS,
CONFIRMED THEIR DECISION OF 2 DECEMBER 1972.. s vN a 2/ s 
T* T.
i i 2.
.; THEY ENDORSED OUR PROGRAM, THEY STRENGTHENED OUR': ' C
POSITION IN THE SENATE; THEY ANNIHILATED THE D. L. P. SENATORS.';
: WHOo . C OLLABORATED IN THIS ABUSE OF DEMOCRACY. THEY. CONFIRMED
LABOR'S VOTE IN THE CITIES WHERE THE GOVERNMENT SECURED
MANDATE 17 MONTHS' BEFORE. THEY GAVE US CLEAR INSTRUCTIONS
TO CARRY ON WITH THE JOB THE JOB THEY HAD ELECTED US TO DO.
SWE ACCEPTED THOSE INSTRUCTIONS AND IMMEIATELY SET
ABOUT TO DISCHARGE THEM. -WE HAVE WORKED UNREMITTINGLY TO..
FULFIL OUR UNDERTAKINGS TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. IT HAS NOTi
BEEN EASY.-WE HAVE CONTENDED WITH THE SAME OBSTRUCTION WE
FACED LAST YEAR. YET OUR RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT IN 1974 IS
AS SOLID AND IMPRESSIVE AS IT WAS LAST YEAR,
OUR LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM IN 1974 WAS CARRIED. THROUGH
ON THE SAME MASSIVE SCALE AS LAST YEAR. WHEN THE 28TH PARLIAMENT
ADJOURNED FOR CHRISTMAS LAST YEAR, 254 BILLS HAD BEEN INTRODUCED.
A FURTHER 42 WERE INTRODUCED BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT WAS DISSOLVED
IN APRIL. DURING THE 29TH PARLIAMENT, A TOTAL OF 187 BILLS HAS
BEEN INTRODUCED SO FAR. THE PARLIAMENT HAS THEREFORE DEALT
WITH 229 BILLS IN' 1974 A FIGURE THAT EXCEEDS ALL RECORDS FOR
A SINGLE YEAR WITH THE EXCEPTION OF 1973. WE HAVE SAT FOR A
TOTAL OF HOURS IN 1974 COMPARED WITH 908 HOURS IN 1973.
THE FIGURES FOR EITHER YEAR REPRESENT THE GREATEST NUMBER OF
SITTING HOURS IN SE YEAR FOR MORE THAN HALF A CENTURY, 
3
WE HAVE CONSOLIDATED AND EXPANDED THE GREAT REFORMS , i
WE BEGAN IN 1973. THROUGHOUT THE YEAR WE HAVE. CONTENDED
WITH ECONOMIC PROBLEMS ON A SCALE UNKNOWN FOR MORE THAN
YEARS. SUCH PROBLEMS WOULD BE DAUNTING FOR ANY GOVERNMENT
FOR A LABOR GOVERNMENT, COMMITTED TO REFORM AND INNOVATION
' ON THE WIDEST FRONT, THEY HAVE BEEN DOUBLY BITTER AND
SFRUSTRATING. YET WE HAVE NEVER RELAXED OUR EFFORTS TO DEAL
WITH INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT.' EVERY COUNTRY IN THE WESTERN
WORLD HAS FACED THESE PROBLEMS. NO COUNTRY IN THE WESTERN
WORLD HAS SOLVED THEM. OUR RECORD STANDS UP WELL BESIDE
S" THAT OF ANY OTHER COMPARABLE NATION. S. , Io
a 
-7 7
DESPITE THESE PROBLEMS, AUSTRALIANS TODAY ARE
EVERYWHERE BETTER ' OFF THAN THEY WERE WHEN LABOR CAME IN.,:
AVERAGE EARNINGS HAVE INCREASED IN REAL PURCHASING POWER
BY MORE THAN SEVEN PER CENT UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT.
OUR MEASURES TO STRENGTHEN AND INVIGORATE THE ECONOMY ARE
CONTINUING. WE NO LONGER REGARD THE BUDGET AS THE SOLE
INSTRUMENT OF ECONOMIC POLICY. THIS YEAR, FACED WITH
UNPRECEDENTED AND COMPLEX PROBLEMS OF ECONOMIC IANAGEMENT,
WE HAVE SHOWN OURSELVES READY TO ACT WHENEVER NECESSARY.
THREE WEEKS AGO WE ANNOUNCED CUTS IN TAXATION WORTH
$ 1200 MILLION IN A FULL YEAR. WE HAVE EASED CREDIT AND
BOOSTED THE MONEY SUPPLY TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT, EVERY
FINANCIAL WEAPON, EVERY CONSTITUTIONAL POWER AT OUR
DISPOSAL HAS BEEN USED IN OUR FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION
AND UNEMPLOYMENT. WHENEVER IT HAS BEEN NECESSARY TO
TAKE ACTION WHICH MAY HARM INDIVIDUALS OR COMPANIES,
WE HAVE DONE OUR BEST TO SHIELD THOSE AFFECTED AND CUSHION THE
EFFECTS OF OUR DECISIONS. 
v i 1 rCi; I i
g
ECONOMIC PROBLEMS, HOWEVER, HAVE NOT BEEN OURONLY
DISTRACTION;. THE WORK OF THE PARLIAMENT HAS BEEN MADE
INFINITELY MORE ARDUOUS AND PROTRACTED BY THE BEHAVIOUR OF
THE SENATE, THE DEFERMENT OR REJECTION OF A BILLDOES NOT
AFFECT THAT BILL ALONE; IT DELAYS AND COMPLICATES THE
S GOVERNMENT'S WHOLE LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM. IT FORCES THE
PARLIAMENT TO DEAL WITH MEASURES OVER AND OVER AGAIN. OUR
FOUR REFERENDUM BILLS WERE REJECTED TWICE'BY THE SENATE
DESPITE'THE FACT THAT THEIR REJECTION COULD NOT PREVENT.
THE REFERENDUMS BEING HELD, AND OPPOSITION SENATORS KNEW
THIS. THEY PREFERRED TO: DELAY THE BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.
THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION WAS AN UNNECESSARY AND INTOLERABLE
INTERRUPTION, NOT ONLY FOR WHAT IT SIGNIFIED, BUT FOR THE
DELAY IT CAUSED TO THE GOVERNMENT'S WORK. TWENTY-TWO
BILLS INTRODUCED DURING THE PREVIOUS PARLIAMENT LAPSED
WHEN THE PARLIAMENT WAS DISSOLVED AND HAD TO BE REINTRODUCED
AND DEBATED AGAIN. DURING THE 29TH PARLIAMENT WHICH MET
IN JULY, THE SENATE HAS REJECTED 12 BILLS, DEFERRED ANOTHER
4 AND AMENDED 8 NOT INCLUDING THOSE PASSED BY THE JOINT
SITTING. IF IT WERE NOT FOR THE FACT THAT WE WERE ABLE TO
KEEP THE NUMBER OF SEPARATE BILLS TO A MINIMUM BY
COMBINING RELATED MATTERS IN SINGLE BILLS, THE DELAY AND
INTERFERENCE WITH THE PARLIAMENTARY PROGRAM WOULD HAVE
BEEN MUCH GREATER.
I r
r
i I
r
i' r I :; r
r
. S -i ' i 1
i r I
r i 
WITH OUR MANDATE RENEWED IN MAY WE WERE READY
TO RESUME THE TASK OF GOVERNMENT WITH-EVEN GREATER VIGOR
AND DETERMINATIONS IF JUSTICE AND SANITY PREVAILED IN
THESE MATTERS, WE WOULD HAVE EXPECTED A FAIR, GO AT LAST
FOR OUR LEGISLATION&amp; WE GOT NO SUCH THING. THE OPPOSITION
LEARNT NOTHING* FROM THEIR DEFEAT.' FOR THE THIRD TIME THEY
REJECTED THE SIX BILLS ON WHICH THE DOUBLE DTSSOLUl ION
WAS GRANTED. HONOURABLE MEMBERS WILL RECALL THE SUBSTANCE
OF THOSE BILLS. THEY WERE THOSE IMPLEMENTING OUR UNIVERSAL
HEALTrH INSURANCE SCHEME, OUR PROPOSAL FOR ONE VOTE ONE
VALUE,' OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY. IHEY FORMED
THE BASIS OF THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION IN APRIL AND THE
ELECTION WHICH FOLLOWED. THE PEOPLE ENDORSED THESE MEASURES
AND THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES PASSED THEM FOR'THE THIRD
TIME. YET THE SENATE REJECTED THEM AGAIN, KNOWING-THAT
THE JOINT SITTING WOULD EVENTUALLY, INEVITABLY, PASS THEM.
IT WAS A NEEDLESS AND PETTY DELAY.
THE SENATE'S CAMPAIGN OF WANTON OBSTRUCTION DID
NOT END THERE. WITH THE PASSAGE OF OUR HEALTH LEGISLATION
OPPOSITION SENATORS PROCEEDED TO REJECT THE ANCILLARY
BILLS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT IT.. THEY HAVE REJECTED OUR
LEGISLATION, THREE TIMES PASSED BY THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, TO ESTABLISH THE AUTHORITY-OF THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT OVER AUSTRALIA'S OFF-SHORE RESOURCES. THEY HAVE
CONTINUED TO OBSTRUCT OUR PROPOSALS TO EXPAND THE AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AND ENABLE IT TO ASSIST
AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES AND PROTECT AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP OF
OUR INDUSTRIES. 
FOR THE THIRD TIME'THEY. HAVE REJECTED OUR LEGISLATION TO.
ENCOURAGE GREATER INDUSTRIAL HARMONY BY FACILITATING
INDUSTRIAL AGREEMENTS AND UNION AMALGAMATIONS... THEY HAVE.
REJECTED OUR ELECTORAL LEGISLATION WHICH WOULD SIMPLIFY THE
COMPLEX ANDTEDIOUS VOTING METHODS WHICH LEFT AUSTRALIA
WITHOUT A NATIONAL PARLIAMENT BETWEEN 10 APRIL AND 9 JULY.:
ONLY THIS WEEK THEY REJECTED OUR BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION
BILLS AND OTHER LEGISLATION TO ENCOURAGE GREATER AUSTRALIAN
PARTICIPATION IN THE FILM AND TELEVISION INDUSTRY. ALL
THESE MEASURES HAVE BEEN ENDORSED MOST OF THEM ENDORSED
TWICE BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. THE MOST IMPORTANT OF
THEM THOSE WHICH FORMED THE GROUNDS FOR THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION
HAVE BEEN ENDORSED EMPHATICALLY AND SPECIFICALLY. YET THE
OPPOSITION PERSISENTLY BLOCKS THEM.
THIS PATTERN OF OBSTRUCTION IS A TRAVESTY. OF
THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM AND A TRAVESTY OF DEMOCRACY.
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM IS UNDER
CHALLENGE: IN EUROPE, IN NORTH AMERICA, EVEN IN BRITAIN
ITSELF. NOWHERE IS THE SYSTEM SO STRONG THAT IT CAN
SUSTAIN THESE ATTACKS ON ITS BASIC FOUNDATIONS. THE
OPPOSITION SENATORS I CERTAINLY DO NOT BLAME THE LEADER
OF THE OPPOSITION FOR THEIR CONDUCT FOR HE IS POWERLESS TO
CONTROL THEM ARE NOT JUST ATTACKING THE LABOR GOVERNMENT,.
THEY HAVE DECLARED WAR ON THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM, ON THE
ABILITY OF DULY ELECTED GOVERNMENTS TO GOVERN EFFECTIVELY
AND CARRY THROUGH THEIR PROGRAM WITH THE FAITH AND
CONFIDENCE OF THE PEOPLE. I 1 I
I 
11-IMPLEMENTING OUR PROGRAM, ONE OF OUR HUIMARY
4ASKS HAS BEEN TO IMPROVE THE INSTITUTIUNS SERVINGi THE
GOVERNMENT AND-THE SOURCES OF INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO
US. WE HAVE NEVER BEEN READY ' TO ACCEPT THE METHODS OR
THE MACHTNEFY VIE fNHER2ITEI) FPR( MI OUR PREDECESSORS.
TO DO SO WOULD HAVE MEANT ACCEPTING THEIR VALUES AND
PRIORITIES, THROUGHOUT THIS YEAR WE HAVE CONTINUED
THE PROCESS OF GATHERING INFORMATION, MAKIN4G IT PUbLIC
AND REFORMING THE INSTITUTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. OUR EARLIER.
REFO'RMS ARE BEAPING FRUIT. THE GRANTS COMMISSION, WHOSE
CHARTER VIE AMENDED LAST YEAR TO FNABLE IT TO DIlAL WITH
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN RmN 1l. s BROIlffif IN ITS FIRST
oSi u I C RECUNN~ EN'DAT ! OC ' ThF bi9AR ifS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES. WE HAVE ACCPETED THOSE RECOtIMENDATIONS IN FULL
AND MIADE GRANTS TOTALLI1NfG 7{ L1 IVN 1-0 % L CO U. NC IL-;-
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. THOSE GRANTS ARE AMONG OUR
PROUDEST ACfiIEVLM&amp;! TU-&amp; A ith, LASF YEAR, 1,. E E*.: TAf: I S i-j) 7
AN EXPERT AND IMPART~ IAL SCHOOLS COMMISSION TO RECOMMEND
GRANTS To AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS ON THE BASIS OF NEED.
THE FIRST FULL YEAR'IS GRANTS ARE NOW. FLOWING T0 SCHOOLS
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE COMMISSION'S RF. COM! ENDArIONS,
AND WE HAVE ADJUSTED THE AMOUNTS OF THESE GRANTS TO TAKE,
ACCOUN~ T OF RISING PRICES. 
77
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED NEW BODIES TO ADVISE US AND IMPLEMENT
OUR POLICIES. WE HAVE APPOINTED AN INTERIM COMMITTEE FOR A'.
NEW CHILDREN'S COMMISSION, WHICH WILL PLAN AND CO-ORDINATE OUR
PROGRAMS FOR CHILD CARE AND OTHER SERVICES, WE ARE ESTABLISHING
AN OVERSEAS TRADING CORPORATION AND AN AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE COUNCIL.
WE HAVE EXTENDED THE POWERS OF THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
TO COVER RETAIL PRICES AND THE PRICES OF IMPORTED GOODS.
WE HAVE FORMED AN EXPERT COMMITTEE REPRESENTING INDUSTRY,
. GOVERNMENT AND THE TRADE UNIONS TO ADVISE US ON POLICIES FOR
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES. WE HAVE ESTABLISHED AN EXPORT FINANCE
AND INSURANCE CORPORATION, AFTER MONTHS OF OBSTRUCTION BY THE
OPPOSITION WE HAVE AT . LAST SET UP OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERALS
AUTHORITY TO SAFEGUARD AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR
RESOURCES. WE HAVE HAD THE BENEFIT OFA GREEN PAPER IN THE
PROBLEMS OF RURAL INDUSTRY, THERE ARE CURRENTLY NO FEWER THAN.
EIGHT ROYAL COMMISSIONS INQUIRING INTO MATTERS OF SOCIAL IMPORTANCE
PERHAPS THE MOST IMPORTANT OF THEM, THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION HEADED BY DR. H. C. COOMBS,
HAS UNDERTAKEN THE FIRST COMPREHENSIVE INQUIRY INTO THE
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE FOR MORE THAN 50 YEARS. OTHER ROYAL
COMMISSIONS ARE-DEALING WITH THE MARITIME INDUSTRY, LAND TENURES,
THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY, INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY, TASMANIAN
TRANSPORT COSTS AND HUMAN RELATIONS. IN ADDITION THIS YEAR WE
HAVE APPOINTED TWENTY-FIVE COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES OF INQUIRY
AND TASK FORCES TO REPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT, S~~ v 
l0
DESPITE AN IRRESPONSIBLE OPPOSITION AND COMPLEX ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS, WE HAVEMADE GREAT PROGRESS TOWARDS OUR GOALS IN 1974.
I LIST SOME OF OUR ACHIEVEMENTS TO DEMONSTRATE THE SCOPE AND
IMPORTANCE OF WHAT WE HAVE DONE. WE HAVE NOT . EEN CONTENT TO
REST ON OUR LAURELS OR MERELY CONTINUE THE POLICIES WE BEGAN
LAST YEAR. WE HAVE NOT MERELY PROVIDED MORE MONEY. FOR THINGS
WE WERE DOING BEFORE, THOUGH MORE MONEY THERE HAS CERTAINLY BEEN.
WE HAVE LAUNCHED NEW PROGRAMS AND INITIATIVES. , WE HAVE INTRODUCED
OUR NATIONAL COMPENSATION SCHEME BASED ON THE COMPREHENSIVE REPORT
OF JUSTICES SIR OWEN WOODHOUSE AND MEARES; WE HAVE EMBARKED ON
OUR PLANS FOR A MASSIVE UPGRADING OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER
EDUCATION. AND HAVE BUDGETED $ 100 MILLION FOR THIS PURPOSE OVER
THE NEXT TWO YEARS, IN THIS WE ARE ACTING ON THE REPORT'OF THE
KANGAN COMMITTEE WHICH WE RECEIVED THIS YEAR. WE HAVE REACHED
SUBSTANTIAL AGREEMENT WITH EVERY STATE EXCEPT QUEENSLAND ON THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF LAND COMMISSIONS TO STABILISE LAND PRICES IN
URBAN AREAS.. WE HAVE ACCEPTED IN PRINCIPLE THE REPORT OF MR.
JUSTICE E. A. WOODWARD ON LAND. RIGHTS FOR ABORIGINES. WE HAVE
CAUGHT UP FURTHER WITH THE SEWERAGE BACKLOG IN OUR MAJOR CITIES,
INCREASED OUR GRANTS FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND LAUNCHED
UUR PLANS FOR A NATIONAL HIGHWAYS SYSTEM. AFTER THE PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE IN JUNE WE GAVE THE STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE
FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF WELFARE HOUSING. WE HAVE ESTABLISHED
OUR LEGAL AID SERVICE AND THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT COMMUNITY.
HEALTH CENTRE THE FIRST OF MANY SUCH CENTRES UNDER OUR
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM, 
CONTINUED OUR EFFORTS' A'
THAILAND, EAST GERMANY, THE PHILLIPINES, BULGARIA, SOUTH KOREA
S CERTAIN ACSH EVEMENST S THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN ESPECUIDAELDL, Y O
SYMBOLIC OF OUR WHOLE PHILOSOPHY.-OUR LEGISLATION AGAINST U " IS
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION OUR WORK FOR WOMEN, OUR VIGOROUS i . i:
AND SUCCESSFUL POLICIES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, OUR"
30 PER CENT INCREASE IN OUR FOREIGN AID PROGRAM. WE HAVE
CONTiNUED OUR EFFORTS TO ENHANCE AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION
' ABROAD. AND IDENTIFY OUR PEOPLE WITH THE BEST AND MOST
S: ENLIGHTENED MOVEMENTS IN WORLD AFFAIRS, WE HAVE'CONFIRME
OUR IMPLACABLE HOSTILITY TO RACIALISM IN ALL ITS FORMS BY::
S '" OUR VOTE IN THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON SOUTH AFRICA'S MEMBERSHIP
OF THE UNITED NATIONS. WE.. HAVE BROADENED THE RANGE OF OUR
DIPLOMATIC CONTACTS BY ESTABLISHING RELATIONS THIS YEAR WITH
MORE THAN 20 COUNTRIES IN AFRICA, LATIN AMERICA, MIDDLE EAST.-
AND ASIA. WE ARE NEGOTIATING TRADE AGREEMENTS WITH IRAN,
THAILAND, EAST GERMANY, THE PHILLIPINES, BULGARIA, SOUTH KOREA,
LAOS, NORTH VIETNAM AND RUMANIA IN ADDITION TO THE MANY
AGREEMENTS WE ESTABLISHED LAST YEAR, WE HAVE CONCLUDED, OR
ARE NEGOTIATING, SCIENTIFIC OR CULTURALAGREEMENTS WITH 14 COUNTRIES.. 4, 
I 1
AUSTRALIA HAS CONTINUED TO PLAY. ITS PART IN
ENHANCING GLOBAL STRATEGIC,' ECONOMIC AND. SOCIAL SECURITY
AND PROGRESS. WE HAVE URGED MUTUAL RESTRAINT ON THE
TWO SUPERPOWERS IN THE INDIAN OCEAN AND GIVEN OUR SUPPORT
IN PRINCIPLE TO PEACE ZONE PROPOSALS AS PART OF OUR
DESIGN TO STRENGTHEN THE NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY. WE
HAVE SIGNED AN AGREEMENT WITH THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC
ENERGY AGENCY ON THE APPLICATION OF SAFEGUARDS , PURSUANT
TO RATIFICATION OF THE NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY AND
PROPOSED THE INTRODUCTION OF AN INTERNATIONAL SERVICE
FOR PEACEFUL NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS.
AUSTRALIA HAS DEMONSTRATED ITS CONCERN TO
BRING ABOUT A MORE EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF THE WORLD'S
' WEALTH AND IMPROVE LIVING STANDARDS IN" ALL COUNTRIES.
WE HAVE PLEDGED $ 40 MILLION TO THE UNITED NATIONS EMERGENCY
PROGRAM TO ASSIST. THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES HARDEST HIT BY.
SRECENT RISES' IN OIL AND RELATED COMMODITY PRICES AND
OTHER ADVERSE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS, WE HAVE OFFERED
MILLION AT THE RECENT WORLD FOOD CONFERENCE IN ROME
AN ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTION TO COUNTRIES STRICKEN BY FOOD
SHORTAGES, WE HAVE GIVEN $ 5 MILLION TO ASEAN FOR JOINT
PROJECTS. WE HAVE BECOME A FOUNDING MEMBER OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BAUXITE ASSOCIATION AND HAVE ATTENDED A
RECENT MEETING OF IRON ORE EXPORTING COUNTRIES, AUSTRALIA
PLAYED AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE LAW OF THE SEA CONFERENCE
A
IN CARCAS AND THE WORLD POLLUTION: CONFERENCE IN BUCHAREST t I 
AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN PROMINENT . IN EXPRESSING
CONCERN ABOUT VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS. AND UPHOLDING
THE RIGHT OF: ALL, PEOPLES ', TO LIVE IN DIGNI TY .: ANDF'R EEDOM.
AN AusTRALIAN INITIATIVE ON DIPLOMATIC. ASYLUM WAS'
-,..,. BROUGHT BEFORE/ THE 29TH UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
'. AUSTRALIA HAD MADE KNOWN ITS ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE
DETENTION OF POLITICAL PRISONERS AND SUPPORTED*
UNITED -NATIONS RESOLUTIONS CONDEMNING THE VIOLATIONS
; OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHILE.... WE-WILL MARK THE 26TH-ANNIVERSARY-'.
OF THE UNIVERSAL. DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS-NtXT
' TUESDAY, BY BECOMING A PARTY. TO TWO SIGNIFICANT INTERNATIONAL. 1
-:-' CONVENTIONS ON THE CIVIL RIGHTS OF WOMEN..
HUMANITY AND ENLIGHTENMENT ABROAD ARE'
. REFLECTED IN OUR POLICIES AT HOME. ERNMENT HAS
DONE MORE FOR THOSE MOST IN NEED, FOR THE WORKING
MAN AND HIS' FAMILY1 FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN. NEVER
ONCE IN c23 YEARS1 0 % WHETHER THERE WAS INFLATION OR
RECESSION1DID A LIBERAL GOVERNMENT FAIL TO * LEND' ITS
SUPPORT TO'THE EMPLOYERS IN THE NATIONAL WAGE CASEI
FOR 20 YEARS UNIONSHAD BEEN ARGUING FOR. THE
RE-INTRODUCTION OF WAGE INDEXATION. ONLY NOW HAVE
WE A GOVERNMENT TAKING A POSI. TIVE ATTITUDE TO THE
QUESTION. WE HAVE MADE A POSITIVE AND CONSTRUCTIVE
INTERVENTION BEFORETHE ARBITRATION COMMISSION.
WITHIN HOURS OFTAKING OFFICE WE RE-OPENED THE WAGE
CASE TO SECURE EQUAL PAY FOR WOMEN. oil
r a 
I IN MAY THIS YEAR WE SUPPORTED THE EXTENSION OF THE
ADULT MINIMUM WAGE TO WOMEN. WE HAVE TAKEN NEW
INITIATIVES TO PROTECT EMPLOYEES BY TRAINING AND
RETRAINING PROGRAMS AND STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT
ASSISTANCE. NO ONE SHOULD BE IN ANY DOUBT ABOUT THE:;
OPPOSITION S POLICIES ON THE GREAT PROBLEMS BEFORE
US. ONE THING IS CLEARLY IMPLICIT IN OUR OPPONENTS'
PROPOSALS THE SLASHING OF BASIC PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE ON SCHOOLS, WELFARE, HEALTH AND CITIES.
EMPLOYEES AND THEIR FAMILIES WOULD BE THE FIRST
TO SUFFER. I WANT TO EMPHASISE AS STRONGLY AS I CAN
THAT THE CURRENT PROBLEM OF INFLATION IN NO WAY
DOWNGRADES THE IMPORTANCE OF OUR GOVERNMENT'S TOTAL
PROGRAM-THE PROGRAM I ANNOUNCED IN 1972, THE. PROGRAM
I REPEATED IN MAY 1974, THE PROGRAM ONCE AGAIN
ENDORSED BY THE PEOPLE IN 1974. WE SHALL GO AHEAD
WITH THAT PROGRAM. IT IS CRUCIAL TO ALL OUR EFFORTS
TO PROTECT THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY FROM THE BUFFETS
OF ECONOMIC CHANCE AND CIRCUMSTANCE. THE FIGHT
AGAINST INFLATION AND THE IMPLEMENTATION OF OUR
PROGRAM WILL GO ON TOGETHER. i i
c 
WITH'OUR PROGRAM WE WILL BUILD A FAIRER
AND STRONGER AUSTRALIA, AN AUSTRALIA PROVIDING GREATER'
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL OUR: PEOPLE AND. A
GREATER ABUNDANCE OF THESE OPPORTUNITIES.' WE ARE NOT
GOING TO BE DETERRED FROM THOSE GOALS, THE GOALS
ADOPTED BY THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN 1972 AND 1974.
OUR RECORD THIS-YEAR HAS BROUGHT US CLOSER TO THEM.
IEMPHASI SE THAT IN EVERY THING WE DO, IN ALL OUR
PLANS AND DECISIONS, WE SHALL PROCEED ON THE
ASSUMPTION THAT THE GOVERNMENT WILL SERVE ITS FULL
ELECTED TERM.' THAT IS THE BASIS ON WHI . CH WE WERE
ELECTED AND THAT IS THE BASIS ON WHICH WE SHALL
PROCEED. II 



PRESS STATEMENT No. 397
DECEMBER 1974
TELEGRAM TO PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The Prime Minister today released the text
of the telegram he sent this morning to Sir Robert Askin
and the text of Sir Robert's reply to that telegram.
" On adjournment in House of Representatives
last night Mr John Howard mentioned information he had
received that afternoon concerning
Quote a well-publicised appointment to the staff
of the future Treasurer, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Overseas Trade
( Dr J. F. Cairns). Information I subsequently
received indicates that companies of which
that person and her husbani were directors,
officers and/ or shareholders are currently
the subject of investigation by the New South
Wales Commissioner for Corporate Affairs.
Unquote-
" Please let me know whether such an investigation
is being made and if so whether and how this person and
her husband are implicated. Signed E. G. Whitlam
Prime Minister"
Sir Robert's reply, which was received late
this afternoon read as follows:
" Reference your telegram of today's date
concerning an appointment to the staff of the Deputy
Prime Minister. Am given to understand that there is
some substance in what you say but matter is one for the
Corporate Affairs Commission whose administration comes
under the Attorney-General for New South Wales. Am seeking
urgent report from him and will then send you further
advice.'-R. W. Askin Premier"
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JJ, AUST AL1Ag. PRESS STATEMENT NO. 398
6 December 1974
TEXTILE FLOOR COVERINGS REFERENCE TO THE TEXTILES AUTHORITY
OF THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlan, announced today that
he had sent a reference to the Textiles Authority within the
Industries Assistance Commission covering certain textile
floor coverings. Mr. Whitlam said that this action was being
taken as a result of high and rising levels of imports and an
apparent total availability of such goods on the Australian
market in excess of previous levels.
The reference seeks the advice of the Authority on whether
action should be taken in terms of the GATT Textiles Arrangement,
to which Australia acceded earlier this year, to restrain imports
into Australia. The Authority has also been asked that if it is.
found that restraint measures are necessary and that measures which
may be recommended in accordance with the GATT Textiles Arrangement
are unlikely to overcome the market disruption, what other measures,
if any, should be taken to overcome the disruption. The Authority
has been requested to make its report by 28 February 1975 on the
goods covered by the reference.
The Prime Minister emphasised that the questions of whether
it would be necessary to have negotiations on the goods in question
with exporting countries or take other action would have to await
examination of the recommendations of the Textiles Authority.
Mr. Whitlam said that, although it is not clear to the
Government at this stage that action on goods covered by this
latest reference is necessary, he considered it important that
the Government be able to take the initiative in having
investigations undertaken so that action can be taken promptly
if found necessary. 



4JJ,, AUSr1( A .1A_ 1 PRESS STATEMENT NO. 399
6 December 1974
PAPUA NEW GUINEA TRANSFER OF POWERS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said this
evening that the Australian Government welcomed the
initiative of the Papua New Guinea Government in requesting
that authority over defence and foreign relations, the
Papua New Guinea Supreme Court and other leqal matters
be transferred' to Papua New Guinea as soon as practicable.
Mr Whitlam said that such a transfer was in
accordance with long-standing Australian policy which was
to enable Papua New Guinea to exercise final authority in
all matters of government before the formal step to
independence. The existing close consultations on major
foreign policy and defence matters would continue.
Mr Whitlam said that the transfer of authority
over the defence and foreign relations functions in the
period to independence would necessarily be subject to
Australia's continuing international and treaty obligations
including its obligations to the United Nations under the
Trusteeship Agreement and the Charter, and the Papua New
Guinea Government had agreed to this. However, the transfer
to Papua New Guinea of these matters would enable the
Papua New Guinea Government to give effect to its own
policies and priorities which it was already determining.
Mr Whitlam said that Australia, by legislation
at present before the Senate, was preparing itself to be
able to transfer these matters and he was confident that
the administrative and legislative details regarding the
transfers could be settled in time to meet Papua New Guinea's
requests. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JAUSTHALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 398
6 December 1974
APPOINTMENTS TO THE GRANTS COMMISSION, THE AUSTRALIAN
ATOMIC COMMISSION AND THE CHIEF OF THE AIR STAFF
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam announced today
that the Executive Council had agreed to the following
appointments. Mr D. V. Moye, who is Secretary of the Grants
Commission, has been appointed a full-time member of the
Grants Commission from 1 January 1975. His appointment is
for a five year term. He will take the place of
Mr J. F. Nimmo who since 1 March 1974 has been Commissioner
of an Inquiry into Transport Charges to and from Tasmaniii.
Mr Moye has been acting in Mr Nimmo's place on the Grant--
Commission since that time.
Professor Harry Messel has been appointed
to a vacant position on the Australian Atomic Commission
and will take up the position immediately.
Air Vic Marshal J. A. Rowland, A. F. C.,
will become Chief of the Air Staff from 21 March 1975
for a period of three years. He succeeds Air Marshal
C. F. Read, whose appointment
expires on 20 March 1975. Air Vice Marshal Rowland will
be promoted to the rank of Air Marshal from 21 March 1975.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 400
8 December 1974
QUEENSLAND ELECTION
The results in Queensland will disappoint all
Labor supporters and disillusion all believers in a healthy
Parliamentary democracy. I very much regret that Perc Tucker, an able
leader and a close friend has lost his seat in Townsville.
He fought a clean, honourable and vigorous campaign.
It is unhealthy that with 36.4% of the vote
Labor seems likely to hold only 10 or 12 seats out of 82.
The Liberals under Sir Gordon Chalk won 4%
more votes than the National Party under Mr Bjelke-Petersen
and the increase in the Liberal vote since the last State
election was much greater than the increase in the National
Party vote. Nevertheless, thanks to Mr Bjelke-Petersen's
gerrymander the National Party will hold at least 5 more seats
than the Liberal Party in the new Queensland Parliament and
Mr Bjelke-Petersen will remain Premier.
Throughout the campaign the Liberals showed
a much greater willingness than the National Party to
co-operate with the Australian Government in the development
of Queensland. The continued eclipse of the Liberals will
do nothing to heal the deep division in the coalition.
I regret that Queensland electors have been exposed to
emotive tactics and inflammatory slogans that would win
little attention in other parts of Australia. There are
dark currents of intolerance and extremism at work in
Queensland. I am convinced that honest policies of
co-operation will eventually prevail over bitterness and
division.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 401
9 December 1974
INTERIM REPORT FROM I. A. C. ON FARM INCOME STABILISATION
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
that he had asked the I. A. C. to provide an interim report
by 30 June 1975 on two recommendations made in the Green
Paper on Rural Policy.
The two recommendations related to income tax
measures being taken either by means of tax averaging
provisions or income equalisation deposits to reduce
fluctuations in the incomes of rural producers.
Mr. Whitlam said that the interim report would be
part of the overall report on the inquiry being conducted
by the T. A. C. on what assistance was needed to reduce
fluctuations in the incomes of primary producers.
Receipt of the interim report by 30 June 1975 would
enable the Government to consider its recommendations in the
context of the 1975/ 76 Budget.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE LAUNCHING OF
" GRAB FOR POWER"
BY LAURIE OAKES AND DAVID SOLOMON
9 DECEMBER 1974
Reminding this distinguished gathering and
also all those who listen to and view the media how much
my Government has meant to the publishing industry.
When I first tarted launching books at the request of
the Australian publishers the books were printed overseas.
The Australians were the authors but the printers and the
publishers were not. On this occasion there are distinguishedI
Australian writers, authors and skilled printers and, I trust,
prosperous-publishers.
It's the " Grab for Power" the book is called.
Another from the tree of Oakes and Solomon. Some people may
see a similarity between the events which precipitated this
latest tome and the present time. Nothing is so dead as
last weekA scandal. Anybody reading this book will see how
issues which were regarded as overwhelming, at the outset of
the campaign, whie/ proper grabs for power are made, how
they can be transmuted in the hands of skilled practitioners
during the campaign. The public gets a sense of proportion.
The public sees what are the alternatives. They have to see
not only the faults of the incumbents but the deficiencies
of the challengers. This book is, I'm certain,. bound to be read by a
very great number of people, from all walks of life.
It is a fascinating story. Racily written, an exciting
story. At the same time it is a substantial work of research
and there will be young and old read about it, there will
be professors reading it and ofcourse sayin g how much better
they would have done it themselves, and I suppose if you
can wait for decades that may be true. And there will
be aspiring politicians who will say how much better they
would have done it, achieved it or avoided it. I would
like to pay tribute'to the authors, because I've never 
I would like to paC t::. rhute to) hLo; h
because I. have never known opeople to work so thoroughly and
api: ly as Oakes and Solomon, They're very much -etter
authors of books than interpr:..:-ers in the cdii;. papers.
You can always rely on yesterdayi s paper beinc-li; carded,
nobody can find it. But books like this endure' Thy will
He around for a long time, and I believe it will stand the
passage of time.
There are similarities, aren't there between what
people thought were the circumstances of last April and
what some people think are the circumstances of today.
But I think the Australian people have learnt from two
aspects of the events of last April and May. The people
who grabbed for power last April thought that Australians
didn't know what went on in the rest of the world. They
thought we were still an isolated, insular, backward
people. In fact Australians, largely due to the press,
are now aware of what goes on in other parts of-the world.
They know that Australia isn't so different from other
countries, that in fact all the countries in which
Australians are interested are very similar to Australiasocially,
politically and economically. We all influence
each other. And this is a process which is going to become
more marked instead of less marked. All the things which
appal people, distress people and I dare say, in the next
couple of months will make many people hysterical, are
also being found in other countries the countries that
people visit in the course of their duties. The countries
which people should study. The countries with which wer
trade. The countries with which we compare ourselves.
Appail-ng unemployment figures in Australia at the moment,
but not as bad as in North America or most countries of
western Europe or Japan. And the measures which I announced
a month ago ad some which I will be announcing, not directly
face to face, orally as I am speaking to you now, but in
a prepared statement, will I am sure convince you that in
these matters Australia is not only still more successful
than any comparable country but in fact is taking steps 
-3-
which will mean that the position will improve improve
markedly be seen to improve and be certainly very much
betterbefore any other grab can be achieved.
There's another lesson I believe we have to draw
in addition to that concerning the similarities of conditions
in Australia and those in North America, Western Europe and
Japan and that is the sheer impropriety of what was done
politically last April. Some people believe that having
done it once, even though they didn't get away with it,
they should or could do it again. I don't believe that
Australians are impressed with those who still seek to
destroy the system, t. o make it unworkable. In April,
in May, nobody sought a mandate to use the Senate against
either side which succeeded in getting a majority in the
House of Representatives. There are often references to
mandates. Mandates apparently are sometimes doubted when
they're in the hands of those who win. But people, it
would be extraordinary if it were held that mandates are
in the hands of those who didn't succeed in getting enough
seats. Now last April and last May the campaign was to
form a Government and the Government was returned. There
was never any threat, at that time, by the challengers
that if they didn't get a majority in the House of
Representatives they would still try to achieve a
combination in the Senate which would thwart the side which
got the majority in the House of Representatives. No mandate
was sought, nobody came clean then and yet that apparently is
the threat which is being held now. If you lose twice you
can still destroy the system. Now of course it is difficult
to govern in Australia now, it is difficult to govern in
any comparable country, there is no head of government anywhere
in the Western world and for that purpose one includes Japan,
Australia and New Zealand who can rest securely or serenely.
The system is under challenge everywhere., whether it is a
system of divided powers, such as in the United States or
whether it is a system of Presidential powers, such as in
France or whether it is a Westminster system as in Britain
itself or in Australia or in New Zealand. In all these systems
there is immense stress and we jeopardise the system at our
peril because in each case there ir a history, there are some 
-4-
traditions, there are some conventions which have made the
system work and those who jeopardise the system have nothing*
to put in its place. These are serious matters. I sometimes4
on these occasionsA,, fl somewhat more flippant. But I expect
you expect me to say something rather more serious because
there are economic and there are Political matters arising
from last April from which we should all learn. It is important
that the political system in Australia should be effective.
It should be seen to be effective, socially and economically
and those who grab power and fail, those who do not get the
support * of the people at an election should not try to make
the system unworkable thereafter. We are ending a year
in the Australian Parliament where some bills have had to be
debated seven times before they have gone through. Seven times,
three times in each House and at a Joint Sitting. ( unclear)
Joint Sitting is held and the inevitable results flow from all
six bills which came before it after six debates . before being
debated at the Joint Sitting, Since that time there have been
eleven more bills passed by the House of Representatives and
rejected by the Senate and in most cases those bills were
precisely stated in the policy speech of the Government party
last April. Ladies and Gentlemen , this grab for power should
be a very salutary lesson to all. For whateitver polls may say
and there was a Western Australian poll a couple of weeks
before the grab was made-and whatever the economics, statistics
and indices may show-and they were deteriorating last March and
last april whaterver ephemeral scand als may emerge and be
blown up. The fact in that the grab failed ( unclear) and that
any further grab is similar circumstances or ciruinstances which
people thought similar, circumstances which blow some people's
tops, any similar grabs~ imilarly will fail. Its al-la question
of how soon Oakes and Solomon write the next book. I am satisfied
that I will be launching it and in the same happy circumstances.
I congratulate the authors, printers and the publishers and
I am certain there will be thousands of readers for Christmas and
in the following years who will enjoy am happy
to contribute to it somehow. It has at least solved my
Christmas problem anyway. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 403
9 December 1974
IMPORT POLICY FOR 1975
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
a program of action for 1975 aimed at reducing current pressures
from import competition on employment in certain industries.
The Prime Minister said this action followed a
recent review of import trends undertaken by himself, the Deputy
Prime Minister, Dr Cairns, and the Minister for Manufacturing
Industry, Mr Enderby. The Prime Minister said it was clear that high levels
of imports were contributing to problems of unemployment in those
industries sensitive to import competition. It was important that
manufacturers and importers who were planning their activities for
1975 be aware of the Government's concern with recent trends,
and the Government's intentions in relation to imports during
1975. The Prime Minister went on to say that the program
of action decided upon would be based on a selective review
of those industries with demonstrable import problems. The
review would be undertaken through the machinery and procedures
provided under the Industries Assistance Commission Act. A program
of references would be sent to the Temporary Assistance
Authority and the Textiles Authority during the next month. This
would ensure that reports would be received and action taken
by February. The Government was determined to use to the full
the system and the machinery it had created to deal with such
problems. The integrity of the system would be maintained.
The Prime Minister said that, consistent with the
provisions establishing the Temporary Assistance Authority, new
appointments would be made to the Temporary Assistance Authority
to enable it to undertake enquiries promptly. In addition, the
Department of Manufacturing Industry had been instructed to
provide full assistance to manufacturers to help them prepare
cases for consideration for references to the Temporary Assistance
Authority. / 2 
2,'
This programme of action involves an examination of the major
industries being affected by a high level of imports. The
Government will initiate appropriate action on these industries
within a few weeks, with full regard to the short term need to
maintain employmen~ t in these industries. The Prime Minister
stressed that the more prompt and specific an application for a
reference was, the more quickly appropriate action to safeguard
employment could be taken.
The Prime Minister pointed out that should the need for urgent
action emerge from these inquiries, goods ordered overseas but not
cleared for home consumption at the date of announcement of any
action would lie subject to the terms oi. -the action. Importers should
therefore exercise cauition in placing orders overseas and in
entering into financial commitments on such orders as special
consideration may not be given to outstanding commitments should
action be taken by the Government0
Motor Vehicles
As part of-the new policy for the motor vehicles industry
announced by the Government last month, the tariff on
passenger motor vehicles was immediately raised as shaort term
action, N~ ith the object of limiting imports of completely built*
up vehicles to a level no higher than 20 per cent of the
1-ocal market. * o / 3 
Textiles. Clothina and Footwear
Effective action against imports had already been taken in
relation to a significant part of the textiles~ clothing and
footwear industries and further action was now being taken as
part of the program of action.
Import licensing controls ha~ d been applied to footwear in
October, following an inquiry and recommendations by the Temporary
Assistance Authority.
In clothing, the Government had in recent months negotiated
voluntary restraints on exports of certain knitwear and woven
apparel from Hong Kong, India, People's Republic of China and the
Republic of Korea. Import licensing controls had been applied
to imports of the knitwear goods concerned from Taiwan. These
arrangements generally applied to imports to 30 June 1975.
A review of the arrangements would be made early in 1975 to
determine as soon as possible the arrangements to apply from
1 July 1975.
Tariff quota arrangements h1ad been announced on 3 December for
imports of acrylic apparel yarns, knitted man-made fibre fabrics
and towels. This action followed an inquiry and repoort by the
Textiles Authority within the TAG.
As a result of decisions taken today on IAC reports before the
Government, tariff quota arrangements were also to be applied
immediately to imports of
0 polyamide and polyester yarns
o woven man-made fibre fabrics
o foundation garments
Details of these decisions would be announced separately by
the Minister for Manufacturing Industry.
There were currently references with the Textiles Authority
on the balance of the apparel industry for re.-. ort by the end of
December and January 1975 and further references were being
considered in relation to cotton fabrics and piece goods. 00 ./ 4 
4,
A reference had been sent to the Textiles Authority in the
last few days on the carpet industry and the report on that
industry was expected about the end of January 1975.
in addition, over $ 1.5 million have been approved as grants to a
number of textile firms affected by import competition. These
grants were made under the Special Assistance for Non-Metropolitan
Areas ( SANMA) Scheme. Further applications from textile firms for
assistance under this scheme were being given urgent attention.
Domestic Appliances and Electronics
The Prime Minister said that the Government had been informed
tha~ t the domestic appliance industry was in the final stages of
preparing a documented case on the problems of import competition
which it was facing as the basis for an application for additional
short term assi~ tance. Submission of this application was expected
in the next few days. The application would be given urgent
consideration by Departments.
In relation to consumer electronic products, no application had
been made for additional assistance, elthough this had been
foreshadowed by some companies in the industry. The Prime Minister
invited the industry to prepare and submit a documented case
concerning import competition. Departments would consider urgently
any application submitted for a reference to the Temporary
Assistance Authority.
Other Industries
Reference's were sent last week to the Temporary Assistance
Authority on injection moulding machines and tyres. In the area of
glass, tariff preferences for imports of flat glass from developing
countries have been removed and the Government will be announcing
decisions on the IAC's glass and glasswear report early in the
New Year. Sectors of the forest products, furniture and ceramics 
industries have foreshadowed making applications for short-term
assistance. In relation to printed books which are assisted by
way of bounty rather than tariff or quantitative restrictions,
the. Government is currently considering representations for a wider
coverage of bounty0
Other Measures
In the field of exchange rates the Government took action in
September to devalue the Australian dollar by 12 per cent. This
significantly improved the competitive position ofL Australian
industry on both domestic and export markets0
The Priine inister said thct thLe Department of Customs and Excise
had been directed to expedite action regarding applications for
anti-dumping action and to give more attention to the likelihood
of injury to Australian industry from dump,. ing0
Similarly, in relation to by-law policy, the Minister for Customs
and Excise had already announced that this policy would be
interpreted to ensure that local manufacturers were not disadvantaged
vis-a-vis imports. A careful Miatch would be kept on the
application of by-law policy during 1975,
The Prime Minister concluded by saying that the Government would
ensure that the community had a reasonable choice between imports
and local manufacture. However, there was a need for a
careful balance to ensure that employment opportunities were not
disrupted. The Government would ensure that during 1975 the most
appropriate balance was achieved between imports and local
production. 0 



.37
PRIME MINISTER PRESS SATEENT NO. 408
9 Deeber 1974
4.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION REPORT
FOUNDATION GARMENTS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that'as a long term objective the Government has accepted the
Industries Assistance Commission's recommendation in its report
on Foundation Garments.
Mr Whitlam. said that in view of current economic
conditions and the possible employment consequences of introduction
of the reduced duties recommended by the Commission at this time,
the Government considered that the recommended duty rate of
would best be phased in and that in the case of brassieres
( complete and incomplete) a tariff quota be adopted with a
penality rate of $ 2.50 per garment when imports exceed a certain
level, approximately 25% of the market.
, Mr Whitlam, said that the tariff quotas which were
being introduced consistently with Australia's rights and
obligations under the GATT would remain in effect for the next
12 months and that this form of assistance would be reviewed
within that period as to the need for an extension of a further
12 months. Implementation of the Government's decision will
mean that in the first year existing rates of duty will be maintained
for all goods under reference, subject to a tariff quota in
respect of brassieres. Mr Whitlam added that tariff quotas would apply
to all imports of the products concerned cleared for home
consumption after the date of this announcement. A detailed
statement of Customs Tariff changes arising from the Government's
decision will be issued by the Minister for Customs and Excise
when arrangements have been finalised to implement the proposed
changes. The policy aspects of the administration of the
tariff quotas will be the responsibility of the Minister for
Manufacturing Industry who will announce detailed arrangements
in the near future.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 407
9 December 1974
Report Tyre Cord and Tyre Cord
Fabric
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam,. announced today
that as a long term objective the Government has accepted the
recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission in its
report on Tyre Cord and Tyre Cord Fabric.
Mr Whitlam said that in view of current economic
conditions and the possible employment consequences of introduction
of the reduced duties recommended by the Commission, at this time,
the Government considered that the recommended duty rate would
best be phased in. The Government's decision was also made
having regard to the Commission's supplementary recommendations
received on 26 November 1974.
Implementation of the Government's decision will
mean in the case of viscose tyre cord fabric, current duties
will continue until 31 December 1976 and then reduce to
General until 31 December 1977 and then further reduce to the
rate of 15%. General recommended by the Commission. In the case
of other tyre cord fabrics, the current rates of duty will be
increased to the Commnission's supplementary recommended rate
General until 31 December 1975 then be reduced to the rate
of 15% General recommended by the Commission in its report.
In respect of viscose tyre cord fabric the Government
did not implement the Commission's supplementary recommended rate
as Courtaulds is already receiving assistance of $ 200,000 under
the Special Assistance for Non-l Metropolitan Areas scheme which
was announced by the Minister for Manufacturing Industry on
21 November 1974. A detailed statement of the Customs tariff changes
arising from the Government's decision will be issued by the
Minister for Customs and Excise when arrangements have been
finalised to implement the new duty rates.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



3
Press Statement No. 404
9 December 1974
Industries Assistance Commission Report
Woven Man-Made Fibre Fabrics
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced
the Government's decision on the report of the Industries
Assistance Commission on Woven Man-Made Fibre Fabrics.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government accepted the
long-term level of assistance of 40% for " traditional"
fabrics of nylon or polyester but not polyolefin) as
recommended by the Commission but because of problems
presently being experienced by the industry it had been
decided to introduce as from today tariff quotas on a
short-term basis. On polyolefin fabrics the Government has
accepted the recommended long-term level of assistance of
22.5% but decided to reduce the present rate to this level
over a two year period.
The Government decided not to accept the supplementary
recommendations received from the Industries Assistance Commission
for an increase in tariff levels for certain fabrics for 12 months
as it considered that the arrangements for tariff quotas should
adequately achieve the necessary short-term protection for the
industry. Mr Whitlam said that the Government had also decided
to extend duty-free admission under by-law to certain light-weight
fabrics including some used in the production of school uniforms.
The Minister for Manufacturing Industry will have
responsibility for the policy aspects of the administration of
tariff quotas and he will announce detailed arrangements in the
near future. Mr Whitlam said that details of the customs tariff
changes arising from the Government's decision will be announced
when administrative arrangements to implement them have been
finalised. 2/. 
-2-
The Government has also decided to prescribe the
industry producing woven man-made fibre fabrics as being
eligible for structural adjustment assistance.
Canberra, A. C. T. . AUST LI 



A USTRLIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 402.
9 December 1974
MOROSI REPORT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today released
the text of a telegram he received this morning from the
Premier of New South Wales, Sir Robert Askin.
" With further reference to your telegram
December concerning an appointment to the staff of
the Deputy Prime Minister my colleague, the Attorney-General,
has advised me that the Commissioner for Corporate Affairs
has informed him as follows:
Tacticair Pty. Limited a company inr-rDorated in
New South Wales was wound up by order of the
Supreme Court on 28 February 1972 Atc the date of
winding up the officers of the company were:
Directors: David Mervyn Lindsay Ditchburn,
Juni Morosi,
Cecilio Hechanova
Secretaries: David Mervyn Lindsay Ditchburn,
Lionel Hart
all appointed 8 December 1969.
The statement of affairs for the company signed by Miss Juni Morosi
showed estimated realisable assets as nil and liabilities of $ 39,992.
On 29 March 1972 Mr. Roy Leslie Pegler the Liquidator of the
company reported to the Commission pursuant to Section 306( 3)
of the Companies Act that the company would be unable to pay its
unsecured creditors 50 cents in the dollar. * That section gives
the Commission certain powers of investigation when it receives
such a report. The investigatibn conducted by the Commission
following the receipt of this report has led the Commission to
seek advice from the New South Wales Crown Solicitor as to whether
any offence has been committed by any person in relation to the
affairs of the company. The matter is presently under consideration
by a Deputy Senior Crown Prosecutor whose advice is expected to be
received within the next few days. 



J AUSTRALI( A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 406
9 December 1974
Industries Assistance Commission Report
Polyester and Polyamide Yarns
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, today announced
the Government's decision on the report of the Industries
Assistance Commission on polyester and polyamide yarns.
Mr Whitlam said that the Governme nt accepted the
long-term level of assistance of 15% for raw and processed
yarns as recommended by the Commission but because of
problems presently being experienced by the industry it hadbeen
decided to introduce as from today tariff quotas on a
short-term basis subject to certain undertakings being given
by local manufacturers. The Government had decided not to accept a
supplementary recommendation received from the Industries
Assistance Commission for an increase in tariff levels from
to 20% for 1.2 months as it considered this rate alone
would provide insufficient short-term protection for the
industry. The present criteria-for granting by-law admission
of yarns will continue to apply and thus normal by-law
admission of yarns will not generally be granted.
The Minister for Manufacturing Industry will have
responsibility for the policy aspects of the admini~ tration
of the tariff quotas and will announce details of the quotas
and other administrative arrangements in the immediate
future.
Can~ erra, A. C. T. 



v1 I
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 405
9 December 1974
Industries Assistance Commission Report
Wood and Metal-Working Machinery, Etc.
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Industries Assistance Commission in its repo rt on Wood and
Metal-Working Machinery, Etc.
The Government's decision to implement the
Commission's recommendations will mean that duties of
General will apply to gas operated welding, etc. equipment
and electric furnaces and ovens, and 25% General'for the other
goods covered by the report.
Mr Whitlam said that significant employment effects
Were unlikely to result from the implementation of the
recommendations. A detailed statement of the Customs tariff changes
arising from the Government's decision will be issued by the
Minister for Customs and Excise.-when arrangements have been
finalised to implement the new duty rates.
Canberra, A. C. T. 



4JAUSTRALIA(
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 409
9 DECEMBER, 1974.
POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN
The Australian Government has taken action to
accede to the UN Convention on the Political Rights of Women
and to ratify ILO Convention No. 100 ( Equal Remuneration).
Announcing this today, the Prime Minister, Mr.
Whitlam, said 10 December 1974 was a fitting date for
Australia to become a party to those two Conventions.
It was on 10 December 1948 that the United Nations General
Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The
purpose of that Declaration was to ensure fundamental rights
and freedoms for all persons, without discrimination of any
kind, arising from race, sex, religion and political or other
opinions. Since it came to power, the Government has sought to
pass legislation to guarantee fundamental rights without
discrimination on grounds of sex and to take other steps to
ensure that it acted in the spirit of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. Mr. Whitlam said that the Government's decision to
become a party to these two Conventions was evidence, of its
desire to ensure that Australia's policies were soundly based
on respect for, and on the protection and enhancement of, civil
liberties and basic human rights for all its people, regardless
of their sex. The Government had signed the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic,*"
Social and Cultural Rights and would proceed to ratification
of them as soon as enabling legislation had been passed by
Parliament. Australia would also ratify the International
Convention of the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination
as soon as Parliament had passed the appropriate legislation.
Mr. Whitlam said 1975 had been designated by the
United Nations as International Women's Year. The Government
had, since it came to office, been active in promoting equal
opportunities for women in all fields of public life and
ensuring that all discriminatory legislationf was removed which
might prevent women from taking their rightful place in society.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



4j)' A ) IHALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 410
December 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S OVERSEAS VISIT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that
he had no intention of postponing again his visit to
Europe, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Pakistan.
The Prime Minister said that while Australia faces
a number of difficulties related to the economy, it would
be irresponsible to give the impression overseas and
indeed in Australia that the country was in such a
parlous state that the Prime Minister was unable to leave
it during the summer recess. Moreover, to cancel or
postpono again the visit at this stage would be a discourtesy
to Heads of Government of the host countries who appreciated
the necessity for deferring the visit in July, immediately
after the elections.
The Prime Minister said that there were many important
reasons why the visit should proceed at this time. In
addition to other matters which would be discussed he saw
considerable value in discussions on common economic problems
faced, not only by Australia, but by the developed countries
of Western Europe.
The Prime Minister said that at a time of crisis
in the world economy there was an urgent and continuing need
for leaders of Western countries to concert their economic
policies in the interests of stability and welfare.
One of the great dangers of the present situation
was that countries might feel themselves compelled to
embark on beggar-my-neighbour policies which could only lead
to economic disaster.
Policies of restricti * on policies that curtail
employment, production and welfare could be fatal to the
framework of the world economy as we knew it and could
threaten everywhere those liberal and democratic forms
that were so vital a part of our political heritage. / 2 
-2-
The Prime Minister said that discussion of these
grave economic problems with European leaders at this
time was not a luxury but a responsibility which any
Australian Prime Minister should assume.
For this reason, too, he would be accompanied on
the visit not only by senior Foreign Affairs officials
and the Secretary of the Department of Overseas Trade,
but also by the Secretary of the Department of Minerals and
Energy and by a senior Treasury official so that
important matters affecting energy and the economy might
be fully discussed.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



/ 0
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 411
11 December 1974
MINISTERIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, has announced that the
Governor-General today swore-in the Honourable Jim Cairns, M. P.
as Treasurer and the Honourable Frank Crean, as Minister
for Overseas Trade.
This gives effect to the Prime Minister's announcement
of 21 November 1974 that these changes would be made at the end
of the Budget sittings.
The Prime Minister also announced that the Governor-
General had approved certain changes in administrative
arrangements. The Industries Assistance Commission and the Prices
Justification Tribunal, which have to date been administered
by the Prime Minister, are being transferred to the
administration of the Special minister of State.
The Australian Industry Development Corporation is
being transferred from the overseas Trade Portfolio to that
of the Treasurer. Responsibility for the administration of the scheme of
adjustment assistance to industry is being transferred from the
portfolio of the Minister for Overseas Trade to that of the
Minister for Manufacturing Industry.
The Prime Minister also announced that the administration
of the Priorities Review Staff is being transferred to his own
portfolio.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 412
12 December 1974
WORKING PARTIES ON THE ECONOMY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today the
Australian Government has still not received assurances from
all States that they would co-operate in implementing
joint economic measures, particularly in relation to prices.
Mr Whitlam was commenting on a report that the
South Australian Premier, Mr Dunstan, had claimed that the
Australian Government had ignored offers-by the States to hand
over their powers on prices to the Prices Justification
Tribunal. Mr Whitlam also denied that there had been any
breakdown on the Australian Government's part in implementing
recommendations of joint Commonwealth/ State working parties
on prospective joint economic action. I
He said only two State Governments Tasmania and
South Australia had said they would co-operate fully with
the Australian Government on strengthening the powers of the
Prices Justification Tribunal.
He had written to the Premiers as long ago as
16 September. So far Queensland had not replied at all,
Victoria had not yet indicated its attitude and New South
Wales and Western Australia had said they wanted a special
Premiers'm Conference but did not say if they accepted the
proposal. Mr Whitlam said the Australian Government had dealt
promptly with the report from working parties dealing with
various aspects of inflation. The working parties were concerned
with action to limit wage increases; the multiplicity of wage
fixing tribunals; tax penalties on companies granting excessive
wage increases; State legislation to support the jurisdiction
of the Prices Justification Tribunal; Government tendering
procedures; and on control of restrictive trade practices. 
2
The working parties had been commissioned by the
Premiers' Conference on 13 August.
The Australian Government was anxious to get State
approval for the transfer of powers recommended by these
groups of Australian and State Government officials, Mr. Whitlam
said.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 10.00 PM
ljAUSI+ KALA L
PRIME MINNSTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 414
13 December 1974
VISIT BY THE PRINCESS ANNE AND CAPTAIN-MARK PHILLIPS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
the following statement had been issued from Buckingham Palace.
" The Princess Anne, Mrs Mark Phillips, and
Captain Mark Phillips, have accepted with very
much pleasure the invitation from the Australian
Government and from the Government of South
Australia to visit South Australia in April next
to attend the International Equestrian Expo 1975.
Her Royal Highness and Captain Phillips plan..-
to leave London after competing in the Badminton
Horse Trials from 16 to 19 April and are expected
to be in Adelaide on 25 April for Expo 1975.
From South Australia they will visit Western
Australia and the Northern Territory before
returning to London on 7 May."
The Prime Minister said that he was sure that the
Royal couple would be most warmly welcomed to South Australia..
" I share with the South Australian Premier qreat pleasure
that Her Royal Highness and Captain Phillips will visit
South Australia for the International Equestrian Expo 1975."
Precise dates for the itinerary have yet to be decided.
Consultations will take place to prepare a program and the
details will be announced as soon as possible.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 415
13 December 1974
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO HUMAN RELATIONSHIPS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that he
had received a letter from the Premier of New South Wales
stating that the New South Wales Government was prepared
to assist the Royal Commission into Human Relationships in
its inquiries. The State will provide information and advice in
response to particular requests of the Commission as it
is able to do. The Premier also put forward arrangements
for liaison with the New South Wales Government.
Mr Whitlam. said that he was pleased with this
co-operative attitude of the Premier*. ., The assistance
offered by him together with that promised by the
Premiers of South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania should
assist considerably the Royal Commission in its task.
The Prime Minister said that he hoped the Premiers
of Queensland and Western Australia would be able to
advise him soon of their willingness to co-operate. with
the work of the Royal Commission.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JAUSA.% AI I
PRIME MONBSTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 413
13 December 1974
STATE AGENTS-GENERAL
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today denied reports
that he had any intention of raising with the British Government
the position of State Agents-General in London.
Mr Whitlam said he appreciated that the Agents-
General had a role to perform in relation to commercial and
related matters to which the States attributed considerable
importance. There was, however, no suggestion that Agents-
General exercised diplomatic functions, as these were the
sole concern of the Australian Government.
There was no foundation whatsoever for the Queensland
Premier' s assertion that the question of a border with
Papua New Guinea and the Torres Strait area would be raised
with the British Government.
" The Premier will be aware that a first round of
discussions, of an essentially preliminary nature, was held
in Canberra on 13 November between officials of the Australian
and Queensland Governments.
" At this meeting it was agreed that a second, and
more technical, meeting be held after the Queensland elections.
The expectation was that this meeting would be held in the
week beginning 16 December.
" The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet was
advised this week by Queensland officials that processes
associated with the formation of a new Queensland Government
would not be complete until 23 December and that, therefore,
the proposed meeting would have to be deferred until some time
in January, probably the last week in January," , Mr Whitlam said.
The-Prime Minister added that he had no intention of
canvassing in public the matters which would be raised during
his impending private talks with Her Majesty The Queen or
with the British Government.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
COLOMBO 15 DECEMBER 1974
FOLLOWING IS TEXT OF PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
HELD AT 0830 HOURS SUNDAY, 15 DECEMBER.
REPORTER: REGARDING THE POLICY OF IMMIGRATION YOU HAVE AT THE MOMENT
IN AUSTRALIA WE SEE THERE IS A KIND OF CURTAILMENT. THERE
IS A KIND OF HUNCH OR SOME PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY THE SETTLERS IN
AUSTRALIA, FEEL THAT ALTHOUGH YOU STILL HAVE THIS CURTAILMENT
ON THERE IS A KIND OF PREFERENCE TO SOME OF THE PEOPLE COMING
FROM THE WEST WHICH IS A SORT OF UNDECLARED POLICY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. I'D JUST LIKE TO FIND OUT WHETHER THIS
IS CORRECT OR NOT?
PRIME MINISTER:
THERE IS A CURTAILMENT IN THE OVERALL IMMIGRATION TO
AUSTRALIA BECAUSE OF UNEMPLOYMENT WHICH.. IS AT PRESENT
IN AUSTRALIA NOW BUT THERE IS NO CURTAILMENT ON REGIONAL OR
RACIAL GROUNDS. THERE HAS BEEN A CURTAILMENT PERCENTAGE
WISE IN RESPECT TO EUROPEAN MIGRATION JUST AS MUCH AS THERE
HAS BEEN IN RESPECT TO MIGRATION WITHIN OUR REGION. ONE OF
THE FACTORS WHICH ENTITLES A PERSON TO COME AS A MIGRANT
TO AUSTRALIA IS THE FACT THAT HE HAS CLOSE RELATIVES IN
AUSTRALIA NOMINATING HIM SUCH AS PARENTS, CHILDREN OR
DEPENDANT BROTHERS OR SISTERS. THERE WOULD VERY LIKELY BE
MORE SUCH PERSONS IN AUSTRALIA FROM EUROPE THAN FROM THE
./ 2 N
I K&gt; 
REGION BUT, NEVERTHELESS, THE QUALIFICATIONS ARE THE SAME
AND HAVE BEEN SINCE MY GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED TWO YEARS AGO
IN RESPECT OF ALL PEOPLE SEEKING TO COME TO AUSTRALIA. I
THINK THERE ARE MANY THOUSANDS I'M NOT SURE THERE'S NOT
ABOUT 30,000 PEOPLE IN AUSTRALIA WHO HAVE COME FROM
SRI LANKA.
REPORTER: IF I MAY JUST ADD ONE MORE QUESTION TO THAT. WHAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN THE CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CURTAILMENT WERE THEY
POLITICAL OR a*
PIAME MINISTER:
ECONOM IC.
REPORTER: MR PRIME MINISTER, YOU ARE A FIRM SUPPORTER OF OUR PRIME
MINISTER'S INDDAN OCEAN PEACE ZONE IDEA. WHAT ARE YOUR VIEWS
ON BUILDING OF THE DIEGO GARCIA BASE. THE DIEGO GAR'CIA BASE
ANGLO-AMERICAN BASE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN?
PRIME MINISTER:
YES, WHEN WE CAME INTO OFFICE WE VOTED IN THE UNITED
NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN FAVOUR OF SRI LANKA'S PROPOSAL
FOR A ZONE OF PEACE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN. THE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENT HAD NOT VOTED FOR OR AGAINST THE PROPOSAL. IT
HAD ABSTAINED IN THE VOTE UPON IT. WE REMAIN OF THE VIEW
THAT IT IS HELPFUL IF THE TWO GREAT POWERS, THE UNITED
STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION, THE TWO GREAT NAVAL POWERS IN
THE WORLD DO NOT INCREASE THEIR FORCES IN THE INDIAN OCEAN.
WE RESIST THE ESCALATION OFI OR ANY CONFRONTATION BETWEEP
THEM. WE HAVE MADE IT PLAIN IN BOTH WASHINGTON AND MOSCOW
THAT THAT IS OUR VIEW. I'VE MADE IT PLAIN IN WASHINGTON A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO AND I WILL BE DOING IT IN MOSCOW IN ONE
MONT H. * K:~
UNV.
: N
N
N x.\
A N
' S 
REPORTER: AS A FOLLOW UP TO THIS QUESTION MAY I KNOW YOUR REACTIONS
ABOUT THE RECENT CENTO EXERCISES IN THE INDIAN OCEAN CENT0,
CENTO EXERCISES.
PRIME MINISTER:
I WOUIN'T EXPRESS A VIEW ON THE CENTO ONES I'M
NOT FAMILIAR ENOUGH WITH THEM AND, OF COURSE, WE AREN'T
A MEMBER OF CENTO.
REPORTER: IN YOUR DISCUSSIONS LAST NIGHT WITH OUR PRIME MINISTER
DID YOU SUGGEST THAT SRI LANKA SHOULD JOIN ASEANO
PRIME MINISTER:
THE TALKS BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER AND ME WERE JUST
BETWEEN US, THERE WERE NO OTHERS THERE AT ALL THEY WERE
PRIVATE. SO I THINK THAT YOU OUGHT TO ASK ANY QUESTIONS
LIKE THAT IF I MAY SUGGEST IN THE FORM OF '" DO I -FAVOUR
ANY SUCH PROPOSAL?"'
REPORTER: NEVILLE DE SILVA NEW YORK TIMES
ONE OF THE OBJECTIVES OF THE INDIAN OCEAN PEACE ZONE
PROPOSAL IS TO SEE THAT THE INDIAN OCEAN IS FREE OF FOREIGN
MILITARY BASES. IT IS NOT INCONSISTENT THAT YOU SHOULD
SUPPORT THE PEACE ZONE PROPOSAL WHILE YOU PERMIT FOREIGN
BASES TO EXIST ON YOUR TERRITORY? I REFER IN PARTICULAR TO
THE NORTH WEST CAPE BASE.
PRIME MINISTER:
THERE IS ONL Y ONE MILITARY BASE ON AUSTRALIAN TERRITORfY.
IT IS THE U. S. NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION AT NORTH WEST
CAPE. IT WAS ESTABLISHED UNDER A 25 YEAR ARRANGEMENT MADE
IN 1963. IT THUS HAS 14 YEARS TO RUN. I DON'T BELIEVE THE
ARRANGEMENT WOULD HAVE BEEN MADE THESE DAYS. THERE HAVE
BEEN SOME NECESSARY AND ACCEPTABLE ALTERATIONS MADE TO IT
SINCE MY GOVERNMENT CAME INTO OFFICE. I SIGNED THOSE
0 0 / 4 Sz'
N S
N'
N N 
-4-
ARRANGEMENTS, I EXPECT THEY WILL BE MADE STATUTORY IN THIS
COMING YEAR, THE ARRANGEMENTS ARE THERE AND, OR COURSE,
ONE CANNOT BREAK ARRANGEMENTS.
REPORTER: ROBERT HAUPT AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW.
POLLOWING MR DE SILVA'S QUESTION, COULD WE TAKE IT FROM
YOUR REMARKS THAT IF YOU WERE IN POWER WHEN THE NORTH WEST
CAPE AGREEMENT COMES UP FOR RENEWAL YOU WILL DO EVERYTHING
IN YOUR POWER TO END THE ARRANGEMENT.
PRIME MINISTER:
THIS IS TOO SPECULATIVE I WON'T ANSWER THAT. THAT'S
14 YEARS AHEAD. I EXPECT TO BE IN RETIREMENTTHEN. I WILL
RET'RF MIDWAY BETWEEN NOW AND THAT TIME.
REPORTER: HOW WILL YOU REGARD OUR PRIME MINISTER AS THE LEADER OF THE
NON-ALIGNED NATIONS.
PRIME MINISTER:
MRS BANDARANAIKE HAS PLAYED A LEADING ROLE IN THE WHOLE
NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT. SHE AND PRESIDENT TITO I BELIEVE,
ARE THE ONLY HEADS OF GOVERNMENT OR HEADS OF STATE WHO HAVE
ATTENDED ALL FOUR NON-ALIGNED CONFERENCES. I BELIEVE, IT
IS A VERY FITTING TRIBUTE TO MRS BANDARANAIKE'S STATUS IN
THE WORLD AND IN THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENTt THAT SHE WILL BE
THE HOSTESS TO THE NEXT CONFERENCE HERE IN COLOMBO IN 1976.
REPORTER: U. P. I.
MRPRIME MINISTER, ANY CHANCE OF AUSTRALIA PARTICIPATING
IN THE NEXT W4ON-ALIGNED CONFERENCE?
PRIME MINISTER:
WE AREN'T A NON-ALIGNED COUNTRY BUT WE WOULD BE VERY
HAPPY TO ATTEND IF WE WERE INVITED AS AN OBSERVER. 
REPORTER: NEVILLE DE SILVA NEW YORK TIMES
WOULD YOU CARE TO COMMENT ON MR BREZHNEVS PROPOSAL FOR
ASIAN COLLECTIVE SECURITY SYSTEMS.
PRIME MINISTER:
NO. THE PROPOSAL WAS MADE ABOUT THREE YEARS OR SO AGO
NOW. I WOULD RATHER SEE WHAT THE PRESENT OBJECTIVES OR
PROPOSAL ARE I CAN DO THAT WITHIN A MONTH. I'D RATHER
HEAR DIRECTLY, SOON, RATHER THAN COMMENT AT THIS DISTANCE
FROM THE ORIGINAL PROPOSAL.
REPORTER: MANIK DE SILVA CEYLON DAILY NEWS.
PRIME MINISTER:
VERY GOOD EDITORIAL YESTERDAYGOODo
REPORTER: COULD YOU KINDLY COMMENT ON FUTURE SRI LANKA/ AUSTRALIAN
RELATIONS? PARTICULARLY IN THE CONTEXT OF YOUR HAVING MET
OUR PRIME MINISTER LAST NIGHT.
PRIME MINISTER:
I BELIEVE THAT THERE ARE VERY GOOD OPPORTUNITIES FOR
MAKING THE RELATIONS BETWEEN SRI LANKA AND AUSTRALIA MORE
DIRECT AND SUBSTANTIAL THE PRIME MINISTER ASKED ME TO VISIT
CEYLON WITHIN A COUPLE OF WEEKS OF MY BECOMING PRIME MINISTER.
IT WAS ONE OF THE VERY FIRST INVITATIONS I RECEIVED. I
THINK I CAN SAY THAT I CAME TO KNOW THE PRIME MINISTER QUITE
WELL AT OTTAWA LAST AUGUST, DURING THE MEETING OF THE
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT. MY WIFE WAS THERE AND
MRS BANDARANAIKE'S DAUGHTERS WERE THERE AND SO NOT ONLY DURING
THE CONFERENCE WHICH EXTENDED OVER, I THINK, SEVEN WORKING
DAYS, BUT ALSO THE INTERVENING WEEKEND AND AT VARIOUS OTHER
OCCASIONS ONE OF WHICH WAS HER GRACIOUS INVITATION TO ME TO
HAVE LUNCH WITH HER. I THINK I CAN SAY WE CAME TO KNOW EACH
OTHER QUITE WELL. IT'S BEEN, OF COURSE, A VERY GREAT PLEASURE
6
oN 
FOR ME TO SPEND SOME HOURS WITH HER LAST NIGHT. SHE HAS BEEN
A HEAD OF GOVERNMENT FOR LONGER THAN MOST PEOPLE IN THE WORLD.
SHE BECAME THE HEAD OF GOVERNMENT, OFCOURSE, IN 1960
AND HAS CONTINUED WITH A FIVE YEAR INTERVAL AND SHE REMAINS
A FIGURE OF VERY GREAT INTERNATIONAL INTEREST BECAUSE SHE
WAS . THE FIRST WOMAN TO BECOME A PRIME MINISTER.
REPORTER: DE SILVA
PRIME MINISTER:
ANOTHER DE SILVA. THE PORTUGESE INFLUENCE IS STILL
TERRIBLY STRONG HERE.
REPORTER: DO YOU SEE ANY FAINT SIGNS OF PROGRESS TOWARDS DETENTE
BETWEEN CHINA AND THE SOVIET UNION?
PRIME MINISTER:
I'D RATHER NOT COMMENT ON THIS MATTER. I'D OBVIOUSLY
BE IN A BETTER. POSITION TO MAKE AN ASSESSMENT IN A MONTH'S
TIME AFTER I'VE BEEN TO THE SOVIET UNION. I'M RELATIVELY
HOPEFUL THAT THERE ARE SUCH SIGNS. THE GREAT STEP TOWARDS
DETENTE RECENLY HAS BEEN THE MEETING BETWEEN MR BREZCHNEV
AND MR FORD IN VLADIVOSTOK.
REPORTER ( INDISTINCT)
PRIME MINISTER:
OH NO, NO, A TROIKA. ARE THERE ANY OTHER DE SILVA'S.
HERE? FOUR DE SILVAS A QUADRUMVERATE.
REPORTER: HOW FAVOURABLE DO YOU THINK YOUR RELATIONS ARE WITH THE
EUROPEAN COMMON MARKET? o,/ 7 
7--
PRIME MINISTER:
THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC
COMMUNITY IS ONE OF THE THREE GREAT COMMERCIAL AREAS OF
INTEREST TO AUSTRALIA. IN VERY ROUGH TERMS ONE THIRD OF
AUSTRALIA'S TRADE TAKES PLACE WITH THE EECo ONE THIRD WITH
JAPAN AND ONE THIRD WITH THE UNITED STATES. CLEARLY, THEREFORE,
IT IS VERY IMPORTANT TO AUSTRALIA THAT SHE SHOULD BE AWARE
OF AND SHE SHOULD BE INVOLVED IN THE AFFAIRS OF THE COMMON
MARKET. TRADITIONALLY, AUSTRALIA'S INTERESTS WITH THE MEMBER
COUNTRIES OF THE COMMON MARKET HAS BEEN IN AGRICULTURAL AND
PASTORAL PRODUCTS. NOW THERE IS A VERY GREAT PROSPECT OF
INTEREST IN MINERAL PRODUCTS. THE COMMON MARKET IS NATURALLY
CONCERNED WITH THE ENERGY CRISISo AUSTRALIA HAS VERY GREAT
ENERGY RESOURCES. THE ENERGY RESOURCE IN WHICH THE MEMBERS
Or fHE COMMON MARKET ARE MOSTLY INTERESTED IS URANIUM. WE
WOULD HAVE IN AUSTRALIA ABOUT ONE FIFTH OF THE KNOWN
PROVEN URANIUM RESERVES IN THE WORLD. FURTHERMORE, EUROPE
IS INTERESTED IN, FOR INSTANCE, OUR COAL TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT BECAUSE THERE hGAIN WE HAVE VERY GREAT COAL RESERVES
OF ALL SORTS FOR HYDROGENATION AND FOR STEAMING AND FOR
METALLURGICAL PURPOSESe THE LOT.. o. WE HAVE IN VERY GOOD
QUANTITIES AND EUROPE HAS MADE IT PLAIN BY DELEGATIONS FOR
INSTANCE, THE FOREIGN MINISTER OF THE EEC, SIR CHRISTOPHER
SOAMES, HAS BEEN TO AUSTRALIA AND IN A SOMEWHAT RELATED AREA
THE OECDt THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, YONKIER FARN-LINETTE
HAS BEEN TWICE TO AUSTRALIA. NOW IT'S BEEN VERY CLEAR TO
ME IN THE CONVERSATIONS WHICH I MYSELF HAVE HAD AND SEVERAL
OF MY MINISTERS HAVE HAD WITH SIR CHRISTOPHER SOAMES AND
MR FARN-LINETTE THAT THE COMMON MARKET IS VERY INTERESTED IN
THE DEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIA'S RESOURCES AND THE COMMON
MARKET'S PARTICIPATION IN THAT DEVELOPMENT. FURTHERMORE,
THERE IS THE GENERAL QUESTION OF TRADE AND INVESTMENT AND
DEVELOPMENT AMONG COUNTRIES OF THE COMMON MARKET OR
AUSTRALIA PATTERN THE OECD PATTERN. THE GREAT ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS WHICH BESET AUSTRALIA ARE JUST THE SAME AS THOSE
WHICH BESET THE COMMON MARKET COUNTRIES AND IN FACT, OF.
COURSE, ALL THE OECD COUNTRIES BECAUSE THE OECD CONSISTS
IN EFFECT OF THE COMMON MARKET, MOST OF THEM, AND
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES AND
CANADA, SO IT ' S VERY IMPORTANT INDEED THAT THESE COUNTRIES,
AS I POINT OUT, THREE QUARTERS OF AUSTRALIA'S TRADE TAKES
PLACE WITHIN THE OECD CONTEXT AND MOST OF OUR INVESTMENT 
AND TECHNOLOGY IS IN THAT CONTEXT. NOW IN THESE
CIRCUMSTANCES IT IS VERY IMPORTANT INDEED THAT AUSTRALIA
AND THE EEC SHOULD BE CONSTANTLY IN CONTACT,
REPORTER: FERNANDO
PRIME MINISTER:
ANOTHER PORTUGESE'. ANY MORE FERNANDO'S OR PERERA'S,
NO PERERA'S? RIGHT FOUR DE SILVAS, TWO FERNANDOSo
REPORTER: WHAT ARE YOUR RELATIONS WITH THE PEOPLES REPUBLIC OF CHINA
AND HAVE THEY IMPROVED SINCE YOU BECAME PRIME MINISTER?
PRIME MINISTER:
CLOSE YES. MY GOVERNMENT WITHIN A COUPLE OF WEEKS OF
COMING TO OFFICE NORMALISED RELATIONS WITH THE PEOPLES
REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND, MR BOWEN, THE SPECIAL MINISTER OF
STATE, THE MINISTER WHO ASSISTS ME, WENT TO CHINA IN THE
MIDDLE OF LAST YEARo I, MYSELF, WENT THERE WITH THREE OTHER
MINISTERS IN NOVEMBER LAST YEAR. THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER,
DR CAIRNS, WHO IS NOW THE TREASURER AND AT THAT TIME WAS THE
MINISTER FOR OVERSEAS TRADE, WENT THERE TWO MONTHS AGO.
THERE IS QUITE A CLOSE RELATIONSHIP NOW BETWEEN THE PRC AND
AUSTRALIA. THIS IS GROWING COMMERCIALLY AND CLEARLY, OF
COURSE, WE TAKE INTO ACCOUNT WHAT THE ATTITUDES OF CHINA
ARE LIKELY TO BE TO OUR NEIGHBOURS AND THE ATTITUDES OF OUR
NEIGHBOURS TO CHINAo IT'S SIGNIFICANT OF COURSE, THAT
THERE HAS BEEN A CONSIDERABLE MOVEMENT AMONG THE ASEAN
COUNTRIES TO NORMALISE RELATIONS WITH CHINA NOWo SUCH
RELATIONS HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED BETWEEN MALAYSIA AND CHINA,
AND THERE HAVE BEEN TOP VISITS FROM THAILAND AND. THE
PHILIPPINES TO CHINA.
REPORTER: PRIME MINISTER:
WHAT'S YOUR NAME? i 
REPORTER: TAMIL NEWSPAPER,
T1iE WESTERN NATIONS ARE MILITARILY AND PHYSICALLY STRONG
AND WEt IN OUR VIEWt WE ARE SPIRITUALLY STRONG. STRONGER
THAN THE MILITARY STRENGTH OF THE WESTERN NATIONS0 SO AS
W2: LL AS AUSTRALIA IS. CONCERNEDt WHICH ONE IT GIVES TOP
PRIORITY FOR THE SPIRITUAL SIDE OR THE PHYSICAL SIDE?
PRIME MINISTER:
I DON'T KNOW THAT ANY ANSWER I COULD GIVE TO THAT
QUESTION WOULD BE SATISFACTORY. I CERTAINLY OBSERVE AND
APLFtJD THE SPIRITUAL STRENGTH OF MANY COUNTRIES IN THIS
REGION. IT IS ONE OF THE VERY HOPEFUL SIGNS THAT THERE
ARE SEVERAL COUNTRIES IN THIS REGION WHICH HAVE THE
CONFIDENCE, THE DIGNITY, WHICH STEMS FROM HAVING CENTURIES
OF IDENTITY IN THE ONE GEOGRAPHICAL AREA AND THAT IDENTITYp
THAT CONFIDENCE, THAT SERENITY, HAS SURVIVED ONSLAUGHTS FROM
OUTSIDE, YOUR OWN COUNTRY HAS BEEN RULED BY THREE EUROPEAN
NATIONS, THREE GREAT EMPIRES IN THE LAST FOUR CENTURIES OR
SO. THE EMPIRES ARE GONE AND SRI LANKA REMAINS. THERE AREA
SEVERAL OTHER COUNTRIES WHICH HAVE THAT SAME CONTINUITY AND
COHESION AND IDENTITY IN A GEOGRAPHICAL AREA AND THEY ALSO
HAVE THE ADVANTAGE OF HAVING OVER CENTURIES BEEN ABLE TO COME
TO SOME ACCOMMODATION WITH THEIR NEIGHBOURS WHO MAY BE
DIFFERENT IN RELIGION OR RACE OR HISTORY BUT, NEVERTHELESS,
HAVE A SIMILAR COHESION, IDENTITY AND CONFIDENCE, THERE ARE
GREAT ADVANTAGES IN THIS, THE OLD INTRUSION FROM EUROPE
TO DIVIDE AND RULE CAN NO LONGER APPLY.
REPORTER: WHEN YOU'RE . IN EUROPE, WHAT ASSURANCES WILL YOU BE GIVING
TO, PARTICULARLY ITALY AND GERMANY, REGARDING SUPPLY OF
AUSTRALIAN URANIUM AND THE SALE?
;' hfliff MINISTER
THE ATTITUDE THAT WE'VE TAKEN TO SUPPLYING URANIUM TO
THOSE COUNTRIES HAS ALREADY BEEN MADE PLAIN ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS I U V. 
FOR SOME TIME PAST BY MY MINISTER FOR MINERALS AN ENERGY.
THEY RELATE TO THE USES, THE PEACEFUL USES, THAT WILL BE MADE
OF NUCLEAR FUELS. THE DEGREE OF CONTROL EXERCISED OVER THEM
WITHIN AUSTRALIA, AND THE PROPER RETURN WHICH AUSTRALIA WILL
GET FROM THEM AND PARTICIPATION WHICH AUSTRALIA WILL GET IN THEM.
VERY OBVIOUSLY THERE ARE COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD WHICH HAVE MUCH
GREATER TECHNOLOGY THAN AUSTRALIA CAN HOPE TO ACQUIRE IN THE NEAR
FUTURE OR WHICH, SAY JAPAN HAS AT THIS STAGE. NOW IN THESE
CIRCUMSTANCES, IT'S VERY MATERIAL TO DISCUSS THESE MATTERS ON THE
SPOT AND I'LL BE VISITING BRUSSELS, THE CAPITAL OF THE COMMON
MARKET, AND OF COURSE, ALSO GERMANY AND FRANCE AND ITALY AND
BRITAIN, ALL OF WHICH HAVE INTERESTS IN THIS MATTER, AND I'M
ACCOMPANIED BY SIR LENOX HEWITT, THE SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF MINERALS AND ENERGY, WHO HAS BEEN INVOLVED IN ALL THESE
MATTERS IN ALL THESE COUNTRIES THROUGHOUT OUR TERM OF OFFICE0
REPORTER DE SILVA TIMES''
MAY I TURN FROM THE SPIRITUAL TO THE POLITICALo WOULD YOU
CARE TO COMMENT ON PAKISTAN'S PROPOSAL FOR A NUCLEAR WEAPON FREE
ZONE IN SOUTH ASIA.
PRIME MINISTER
WE SUPPORTED THIS PROPOSAL AS WE SUPPORTED ALL THE SIMILAR
PROPOSALS IN THE UNITED NATIONS IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS. IRAN
MADE ONE AND THERE HAVE BEEN SEVERALo
REPORTER LANKA DIVA
IN MORE OF THE SAME ( INDISTINCT) OF MR BREZHNEV'S SUGGESTION
OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY SYSTEM AND THE EXPANSION OF ASEAN
COMMUNITYo
PRIME MINISTER
WELL WE AREN'T A MEMBER OF ASEAN AND WHAT THE ATTITUDE " OF THE
MEMBERS OF ASEAN TO EXPANDING THEIR MEMBERSHIP MAY BE, IS A
MATTER FOR THEMo ASEAN HAS BEEN A MOST VALUABLE ARRANGEMENT AND
IT HAS DEVELOPED CONSISTENTLY OVER THE YEARSø AUSTRALIA WOULD
VIEW WITH FAVOUR ANY EXPANSION OF ASEAN. NOW WHICH COUNTRIES 0 ,0/ 11 
-FRIN
SHOULD COME IN IS REALLY NOT FOR AUSTRALIA TO SUGGEST -IT IS N
FOR THE FIVE PRESENT MEMBERSO
REPORTER BEFORE THE SECOND WORLD WAR THERE WERE EIGHT MAJOR POWERS
GEIRMANY, ITALY, JAPAN, BRITAIN, RUSSIA, AMERICA AND ALL THOSE
THINGS. NOW IT IS R~ EDUCED TO TWO WORLD SUPER POWERS. THAT IS
BECAUSE OTP'THIS PHYSICAL CONFLICT. BECAUSE OF THE PHYSICAL
CONFLICT WORLD POWERS HAVE REDUCED TO TWO FROM EIGHT* SO IN
THAT CASE, EIGHT OF SUPPOSED COUNTRIES LIKE ASIA JOIN THESE
COUNTRIES OF ASIA THE OTHER NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES THAT MEANS
TO MAKE THE INDIAN OCEAN A FREE ZONE OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
IF IT DESISTS FROM JOINING THE MILITARY PACTS I THINK IT WOULD N
BE VJERY HELPFUL TO THE BENEFIT OF THE FUTURE WORLD,
PRIME MINISTER
I'M NOT SURE IF I CAUGHT OR FOLLOWED EVERYTHING YOU WERE
PUTTING TO ME. I DOUBT IF THERE WILL BE ANY MORE MILITARY PACTS
IN THE WORLD, THERE HAVEN'T BEEN ANY NEW ONES FOR MANY YEARS
NOW. THERE WERE A FEW MADE IN THE 1960' S IN THE VIET-NAM
CONTEXT AND THE LESS SAID ABOUT THEM THE BETTERO* AND. THE ONES
THAT WERE MADE IN THE 50' S HAVE NOT REALLY BEEN EXPANDED MUCH
SINCE. I THINK THE DAYS OF MILITARY PACTS ARE NUMBERED. I DON'T
KNOW OF ANY WHICH ANY OF THE GREAT POWERS ARE NOW SEEKING TO
FORM.
REPORTER FERNANDO
MR PRIME MINISTER WOULD YOU CARE TO COMMENT ON THE OPPOSITION
TO YOUR OVERSEAS JOURNEY FROM THE HOME FRONT AND ALSO ON THE
REPORTED BOMB SCARE ON BOARD THE PLANE YOU ARRIVED ONO
PRIME MINISTER
OH I WON'T COMMENT ON THE FIRST BECAUSE THAT HAPPENS WJHENEVER
WE ARE STILL VERY PROVINCIAL, 1 MUST CONFESS0 AND
; O HE0OTHER ONE IT BEARS OUT THE WISDOM OF THE HEAD OF GOVERNMENT " N
CHARTERING HIS OWN PLANE IN THIS RESPECT. IF THIS BOMB SCARE
HAD BEEN MADE IN RESPECT OF A COMMERCIAL PLANE THEN THE WHOLE OF
THE JOURNEY WOULD HAVE HAD TO BE DISRUPTED. WE WOULD HAVE HAD TO 
DELAY OR DEFLIGHT, 9 GO BACK TO BASEt UNLOAD AND SO. ON. BUT
WE KNEW FOR CERTAIN WHAT WAS ON THE PLANE, SO ANY SCARE LIKE
THAT WE KNEW TO BE A COMPLETE HOAX. YOU WOULDN'T KNOW IN THE
CASE OF A COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT BECAUSE YOU CAN'T BE CERTAIN WHAT
IS IN THE HOLDS OR THE LUGGAGE OR ON THE PERSONS OF THE PASSENGERS.
SO IT ' WOULD SEEM, IF ONE TRAVELLED COMMERCIALLY IT WOULD NOT
ONLY DISRUPT THE OFFI* CIAL PARTY IT WOULD INCONVENIENCE AND DISTRESS
THE UNOFFICI. AL 0 THE CIVILIAN PASSENGERS AS WELL.
REPORTER DID IT BOTHER YOU IN ANY WAYo
PRIME MINISTER
I DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT IT UNTIL DURING DINNER LAST NIGHT. IT
DIDN'T PUT ME OFF THE FOOD.
REPORTER MR PRIME MINISTER MAY I ASK YOU A QUESTION ON CRICKET.*
YOU KNOW INDIA, PAKISTAN AND SRI LANKA ARE FORMING THE -ASIAN
CRICKET CONFERENCE BECAUSE SINCE MANY YEARS CEYLON, SRI LANKA HAS
BEEN TRYING TO GET INTO THE INTERNATIONAL CRICKET
CONFERENCE.
PRIME MINISTER
YE S
RE PORTER AND UNFORTUNATELY SHE HAS BEEN KEPT OUT BECAUSE AUSTRALIA
AND BRITAIN, I BELIEVE, HAVE A VETO POWER, IN THE INTERNATIONAL
CRICKET CONFERENCE. SO WE HAVE JUST FORMED THE ASIAN CRICKET
CONFERE NCE, WHAT ARE YOUR VIEWS ON IT MR PRIME MINISTER.
PRIME MINISTER
WELL I9M VERY GLAD TO HEAR THIS. I DIDN'T KNOW THAT
AUSTRALIA AND BRITAIN HAD VETO POWERS IN THIS RESPECT I'M
0/ 13 K~]
K 
EMBARRASSED TO HEAR IT. NEVERTHELESS AS YOU APPRECIATE THE
SPORTING ASSOCIATION ARE ENTIRELY VOLUNTARY ONES AS FAR AS MY
COUNTRY IS CONCERNED. IT'S TRUE MY GOVERNMENT IS NOW SUBSIDISING
INTERNATIONAL SPORTING CONTESTS AND I'D BE GLAD TO
KNOW IF THERE IS ANY SUCH VETO POWER BEING USED BY OUR CRICKET
ASSOCIATION. IF THERE IS, IT WOULD OBVIOUSLY AFFECT OUR VIEW
OF' THEIR ENTITLEMENT' TO ANY SUBSIDIES IN THIS RESPECT. NOW, 9
I THOUGHT WE WERE GOING TO GIVEt OR LEND, 9 A FAST BOWLER TO HELP
IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CRICKET IN THIS COUNTRY. ONE OF THE
REMARKABLE THINGS ABOUT THE OLD BRITISH EMPIRE WAS THAT ALL
ITS MEMBERS ARE HAVE DEVELOPED THIS FASCINATION WITH CRICKET.
NOW INDIA, AND PAKISTAN HAVE FOR A VERY LONG TIME. THE WEST
INDIES HAS AND I'M DELIGHTED TO HEAR THAT SRI LANKA IS DEVELOP-
.( NG IT TO O0 I'VE NO REASON TO THINK THAT THEY SHOULDN'T
BE 3 OUTSTANDING IN THE GAME AS INDIA AND PAKISTAN HAVE LONG
BEEN KNOWN TO BE, INTERNATIONALLY.
REPORTER CAN YOU ENLIGHTEN US ABOUT ANZUS THE PACT BETWEEN AUSTRALIA
AND NEW ZEALAND AND THE UNITED STATES ITS PURPOSES AND ITS
FUNCTIONS ANZUS.
PRIME MINISTER
YES., 9 ANZUS HAS BEEN THERE FOR WELL OVER 20 YEARS
NOW A ND IT ' S NEVER CALL ED I N QUESTIO0N I N AUSTR AL IA, NEW
ZEALAND OR THE UNITED STATES. THE FUNCTIONS OF IT, OF COURSE,
ARE WELL KNOWN THEY ARE SET OUT IN PUBLIC DOCUMENTS. THERE
IS AN ANNUAL, SOMETIMES MORE FREQUENT CONSULTATION BUT IT'S
JUST NOT A MATTER OF CONTROVERSY OR CHALLENGE IN ANY OF THE
THREE COUNTRIES.
REPORTER THANK YOU, PRIME MINISTER. 9 N 



PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH SRI LANKA BROADCASTING
CORPORATION 15 DECEMBER 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT: INTERVIEW WITH SRI LANKA
BROADCASTING CORPORATION,
FOLLOWING IS THE TEXT OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW
WITH SRI LANKA BROADCASTING CORPORATION HELD IN COLOMBO
AT 0815 HOURS SUNDAY 15 DECEMBER 1974.
1. QUESTION: MR PRIME MINISTER, SRI LANKA HAS CLOSE LINKS
WITH AUSTRALIA.
WHAT ARE THE MEASURES THAT BOTH NATIONS COULD TAKE TO
FURTHER STRENGTHEN THESE TIES PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELD OF
ECONOMIC CO-OPERATON?
ANSWER: I LOOK FOR14ARD TO THE STRENGTHENING OF THE LONGSTANDING
TIES BETWEEN SRI LANKA AND AUSTRALIA.
APART FROM OUR CONTINUING CO-OPERATION IN INTERNATIONAL
FORUMS LIKE THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE UNITED NATIONS, I
WOULD HOPE THAT-OUR TIES WILL BE FURTHER CONSOLIDATED
THROUGH THE DEVELOPMENT OF TRADE, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND
THE GROWING NETWORK OF CULTURAL AND OTHER CONTACTS.
2. QUESTION: WHAT ARE THE PRINCIPAL EFFECTS OF THE
ENLARGEMENT OF T-HE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY ON THE
AUJSTRALIAN ECONOMY? AND WHAT STEPS IS AUSTRALIA TAKING TO
COPE WITH ANY PROBLEMS ARISING IN THIS CONTEXT?
ANSWER: THE ENLARGEMENT OF THE COMMUNITY HAS NOT HAD MUCH
EFFECT ON THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY IN TOTAL.
IT HAS MEANT SOME RE-DIRECTION OF AUSTRALIAN EXPORT TRADE IN
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS AWAY FROM EUROPE TO OTHER, AND
PRINCIPALLY ASIAN, MARKETS.
THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD HAS BEEN MADE EASIER FOR 0 MNON, 
AUSTRALIA BY THE STRONG WORLD DEMAND FOR FOODSTUFFS
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS. s
A NOTABLE EXCEPTION TO ALL THIS HAS BEEN MEAT MORE
ESPECIALLY BEEF.
BRITAIN WAS ONCE A VALVED MARKET FOR AUSTRALIAN BEEF, BUT
WITH THE CLOSING OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY MARKET
TO IMPORTS OF BEEF, THE BRITISH MARKET HAS OF COURSE ALSO
BEENJ CLOSED TO AUSTRALIA..
AT THE SAME TIME, THE JAPANESE HAVE CLOSED OFF THEIR-MEAT
IMPORTS.
SO WE HAVE SOME VERY GREAT PROBLEMS WITH BEEF.
I SHALL TAKE THIS UP IN BRUSSELS AND THE OTHER E. E. C.
CAPITALS IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS.
ON THE OTHER HAND, BRITAIN HAS SOUGHT TO CONTINUE
TO IMPORT SUGAR FROM AUSTRALIA AS IN THE PAST.
THr EEC RULES WILL NOT PERMIT THIS.
BUT IN THE CASE OF SUGAR, THE BRITISH HOUSEWIfVES ARE THE
LOSERS AS AUSTRALIA HAS NO DIFFICULTY IN FINDING ALTERNATE
LONG-TERM MARKETS FOR SUGAR.
IN GENERAL, AUSTRALIA WELCOMES THE ENLARGEMENT OF THE
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY, AND APART FROM THE EVIDENT
POLIT ICAL BENEFITS WHICH WILL FLOW FROM PROGRESSIVE MOVES
TOW.' ARDS GREATER POLITICAL UNION IN EUROPE, AUSTRALIA SEES
THE EMERGENCE OF AN ECONOMICALLY STRONG EUROPE AS ADVANTAGEOUS'
TO AUSTRALIA'S LONG-TERM TRADE INTERESTS.
NO DOUBT PROBLEMS WJILL ARISE FROM TIME TO TIME AND WE HOPE
TO BE ABLE TO CONTINUE TO SIT DOWN WITH THE EUROPEANS TO
TALK THEM THROUGH, AS WE HAVE FOR SOME YEARSo AND THIS
I'LL BE DOING IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS.
3. QUESTION: ON THE SUBJECT OF THE INDIAN OCEAN PEACE ZONE
PROPOSAL, WHAT ROLE DOES AUSTRALIA EXPECT TO PLAY IN-ITS
IMPLEMENJTAT ION?
ANSWER: AUSTRALIA WANTS TO HELP REDUCE TENSIONS IN THE ASIAN
REGION. SHORTLY AFTER MY GOVERNMENT CAME TO POWER IT ANNOUNCED THAT
AUSTRALIA WOULD SUPPORT SRI LANKA'S INITIATIVE FOR A ZONE
OF PEACE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN.
WE SHALL CONTINUE TO CO-OPERATE IN THE UNITED NATIONS WITH
so N 
-2-
SRI LANKA AND THE INDIAN OCEAN LITTORAL STATES ON ! HIS QUE: STION.
WE HAVE MADE REPRESENTATIONS TO THE GREAT POWERS BOTH THE
UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION URGING ON THEM MUTUAL
RESTRAINT IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THEIR MILITARY PRESENCE IN
THE INDIAN OCEAN.
WE SHALL CONTINUE TO TAKE WHAT STEPS WE CAN TO REDUCE-THE
PROSPECTS OF GREAT POWER CONFRONTATION IN THE INDIAN OCEAN.
4. QUESTION: WOULD YOU AGREE WITH THE VIEW THAT THE
PROSPECTS FOR WORLD PEACE ARE BETTER NOW THAN THEY HAVE EVER
BEEN SINCE THE LAST WORLD WAR?
ANSWER: YES, I WOULD. I DON'T DENY THAT THERE CAN BE AN
OUTBREAK OF HOSTILITIES IN INDIVIDUAL REGIONS.
I THINK IT IS UNLIKELY THAT THEY WILL SPREAD ROUND THE WORLD.
PEACE DOES NOT COME SIMPLY BECAUSE WE WANT IT.
IT HAS TO BE CONSOLIDATED PATIENTLY THROUGH CONTACTS
BETWEEN LEADERS, ACCOMMODATIONS AND THE RECONCILIATION
OF CONFLICTING INTERESTS.
DETENTE BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION MUST
BE MADE TO WORK AND THE MIDDLE AND SMALLER POWERS OR THE POWERS
WHICH ARE STRATEGICALLY LOCATED COUNTRIES LIKE AUSTRALIA
AND SRI LANKA MUST CONTINUE TO ENCOURAGE THE LARGER
COUNTRIES TO GRASP THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR BUILDING AN
INTERNATIONAL STRUCTURE OF PEACE AND THIS STRUCTURE , I
BELIEVE, IS BETTER NOW THAN IT HAS BEEN SINCE THE SECOND
WORLD 9AR.
QUESTION: ONE FINAL QUESTION. HOW DO YOU ENVISAGE
AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE ROLE IN ASIA AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF
ASIA ASIAN COUNTRIES?
AN SWER:
THIS IS A VAST SUBJECT OF COURSE. BRIEFLY, AUSTRALIA
SEEKS TO ESTABLISH HER OWN IDENTITY IN ASIA.
OUR HISTORY AND OUR GEOGRAPHY HAVE AFFORDED US AN OPPORTUNITY
TO BUILD LASTING FRIENDSHIP WITH THE NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES*
OF ASIA AND THE PACIFIC NOTWITHSTANDING OUR ETHNIC, CULTURAL
AND HISTORICAL DIFFERENCES.
ONE MEDIUM FOR DOING THIS OF COURSE IS THE COMMONWEALTH OF
NAT IONS.
MOST OF THE MEMBERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS LIE " N
.2~ K N 
AROUND OR IN THE INDIAN OCEAN AND THE SOUTH PACIFIC.
MY GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED THAT AUSTRALIA SHALL PLAY A
CONSTRUCTIVE ROLE IN DEVELOPING REGIONAL CO-OPERATION IN ASIA
AND IN STRENGTHENING OUR TIES BILATERALLY WITH THE COUNTRIES
OF THE REGION.
WE ALSO HOPE TO PLAY A ROLE IN PROMOTING DEVELOPMENT THROUGH
MUTUALLY ADVANTAGEOUS TRADING ARRANGEMENTS AND THROUGH OUR
AID PROGRAMS.
I'VE ANNOUNCED WHILE I'VE BEEN IN SRI LANKA THAT WE ARE
MAKING A GRANT OF 30,000 TONNES OF WHEAT.
WE DON'T WISH TO BE REGARDED AS SOME TRANSPLANTED EUROPEAN
OUTPOST. RATHER WE W'ANT TO BE ACCEPTED AS A HELPFUL AND CO-OPERATIVE
MEMBER OF AN ASIAN REGION WHICH IS GROWING IN ECONOMIC
STthE,* GTH AND STABILITY.
INTERVIEWER:' WELL, THANK YOU VERY MUCH MR PRIME MINISTER
FOR THIS INTERVIE. 



,,, AUSTKAU( A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 416
December 1974
NATIONAL ADVISORY COUNCIL ON REHABILITATION
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today that a
National Advisory Council on Rehabilitation was being
established to advise the Government on all aspects of its
policies affecting the rehabilitation of the injured and
the handicapped. The Chairman will be Mr Justice C. L. D. Meares,
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, and the Chairman
of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government had been very
fortunate in securing Mr Justice Meares' services. With
Sir Owen Woodhouse, he had formed the Committee of Inquiry
into Compensation and Rehabilitation in Australia. The
Committee's Report was presented earlier this year, and the
National Compensation Bill, which was currently before the
Parliament, was one substantial result of it.
The Government would be looking to the Council for
advice on implementing the rehabilitation aspects of the
Woodhouse Report, the Prime Minister added. The Committee
of Inquiry said in that section of itp Report dealing with
rehabilitation that " in the past, the handicapped have been
neglected and often isolated. Society has paid far too little
attention to their needs". Mr Whitlam said that with the
Council's help, the Government would ensure that the
handicapped would receive all the assistance and protection
which could reasonably be provided, so that they could find
a worthwhile place in society.
The Prime Minister said that the Council would be
responsible to the Special Minister of State, Mr Bowen.
The other members would be announced following discussions
with Mr Justice Meares.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Belgium Speech by the Prime Minister of Belgium, M. Leo Tindemans, at a
dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in Brussels on
16 December 1974
I take great pleasure in welcoming you to Belgium
and also in welcoming Mrs Whitlam, the
Minister of State, and the important Australian
Delegation.
While our two countries are geographically
separated by a great distance, this does not
necessarily mean that our political and moral
aims are different. Quite the contrary, our two
countries are fundamentally attached to political
democracy and improvement in international
relationships, in order to keep peace in the
world and to develop that peace based on a
greater justice.
There also exists a convergence in the foreign
policies followed by our two countries lately,
among others in the United Nations Organisation,
in order to contribute to international
detente. This is in particular the case with the
action we are developing within the framework
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty with the aim of
organising control of nuclear tests.
It was with great interest that I learnt about the
main trends of your home and foreign policy.
At home your Government at present aims at a
greater centralisation and reinforcing of the
responsibilities of the state in the economic and
social field.
As to foreign policy, your country is concerned
about a greater independence and endeavours
to show a characteristically Australian identity.
I believe that our two countries are becoming
more and more aware of the fact that we are at
the start of a period that forces us to consider our
international relationships and to place us in a
renewed framework. The present world can hardly be content with
the bipolar balance that has dominated these
international relationships.
Your country, just like ours, is anxious to contribute
to the development of subcontinental
organisations or communities of nations, after
the manner of our friendly countries of Western
Europe within the framework of the European
Union. I hope that the efforts we undertake in a parallel
direction in this international community will
bear fruit in the near future, in order to make the
same aims prevail.
I also hope that the bilateral relations between
your country and Belgium will be reinforced in
the years to come. These relations already
assume a very important nature in the trade
field. Your country exports to our country important
quantities of iron ore, textile and food products;
we export to your country manufactured goods
which seem to be particularly appreciated by
your Government. I am thinking for instance of
the electronic sector.
It would be desirable if our business relations
could be developed in other fields, in the sector
of uranium, and especially if a more intense
industrial co-operation could be envisaged
between our two countries, for instance through
participating in industrial co-operation agreements.
Prime Minister, today was the first day of your
visit to our country.
I believe our first discussions have been fruitful 
so that one can envisage concrete progress in
the above-mentioned fields.
I hope that tomorrow you will be able to go
deeply into the different aspects of our future
collaboration, not only as to what concerns our
own country, but also in regard to the relationships
with the European Economic Community.
The Prime Minister with the Prime Minister of Belgium, 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of Belgium in Brussels on
16 December 1974
Thank you, Prime Minister, for the warm and
gracious welcome you have accorded my wife
and me and the members of my party. It is
fitting that my visit to Europe should begin here
in Brussels, the very capital of Europe, a city
ancient in its culture and history yet symbolising
all that is modern and contemporary in the
new Europe. It is fifteen years since an Australian
Prime Minister made an official visit to
Belgium and the other capitals of Europe. Ten,
or even five years ago, no Australian Prime
Minister would have visited Brussels before
going to London. No Australian Prime Minister
would have discussed in Brussels matters
affecting not only Australia's relations with Belgium
but her relations with Britain and Europe.
For our part, nothing could illustrate more
clearly the momentous changes that have
occurred in recent years-in Belgium, in Britain,
in Europe, in Australia, in the world at large. I
welcome the opportunity to reaffirm the
strength of our friendship. Throughout this era
of historic change relations between Belgium
and Australia have grown and strengthenedfounded
as they are in common cultural traditions
and based on the enduring Western
values of liberty, democracy and the rule of law.
There is an impression abroad-in Australia and
elsewhere-that Europe no longer matters to
Australia, and that our destiny now lies exclusively
with Asia, Japan and the nations to our
north. That is a false impression. It is true that
Australia has developed closer and more realistic
ties with Asia and Japan. Our trade with
those nations has increased three-fold in the
last twenty years, and Japan is now our biggest
single trading partner. No one welcomes more
than I do the historic trends that have brought
Australia closer to the nations of her own region,
deepened our friendship with our neighbours
and sharpened our sense of regional responsibility.
No one has worked harder to encourage
those trends. But it would be a grave mistake to
suppose that our greater involvement in Asia
means a lesser involvement in Europe. Australia's interests in Europe are of great and
growing importance.
Britain and Europe take roughly one-third of our
exports. Our involvement in Asia and our involvement
in Europe are not mutually exclusive.
They are complementary. They reflect not only
our desire-a natural desire-to enlarge our role
in the world, but a growing trend towards interdependence
between all nations. On my first
visit to Brussels as Prime Minister I reaffirm
Australia's profound and lasting interest in
Europe, our support for the European ideal, and
our desire for stronger and closer ties with all
European nations.
Australia has always given her full support to
the concept of a united Europe. It is true that we
have sought to safeguard our own trading
interests as best we can, but on the wider issue
of European unity there has never been any
question of our support for the high principles
and noble aspirations that guide and sustain the
European community. Australia believes deeply
in the value of regional co-operation at the
economic and political levels: in our own region
we have done our best to promote it. How natural,
then, that we should support one of the
greatest and most successful examples of
regional integration ever attempted by sovereign
nations. I acknowledge the anxiety that
many Australians felt at the prospect of Britain's
entry. Speaking for myself, it seemed to me a matter of
profound historical justice, of singular ' rightness',
that within the space of a week in 1971,
two of the world's greatest nations were committed
to membership of organisations to which
they were destined to belong-China was
admitted to the United Nations General Assembly,
and the House of Commons voted in favour
of Britain's entry to the European Community.
May I say, Prime Minister, how greatly Australians
admire your own contribution to the
cause of Europe and Belgium's central role in
that cause. This city, always one of the loveliest 
in Europe, now enjoys a new eminence and a
proud status as the institutional capital of the
European communities and the headquarters of
its most significant and enduring security alliance.
Australians for many years honoured
your predecessor, the late Paul-Henri Spaak, as
a statesman of world stature and one of the
founding spirits of the Common Market.
It is appropriate that you, Sir, have been
charged by the recent conference of Heads of
Government of the Community with the task of
reporting to them on the prospects and progress
of European political unity. In that difficult and
complex undertaking, I have no doubt that your
efforts will bring closer the fundamental and
guiding objective which for twenty years has
provided the inspiration and philosophical basis
of the European experiment-the belief that
independent states may one day submerge
their political differences and come together in a
political union.
There are pressing reasons why nations'of all
kinds must seek a unity of purpose, a greater
measure of co-operation and understanding.
The whole world-Australia no less than Belgium,
our own region no less than Europe-is
beset by problems of unprecedented difficulty,
of daunting complexity, of great danger. Overpopulation,
pollution, the energy shortage, terrorism,
racial tensions are some of the most
urgent. Overhanging the economies of the
Western nations are the twin problems of
unemployment and inflation. Because these
problems are global in their scope and origin,
the solutions to them must be international
solutions. It is folly to pretend that they will be
solved by nations, or even groups of nations,
acting alone or in isolation.
What is at stake is not just the ability of democratic
states to manage their economies, but
people's faith in the ability of democracy to survive.
Must the democracies concede that only
authoritarian regimes can cope with inflation
and employment? This is a battle that the
democracies must win, not just for the sake of
their economies, but for the sake of their democratic
institutions. Here in Europe, where the
highest living standards are combined with the
highest measure of personal freedom and a
unique abundance of cultural and artistic riches,
the advanced industrial nations have a supreme incentive to preserve the strength of their system
and overcome the social economic and environmental
problems that threaten its survival.
No nation has pursued a more active policy of
international co-operation than Belgium during
the past quarter of a century. I pay tribute to that
effort. You are a member of the United Nations,
a member of NATO, a member of the Council of
Europe and Western European Union. You are
one of the Benelux countries. You are a member
of Euratom, the European Coal and Steel Community
and, of course, the EEC. Your support for
the Atlantic Alliance and an integrated Europe
has provided the basis of a viable Belgian
foreign policy. There is not a better example of
the ability of a small power to set an example of
co-operation and exercise an influence for good
out of all proportion to its size and population.
There is another reason why European union is
profoundly important for the world. It has a
poignant relevance to my own country no less
than yours. Thousands of Australians fought
and died in Belgium during the two world wars.
Ypres, Mons, Messines are names firmly
engraved on the consciousness of the Australian
people. I visited this morning the tomb of
the Unknown Soldier and every year the Australian
Ambassador in this city attends a
ceremony at the Menin Gate in memory of the
Belgian and Australian soldiers who fought as
comrades in arms. We recall the suffering of
those days, not to glorify war but to reaffirm the
spirit of peace which is so much a part of the
spirit of the new Europe. All your plans, all your
hopes, all your ambitions for a greater and more
prosperous Europe rest on the preservation of
peace. If your Community achieves nothing
else, the world will rejoice that for the first time
the threat of war has been lifted from a continent
ravaged by the most terrible wars in
history. In this context I commend the action of your
Government in ratifying the nuclear nonproliferation
treaty. Australia has worked
consistently for the strengthening of that treaty.
We regard it as crucial to the preservation of
peace and the survival of civilisation. The
alternative is a nightmare world in which dozens
of nations may possess nuclear weapons by the
early 1980s. Yet six years after the treaty was
concluded and four years after it came into 
force, some states-including some states in
Europe-have still to ratify the treaty or make
clear their renunciation of nuclear weapons
development. Australia and Belgium are comparatively small
powers. Remote as we are from each other in
terms of distance, we have a great deal in common.
We are affluent nations in a world of widespread
poverty. We are highly industrialised.
We are devoted to regional co-operation. Our
bilateral trade, though modest in scale, has
grown steadily and exhibits a remarkable balance.
Australia's exports to Belgium in
1973-74 were worth $ A59000000: Belgium's
exports to Australia were worth
$ A57 000 000. Australia's ties with Europe
have been strengthened since World War II by a
vast immigration program. It is a reminder to us
that modern civilisation in Australia sprang from
the great tide of European colonisation in the
19th century-a process of colonisation in
which Belgium played her part.
To the north, east and west of Australia there
are many nations which were once parts of
European empires. These links with Europe
have left an enduring mark on the newer
nations of Africa, Asia and the Pacific. Australia,
like many other states in her region, has set her
own firm and independent course in world
affairs. In doing so we acknowledge our historic
and cultural debt to Europe and look to the
nations of Europe for support and collaboration
in overcoming the problems shared by all mankind.
I take heart from the great achievement in
international co-operation we have witnessed
in Europe itself-an achievement in which your
own country has played a lasting and a leading
role. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at the International
Press Centre in Brussels on 18 December 1974
I am conscious that my visit to Europe-the first
by an Australian Prime Minister for fifteen
years-coincides with a growing sense of crisis
in international economic affairs. Continuing
high rates of inflation, the threat of emergent
recessionary forces, severe balance of payments
problems for many countries, strains on international
monetary mechanisms and the accentuation
of the problems of the developing countries
constitute pressures of a magnitude and
diversity which the world has not faced since
the war. The European Community is the largest single
trading bloc in the world. The impact of these
developments on the relationships between the
Community and other countries and between
member nations within the Community is of
major significance to all the world's trading
countries. As the Head of Government of a trading
nation of growing significance, I believe
these events demonstrate with unmistakable
force the interdependence of the world's economies.
Such a comment may sound trite. There
are times, however, when restating the obvious
The Prime Minister speaks at the International Press Centre in Brussels.
r 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 418
17. December 1974
SYDNEY HARBOUR NATIONAL PARK
The Australian Government has agreed to release to
the New South Wales Government on 1 January l97fapproximately
312 hectares of land including 250 hectares of sydney Harbour
foreshore holdings for the creation of a Sydney Harbour National
Park and 60 hectares for other recreational purposes.
This was announced in a joint statement by the
Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the New South Wales Premier,
Sir Robert Askin, today.
The joint statement followed today's State Cabinet
meeting. The 312 hectares of land will be purchased by the
New South Wales Government oni the understanding that it will
be dedicated permanently either for national park or for public
recreation purposes. The Australian Government has aiso agreed to vaeate
at a later date a further 126 hectares of foreshore land for use
for similar purposes. In discussion last week the New South Wales Govenment
also agreed to sell to the Australian Government 13,600 hectares
of land at Holsworthy, 2850 hectares of land at Beecroft Peninsula.
Both of these areas are used by the Australian Government for
defence purposes. Formal transfer of the land will take place as
soon 49 practicable. Vacant position will be-given to most of the
land on 1 January 1975.
Agreement of this and other points was reached at
a meeting between the New South Wales Minister for Lands and
Tourism( tthe Hon. T. L. Lewis, Minister for Services and Property,
the uQno F. M. Daly, and the Minister for Environment and
Consafvation, the Hon. Dr M. Cass.
The Initial 312 hectares includes holdings at
Dobroyd Head, Middle Head, North Head, and South Head, as well
as similar pracels at Steel Point, Clarke Reserve, Williams Park,
Mqrks Park, Henry Head, Barrenjoey Head, and Georges Heights.
Canberra. ACT. 



-PRESS STATEbIENT BY DR. J. F. CAIRNS, ACTING PRIME MINISTER
HILIBOURNE DECEM. BER, 17, 1974
There is no need for G. M. H. to threaten the Government, nor
to sack thousands of workers to get action by the Government.
A few weeks ago the Government had, with G. M. H. and all other
sections of the industry, most extensive and constructive
discussions. A National Plan for the automotive industry was the result.
Among othe r things, it provided for the reduction to, and
limitation of, imports to about 20 per cent of the total.
G. M. H. and all others expressed complete approval.
Necessary steps were immediately taken to implement the
Plan. Imports began to fall and will continue to fall
Officials of the Department of Manufacturing Industry have
been in Japan for the past few weeks and from examination
of invoices and orders established that imports of Japanese
cars into Australia would be halved from the 36/ 37 per cent
level in January. This information was conveyed to G. M. H.
but they persisted in taking the action that they have taken.
The consumer also has to be protected and imports must remainr
sufficient to represent competition for the Australian monopoly
producers of motor cars.
The Australian Government also has a responsibility to
Australian producers of wool, wheat and minerals.
Japan is an important market and we muist buy front Japan.
Japan has co-operated with us in reducing imports of motor 
-2-
cars into Australia. We are satisified we will continue to
receive that co-operation.
But G. M. H. threats and dismissals are not just the result
of car imports into Australia.
G. M. H. threats and dismissals are a result of decisions in
Detroit and they are far greater in the United States, and
the same is happening in Germany and in Japan where imports
are not significant.
The automotive industry all over the world is going through
a basic re-construction. G. M. H. in Australia is part of this.
If it wants to blame the Australian Government this may
provide it with an excuse but that is no way to handle industry
reconstruction problems.
G. M. H. need not threaten the Government nor the workers just
before Christmas.
We will respond again and immediately. I am arranging
conferences with the A. C. T. U. and the Unions, with all
sections of the automative industry and finally, I hope,
with We will tackle the problems of the automotive
industry in Australia, not just from the point of view of
reducing or eliminsating import competition but so we can
plan our future together.
I hope G. M. H. will respond too and not dismiss as they did
yesterday every suggestion put forward by the Minister who
is responsible for the industry.
A solution can be found. 



457
AUS l RIA. A IA PRP'SS STATEMENT NO. 417
17 Mecember 1974
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN' S YEAR
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today the
recipients of the first set of grants to be made for special
activities during International Women's Year, 1075.
He stated that he had approved the grants on the
advice of the Australian National Advisory Committee for
International Women's Year. This w,. iuld be the first of a
series of grants to be made for the Year .: ind ref-! ected the
areas of special priority determined by the Committee and set
out in the paper for discussion tabled in both es of
Parliament on 4 December 1974. De: ni. cd arrangements are
subject to negotiation with the individuals ao groups
concerned.
General Community Attitudes
Australian Council of Churches Status of Women Commission
The Australian Council of Churches in June 1973 established
a Commission on the Status of Women to investigate the status
and role of women in the church and society, to remove discrimination
on the grounds of sex and to stimulate tilr. full participation of
women in the church and society. During 1975, the Commission
will hold a national conference, a regional conference involving
women from Papua New Guinea, Pacific Islands, New Zealand and
Australia . and a seminar for clergy; will undertake a study of
the history of women in the church! and will produce various
publications and visual displays.
Gwen Wesson La Trobe University ( Victoria)
Ms Wesson has collected the writings ( poems, essays, short
stories) of suburban housewives, to be published in a book as
unedited expressions of women in the process of resocialisation
as they move from the domination housewifery.
Australia ' 75 ( Canberra)
This festival, to be held in Canberra in March, will feature
a Baroque to Rock Concert, featuring woeien arliists; the reading
of songs and poetry by Dorothy Hewett; and a stage portrayal of
pioneer women in Australia by Nita Pannell. ./ 2 
2
National Council of Women of Tasmania
The Council will hold a one-day seminar in May 1975 to
focus attention on the importance of women in all walks of
life taking an active part in the processes of government
at all levels, to encourage the increased participation of
women in government.
Health and Welfare
Fitzroy Accommodation Service ( Victoria)
The Fitzroy Accommodation Service will receive an interim
grant to enable it to continue to assist homeless women and
men find suitable accommodation until the Department of
Housing and Construction is in a position to fund it. The
majority of such demands for assistance are made by women.
Committee for the Liverpool Women's Health and Resources
Centre Interim funding is to be provided to enable the establishment
of a multi-purpose women's centre consi'sting of a refuge shelter
for women in urgent and desparate need, and a meicrial/ recreational/
educational centre with child mindi~ g facilities.
Western Australian Institute of Technology
A grant has been approved to enable women with low incomes
to attend a one-day seminar on " Women frori Minority Groups"
which will involve women from various minorities ( aboriginal,
ethnic, single mothers, physically and emotionally handicapped,
etc.) Education Footscray Institute of Technology ( Victoria)
The Institute will prepare leaflets to attract women to
engineering, against obvious Australian prejudi. ce to the
contrary, and will offer an orientation course to women who
have felt that their knowledge of technological terminology
has been inadequate compared to that of men. It is hoped
that their action will attract some women to enter the profession
of engineering who would otherwise have gone to a profession
of their second preference.
Work Anne Conlon and Edna Ryan
Ms Conlon and Ms Ryan have written a book, The Gentle
Invaders Australian Women at Work 1788-. 974, on women's
participation in the labour force rince Australia was founded.
It describes the arbitration system and gives the background
to wage fixation in Australia with particular refercnce to
women. 
-3-
Creativity Joan Long
A grant will assist in the production of a feature fil. m
based on the book Caddie, an autobiography set in 1.925-32
about a woman on her wn, her struggle to support herself
and her children, of the attitudes of the society and of
her efforts to adjust and survive.
Women's Theatre Group ( Victoria)
This group of women uses theatre to show the oppression
of women in society, to challenge sex roles, and to create
new styles and new images for women. Their 1975 program will
include community per: ormances, performances in schools and
places of work, and a country tour.
The Prime Minister also announced that the Australian
National Advisory Committee, which is composed of individuals
chosen from the community and do not represent nry organisation,
state or sectional group, recoanised the great value and need
to actively involvewomen's groLps in International Women's
Year. Accordingly in view of the long association of the
United Nations Association of Australia in United Natio'ns
Years he intended to make grants to the forum of women's groups
at both national and state level constituted by the United
Nations Association of Australia the United : ations Association
of Australia Committees for International Wonten's Year. These
grants would enable the Committees to meet throughout the Year
and engage in specified activities. It was expected that the
Committees would carry out these activities within the context
of the objectives formulated by the National Advisory Committee.
The Prime Minister also announced that Australia had
contributed $ US40,000 towards the United Nations Voluntary Fund
for International Women's Year. This will ena''. e the United
Nations to carry out its own activities duri!, i the year whichinclude
a world conference on the theme-of Equality, Development
and Peace to be held in Mexico in June 1975, an inter-regional
conference on The Communication of Attitudes: Women, The Arts
and The Media to be held in Australia in 1975,
and the publication of a wide range of malrerial relating to the
Year. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



TREASURER
PARLIAMENT HOUSE,.
CANBERRA 2600
16 Dscmwt. Af
PRESS STATEMENT
By the Acting Prime Minister, Dr J. F. Cairns
C The Acting Prime Minister, Dr Cairns, this morning conferred
with the Minister for. Manufacturing Industry, Mr Enderby, on
the proposed sackings of G. M. H. workers.
Dr Cairns said later that Mr Enderby was arranging discussions
with the President of the Mr Hawke, trade
unions, and the management of G. M. H.
Dr Cairns said he had received a telegram from G. M. H. managing
director, Mr D. Martin, indicating that G. M. H. was available
for discussions on industry problems at Dr Cairns convenience.
No time has yet been set for the conference.
Dr Cairns indicated in a press statement yesterday that he
wanted a conference with the A. C. T. U. the vehicle industry
unions, and all sections of the industry and G. M. H.
Today, he described as nonsense statements. by Opposition spokesman
that G. M. H. problems were the result of Australian Government
policies. " The troub] les of the motor industry are world-wide,"
Dr Cairns said. " They are much greater in the United States, and ii
Germany and Japan."
" The present Australian Government has had far closer contact with
the motor industry, and has done more to understand its problems
and find solutions to them than any other Government in history".. 1~ z 
-2-
aaiKG. nNoHw. led-ed t-his ivhen we produced a National Plan
f or the indu str y several weeks ago
" In fact, they took to thI-e media to advertise their a., cceptance
of the Pl an."
" At nio time during thIe extensive discussions we. had with. them
did they mentionL retrenchiierts of the order they are no-,'
f ore shadowing."
" I hope that whnen the Government talks to G. M. H. that tha
company will be more co-operative than it has been in the past
feTw days."
Gonrb~ r r a
Decembar 18, 1974
7) 



TR EAZU I:-P.
PARLIAMENT L; C JSi:
CANI4E RA 26tL
PRESS STATEMENT
by L-he Actinq Prime Minister, Dr. J. F. Cairns
The Food Group Index released today showed a substantial
decline of 1.6 per cent for November ( weighted averagefor
the six capital cities) and is the largest monthly
fall since January 1971.
Falls in the Index occurred in all cities except Perth,
where it rose by 0.5 per cent. The largest fall was
2.8 per cent, in Brisbane.
This is the second consecutive monthly decline and the
Index has now fallen 1.9 per cent over the past two months.
The Food Group contributes about 28 per cent of the total
Consumer Price Index aggregate, and the fall in this
Group represents a significant reduction in the cost of
living. Canberra December 18, 1974 



United Kingdom
Speech by the Prime Minister at the Mansion House, London, on
19 December 1974
I suppose I would be less than human if I did not
feel some sense of awe-even some slight
trepidation-at the prospect of addressing this
august gathering in this historic hall. An Australian
Prime Minister who comes to London is
made very much aware of his country's British
origins and its place in the scheme of things. He
is subtly reminded of the actions and reputations
of his predecessors, of the rich and
intricate fabric of history, law and tradition that
has shaped his country and the very nature of
his office. For an Australian Prime Minister,
London can never be just another city or Britain
just another country-however much a proud
and self-assertive people would like to think
them so.
I must confess that by past standards my
present visit to London has been somewhat
brash and unorthodox. It is more than two years
since a Labor Government was elected in
Australia, yet this is the first time I have spoken
to a British audience. My coming out in London
has been unconscionably delayed. A generation
ago no Australian Prime Minister would have
engaged in talks with Robin Day and David
Frost before talking to the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. No
Australian Prime Minister would have visited
Brussels before visiting London. Very likely, no
Australian Prime Minister would have visited
Brussels at all. There was a time when
Australia's main involvement with Europe was
on the battlefield. The real decisions on
Australia's trade, on her economic and financial
policies, on her foreign policies, on the very
borders of her States and Territories, were taken
in London. We were the creation of a great trading
empire at the height of its influence and prestige. We were the last frontier of European
colonial might. When Australia was settled
there was literally nowhere further for the
European to go. To me it is strikingly symbolic of
the link between British political and mercantile
power that the word ' corporation'--the very
name of this ancient assembly-has come to
denote both the municipal government of London
and the great network of financial institutions
that for so long influenced the destinies of
the Australian people.
Mr Wilson, the British Prime Minister,
welcomes Mr Whitlam. 
It is a commonplace to say that the world is rapidly
changing. Yet never has the truth of that
statement been more manifest than today. Little
that we have taken for granted, little to which
we are accustomed, little even that we hold
dear, has remained unaffected by the events of
the past thirty years, and especially by the pace
and scope of change in the 19 70' s. I do not
need to tell you of the difficulty and complexity
of the economic problems that confront every
western trading nation -Australia and Britain
among them. In Australia's case, not only has it
been necessary to accept changes in our thinking
and national life: it has been necessary to
welcome and promote changes. Since my
Government was elected it has pursued a new
course in its foreign affairs. We have sought a
more distinctive and independent role for
Australia, especially in our own region. We
have established new friendships and contacts
with other nations. While this has meant some
reappraisal of our traditional arrangements, the
changes we have made have not been at the
expense of old and proven friends. I want to
emphasise this; our policies were a response to a growing spirit of self-confidence and selfreliance
in Australian society. We have
developed a keener sense of national independence.
And I must say, in all frankness, it was
high time we did.
Some people-more in Australia than in
Britain-have regarded Australia's foreign poli
cies in recent years as some sort of aff ront to Bri
tamn; an insult to the Mother Country. Let me be
personal for a moment. I don't suppose there is
anyone in Australia, certainly no one else who is
still in public life, who has a greater love for
Britain than I have. Against very strong advice,
from friend and foe alike, I insisted on coming
here for Christmas. What better proof could
there be of my British sympathies. Not many of
my countrymen have a greater respect for
Britain's institutions and traditions than I do-a
greater knowledge of your history, a greater
affection for your language, your laws, your
literature, your unique intellectual traditions of
moderation, detachment, tolerance and liberty.
In saying this I don't want to sound boastful or
ingratiating. I want to dispel the impression that
A luncheon at the Mansion House giyen by the Lord Mayor of London in honour of the Prime Minister. 
Australia's attitude to Britain has been churlish
or nit-picking. What we seek is a more mature
and contemporary relationship with Britain-a
relationship based on a growing sense of
national pride and purpose.
For more than twenty years successive Australian
Governments saw our continent as a
small and insignificant country, an outpost of
European civilisation, exposed to the tides of
communism which threatened to engulf the
region, and prey to the covetous attentions of
our neighbours. These feelings were heightened
by a sense of geographical isolation, racial
and cultural, which established the main directions
of Australia's foreign relations from 1950
onwards. They ultimately led us to commit
Australian forces to the Viet-Nam War. They
led us to tolerate the increasing overseas ownership
and control of our industries and
resources. By December 1972 the external
environment and Australia's Government had
changed. Our perceptions of Australia's place
and role in international affairs had changed.
We never were small and insignificant. Our
economy is a good deal larger than the econom
ies of many European nations. We have ended
our military involvement in Viet-Nam. We have
recognised and established diplomatic relations
with all the countries in Asia and with many
other countries which were formerly ignored by
Australia. We have been a helpful and cooperative
neighbour in our region. In the United
Nations we have given steadfast support to the
causes of self-determination, disarmament and
anti-colonialism.
To a great extent the new directions in our
foreign policy have been influenced by Britain's
example. In 1972 we established formal relations
with the People's Republic of China:
Britain had done so in 1949. We withdrew our
forces from Indo-China: Britain had never committed
such forces. I doubt if anyone in this
country would take it amiss if I declared that
Australia's involvement in Viet-Nam had been
a mistake. It was a mistake, and only now are
we repairing the damage. Britain herself was in
the forefront of the great post-war movement
which brought self-determination and
independence to a host of former colonial states.
Once when Australians travelled to Europe,
every port and stop-over was ruled from London-
Singapore, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Malta, Port Said, Gibraltar. One of the triumphs of
British foreign policy has been the peaceful and
orderly transfer of power to the new selfgoverning
nations.
In the light of these changes, it was inevitable
and natural that Britain's relationship with
Australia would change too. The impetus for
change did not come from Australia alone.
Britain's historic move towards Europe meant a
change in her attitude to her Commonwealth
partners. Australia did not oppose or resent
Britain's involvement in Europe. Enlightened
opinion in my country welcomed and
encouraged it, just as the great financial institutions
of this city welcomed and encouraged it.
True enough, Britain's entry into Europe meant
some adjustment, a difficult adjustment, in
Australia's pattern of trade, but this process of
adjustment had begun with Britain's first
attempt to join the European Community in the
early 1960' s. Since that time Australia has
sought to diversify its trade in an effort to reduce
our dependence on the British market. In
1961-62, some 20 per cent of our exports
were directed to Britain. Britain was our principal
export market. Now, nearly two years after
Britain's entry into the European Community,
we sell only 6.5 per cent of our exports to
Britain. Many of our new markets are among the nations
of the Commonwealth, the great majority of the
members of the Commonwealth now lie in and
around the Indian and South Pacific Oceans. In
a geographical sense, Australia is much closer
to the new Commonwealth than Britain herself.
Far from being on the periphery we are much
nearer the centre. It is Britain, if I may say so,
that has become the outpost of European civilisation
in an organisation essentially oriented
toward Asian, Pacific, Indian Ocean and Caribbean
States. You hear a lot of disparagement of
the Commonwealth but you will never hear it
from Australia. The Commonwealth today provides
the world's largest regular forum for
meetings of Heads of Government. In this
respect it has no parallel, and Australia has
given the Commonwealth its fullest and most
active support.
It is against this background of economic and
political change that Australia has looked afresh
at her traditional relationship with Britain. There
are some things we have changed. Many of the 
things we have changed have been essentially
symbolic, but no less important for that. Many
of the changes would have been made whichever
government was in power in Australia;
indeed some of them had their origins in decisions
taken by my predecessors. One of our
first acts as a government was to amend Her
Majesty's Royal Style and Titles in Australia.
That change had the warm personal approval of
the Queen and the overwhelming endorsement
of the Australian people. The result is that
Queen Elizabeth II is now properly, proudly and
officially designated ' Queen of Australia'. She
has always been Queen of Australia; now she
bears the title, I am proud of it. It is an entirely
contemporary and appropriate title. It takes
account of popular feeling. It makes the
monarchy a closer and more relevant institution
for Australians.
We decided it was time Australia had a distinctive
national anthem and abandoned knighthoods
and other awards conferred in the name
of the British Empire. Other nations like Canada
had taken this course and public opinion in
Australia was fully in sympathy with such
changes. We no longer confer knighthoods in
the name of an empire that has ceased to exist.
We retain God Save The Queen on occasions
when Her Majesty is present or when it is
especially important to emphasise our links with
the Crown, but our official anthem, the only
anthem recognised by the Australian Government,
is Advance Australia Fair. All the evidence
suggests that Australians want an
anthem of their own. There is nothing particularly
surprising about this; it would be more
surprising if they didn't. Yet there are Australians
who see the choice of an anthem and
the rejection of Imperial Titles as an insult to the
Crown. I regard our preference for an Australian
anthem as a perfectly natural reflection of Australian
maturity and I am convinced that the Bri
tish people do likewise.
I give you another example. Six years ago an
earlier Australian Government-a conservative
government-abolished appeals to the Privy
Council in London from judgments of the Australian
High Court. That decision was accepted
in Australia without dissent. In the same way,
for the same reasons, my Government has
sought to abolish appeals to the Privy Council
from the Supreme Courts of the States. Our proposal has been resisted by the States. I
merely say this: no people with an ounce of selfrespect
would allow decisions made by their
own judges, appointed by their own governments
and sitting in their own courts, to be
overruled by judges sitting in another country
and appointed by the Government of another
country. We still retain procedures by which the
Governors of the States are commissioned by
the Queen-not as Queen of Australia but as
Queen of the United Kingdom. The commissions
are countersigned not by the Premier
of the State but by the British Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. I do not
think it unduly chauvinistic of Australians to
object to such a procedure. I do not think I am
alone in seeing something absurd in the proposal
to have a Queen of Queensland. Is there to
be a Queen of Alberta and a Queen of Prince
Edward Island? These are matters affecting
Australia's standing and reputation as a contemporary
independent nation.
Two of the great things we have inherited from
Britain are our tradition of judicial independence
and our parliamentary democracy. For a variety
of reasons, including the present strains on the
world economy, our democratic system has
come under challenge and in many countries is
afflicted by instability and frequent changes of
government. It is imperative that countries like
Australia and Britain ensure the survival of robust
democracy and individual liberty. I look
forward to discussions with your Prime Minister
on how the fabric of our democratic society can
be stengthened during the present economic
crisis. In saying this I do not want to adopt the
mantle of a prophet of doom. In Australia, as in
Britain, governments face serious problems of
inflation, a slowing down of growth and, for us,
a high level of unemployment. But these temporary
factors, unfortunate as they are, should
not obscure the fundamental long-term
strength of our economies. Must we admit that
only the Soviet Union among industrial and
trading nations can avoid unemployment and
inflation?
There has never been a time when the institutions
of government, the parliaments, the
courts-not only in Australia but in all
democracies-were more in need of strengthening.
There has never been a time when the
problems of society posed a greater challenge to 
the ingenuity and skill of governments. There
has never been a time when democratic institutions
have been so sternly challenged. In my
own country this year we saw the Upper House
in the national Parliament for the first time
refuse Supply to the elected government and
force a general election. It was a gross breach of
a hitherto unchallenged convention. Moreover,
so complex and cumbersome are Australia's
electoral laws that the new Parliament could not
convene for three months. Where else could a
Parliamentary democracy be without a Parliament
for so long?
Many in Britain may be aware that some of
Australia's State Governments have resented
some of the initiatives of my Government.
Indeed, after my visit in April last year Premiers
and State Attorneys-General flocked to London
to beseech the British Government to save them
from the Australian Government. The point in
issue can be solved within the Australian judicial
system established by the Australian
Constitution. There is no possible advantage to
Britain in embroiling the Queen, the Government
or the Courts of Britain in such Australian
domestic disputes. I shall not go into such matters
here, except to say this: The great lesson of
the Australian federal system, as in the
American, Canadian and West German federal
systems since the War, has been the need for
greater involvement, greater responsibility, on
the part of the national government. I give two
illustrations. In the two Australian States with
the largest populations it had become obvious
for a decade that only through the involvement
of the national government could the people in
new areas secure access to essential public services
such as health, higher education and public
transport. In the two States with the largest
areas, it had become obvious that only the
national government could safeguard Australian
control of the vast new natural resources
discovered in the past ten years. I believe the
federal system can be made to work, as it has
worked in other democracies, if the States
accept that Australians are one people, with
national interests and legitimate national aspirations,
and that there are some government
services and responsibilities that can only be
adequately provided and exercised if the Federal
Government is involved.
Those who see in some of our recent actions concerning Britain a manifestation of some strident
new nationalism or anti-British feeling
have completely misread our intentions and
mistaken the mood of our people. What
Australia istrying todoisestablish an independent
indentity in the world and especially in our
own region. We have grown up. Our actions are
in no way anti-British. They are simply pro-
Australian. I speak to you frankly because I
know there can never be any questions about
the enduring strength of Australia's ties with
Britain and the British people. The vast majority
of our people are of British stock. We wish to
build on British institutions. I believe that our
understanding and affection will deepen, rather
than diminish, as Australia assumes her rightful
place as a proud and independent nation, with a
distinctive role and a distinctive voice in her
region and in the world at large. 
/ if lm
p
The Prime Minister speaks to the press in Dublin.
I Ai 



Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at the International
Press Centre in Brussels on 18 December 1974
I am conscious that my visit to Europe-the first
by an Australian Prime Minister for fifteen
years-coincides with a growing sense of crisis
in international economic affairs. Continuing
high rates of inflation, the threat of emergent
recessionary forces, severe balance of payments
problems for many countries, strains on international
monetary mechanisms and the accentuation
of the problems of the developing countries
constitute pressures of a magnitude and
diversity which the world has not faced since
the war. The European Community is the largest single
trading bloc in the world. The impact of these
developments on the relationships between the
Community and other countries and between
member nations within the Community is of
major significance to all the world's trading
countries. As the Head of Government of a trading
nation of growing significance, I believe
these events demonstrate with unmistakable
force the interdependence of the world's economies.
Such a comment may sound trite. There
are times, however, when restating the obvious
The Prime Minister speaks at the International Press Centre in Brussels. 
force, some states-including some states in
Europe-have still to ratify the treaty or make
clear their renunciation of nuclear weapons
development. Australia and Belgium are comparatively small
powers. Remote as we are from each other in
terms of distance, we have a great deal in common.
We are affluent nations in a world of widespread
poverty. We are highly industrialised.
We are devoted to regional co-operation. Our
bilateral trade, though modest in scale, has
grown steadily and exhibits a remarkable balance.
Australia's exports to Belgium in
1973-74 were worth SA59 000000: Belgium's
exports to Australia were worth
$ A57 000000. Australia's ties with Europe
have been strengthened since World War II by a
vast immigration program. It is a reminder to us
that modern civilisation in Australia sprang from
the great tide of European colonisation in the
19th century-a process of colonisation in
which Belgium played her part.
To the north, east and west of Australia there
are many nations which were once parts of
European empires. These links with Europe
have left an enduring mark on the newer
nations of Africa, Asia and the Pacific. Australia,
like many other states in her region, has set her
own firm and independent course in world
affairs. In doing so we acknowledge our historic
and cultural debt to Europe and look to the
nations of Europe for support and collaboration
in overcoming the problems shared by all mankind.
I take heart from the great achievement in
international co-operation we have witnessed
in Europe itself-an achievement in which your
own country has played a lasting and a leading
role. 
is required and I believe this is such a time. Each
nation has its definable economic interests, but
the circumstances we face today emphasise the
importance of international co-operation-in
the common good and in the enlightened selfinterest
of all the world's trading nations.
In my discussions with European leaders I shall
indicate-as I have already done with the Prime
Minister of Belgium and President of the Commission-
that:
1. Australia recognises its overriding interest
in the stability of the international economy
and is willing to play its role in restoring
stability and promoting development;
2. Australia has its own specific interests and
objectives in economic matters and intends
to pursue them with vigour and determination;
and
3. Australia recognises the imbalance of
world development and attaches great
importance to the problems of developing
countries.
The pursuit of our interest in the restoration of
economic stability must take account of the
actions of the OPEC countries. The problems of
the western world are those of adjustment to a
new international economy. We are seeing a
redistribution of the world's wealth towards
resource-owning countries. The days are past
when the market value of the world's limited
supply of non-renewable resources-for example,
uranium-could be primarily determined
by the cost of their extraction and transportation-
a view which I know is now held within
the Commission. It is pointless for me not to acknowledge
that our interests are those of a
resource-rich nation. Nevertheless, we trade in
many goods, and across the broad range of our
trade Australia's prosperity depends on the
orderly development of the world economy. The
immediate adjustment processes involved in
the present transition threaten to disrupt our
trade in all areas.
The most pressing and immediate problem we
share with the rest of the world concerns the
strains on the international monetary system
and particularly the problem of recycling
petrodollars. We recognise the urgency and the
seriousness of this sudden development.
Australia has only a limited capacity to contribute
to the solution of this problem, but we stand ready to co-operate to the fullest degree possible.
In my discussions with European leaders I
look forward to broadening my understanding
of their attitudes and intentions in this regard.
There are other areas in which Australia can
make a more significant contribution to international
stability. Since the events of the oil
crisis, all countries have become aware of their
need for secure supplies of essential raw
materials. Australia is richly endowed with
resources. We possess major reserves of coal,
iron ore, bauxite, mineral sands and uranium
and important reserves of lead, zinc, manganese,
nickel and copper. Australia has been and
will continue to be a secure and reliable supplier
of all these commodities. We play a significant
and indeed a growing role in the world trade in
minerals. We shall continue to do so. We have a
reputation for honouring our contracts and we
intend to maintain that reputation. We shall
further develop our mineral resources, including
our energy reserves. We shall be willing
sellers seeking willing buyers. Thus we have
agreed to joint discussions with the Commission
on their needs for uranium and on supplies of
natural and enriched uranium from Australia for
this purpose. Insofar as Australia can contribute
to the stability of world energy supplies, we
shall do so.
We recently announced new developments in
our uranium policy. My Government has not
been prepared to approve further export contracts
because of the unsatisfactory nature of
the market which the Commission acknowledges.
In the meantime, however, in cooperation
with private interests, the Australian
Government intends to establish a uranium
milling plant which we expect will be producing
uranium oxide from 1978. By that time we
hope the market will be sufficiently mature for
the negotiation of new export contracts. We
shall ensure that our traditional trading partners
obtain an equitable share of the uranium we
have for export. This attitude has already been
explained to some of our partners, including
Japan, Italy and the Federal Republic of Germany.
And yesterday we discussed with the
Commission their needs for very substantial additional
supplies of uranium in the 1980' s,
none of which is covered by existing contracts.
The Commission supports, in principle, the
enrichment of part of their additional 
requirement in Australia and we look forward to
early talks on this total picture for co-operation
to our mutual advantage. We also stand ready
to discuss in full detail the Commission's
requirements for additional supplies of coal
which could treble the tonnage now being shipped
to Europe from Australia.
Experience in recent years reinforces the Australian
advocacy of international commodity
agreements. We continue to believe that such
agreements are an essential mechanism for
achieving predictable prices and supplies to
purchasers and predictable markets to suppliers.
We continue to seek such commodity
agreements in areas of vital interest to us such
as wheat and sugar. The supplies of both these
commodities are now subject to severe cyclical
strains which we believe international agreements
can mitigate. In those areas where international
agreements do not prove feasible, we
shall seek to negotiate long-term agreements
for agricultural commodities which will guarantee
supplies at fair prices. In these ways
Australia seeks to contribute to the long-term
stability of international commodity markets.
Partly in the context of our support for international
commodity agreements, Australia has
taken an active part in the formation of agreements
on bauxite and tin. We recognise recent
fears about the formation of resourceproducing
cartels. We believe, however, that
such international commodity agreements can
contribute to orderly marketing arrangements
and can be designed to balance the interests of
producers and consumers. We have been
particularly concerned to ensure that this balance
is maintained.
In recent years Australia has adopted a more
open and outgoing approach to international
trade. There has been a natural and permanent
shift in Australia's position, flowing from the
rapid expansion of our mineral exports and our
growing self-sufficiency in certain commodities,
particularly oil. It is true that in recent
months we have had to take measures, in
response to domestic unemployment, which
may be construed as a contrary trend. Nevertheless,
the net effect of our currency appreciation
and tariff reductions has been significant.
By the standards of our history. Australia has
moved into a new era of freedom and openness
in international economic policies. The more I consider the problems of the international
economic order, the morelI am convinced
that a retreat into economic isolationism is
no answer for us or any other nation. The temptation
to adopt an inward-looking and excessively
protective economic stance must be
resisted. Attempts to restrict trade further would
be self-defeating. In the longer term it would
result in a much worse situation for us all. I reiterate
our support for the OECD trade pledge of
May this year. The current world situation
makes it all the more important to ensure that
the forthcoming multi -lateral trade negotiations
are successful and provide the conditions for a
further boost to world trade. The nations of the
world must not allow their immediate problems
to detract from these negotiations, which in
themselves would be an expression of confidence
in the world economy.
In recent years Australia has developed a new
spirit of self-confidence and self-reliance. In
many of its policy decisions my Government has
reflected this development and, I believe, has
helped to shape and guide it. Our sense of
national independence has sharpened and
matured. One of the reasons for this has been
the entry of Britain into the Common Market.
We continue to hope that British membership
will encourage the Community to adopt a more
outward-looking approach to the international
economic scene. In the context of Britain's endeavour
to renegotiate the terms of its membership
of the community, the last thing Australia
is seeking is a restoration of her old-style pref
erential relationship with Britain. In the discussions
with the British on the possibility of arranging
a long-term agreement on the supply
of sugar two months ago, we made it clear that
any such arrangement would need to be made
with the Community or at least have the Coinmunity'sendorsement.
We have successfully
adjusted the pattern of our trade to take account
of British membership. The progress which
Australia had made in recent years in diversifying
its export markets, and the generally strong
demand in most world commodity markets over
the past two years, have considerably reduced
the immediate impact on Australia of the Community's
enlargement.
Our ability to overcome these transitional problems
has reinforced our self -confidence. We are
not concerned to turn back the clock. We regard 
any renegotiation of Britain's membership as a
matter for Britain and her European partners.
We will, however, continue to press our own
interests as effectively as we can. We will seek
amendments to those areas of Community policy,
including parts of the common agricultural
policy, which adversely affect Australia. We will
not be appealing to British sentiment but to the
interests of Britain and all her partners in the
Community. I am well aware that in political terms consumers
are not as well organised as producers.
Nevertheless, I would have thought that at a
time of high inflation European countries would
see advantages in seeking cheaper food.
Australia has a particularly efficient farming
community, and I stress the advantages to
Europe of allowing greater access to agricultural
imports. In multi-lateral trade negotiations
Australia will press her objective of reasonable
access to world markets for agricultural products
from countries like Australia. In determining
the concessions we will offer in these negotiations,
we will have one basic considerationthe
willingness of others to negotiate on primary
products. We were disappointed that the outcome
of the Kennedy Round was a concentration
on tariff reductions in the industrial sector.
It is our earnest hope that on this occasion
concessions on agriculture will move in parallel
with those in other areas.
This question cannot be separated from the
wish of European countries to obtain secure
supplies of materials, particularly energy
resources. I take one example of immediate and
pressing concern to Australia, the ban currently
imposed by the Community on imports of beef.
Australia, over some years, has made significant
investments specifically for the supply
of beef to Europe and Japan. Our confidence in
the security of future investments must be
affected by the abrupt manner in which Europe
and Japan have sought to shift the burden of
excessive beef supplies primarily to exporting
nations such as Australia. Are we now expected
to engage in further massive investment in coal,
for example, when our legitimate interests can
be treated with such disdain in other areas? We
are proceeding with our attempts to avoid
further market disruption in beef. We have
proposed that a consultative group be established
within GATT for this purpose and I am hopeful that the Community will lend its support
to this suggestion.
Another area in which there is heightened Australian
awareness of our national interest concerns
the role of overseas capital in our economy.
The extent of European investment in
Australia bears witness to the scope of fruitful
co-operation in this area. We believe that overseas
capital must continue to play a significant
role, in partnership with Australian capital, in
promoting our future economic growth. We
have, however, adopted a more selective approach
than hitherto towards such investment.
We have a firm policy objective of promoting
Australian ownership of our resources and
industries. When my Government took office
68 per cent of our energy resources were controlled
overseas. We could not allow such a
trend to continue. Our new investment policy.
while firm on this point, is being applied in a
pragmatic fashion with each case being considered
on its merits.
I referred at the outset to the problems of
developing countries. These nations have
suffered considerable deterioration in their
terms of trade during recent years. Their already
severe difficulties have become more acute.
Many of the matters on which I have already
touched are relevant in this context. The comments
I have made on Australia's development
of its mineral resources are in accord with the
interests of many developing nations. Many of
our partners in the International Bauxite Association
and those proposing the Association of
Iron Ore Exporting Nations are developing
countries. Australia's desire to broaden the
world's access -to agricultural markets and
stabilise those markets is of great importance to
developing nations. The multi-lateral trade
negotiations must make a special effort to accommodate
their needs.
Australia has a special interest and a special responsibility
in promoting the development of
countries in the Asian and Pacific region. We
welcome the steps which the European community
is taking to promote trade and aid with
our neighbours. In particular, I think of the contribution
made through the United Nations
Emergency Fund to those countries hardest hit
by the energy crisis, the declaration of intent for
Commonwealth Asian countries, the com-
munity's efforts to foster ties with ASEAN, as
well as the possible extension of your Association
arrangements to include, among others,
certain of our neighbours in the South Pacific.
I am glad that periodic consultations, either at
ministerial or senior official level, will be taking
place between Australia and the European
Commission. It is my firm hope that my present
visit to Europe, the consultations which will be
held with the Commission in future the specific
discussions of uranium and coal supplies and
the contacts we shall have with individual
member states of the community will enable
Australia to develop a firm, many-sided and cooperative
relationship with the new Europe.
We regard European economic and political
integration as one of the great historical forward
movements of this century. We see a strong
European Community as an essential pillar of
world-wide economic stability. In this context I
give an assurance that Australia will play its full
and proper role in the resolution of the world's
economic difficulties. 



J, Au.,-, rHAI. IAA PRESS STATEEIiET
19 December 1974
Joint Statement by the Hon. J. F. Cairns, Acting Prime Minister,
and the H7on. J. Bjelke-Fetersen, Premier of Queensland
GREAT BARRIER REEF PFjTROITEUM DRILLIiG ROYPL CO.-AISSIOM3
Dr Cairns and Mr Bjelke-Peter-en announced today that the
Report of the Great Barrier Reef Petroleum Drilling Royal Commissiclns
has been released to the public.
Printing has been completed and copies will be on sale
from Australian Government Pul. ications and Inquiry Centres in all
capital cities. othi Dr Cairns -nd Nr 13j. 11ke-Petersen have directded that
copies be circulated to all Members of the Australian and Queensland
Parliamcn-iLs Ii. PJdiately.
They said that this action has been taken to ensure that
Parliamentarians receive copies of the Report at the earliest po: sl. ie
time. Dr Cairns noted that it would be February next year before t'e
Australian Parliament reassembled and formal tabling of the Report
could proceed. Both Dr Cairns and Mr Bjelke-Fetersen stated that
consideration of the Report had begun and that decisions on its
recommendations could be expected in early 1975. 



Isi3
PJ: r' S S rLr
rr.-e T" C ; i4" Prr: nLse Dr. J. P Cai11rns anid M.~ ne
fœ*. r5IJVe for aar~ indJustrv, today armouyicer,.
~ ti s fthe Go : e: splans fror the 7t~ ia/
th t CG'' n' stLeat vTK h the C .'~ rlP
jfl1f~ l.'~~ Idi be maar-a
r . da incrtc: maLe~ isf: c: duty . cd-e on CKD asse-cal'lY rz
pro: to % ebr17 a 260%, shoul4. b ha: x
cove--a four-c yoa-c perioCL or' the : F o oirng basis:
CKD) Pac c d \ a1 DIIP: y
January 75 1.. 71-W. 77 1.1.78 1.1 79
32% 3
Dur iD c( Tf pha-se-in; volIAfe 1Jijrlt42.) riS 0r1 the itpor of I) cz~
by assE!, b1,: rs vi. 131 auply. rThesc : LX'ia3osWhich will be L,
en piOUL1uctic. . in caien-. 1ar year~ Ji. 4 olus; a, an rajcQw2: c
.3 per cent and w* ill1 be on a ccoi;: a*.. basis,
DrC. a~ ri-is nd adJ i. Edte. hba t1 tbhere I~ as a iced for fulthr
2 0C. CCC CC3 5SICS22~ VO. VXiin deterining; duty r
to-C app' tc) so:. ur whe-' a~ n lig'~~~ j1~ c m-r , ercial vhc;&amp;
wihl~ l donc in cu nLinwith the cGov': rnmnert' ils a~ n o
of t~ he c~ : m on Ccr. mircial VehIIIcles.
-r9 ~ at t-eC tlhat-. the rnew po-licy for ig mr c Ec Prs
wI-I 1ave e."" ect froic January 197
D e 20); * L9 7 4 



0. LH22933 KG1
TOR 0750 21.12.74
. LH22933 1719 20.12.74 UNC
* 0.
I CANBERRA/ 1490
P ROME/ 272
P. P BONN/ 194 THE HAGUE/ 190 ATHENS/ 269
' P PARIS/ 348 MOSCOW/ 234 ISLAMABAD/ 54 oNN S
IR MALTA/ 5 KUALA LUMPUR / 56 BELGRADE/ 184
? R JAKARTA/ 64
FM. LONDON
U N C L A S S I FI ED
TRANSCRIPT PM'S NEWS CONFERENCE 20TH DECEMBER 1974.
HIGH COMMISSIONER: LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA. ANY QUESTION?
BOB HAUPT ( AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW): DID YOU RECEIVE ANY'
FIRM UNDERTAKINGS FROM THE EUROPEANS ABOUT THE PURCHASE OF
AUSTRALIAN URANIUM AND CAN YOU CONFIRM FIGURES WHICH HAVE APPEARED
IN THE AUSTRALIAN PRESS ABOUT THE EUROPEAN DEMAND FOR AUSTRALIAN
URANIUM?
PM: I HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO SEE THE AUSTRALIAN PAPERS FOR THE
LAST COUPLE OF DAYS. FIGURES WERE GIVEN TO US BY THE COMMISSION
CONCERNING THE PROJECTED DEMAND FOR URANIUM IN VARIOUS FORMS FOR
SEVERAL YEARS AHEAD. WE WERE ASKED TO KEEP THE FIGURES
CONFIDENTIAL. Q: PRIME MINISTER COULD YOU POSSIBLY SAY WHETHER YOU DISCUSSED
WITH MR WILSON THE RIGHTS ' OF THE STATES OF AUSTRALIA TO APPEAL
TO THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE OF THE PRIVY COUNCIL?
PM: THE GENERAL QUESTION OF APPEALS FROM STATE COURTS IN
AUSTRALIA TO THE PRIVY COUNCIL IS A MATTER OF CONCERN OF COURSE
TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BUT I DO NOT THINK I HAVE ANY MORE
TO SAY ABOUT IT IN ADDITION TO WHAT I SAID YESTERDAY.
MALCOLM STEWART ( MACQUARIE RADIO NETWORK): I GATHER YOU HAVE JUST
HAD LUNCH WITH THE QUEEN. DO YOU ENVISAGE THAT THE STATUS OF THE
QUEEN IN AUSTRALIA WILL CHANGE FURTHER DURING THE COURSE OF YOUR
ADMINISTRATION.
URPM: ( DID NOT REP o/ 
\, IM i ' T I( i' I A. 1k S
INWARD CABL EGRAM 2 0. LH22933
Q: IAN RICHARDSON ( RADIO 3DB) YESTERDAY YOU SEEMED TO BE MAKING
SOME ATTEMPT TO IMPROVE RELATIONS BETWEEN BRITAIN AND AUSTRALIA
AS YCU WERE AWARE THAT THERE WAS A LOT OF IRRITATION FROM
THE BRITISH SIDE AT WHAT THEY SAW WAS YOUR ANTI-BRITISH ATTITUDE.
YOU WENT TO GREAT LENGTHS TO PUT THIS RIGHT. ARE YOU TRYING
TO FOLLOW THIS UP, ARE YOU GOING TO TAKE ANY OTHER STEPS
TO IMPROVE RELATIONS BETWEEN BRITAIN AND AUSTRALIA?
PM: THE RELATIONS BETWEEN BRITAIN AND AUSTRALIA HAVE ALWAYS
BEEN GOOD AND CONTINUE TO BE GOOD. THERE IS NOTHING THAT MY
GOVERNMENT HAS DONE WHICH WOULD LEND ANY BASIS WHATEVER TO
ANY SUGGESTIONS THAT RELATIONS BETWEEN BRITAIN AND AUSTRALIA WERE
IN ANY WAY DIMINISHED, . NONE WHATEVER.
Q: YES THAT IS AS YOU SEE IT BUT A LOT OF PEOPLE OVER HERE
ARE SAYING THAT YOU WERE THE FIRST ANTI-POM AUSTRALIAN
PRIME MINISTER.
PM: WELL LET'S BE A BIT PRECISE. LET'S SPECIFY WHAT I HAVE
DONE WHICH COULD BE SAID TO BE IN ANY WAY ANTI-POM. DON'T
TALK IN GENERALITIES, LET'S BE PRECISE. LET'S MEET ANY
PRECISE OBJECTION OR ALLEGATION.
Q: I AM NOT QUESTIONING WHETHER YOU ARE RIGHT OR WRONG BUT
THE FACT IS A LOT OF PEOPLE DO THINK YOU ARE ANTI BRITISH.
PM: WELL, THEY ARE WRONG. LET'S BE PRECISE THERE IS NO
BASIS WHATEVER FOR THINKING THAT I AM ANTI-POM, TO USE YOUR
WORDS. Q: JOHN DICKIE ( DAILY MAIL). SINCE YOUR ARRIVAL HERE YOU.
HAVE BEEN CALLING FOR A STRENGTHENING OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
DO YOU SEE A PARTICULAR ROLE FOR THE COMMONWEALTH IN RESOLVING
THE RHODESIAN PROBLEM AND DO YOU SEE AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
BEING PREPARED TO TAKE PART IN A CRASH EDUCATION PROGRAMME TO HELP
THE AFRICANS AS PART OF A SETTLEMENT.
PM: THE QUESTION OF RHODESIA WAS DISCUSSED AT THE LAST MEETING
OF THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT IN OTTAWA LAST AUGUST
AND AUSTRALIA THERE MADE IT PLAIN THAT IT WOULD PARTICIPATE VERY
HAPPILY IN ANY COMMONWEALTH INITIATIVES ABOUT RHODESIA., AND NOTHING
HAS BEEN DONE IN THE COMMONWEALTH CONTEXT SINCE THEN.
Q: DID YOU GET ANY ASSURANCE FROM MR WILSON ABOUT DIEGO GARCIA,
AND COULD YOU TELL US WHAT VIEWS WERE EXCHANGED ON THE
SUBJECT. 3/ I' 
1i 1AR ITNIN I 0I1 0 I \ 11 S
il NWARD CABLEGRAM N
N\
3 O. LH22933 W
PM: MR WILSON AND I DISCUSSED FAIRLY BRIEFLY THE GENERAL
QUESTION OF BRITAIN'S INTEREST IN THE INDIAN OCEAN AND
SOUTH-EAST ASIA. MR WILSON ASSURED ME AS I BELIEVE HE HAD
ASSURED THE HOUSE OF COMMONS THAT THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
VERY MUCH SUPPORTS THE ATTITUDE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IN CALLING ON THE TWO SUPER POWERS THE UNITED STATES AND
THE SOVIET UNION TO AVOID ANY ESCALATION OF THEIR FORCES.
ANY CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THEM IN THE INDIAN OCEAN.
I HAVE OF COURSE READ THIS IN ACCOUNTS OF WHAT MR. WILSON
HAD SAID IN THE COMMONS. I WAS NATURALLY HAPPY TO
HAVE IT RAISED BY HIM IN A STRONG CORDIAL TERMS FACE TO
FACE THIS MORNING.
DO YOU STILL MAINTAIN OUTRIGHT OPPOSITION TO AN
AMERICAN BASE ON DIEGO GARCIA.
PM: I DON'T BELIEVE THERE IS ANY COUNTRY AROUND THE INDIAN
OCEAN WHICH WISHES TO HAVE AN INCREASE IN THE
INSTALLATIONS ON DIEGO GARCIA. I HAVE SAID THAT BEFORE I
HAVE NO REASON TO CHANGE THE VIEW.
INSTALLATIONS OF THE AMERICANS IN DIEGO GARCIA
CONSIDERING SAY THE HISTORY OF THE LAST WAR SUCH INSTALLATIONS
NEARER AUSTRALIA WERE QUITE USEFUL.
PM: THE SITUATION HAS CHANGED GREATLY SINCE THE LAST WAR.
Q: THERE HAS BEEN A CURB IN MIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA IN THE LAST
TWO OR THREE MONTHS. CAN YOU SEE THIS CURB BEING LIFTED
WITH A GREATER NUMBER OF INCREASE IN MIGRANTS IN THE COMING
YEAR 1975.
PM: NO I DON'T BELIEVE THERE IS LIKELY TO BE AN INCREASE IN
THE NUMBER OF MIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA IN THE NEXT 12 MONTHS.
THERE ARE TWO REASONS. THE FIRST IS AT A TIME OF UNEMPLOYMENT IN
AUSTRALIA IT DOESN'T HELP TO HAVE A GREAT NUMBER OF MIGRANTS
COMING TO AUSTRALIA. THE SECOND REASON IS THAT THE PRESSURE
OF MIGRANTS FROM OTHER COUNTRIES HAS DIMINISHED. THE
REASONS WHICH PERSUADED A GREAT NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN EARLIER
YEARS TO COME TO AUSTRALIA NO LONGER PREVAILS WITH SUCH FORCE.
THE MAIN NUMBER OF MIGRANTS COMING TO AUSTRALIA NOW ARE THOSE
SPONSORED BY CLOSE RELATIVES. WE BELIEVE THAT PEOPLE THAT COME
TO AUSTRALIA ON THE NOMINATION OF THEIR RELATIVES ARE MOST
LIKELY TO BE HAPPY IN AUSTRALIA. THERE HAS BEEN A VERY GREAT
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF MIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA WHO. HAVE BECOME
NATURALISEDo THERE IS9 I THINK, TWICE AS MANY PEOPLE BEING
NATURALISED THIS YEAR AS TWO YEARS AGO IN AUSTRALIA. N
4/ 
1) l: lA RI M IA 1 0 \ lT .\ IR. S
INWARD CABLEGRAM 4 O. LH22933
Q: YOU WERE SAYING IN BRUSSELS ON THE COMMON MARKET THAT YOU WANTED
TO SEE THE END OF SHILLY SHALLYING ON THE QUESTION OF WHETHER WE STAY
IN THE MARKET. SINCE YOUR TALKS WITH MR WILSON, DO YOU FORM
THE IMPRESSION THAT THE PRIME MINISTER WANTS BRITAIN TO STAY
IN THE MARKET.
PM: THE CONVERSATIONS I HAD WITH MR WILSON OF COURSE WERE
PRIVATE AND IT WOULD BE QUITE WRONG FOR ME TO GIVE ANY
IMPRESSION OF WHAT WAS SAID BY EITHER OF US IN THOSE TALKS.
IT'S NOT FOR ME REALLY TO EXPRESS A VIEW AS TO WHAT BRITAIN
SHOULD DO ABOUT MEMBERSHIP OF THE EEC. IT IS RATHER FOR ME
TO EXPRESS THE VIEW OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. PREVIOUS
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS HAD UNDOUBTEDLY GIVEN THE IMPRESSION
THAT THEY DIDN'T WANT BR'ITAIN TO JOIN THE COMMUNITY. THEY
CRITICISED THE EFFORTS OF THE CONSERVATIVE AND LABOUR
GOVERNMENTS IN BRITAIN TO JOIN THE COMMUNITY. THEY FREQUENTLY
APPEARED INTENT ON FRUSTRATING BRITAIN'S ATTEMPTS TO JOIN THE
COMMUNITY. THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DONE NOTHING TO
FRUSTRATE THESE ATTEMPTS. IN OUR VIEW THERE IS NO ADVANTAGE
WHATEVER TO AUSTRALIA IN BRITAIN LEAVING THE COMMUNITY.
Q: ( RUSSELL SCHNEIDER, THE AUSTRALIAN): FOLLOWING YOUR DISCUSSIONS
WITH HER MAJESTY AND MR WILSON, HAVE YOU ANY INTENTION OF
INTRODUCING A PURELY AUSTRALIAN FORM OF HONOURS.
PM: THIS IS A MATTER WE HAVE BEEN THINKING ABOUT FOR SOME
TIME. ALL I CAN SAY IS THE GENERAL IDEA IS TO DO WHAT HAS BEEN
DONE IN CANADA. I BELIEVE IT WOULD HELP PEOPLE IN BRITAIN TO
UNDERSTAND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ABOUT IN
CONSTITUTIONAL TERMS IN GENERAL IF YOU WERE TO EQUATE OUR
ASPIRATIONS WITH THE CANADIAN PRACTICE.
Q: ( BILL NORMAN, SYDNEY MORNING HERALD): THERE IS A POSSIBILITY
THAT GMH MAY SACK ANOTHER 5000 WORKERS. DID YOU GET ANY IDEAS FROM iZ
MR WILSON WHEN YOU TALKED TO MR WILSON WHICH MIGHT BE APPLIED IN
AUSTRAL IA.
PM: WE DIDN'T DISCUSS THE MOTOR INDUSTRY. MY GENERAL IMPRESSION
IS THE MOTOR INDUSTRY IS IN TROUBLE THROUGHOUT THE WESTERN
WORLD. THE MONSTROUS AND INTOLERABLE SITUATION IN AUSTRALIA IS
THAT GENERAL MOTORS SUBSIDIARY THERE HAS ATTEMPTED TO STAND
OVER THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. IT HAS AVOIDED USING THE MACHINERY
AVAILABLE TO ANY AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY WHICH BELIEVES IT NEEDS
ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. IT HAS PRESENTED
DEMANDS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SHOULD ELIMINATE
COMPETITION FOR ITS PRODUCTS AND SHOULD SUBSIDISE THOSE PRODUCTS.
I NEVER THOUGHT EVEN GENERAL MOTORS WOULD HAVE THE GALL TO
BE SO OVERT ABOUT IT. THESE UGLY AMERICAN COMPANIES. 
I) 1 I'A I \ I INI I O I: II N AFFAIRS
N WARD CABLEGRAM O. LH22933
Q:... APPLICABLE TO AUSTRALIA.
PM: I DIDN'I UNDERSTAND YOU TO ASK A QUESTION IN SUCH GENERAL
TERMS. YOU MENfION GENERAL MOTORS AND I ANSWERED IN THAT CONTEXT.
OF COURSE, MY COLLEAGUE AND OUR ADVISORS, AND I, SOUGHT AND GAINED
A NUMBER OF IMPRESSIONS ON THE ECONOMIC SITUATION DURING OUR TALKS
IN LONDON AND IN BRUSSELS. OF COURSE WE DID.
Q: ON THE GENERAL MOTORS THING, PRIME MINISTER. AFTER THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED ITS MOTOR INDUSTRY POLICY.
GENERAL MOTORS CAME OUT AND VIRTUALLY SUPPORTED THE GOVERNMENT
AND THAT POLICY.
PM: INDEED, THEY TOOK FULL PAGE ADVERTISEMENTS IN YOUR OWN VALUED
JOURNALS. Q: COULD YOU TELL US WHAT DISCUSSIONS THEY HAD WITH THE
GOVERNMENT IN AN ATTEMPT TO GET THE CHANGE TO THE MOTOR INDUSTRY
POLICY BEFORE THEY ANNOUNCED THAT WORKERS WOULD BE SACKED.
PM: NONE WHATEVERo THEY DELIVERED AN ULTIMATUM.
Q: ( NOT HEARD)
PM: BY THEIR SILENCE, YES. I ACCEPTED WHAT THEY SAID
OPENLY. I DON'T ACCEPT THAT ANY COMPANY HOWEVER LARGE EVEN
IF IT IS AN AMERICAN COMPANY IS ENTITLED TO STAND OVER
THE GOVERNMENT OF A COUNTRY WHERE IT HAS OPERATED SO
PROFITABLY FOR 20 YEARS AND MORE. GENERAL MOTORS' CONDUCT
IN THIS CASE WAS ABOMINABLE. IT IS NOT THE FAULT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IF GENERAL MOTORS IN AUSTRALIA CAN'T
PRODUCE AN ACCEPTABLE VEHICLE. IT CAN'T FACE COMPETITION,
IF IT SEEKS ILLEGAL ASSISTANCE, PROTECTION AND UNJUSTIFIED
SUBSIDIES.
Q: ( JOHN JACKSON, DAILY MIRROR). MAY I JUST CHANGE THE
SUBJECT. COULD I ASK WHETHER THE DIFFICULT PROBLEM OF CRICKET
WAS BROUGHT UP AT NO. 10 OR BUCKINGHAM PALACE.
DID HER MAJESTY OR MR WILSON OFFER TO OPEN THE INNINGS AT
MELBOURNE. PM: I CAN'T DESCRIBE ACTUALLY THE CONVERSATIONS THAT HER MAJESTY
HAD, ANY MORE THAN I CAN THE CONVERSATIONS WITH THE P. M. HOWEVER, AT
THE RISK OF INDISCRETION I WOULD SAY THAT MRo WILSON CONSTANTLY
REFERRED TO MATTERS IN CRICKETING TERMS YESTERDAY AFTERNOON, LAST
NIGHT, THIS MORNING, AND I HAVE NO DOUBT TONIGHT AND TOMORROW NIGHT.
AS I SAID YESTERDAY, WE ARE PREPARED TO FLY THE MCC FIRST ELEVEN
WHEN WE GO BACK IF THAT'S DESIRED. 6/ N,
a N" 
NI ( W OI ' N AlITAIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 6 0. LH22933
Q: DID YOU DISCUSS WITH MR. WILSON YOUR PROPOSAL ON THE INDIAN
OCEAN. AND IF SO WHAT HAS BEEN THE REACTION OF THE BRITISH
GOVERNMENJT. YOU SAID THAT THERE MUST BE SOME UNDERSTANDING
BROUGHT ABOUT BY THE GREAT POWERS ABOUT ARMS LIMITATION IN THE
INDIAN OCEAN. DID YOU DISCUSS THIS MATTER WITH MR. WILSON. WHAT
HAS BEEN HIS REACTION.
PM: I HAVE ALREADY STATED ALL I THINK I SHOULD SAY ABOUT WHAT
MR. WILSON HAD SAID ABOUT THE INDIAN OCEAN. I OBVIOUSLY DON'T MIND
IF YOU ASK ME MY ATTITUDE TOWARD IT, BUT REALLY I CAN'T GO INTO
DETAILS ABOUT WHAT MR. WILSON AND I HAVE SAID IN OUR CONFIDENTIAL
TALKS. MR. WILSON HAS STATED SOME THINGS PUBLICLY. HE REPEATED.
THEM TO ME AND I AM HAPP. Y TO STATE THEM HERE.
Q: DOES THE FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING IN THE PACIFIC STILL WORRY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. AND IF THEY EVER DECIDED TO RESUME IT WOULD
YOU EXPECT A MORE SYMPATHETIC, RATHER MORE SYMPATHY, FROM A BRITISH
LABOUR GOVERNMENT THAN YOU GOT FROM A PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATION.-
PM: A COMPLETELY SPECULATIVE QUESTION. I WON'T ANSWER IT,
Q: WHAT IS YOUR GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE ON SALES OF SUGAR.
PM: WE ARE VERY HAPPY TO SELL SUGAR OR ANY OF OUR OTHER PRIMARY
PRODUCTS, OR MINERAL PRODUCTS OVERSEAS. WE HAVE IN MANY
CASES SUPPLIES SURPLUS TO OUR REQUIREMENTS. WE HAVEN'T GOT SUPPLIES
OF SUGAR SURPLUS TO OUR OWN REQUIREMENTS, OR OUR OWN COMMITMENTS THIS
YEAR. THE CROP IS FULLY COMMITTED. WE ARE HAPPY IN RESPECT
OF SUGAR, OTHER PRIMARY OR MINERAL PRODUCTS, TO INCREASE OUR
PRODUCTION TO MEET DEMANDS OR SALES FROM OVERSEAS PURCHASERS
FROM OVERSEAS.* WE WISH TO HAVE THESE ARRANGEMENTS MADE FOR -A TERM
OF YEARS. IN RESPECT OF SUGAR WE HAVE ENTERED INTO SEVERAL
AGREEMENTS FOR FIVE YEAR TERMS. THERE IS SOME SUGGESTION IN THE
NEWSPAPERS THAT WE HAVE JUST ENTERED INTO SUCH AN AGREEMENT WITH
JAPAN. WE HAVE ALREADY DONE SO WITH OTHER COUNTRIES. THE ONLY
COUNTRY WITH WHICH WE HAVE. ENTERED INTO A SHORTER AGREEMENT IS THE
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THAT IS FOR THREE YEARS. QUITE
OBVIOUSLY WE WANT TO ENTER INTO COMMITMENTS TO SELL OUR PRODUCTS
OVER A TERM OF YEARS BECAUSE OTHERWISE IT DOESN'T SUIT US IT
DOESN'T PAY US TO INCREASE OUR INVESTMENTS IN PRODUCING SURPLUSES
TO OUR REQUIREMENTS IF WE CAN'T RECOVER THOSE INVESTMENTS. WE
CLEARLY ARE EXPECTING ANY SALES OF SUGAR OR SUCH PRIMARY
PRODUCTS IN WESTERN EUROPE TO BE UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE EEC*
WE ARE PROBABLY THE MOST EFFICIENT PRODUCERS OF SUGAR IN THE
WORLD. WE EXPORT MORE THAN ANY COUNTRY OTHER THAN CU5A. YOU
MIGHT NOT REALISE IN BRITAIN THAT AUSTRALIA IS THE SECOND LARGEST
TROPICAL COUNTRY IN THE WORLD. BRAZIL IS THE ONLY COUNTRY IN THE
WORLD WHICH HAS A LARGER LAND SPACE IN THE TROPICS. 0.. 7/ I 
11 A\ RTI\ I N'I 1: 1 OR 1 A\, I T I ISR
INWARD CABLEGRAM 7 O. LH22933
Q: WHAT IS THE STATE OF PLAY ON YOUR PRESENT NEGOTIATIONS ON SALES
OF SUGAR TO THE COMMUNITY.
PM: THERE AREN'T ANY.
Q: WITH THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT, THEN, THIS QUESTION OF SUGAR
SUPPLIES WAS IT RAISED BY EITHER SIDE.
PM: IT HAS BEEN RAISED IN GENERAL TERMS WITH SOME OF OUR ADVISERS
BOTH HERE AND IN BRUSSELS, BUT I DON'T BELIEVE THERE ARE ANY
PRECISE PROPOSALS. THE HEAD OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF OVERSEAS
TRADE IS WITH ME. VERY OBVIOUSLY WE HAVE BEEN LOOKING AT THE
OPPORTUNITIES TO SELL SUGAR AND OTHER PRODUCTS WHILE WE HAVE
BEEN IN BRUSSELS AND LONDON.
Q: ( HIGHFIELD9 ABC) HAVE YOU HAD DISCUSSIONS ON THE CONTINUING FULL
DIPLOMATIC REPRESENTATION OF THE STATE'S AGENTS-GEN4ERAL IN LONDON.
PM: NONE WHATEVER. IT WAS NEVER PROPOSED TO. I NOTICED THAT EVEN
THE TIMES ITSELF SUGGESTED IN THEIR EDITORIAL YESTERDAY THAT MR.
WILSON AND I MIGHT BE DISCUSSING THE POSITION OF THE AGENTS-GENERAL.
OF THE AUSTRALIAN STATES. WE HAVE NEVER DISCUSSED IT, WE HAVE NEVER
CORRESPONDED ABOUT IT. THIS WAS SUGGESTED IN AUSTRALIA ABOUT EIGHT
DAYS AGO. I ISSUED A DENIAL. I AM SURPRISED THAT THE TIMES ITSELF
SHOULD FALL INTO THIS ERROR.
Q: THERE HAS BEEN WORD THAT YOU RAISED CERTAIN CONSTITUTIONAL
MATTERS NOW YOU HAVE BEEN ASKED ABOUT THIS IN A ROUND-ABOUT WAY
ALREADY BUT PERHAPS YOU COULD TELL US SOMETHING OF WHAT THESE
MATTERS ARE, . TO AVOID THE TIMES ITSELF, OR OTHER' PEOPLE FROM GETTING
IT WRONG.
PM: YOU ASK A QUESTION WHAT I THINK ABOUT IT. I D-ID SAY SOMETHING
AT THE MANSION HOUSE AT THE LUNCH YESTERDAY. SO I AM QUITE HAPPY
TO MAKE PRONOUNCEMENTS ON THIS SUBJECT. BUT ASK ME MY VIEWS. DON'T
ASK ME WHAT I HAVE SAID IN CONFIDENTIAL DISCUSSIONS WITH MY
COUNTERPART OR MY MONARCH.
Q: INDISTINCT.
PM: I WAS ASKED IF I THOUGHT THERE WOULD BE ANY CHANGE. AND I SAID
NO.
Q: DO YOU THINK THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WILL LEGISLATE TO ABOLISH
APPEALS TO THE PRIVY COUNCIL FROM STATE SUPREME COURTS.
PM: I WON'T SPEAK ON BE-HALF* OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT. 8/ 
I! PAR IMT I1(, N I\-AIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 8 O. LH22933
Q: CAN I ASK YOU WHAT YOUR OWN VIEWS ARE THEN, ABOUT
CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGES THAT ARE NECESSARY, WITH RELATION TO THE
POSITION OF THE QUEEN, THE TITLE ROYAL.
PM: THE ANSWER TO THE FIRST ONE WAS NONE.
Q: TO THE USE OF THE TITLE ROYAL TO VARIOUS AUSTRALIAN BODIES
LIKE THE RAAF AND SO ON.
PM: I HAVE NO VIEW ON IT AT ALL. WHY DO YOU ASK THIS.
Q: IT'S BEEN REPORTED THAT POSSIBLY CHANGES ARE ON THE WAY.
PM: WELL THERE ARE NOTL
Q. AND YOU ARE NOT CONTEMPLATING ANY.
PM: NO, IT HAS NEVER BEEN SUGGESTED. WHY DO YOU.. I PRESUME YOU
ARE ASKING THIS QUESTION ON THE BASIS OF SOME STORY SOMEWHERE.
I HAVE NOT SEEN ANY SUCH STORY. IT'S THE FIRST TIME THE SUGGESTION
HAS EVER BEEN MADE TO ME. WE HAVE A ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY AND A
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE. NOBODY HAS SUGGESTED CHANGING THE TITLE.
Q: MAY I SAY THIS STEMS FROM A CABLE WHICH HAS COME FROM MELBOURNE
FROM A BRIGADIER EASON, AND A BRIGADIER SIR WILLIAM HALL, WHICH
READS, ACCORDING TO OUR CORRESPONDENT IN MELBOURNE: " YOUR MAJESTY
THE FOLLOWING CABLEGRAMS HAVE BEEN SENT TO YOUR PRIME MINISTER,
MR WILSON: WE WOULD LIKE TO POINT OUT THAT ANY CHANGES IN THE
COMMONWEALTH CONSTITUTION, IN OUR RELATIONS WITH THE MONARCH, QUEEN
ELIZABETH II, SHOULD BE MADE IN AUSTRALIA BY AUSTRALIANS AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM REFRAIN FROM INTERFERENCE. MR.
WHITLAM HAS NEVER SPOKEN FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS ON
THIS MATTER". AND IT WAS THEN MENTIONED ABOUT THE ROYAL BEING TAKEN
AWAY FROM ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE.
PM: THIS IS SHEAR SPECULATION. THESE OLD BRIGADIERS NEVER DIE.
NO, REALLY IT'S THE'FIRST SUGGESTION OF THIS KIND THAT I HAVE EVER
HEARD. Q: ( PATRICK KEATLEY, THE GUARDIAN) I WONDER IF I COULD ASK A
SUPPLEMENTARY TO WHAT YOU RAISED AT THE MANSION HOUSE ON THIS
CONSTITUTIONAL POINT WHERE YOU REFERRED TO THE FACT THAT IT SHOULD
BE POSSIBLE TO MAKE ADJUSTMENTS I AM PARAPHRASING TO THE
AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION WITHIN AUSTRALIA. I HOPE I AM PUTTING THAT
CORRECTLY. I WONDERED IF YOU COULD FILL THAT OUT A BIT AND EXPLAIN
TO US WHAT THE STEPS WOULD BE, OR WHAT THE SCOPE IS THAT YOU COULD
ACHIEVE WITHOUT HAVING TO REFER TO BRITAIN. 9/ s \ vS N'
N 
I) I~~ PDA RTV'IL'NI ) 1 F() IOR I(; N A,\ IFAIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 9 O. LH22933
I THINK THERE WERE TWO PARTICULAR MATTERS I MENTIONED AT THE
IANSION HOUSE YESTERDAY. ONE WAS THE FACT THAT THE GOVERNORS OF
fHE AUSTRALIAN STATES RECEIVE COMMISSION NOT FROM THE QUEEN OF
AUSTRALIA, BUT FROM THE QUEEN OF THE U. K. THE COMMISSIONS ARE
, OUNTERSIGNED NOT BY ANY AUSTRALIAN MINISTER, BUT BY THE BRITISH.
, INISTER FOR FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH RELATIONS. I ALSO MENTIONED
: HAT APPEALS COULD COME FROM THE AUSTRALIAN STATE COURTS IN RESPECT
FO STATE LAWS DIRECTLY TO THE BRITISH PRIVY COUNCIL. NOW IN
? ESPECT TO THOSE TWO MATTERS I EXPRESSED THE VIEW THAT IT WOULD
3E MORE APPROPRIATE FOR THE GOVERNORS OF THE AUSTRALIAN STATES TO
3E COMMISSIONED BY THE QUEEN OF AUSTRALIA. I ALSO EXPRESSED THE
JIEW THAT APPEALS FROM ALL AUSTRALIAN COURTS SHOULD END WITH THE
UIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA. I WOULD EMPHASIZE THAT ANY LEGAL DISPUTES
3ETWEEN, SAY THE FEDERAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS OF AUSTRALIA,
ENDS WITH THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA. ALSO ANY DISPUTES BETWEEN
' AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL
,-AWS END. WITH THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA. THERE IS, HOWEVER,
rHIS SINGLE ANOMOLY. THAT APPEALS FROM STATE COURTS UNDER STATE
-AW. S CAN GO TO THE BRITISH PRIVY COUNCIL. IT SEEMS IN THESE DAYS
U. ITE ANOMOLOUS AND ONE WOULD HAVE THOUGHT IT WOULD ALWAYS HAVE
3EEN OBJECTIONABLE FOR LITIGATION TO TAKE PLACE BETWEEN CITIZENS
) F ANY COUNTRY BEFORE THE COURTS OF ANOTHER COUNTRY, SITTING IN
\ NOTHER COUNTRY, AND COMPOSED OF JUDGES APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
' F,:.. THAT-OTHER COUNTRY. IT IS NO PART, SURELY, OF THE ENGLISH: LAW
N ENGLAND, OR IN ANY ENGLISH. SETTLEMENT, SUCH AS AUSTRALIA, THAT
HERE SHOULD BE LITIGATION IN ANOTHER COUNTRY EVEN IF IT IS THE
! OTHER COUNTRY. IT IS HERE, AGAIN SURELY, THE SITUATION SHOULD BE
, S IN CANADA.
ON THAT POINT, AS INDEED YOU MENTIONED CANADA. AND AS YOU KNOW
-HE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT HAD THE DILEMMA OF WHETHER OR NOT TO HAVE
' HE BNA ACT REVISED IN LONDON. WOULD YOU SAY THEN THE PARALLEL
HEN OBTAINS THAT AUSTRALIA DOES NOT NEED TO HAVE HER ORIGINAL ACT
F INDEPENDENCE OF THE WESTMINISTER PARLIAMENT
MENDED FOR AUSTRALIAN PURPOSES.
M: OH, THE BRITISH NORTH AMERICA ACT IS MORE ARCHAIC THAN THE! i
' OMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA CONSTITUTIONAL ACT. IT IS, AS YOU KNOW,
4 YEARS OLDER. THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTIONAL WOULD BE A MORE
: ONTEMPORARY DOCUMENT IF IT HAD BEEN PASSED AFTER THE PARLIAMENT ACT
; ERE, INSTEAD OF, YOU KNOW, IF IT HAD BEEN PASSED UNDER GEORGE V,.
NSTEAD OF UNDER VICTORIA. BUT THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION CAN
E CHANGED WITHIN AUSTRALIA. THE CANADIAN CONSTITUTION REQUIRES
MENDMENT BY THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT. SO IN THAT RESPECT AUSTRALIA
S MORE FORTUNATELY SITUATED THAN CANADA. THERE HAS BEEN SOME
TTEMPT, LAST YEAR AND THIS YEAR, TO BYPASS THE AUSTRALIAN
ONSTITUTION OF 1900 BY RELYING ON A BRITISH ACT OF 18533. I01 
IDI. I. ARklN II., I 1 lO I \ IN" IAIIS
INWARD CABLEGRAM O. LH22933
Q: THE OPPOSITION HAS SAID THAT YOUR GOVERNMENT IS THE WORST IN
AUSTRALIA'S HISTORY ( PARTLY INAUDIBLE)
PM: HE IS AN EXPERT IN BAD GOVERNMENTS.
ENDS A/ PRIME MINISTER
FOREIGN MINISTER
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
MIN AND DEPT DEFENCE
JIO MIN . AND DEPT LABOR AND IMMIGRATION ( C)
MIN AND DEPT OVERSEAS TRADE
MIN AND DEPT MINERALS AND ENERGY
TREASURER AND TREASURY
PM'S PRESS OFFICE
PM'S PRIVATE OFFICE
AIS ( C)
PM AND C
MR B. JOHNS ( PM AND C)
MR MENADUE
ADAA ( C)
MIN AND DEPT AGRICULTURE MISS BOWTELL ( PM'S PRESS
OFFICE) ADVISED 21/ 0830
I I
I
r
C .7 Ii-C' 



L~ Ih A CJLR : Piws" 1 11 S' D. c iWr
' FTho Actinra Primei Mi riW-Ler, Dr. f. F. Cairns, ta cp'.:. dt'
aro-i7 t-knb h ic Loi:. iar tuoe. ~ cmhn a'-Jir CL
11 i. q'il Couri: the Vc of Au: ra Iic)-1 Go~ e'ran unir,)* clvm j
T tu 1 thc worst ev: mple ofI pl. 3. y-rpoJ-L-Ies the Cd
evI. redp -oplc: tlhat ~* chave ee Dr. Cai-cms SLid.
. I;: 1hc Stiate; haCd cons.:-Ldeyre-d Lh c' wJ S a-A3 LI : irig wronc! : 1.
' iY'f'CSC t ~ iC2-~ 5 t was open frLh( om at TZJ
co ns-; : i1uc. tC LV sugoucst ions a nd. these would ai ' U0 e ill
t; 3'. c-I into CC. ount.
TiIhey d9&amp; ota,. dI theimseives of thatI sji'iple oruiy
Thie cdetructivc acti-on of the Victorian Goverwmcrit th'ae the
Australian Covc. cnrn'-wt ' rs ent. re welfare psrogrrnaic and hItCE, r~~
tChe my-d, tite hai dica. pped, the hoieluoss and the~ UlCL) O'
1I) w my. oemntcould conitemplaLe suha bodly-blow to t.-7A
Fsec io; n cif thie com-mui. irhIy is &gt; c.-yoiid compr eherisioy'.
P~ rocj-~ ststhat are in jeom -cdy ifth Icnjc ov ccvcv
sue ce00s iGeJu7 o\ ernmunt stcn~ shus ~ teVuICsi? c.:
~' udL~ iehL~ idi~:?: p&amp;', a. sis-tCanco sheitce2 o sh js
handicappd hi1. ucJ trainaing and accurpodu iio* n1 Ihhetrs
vi Lal-meAls-on-wheels service, and tbleovtne~ tr
to) as,'-Ast cruani-al-ioyus which poid acToaion f-orchrJc~
S~ eof-those prograimmes were in : i s tonc c, when -w2 LCoc) o c, 1t
peJ iti-ca]. rature of the challenje is thus coaafiroucT.
ThVec-oanMove aliso destrct-ive because it car. otKLy d( I
the application of re-o. mployment measures which the Australiari
conside-s to be of prime importance.
bespliethe actCion of the ' vicl;: orizn Govcerrjm'iienL, the i~ c1a
Govx'e:.: nraent will continue to adm. inister th: e schecaes -icl1y and.
ade-~ ua. el. Ly
DE the St-ate:.; iaro adamarwtnL aholit p-Lrs isting with thceir osL. cLv
appl'icution it--is to be IhoPE'., 3-ihIatl the Hiigh Court once, azc1 f: 0-1 OJI
wiiJ upk: iold 1-ho rigMc of thc C! crlu oirr&amp; n:.. Oa-SS
cLii~ i ~ e~ e3 ~~ OflC-ii: n-. y beu.. rp yd 



SAT7'-m YB' DR. . Jl! C A!
tha~. isTote~: ~ o1.% Ect ñ ei nIi.-egn tPca J_ m ente r Dr. CJoiumr t C0 a7i rJsT usstaicide o. nv
~ in the j aoethe Pa. cifi-c had been: aclhittv:-..
in . u n ce C_ the app 4. catcn to the Cour" t r. Ll 3t
S~ 1Ca'CDIn thC French
7hzarTic~ tix~ o rgthereC~ th Court"'-
rgzaan 2M-ti encr-uz-age nor,: Nations
th C I t. -nirz ratui: e eh Atrre. Cnr~ nc
aff -F t Cori 0 tC.-t w r *'-ithy Tri~ e sentC;.
ce a,,. r; n s uc Ce S 0 fz th ca. t on~.
1 t w-as a tr_-iur-ph of 1:-7 OlveZ wair.
The 6ecioion has radt-he preotige of thje Thr,+-
n~; nC ourt ar(. it. re~ prescr'ts a i~ r-ir precedent
PP 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 419
21 December 1974
NUCLEAR TESTS CASE
The Prime Minister said that he understood that the
effect of the majority decision of the Court was that the
objective of Australia had been accomplished in as much as
the Court found that by its public statements France had
undertaken the obligation to hold no further nuclear tests
in the atmosphere in the South Pacific. The Court was not
therefore called upon to give a decision.
The Court had also indicated that if the basis of
this judgment were to be affected in the future Australia
could request an examination by the Court of the situation
in accordance with the provisions of the statute of the
Court. The Prime Minister added that his advisers would
be studying the judgment of the Court and the separate
opinions given by the individual judges.
Canberra A. C. T. 



Ireland Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given in
his honour by the Taoiseach of Ireland, Mr Liam Cosgrave, in
Dublin on 23 December 1974
I am no stranger to your extraordinary and
beautiful country. This is my fourth visit to
Ireland. Each time I return I take renewed
pleasure from my contact with a country so
close in history and spirit to my own, and whose
valiant and poignant story has so stirred the
imagination of the Australian people. I was last
in Dublin as Leader of the Opposition in January
1972. 1 am the first Australian Prime Minister to
visit Ireland since Sir Robert Menzies was here
in 1941. Another visit was long overdue.
Before his sudden and untimely death I had anticipated
a meeting with your late President, the
distinguished Erskine Childers. With all Australians
I regretted the passing of so notable an
Irishman, whose appointment symbolised
something of the breadth and magnanimity of
the Irish character. I might say that the name
Childers is well known in Australia. One of the
late President's forbears, Hugh Childers, was
the founder of the University of Melbourne and
gave his name to the town of Childers in
Queensland. I reiterate the condolences expressed
by our Governor-General on behalf of
the Australian Government and people to the
late President's family and to the Government
and people of Ireland.
The Irish contribution to the settlement and
development of Australia is a familiar story. We
were the last major area of European colonisation,
and a distinctive Irish element is well
represented in the first wave of settlers to
Australia. Irish migrants helped to expand Australian
settlement outwards and inland beyond
the narrow limits of the eastern and central seaboard.
The development of colonial selfgovernment produced an unmistakable Irish
influence in Australia's emerging political tradition.
The major debates of the late nineteenth
century-debates which canvassed issues of
land tenure, education, the relations between
Church and State and the relationship with Britain-
rehearsed issues well known to the Irish
immigrant and enabled him to give Australian
political life a distinctively Irish flavour.
Times have changed since the first Irish
immigrants settled in Australia. Other European
communities-Italians, Germans, Greeks,
Yugoslavs-have made their contribution to
Australian life. Modern Australia is a pluralist
society. While we acknowledge our European
origins, and remain in many ways the most Irish
country outside Ireland, we are increasingly
aware of our geographical and political destiny
as part of the Asian and Pacific region.
Australia and Ireland are parliamentary
democracies with governmental, judicial and
social institutions derived largely from common
political traditions. The Australian High Court
has had many able judges of Irish extraction-
O'Connor, Higgins, McTiernan, Gavan Duffy.
There are still strong cultural affinities between
us. Yet our political and diplomatic contacts
have not always been as active or as comprehensive
as traditional associations might have
led us to expect. In large part this has reflected
simple considerations of geopolitics and
differences in our major international interests.
It has reflected the absence of serious problems
or conflicts between us. One of the ironies of
history is that conflict between nations is often
productive of greater mutual understanding in
Note The Prime Minister spoke informally and on occasions may have departed from this text. 
the longer term, while an established tradition
of friendship yields all too easily to a comfortable
and accepted pattern of relations which may be
less adaptable to the challenges posed by
changing times and fortunes.
In a period when Australia is seeking to play an
independent and increasingly active role in its
own region in Asia and the Pacific, at a time
when Ireland has perceived that her economic
and political interests lie in a united Europe, it
becomes more important to identify clearly the
real community of interest between us. We are
vulnerable, like all countries, to the threat of
economic and social dislocation posed by inflation,
rising unemployment and the spectre of
recession. We share similar commitments in a
wide range of international issues including
basic human rights, the problems of economic
development among the poorer nations, the
need for an accepted regime to ensure balanced
and proper methods of international maritime
law. We are both concerned with internal questions
of economic and social reform. We share a
common interest in formulating policies which
will guarantee an equitable local share in the
development of our national resources.
Perhaps most important, we realise that our
relations will come to be increasingly defined in
the context of the enlarged Europe of which
Ireland is a member. Australia places considerable
importance on its relations with the
European Community. The new Community is
Australia's largest export market after Japan
and the largest source of our imports.
It is responsible for some 40 per cent of the
world's trade. It is developing new relationships
with the trading nations outside Europe and
Australia is one of the most important of these
nations. Our commercial interests in Europe,
once centred on the British market through the
former preferential trading arrangements, have
changed to a new relationship with the Community
as a whole. Our mutual interests extend
further than a simple commercial relationship.
They include areas of international relations,
finance and questions of energy and resources.
It is against this background of common
interests that we shall be holding periodic
meetings between ourselves and the Commission
of the Community to enable consultations on the broad range of our mutual
interests. These consultations will permit both
the Community and Australia to co-ordinate the
various strands of our relations, ensuring that
proper recognition is given by each to the full
range of our interests.
The new multi-lateral relationship which we see
developing between ourselves and Europe
should not usurp the tradition of bilateral relations
between our two countries. It would be a
pity if our historical association was
overshadowed by the turn of events. With this
in mind the Australian Government has decided
to assist the University College, Dublin, to
establish a Chair of Australian History. We will
contribute $ 70,000 over the next five years
We have already made considerable donations
of books on Australian subjects to the college
and we shall make further contributions in the
future. I am confident that Australia and Ireland will
develop a new kind of relationship within the
the framework of Ireland's emerging multilateral
interests. Our relationship will be as
close, as special as before, but more relevant to
contemporary needs. Ireland is one of the two
English-speaking members of the Community
with whom we share a common cultural and
political heritage and powerful ties of sentiment
and kinship. As such we hope Ireland may
occupy a special position in the evolving relationship
between Australia and the new Europe.
I believe our relations will strengthen as we
move closer to our natural destinies in our
different regions of the world. 



DI1 P'AR I MNIN I 01 I l iS
INWARD CABLEGRAM-. O. DU303 MKII
TOR 1228 24.12.74
O. DU3C8 2130 23.12.74 UNC N"
TO. PP LONDON/ 103s
RP PP CANBERRA/ 430
RP. RR BRUSSELS/ 19 PARIS/ 14 BONN/ I1
RR ROME/ 09 THE HAGUE/ 11
FM. DUBLIN/ FILE 221/ 4/ 7/ 1/ 3 AND 300/ 7
U N C L A S S I F I E D
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO IRELAND: PRESS CONFERENCE.
FOR MRS DWYER ( ASSISTANT PRESS SECRETARY)
FOLLOWING IS TEXT OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
IN DUBLIN AFTERNOON OF 23 DECEMBER:
BEGINS:
Q. I UNDERSTAND MR PRIME MINISTER THAT YOU DISCUSSED WITH THE
TAOISEACH THE TRADE BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND IRELAND, BOTH OF THEM,
WITH THE EEC. ' NOW YOU APPARENTLY EXPRESSED SOME PARTICULAR
INTEREST IN MEAT AND SUGAR. IN WHAT WAY WOULD IRELAND BE ABLE
TO ASSIST THIS IN THE EEC CONTEXT?
THE TAOISEACH DID POINT OUT TO ME THE GRATIFYING INCREASE
IN SALES BY IRELAND TO AUSTRALIA. WE ARE NATURALLY ALSO CONCERNED
WITH THE CONTRIBUTION THAT CAN BE MADE BY IRELAND AS ONE OF THE
NINE IN THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY. AUSTRALIA WAS FOUNDED BY
THE... BY TWO OF THE THREE NEW MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY, BRITAIN
AND IRELAND, AND WE BELIEVE THAT THOSE TWO NEW MEMBERS WILL
UNDERSTAND THE LINKS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN EUROPE AND HOPEFULi
BE SYMPATHETIC TOWARDS THEM. THE COMMUNITY IS ONE OF THE
THREE BIG ECONOMIC GROUPINGS WITH WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS TRADE,
THE OTHER TWO BEING, OF. COURSE, JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES.
Q. LAURIE OAKES, MELBOURNE SUN: PRIME MINISTER, WE'RE TOLD
TIAT WHEN YOU SPOKE TO THE IRISH PRIME MINISTER TODAY YOU.
DISCUSSED THE SITUATION IN NORTHERN IRELAND AND PRESUMABLY IT
IS NOT WITHOUT RELEVANCE THAT THE BOMBS WERE GETTING GRADUALLY
CLOSER TO YOUR HOTEL BEFORE THE TRUCE CAME INTO EFFECT AT
MIDNIGHT. CAN YOU GIVE US YOUR VIEWS ON THE SITUATION IN
NORTHrERN IRELAND?
THE BOMBS WERE FOR THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION,
NOT FOR PRIME MINISTER. NATURALLY, SERIOUSLY, THOSE WITH ME, AND
/ 2 
0. I Ni INI OR I N ' IT \ I R" S
I NWARD CAB LEG R AM 2-O. DU308
I TO0, WERE VERY ANXIOUS TO HEAR WHAT THE TAOISEACH HAD TO SAY
ABOUT THE POSITION IN IRELAND. I AM TALKING ABOUT THE WHOLE
ISLAND. AND IT WAS VALUABLE FOR US TO HAVE HIS ASSESSMENT AND
HIS ANALYSIS OF THE POSSIBILITIES. HE HAS, OF COURSE, WRITTEN
AND SPOKEN ON THIS MATTER, AND I HAVE A PUBLICATION, A BOOK,
OF HIS ON THIS SUBJECT.
Q. MR WHITLAM, TOM MCLOUGHLIN, IRISH TELEVISION: IF I COULD
GET BACK JUST TO THE PURPOSE OF YOUR VISIT. I UNDERSTAND YOU
WILL BE VISITING OTHER EEC COUNTRIES. WHAT EXACTLY ARE YOU
LOOKING FOR? WE ARE VISITING SEVEN OF THE NINE, ALL EXCEPT DENMARK
AND LUXEMBOURG. WE WANT TO REAFFIRM THE TIES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA
AND WESTERN EUROPE. THESE ARE HISTORIC, CULTURAL, AS WELL AS
BEING COMMERCIAL. I HAVE BEEN ASKED A QUESTION ALREADY ABOUT
THE COMMERCIAL TIES AND THESE ARE OF VERY GREAT SIGNIFICANCE.
MANY OF THE PRODUCTS WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS TRADITIONALLY
EXPORTED ARE NOW IN SOME JEOPARDY BECAUSE THEY WERE EXPORTED
TO ENGLAND, AND ENGLAND CAN NOW IMPORT THEM ONLY WITHIN THE
EEC CONTEXT. THERE ARE OTHER PRODUCTS IN THE AGRICULTURAL,
PASTORAL FIELD, WHERE THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE MAY WELL BE
INTERESTED IN HAVING SUCH A SECURE HIGH QUALITY AND RELATIVELY
CHEAP SOURCE OF SUPPLY AS AUSTRALIA AUSTRALIA IS INTERESTED
IN SEEING THAT THERE ARE LONG-TERM ARRANGEMENTS FOR ANY SUCH
PRODUCTS. IN ADDITION TO THAT, AUSTRALIA IS A VERY WELL-ENDOWED
COUNTRY IN RESPECT TO ENERGY RESOURCES AND IN BRUSSELS A WEEK
AGO I WAS DISCUSSING WITH THE COMMISSION THE POSSIBILITY OF
DEVELOPING THESE RESOURCES IN AUSTRALIA AND ESTABLISHING A LONGTERM
MARKET FOR THEM WITH THE COMMUNITY. IN PARTICULAR, OF COURSE,
URANIUM AND COAL.
Q. HAS BRITAIN'S ENTRY INTO THE EEC CAUSED YOU VERY SERIOUS
ECONOMIC PROBLEMS IN AUSTRALIA?
AUSTRALIA HAS ADJUSTED TO THEM. IN 1962 WHEN PRIME
MINISTER MC MILLAN FIRST APPLIED TO JOIN... FIRST SOUGHT BRITAIN'S
ADMISSION TO THE COMMUNITY ABOUT 20 PERCENT OF AUSTRALIAOS EXPORTS
WENT TO BRITAIN. NOW IT. IS BARELY 6 PER CENT. AUSTRALIA HAS
ADJUSTED HER EXPORT PATTERN VERY GREATLY IN THE INTERIM. JAPAN
IS NOW TiE LARGEST COMMERCIAL PARTNER OF AUSTRALIA.
Q. ARE YOU HOPEFUL THAT YOU MAY BE ABLE TO COME TO SOME LONGTERM
TRADE AGREEMENT WITH THE EEC?
NOT OVERALL. WE ARE THINKING. OF VARIOUS COMMODITIES
AND LONG TERM ARRANGEMENTSFOR-THOSE COMMODITIES. WE ARE GOING
TO HAVE REGULAR CONSULTATIONS BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND. THE COMMISSION
. o,/ 3 
D I'ARTMN NT 01-OI ' OR IGN A \-AIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 3-O. DU308
fHE FIRST ONES WILL BE IN THE MIDDLE OF 1975 -WE EXPECT.
0. YOUR COMMUNIQUE MENTIONS ESPECIALLY BEEF AND SUGAR. I AM
SURE YOU ARE AWARE THAT WE EXPORT BOTH AND THAT WE HAVE BEEN
HAVING DIFFICULTIES, LIKE YOURSELF, IN RELATION TO BEEF. CAN YOU
THEREFORE TELL ME WHAT RESPONSE YOU HAD IN YOUR TALKS TODAY ON
THOSE TWO ITEMS?
IRELAND HAS ALWAYS BEEN A VERY LARGE EXPORTER OF BEEF
TO BRITAIN, AND WOULD I EXPECT BE A LARGE EXPORTER OF BEEF TO THE
COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE. THERE ARE OTHER MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY
WHICH WOULD ALSO DEPEND ON THE BEEF MARKET IN THE COMMUNITY AS
A WHOLE SUCH AS DENMARK, AND THE LOW COUNTRIES. THE FDIFFICULTY
HAS ARISEN IN THE LAST YEAR, WHERE SO MANY PEOPLE THOUGHT THAT
: THE MARKET FOR IMPORTS IN THE COMMUNITY WOULD BE MUCH LARGER AND
WOULD CONTINUE MUCH LARGER THAN IS NOW LIKELY TO BE THE-CASE.
UT NEVERTHELESS THERE IS LIKELY TO-BE A MARKET FOR IMPORTS FROM
COUNTRIES NOT IN THE MARKET, AND AUSTRALIA IS I. NTERESTED IN
INVESTIGATING THOSE POSSIBILITIES ON A LONG-TERM BASIS. WE WANT
TO SEE THAT IF WE GUARANTEE OR MAKE ANY INVESTMENTS IN PROVIDING
FACILITIES FOR THOSE EXPORTS THAT WE CAN GET A RETURN ON THOSE
FACILITIES. I DON'T WANT YOU TO THINK THAT IRELAND'S AND AUSTRALIA'S
INTERESTS ARE TOTALLY OPPOSED TO EACH OTHER. CLEARLY
WE OBVIOUSLY ARE RIVALS IN AN EXTENT AND IRELAND WOULD HAVE
FIRST CLAIM. BUT IT IS VERY LIKELY THAT THE COMMUNITY WILL NEED
FROM SEASON TO SEASON MORE BEEF THAN IT CAN ITSELF PRODUCE, AND
AUSTRALIA WOULD CLEARLY BE A SUITABLE SUPPLIER BECAUSE OF PRICE
AND QUALITY.
Q'. Q D'ARCY OF 0-10 NETWORK: PRIME MINISTER, MY QUESTIONN
FOLLOWS ONE ASKED BY LAURIE OAKES EARLIER ON. WITHOUT ASKING
YOU TO COMMENT ON THE INTERNAL PROBLEMS OF ANY PARTICULAR
COUNTRY SIR, COULD I ASK YOU WHAT YOUR ATTITUDE IS GENERALLY
STOWARDS TERRORISM, ESPECIALLY OF THE TYPE THAT IS SEEN IN
RECENT DAYS? WELL OBVIOUSLY MY GOVERNMENT, LIKE EVERY GOVERNMENT
MUST DO ALL IT CAN TO STAMP OUT TERRORISM, TO IDENTIFY-THE PEOPLE
THAT ARE LIKELY TO PERPETRATE IT.
Q. MR PRIME MINISTER JUST TO CLARIFY YOUR ANSWER ON BEEF, DO
YOU WISH TO SEE AN END TO THE EEC BEEF EMBARGO OR NOT?
A TOTAL EMBARGO, CERTAINLY, OF COURSE. -I WOULD THINK
THAT OVER THE YEARS IT IS UNLIKELY THAT THE MOST AFFLUENT
PARTS OF THE WORLD, SUCH AS NORTH AMERICA AND WESTERN EUROPE AND
THE SOVIET UNION WILL BE SELF-CONTAINED IN BEEF. AUSTRALIA,
CLIMATICALLY AND BECAUSE OF HER AREA, CAN PRODUCE BEEF VERY
ADVANTAGEOUSLY. / 4 N 
11 P \ RTMI\' N I r 1 a ; N I\ 1 III
INWARD CABLEGRAM" V
\\ xSX
4-O. DU308
Q. DID YOU FIND MR PRIME MINISTER THAT MR COSGRAVE AGREED WITH
THAT POINT OF-VIEW.?
OH, WELL. WE DIDN'T GO INTO ANY DETAILS ON THESE MATTERS,
OBVIOUSLY WE-HAD A GENERAL DISCUSSION ON THESE MATTERS,.. AND. IT--
WAS VERY USEFUL FOR US TO . HAVETHE VIEW OF . IREL. AND -SI-NCE' IT' HAS
BEEN A VERY GREAT EXPORTER OF BEEF TO COUNTRIES WHICH. ARE NOW INTHE
MARKET.
Q. DID HE GIVE YOU ANY ASSURANCES?
NO, NO OF COURSE NOT, AND T. HEY WEREN'T SOUGHT.
NO, I'LL FINISH THE QUESTION..... REGARDING IRELAND'S
ATTITUDE TO PERHAPS AUSTRALIAN SALES OF SUGAR TO THE COMMON
MARKET. NO, THERE WAS SCARCELY ANY THERE WAS SOME DISCUSSION
ON THIS WITH THE TAOISEACH AND HIS MINISTERS, BUT NO, NO DETAIL
DISCUSSION LIKE THAT.
Q. PRIME MINISTER, GLENNON, IRISH INDEPDENDENT: IT IS REPORTED
HERE TH-AT OUR MINISTER OF LABOUR FAILED TO KEEP SOME APPOINTMENTS
. MADE BY YOUR GOVERNMENT WHEN HE WAS ON A VISIT TC AUSTRALIA SOME
WEEKS AGO. DID THIS QUESTION COME UP IN ANY WAY BETWEEN YOURSELF
AND THE TAOISEACH?
NO, IN NO WAY WHATEVER. NO WAY WHATEVER. MR O'LEARY WAS
A GUEST OF THF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHILE HE WAS IN AUSTRALIA.
IN PARTICULAR, HE SAW MY MINISTER FOR LABOUR. THAT IS THE
-IRISH MINISTER FOR LABOUR SAW THE AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR LABOUR.
AND I KNOW THAT MY MINISTER APPRECIATED THE EXCHANGE OF VIEWS.
FURTHERMORE, THE IRISH MINISTER FOR LABOUR, MR 0' LEARY ALSO
VISITED PAPUA NEW GUINEA. AND HIS VIEWS, HIS ASSESSMENT THERE
WERE HELPFUL TO MY GOVERNMENT.
Q. PRIME MINISTER. A QUESTION MOSTLY OF INTEREST TO AUSTRALIAN
READERS. FOLLOWING YOUR LONDON PRESS CONFERENCE AND YOUR COMMENTS
ON G. M. H. COULD I ASK YOU IF YOU BELIEVE THAT THE G. M. H.
DECISION TO SACK WORKERS IN AUSTRALIA WAS ONE IMPOSED ON THE
AUSTRALIAN COMPANY FROM DETROIT?
I DON'T KNOW.
Q. PRIME MINISTER, HAVING SAMPLED THE IRISH HOSPITALITY.....
P. M. WHAT, IS THAT SO OBVIOUS? / 5 
I) ' ARTMI N T 01 F ORlI N Al I AIRRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 5. O. BDEUTW3IER0IES8HN SITROUIASTN IHDRI SH BEERST. ILL LESBS ETWEEN
Q. WHAT IS YOUR OPINION OF GUINNESS STOUT? DO YOU THINK THAT
IT RATES WITH FOSTER'S LAWGER? I P
I WOULD HAVE THOUGHT THEY WERE... THEY WERE DIFFERENT LAC
SUBSTANCES. I WOULDN'T HAVE THOUGHT THERE WAS ANY SIMILARITY
BETWEEN IRISH STOUT AND IRISH BEER. STILL LESS BETWEEN IRISH
STOUT AND AUSTRALIAN BEER. I MEAN, I.. TE THE TAOISEACH'SEK AGO SOME
LUNCHEON TOOK PLACE IN A MONUMENT TO IRISHB E STODL ETNHO
VEAGH HOUSE. A MONUMENT TO GUINNESS PATRIOTISM AND
HOSPITALITY AND THE RESPONSE WHICH THE IRISH PEOPLE OVER THEIC
CENTURIES HAVE MADE TO THAT PRODUCT. A MAGNIFICENT PLACE,
EXCELLENT HOSPITAL IT Y. YEAR
Q. PRIME MINISTER HIGHFIELD, ABC. WAS THERE ANY DISCUSSION
BETWEEN YOURSELF AND THE IRISH AUTHORITIES ON THE QUESTION OF
AUSTRALIAN SUPPORT FOR TERRORISM HERE? SEVERAL WEEK AGO SOWMEIT
WEAPONS WERE FOUND WHICH WERE ALLEGED TO BE STOLEN FROME
AUSTRALIAN ARMY STORESE R I I
P. I M: NEVER MENTIONED.
Q. YOUR EXCELLENCY. HAVING IN MIND THE ECONOMIC COLLAPSE WHICH
IS FORECAST FOR THESE ISLANDS IN THE NEXT YEAR WOULD YOU
ENCOURAGE MORE EMMIGRATION FROM THESE ISLANDS TO AUSTRALIA IN
THE NEXT SAY TWO. OR THREE YEARS? WL H B
IRISH MIGRANTS HAVE BEEN VERY NUMEROUS TO AUSTRALIA,
AND I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THERE WILL CONTINUE TO BE A SIGNIFICANT
AND A VALUABLE MIGRATION FROM IRELAND TO AUSTRALIA. AUSTRALIAN....
MIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA WILL NOW DEPEND PRINCIPALLY ON PEOPLE IN
AUSTRALIA WHO NOMINATE CLOSE RELATIVES AS INDIVIDUALS. IT WILL
NOT BE OFFICIAL SPONSORSHIP SO MUCH AS INDIVIDUAL SPONSORSHIP.,
YOU MUST HAVE A JOB TO GO TO AND PARTICULARLY, OF COURSE, YOU
OUGHT TO BE A CLOSE RELATIVE. AND THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE IN
AUSTRALIA WHO HAVE CLOSE RELATIVES IN IRELAND. NEVERTHELESS,
I WOULD EXPECT THAT MIGRATION WILL NOT BE AS COPIOUS AS IT WAS,
SAY, TWENTY YEARS AGO. THERE IS NOT THE SAME SCOPE TO EMPLOY
MIGRANTS IN AUSTRALIA AS THERE USED TO BE AND AT THE SAME TIME
THE INTEGRATION OF EUROPE AS A WHOLE WILL MEAN, I EXPECT, THAT
FEWER PEOPLE WILL BE LEAVING EUROPE FOR OTHER CONTINENTS.
Q. PRIME MINISTER. AFTER EIGHT MONTHS IT IS FAIRLY CLEAR
THAT MR GAIR THRIVES ON THE DIPLOMATIC LIFE. CAN YOU TELL US
WHEN HIS TERM ENDS AT THE END OF THREE YEARS WILL HE BE OFFERED
ANOTHER DIPLOMATIC POST?
I'LL CONSIDER THAT IN MY NEXT GOVERNMENT.
Q. DID THE TAOISEACH ACCEPT YOUR INVITATION.... / 6 
S-DlIDEARTIn-NT OF FOR(, EJN AFIA\ IRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 6-O. DU308
PARDON?
Q. DID THE TAOISEACH ACCEPT YOUR INVITATION TO GO TO AUSTRALIA.
-"-AND. IF HE DID WHEN IS HE GOING?
AH WELL., I BELIEVE THAT THE TAOISEACH IS SERIOUSLY
CONSIDERING THE POSSIBILITY OF VISITING AUSTRALIA. MIND YOU
AUSTRALIANS ARE NOT IN A VERY STRONG POSITION TO PRESS THE
PRIME MINISTER OF IRELAND TO VISIT AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE IT'S
33 YEARS AND MORE SINCE AN AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER LAST
VISIT-ED IRELAND. HOWEVER, I DON'T SUPPOSE THERE'S EVER
BEEN A VISIT BY AN IRISH PRIME MINISTER TO. AUSTRALIA. I WOULD
-TIN( K IT WOUL-D BE VERY APPROPRIATE IT WOULD UNDOUBTEDLY BE
VE-RY WARMLY RECEIVED, IF A TAOISEACH WERE TO VISIT AUSTRALIA,
LECUSE AUSTRALIA HAS PEEN ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL IRISH COLONIES.
THE ONLY LARGER ONES WOULD BE THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA.
Q. MR WHITLAM. POWER, IRISH INDPENDENT: DO YOU SEE YOURSELF
COMING BACK FOR A LONGER VISIT TO IRELAND? THIS IS YOUR SECOND
TIME HERE ISN'T IT AND EACH TIME IT WAS ONLY FOR A ONE-DAY VISIT?
P. M. NO IT'S MY FOURTH TIME I'VE BEEN HERE. THIS IS THE
FOURTH TIME I'VE VISITED IRELAND. I CAME HERE IN 1962, 1967
AND IN JANUARY 1972. FOR A MAN WHO HASN'T GOT A DROP OF
IRISH BLOOD IN HIS VEINS, I'M A FAIRLY REGULAR VISITOR.
IN-TERJECTION: AMBASSADOR GAIR.. YOU'RE AN R. C. A REGULAR CUSTOMER.
P. M. AM AN ADHERENT I AM AN ADHERENT OF THE
CHURCH OF IRELAND. I AM A SEPARATED BROTHER.
AMBASSADOR GAIR: WE'RE PRAYING FOR YOU EVERY DAY.
THE..-. I'VE COME TO KNOW THE LEADING MEMBERS OF THE IRISH
GOVERNMENT AND THE IRISH OPPOSITION ON THESE VISITS AND SEVERAL
OF THEM HAVE VISITED AUSTRALIA. MR COSTELLO AND MR O'LEARY OF
COURSE HAVE BEEN THERE THIS YEAR. SO IT IS VERY EASY FOR ME
TO PICK UP A CONVERSATION WITH MR LYNCH OR MR COSGRAVE BECAUSE
I'VE HAD SEVERAL -CONVERSATIONS WITH THEM OVER THE YEARS.
Q. DO YOU SEE YOURSELF HAVING AN EXTENDED HOLIDAY HERE AT
SOME STAGE? I THINK IT WOULD BE VERY PLEASANT.
INTERJEC'i ON: AMBASSADOR GAIR. I'VE INVITED HIM TO COME OVER.
Q. MR WHITLAM CAN YO TELL ME YOUR COMMINIQUE REFERS TO THE
FACT THAT YOU DISCUSSED WITH THE TAOISEACH THE SUMMIT MEETINGS
OF HEADS OF GOVERNMENT IN PARIS. CAN YOU ELABORATE ON THAT A
/ 7 
INWARD ( CABlEGRAM 7-0. DU308
LITTLE BIT? YOU SHOULD GET THAT FROM THE TAOISEACH HIMSELF. BUT HE..
YOU KNOW, THERE'S NO POINT IN ME, AT SECOND HAND, GIVING THE
ACCOUNT WHICH HE'S ABLE SO WELL TO GIVE SINCE HE AND DR FITZGERALD
PARTICIPATED IN THEM. I'M... I'LL BE VERY GLAD TO HEAR THROUGH
THE AMBASELADOR AND OVER THE NEXT FEW MONTH WHEN MR... DR
FITZGiEH. ALD WILL BE PRESIDING.
Q. 1 JL. T WASN'T TOO CLEAR WHAT THIS REFERENCE WAS. I UNDERSTAND
NOW.
Polo: ARE VERY INIERESTED, NATURALLY, IN HAVING THE IRISH
ASSESLMUhT OF TRENDS IN THE COMMUNITY.
Q. MR UHITLAM, ARE YOU MISSING THE AUSTRALIAN CHRISTMAS?
P. M. Oh, I DON'T MIND CHRISTMAS IN THE BRITISH ISLES...
CHRISTMAS IS I'M AMONG FRIENDS HERE... BOSOM OF MY FAMILY.
ENDS. RINI" :' INISTER
REI I ISTER
FOREIC: N AFFAIRS
MIN AND DEPT DEFENCE
JIO
MIN AND DEPT LABOR AND IMMIGRATION ( C)
MIN AND DEPT OVERSEAS TRADE
MIN AND DEPT MINERALS AND ENERGY
TREAShRER AND TREASURY
PMS PRESS OFFICE
PMS PRIVATE OFFICE
AIS ( C)
PM AND C
MR B JOHNS ( PM AND C)
MR MENADUE
ADAA ( C)
MIN1 AND DEPT AGRICULTURE R. GRIFFITr
S3 EC AeM
3 1 EC -c15I\ ii
nr v~
NoO C ~ Ef
i. j
1 1 \ 11 1-N1l. 1N 1 M I ( W I \ 1 I l)* b'S1 



PRIME MINISTER'S-PREJS ReLEASE
PRIME MINISTER'S MISAC-E TO TIIE PEOPLE OF DARWIN
The following is the text of a message
sent from London by the Prime Minister to Mr J. H. Nelson,
Administrator of the Northern Territory, Darwin, and to
Mr HI. Brennan, Mayor of Darwin:
" I am horrified by the appalling loss of life
and the destruction that have befallen Darwin on Christmas
day. The only city on Australian soil to suffer
ex: tensive , daiiage froL,. enemy action in -, ar is now the ocene
of one of our worst natural disasters.
I am in touch with my Ministers and officials
concerning relief measures and have directed that notling
be spared to bring aid to the homeless and afflicted.
The full resources of the new disaster relief
organisation which the government established this year
will be at the disposal of the local authorities and people
of Darwin. Do not hesitate to request whatever assistance
may be needed. On behalf of the government I pledge a detc-rined
and unrem itting effort to rebuild your city and relieve
suffering. Please convey to the people of Darwin my own profound
sense of shock . at this grievous and unseasonal calamity, and
my heartfelt personal sympathy to all the victims.
E. G. Whitlam."
26 December 1974 



56
AUSTRALiA.
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 425
27 December 1974
PERTH AIRPORT STATEMENT
The Prime Minister released the following statement
on his arrival at Perth Airport this afternoon.
" I have been appalled by the reports I have had of
the loss of life and damage in Darwin.
I am going to see the extent of the destruction and
shall then consult with the Ministers who will be directly
concerned with helping the citizens of Darwin and re-constructing
their city. I have called a specLl Cabinet meeting in Sydney on
Monday. I will make a statement after the Cabinet.
I want to extend my sympathy to those who have suffered
in Darwin and promise again that we will do all in our power
to restore and re-build the city as soon as possible and help
those who need our assistance."
Mr. Whitlam flew immediately to Alice Springs where
he will stay overnight. He will confer there with Mr. John
Menadue, of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
who will accompany him to Darwin tomorrow morning.
Mr. Whitlam is due to leave Alice Springs at 6.00 a. m.
tomorrow and is scheduled to arrive in Darwin at 8.05 a. m.
He will spend the whole of the day in the Darwin area, returning
to Mt. Isa at night. On Sunday, Mr. Whitlam will fly from
Mt. Isa to Sydney where the special Cabinet meeting will be
held on Monday.
CANBERRA, AC. T.
0 ' 4-



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 423
27 December 1974
DARWIN EMERGENCY: MESSAGE FROM STATE PREMIERS
The Prime Minister's office has released the text of
messages received today from the Victorian and Western Australian
Premiers offering assistance in the Darwin emergency.
Mr. Hamer's message reads: " I am happy to offer any
resources of the Victorian Government which may be of use in
the Darwin disaster. These resources include emergency
accommodation, medical help, hospital facilities and technical
assistance. Please advise me of any help required through
our State Emergency Service or Disaster Control Victoria Police."
Sir Charles Court's message reads: " As a State which
has felt the devastation and the anguish of cyclones on many
occasions we can understand the feelings of the Darwin people
at this time. All Western Australians send their deepest
sympathy and assurance that any assistance we can give is
available for the mere asking. Please advise if there is any
way you feel we can help. We have many people experienced in
cyclone damage emergencies."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 420
27 December 1974
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO DARWIN
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, said today that after
his arrival in Perth late afternoon, Friday 27 December,
he would fly onto Alice Springs where he would stay overnight.
Mr. Whitlam is due to leave Alice Springs at 6.00 a. m.
on Saturday 28 December, arriving in Darwin at 8.05 a. m.
He will be accompanied by Mr. John Menadue, Secretary of the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and members of
his staff. The Prime Minister will spend the whole of the day in the
Darwin area. So that rescue operations and accommodation
facilities will not be inconvenienced by his visit he will
leave in the late evening for Mt. Isa.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



-ij AUSrRAIIAAt
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 422
27 December 1974
ARRANGEMENTS FOR MEETING IMMEDIATE CASH NEEDS OF PEOPLE
EVACUATED FROM DARWIN
On his arrival at Perth Airport this afternoon, the
Prime Minister released details of measures being taken to
meet the special needs of the people who are being evacuated
from Darwin. He said that a meeting of representatives of relevant
Departments had been held in Canberra this morning to discuss
relief measures and co-ordination. The Minister for Social
Security, Mr. Hayden, had provided details of the arrangements
involving immediate cash needs of those evacuated from Darwin.
The Prime Minister said: " We have decided that the
Department of Social Security will make available to all Darwin
residents who are evacuated amounts equivalent to two weeks
special benefit of $ 31 a week plus $ 5.50 a week for each child.
These payments are being made as an extraordinary
measure designed to assist people to meet their immediate
urgent money needs for daily living.
The payments will be made at the seven emergency
centres that are being set up in the State mainland capital
cities and at Alice Springs and Mt. Isa, as well as from
metropolitan and country Social Security. offices."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



USTRF A 1.1A&amp;
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 424
27 December 1974
DARWIN EMERGENCY: MESSAGES FROM HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
The Prime Minister's office has released the text of
messages received from Hleads of Government expressing concern
and sympathy at the devastation caused by the Darwin cylcone.
New Zealand: " On behalf of my Cabinet colleagues and
the Government and the people of New Zealand, please extend
our deepest sympathy to the people of Darwin who have suffered
so grievously as a result of the recent cylcone.
Bill Rowling, Prime Minister."
Papua New Guinea: " I am deeply grieved and saddened
to learn of the unfortunate cylcone disaster that has fallen
upon the people and the city of Darwin. The Government and
people of Papua New GuirieZ extend to you and the citizens of
Darwin our deepest sympathy and sorrow for the loss of lives
and property. M. T. Somare, Chief Minister."
Fiji: " I am deeply concerned to hear of the tragic loss
of life and destruction aL Darwin caused by cyclone Tracy.
On behalf of the Government and people of Fiji, and personally
I extend to you, to the people of Australia and the bereaved
and suffering, our deepest sympathy at the sad time and trust
that the mammoth task of rehabilitation and reconstruction will
be speedily effected. RatVJ Sir Kamisese Mara."
Nauru: " The Government and people of Nauru are deeply
conscious of the tragic luss of life and widespread distress
caused by the disaster at Darwin and join me in sending the
Government and people of Australia our hoartfelt condolences.
Hammer de Roburt, President.
Ireland: " On beha] C of the Govern~ ment and myself, I
wish to convey to you our great sense of. shock at the disaster
at Darwin and to express the deepest sympathy of all the
people of Ireland. Liam Cosgrove."
Grenada: " Deeply saddened by the news of the disaster
at Darwin. Government and people of Grenr. da share and lighten
the burden of your grief at this time. Please extend our
condolences to the bereaved and our sympathy to victims of the
catastrophe who we pray would receive fromn God the strength and
fortitude to meet this tragedy which might be a precursor to a 
-2-
brighter future. Eric M. Gairy, Prime Minister."
The Indonesian Ambassador, Mr. Hertasning, and the
British High Commissioner, Sir Morrice James, have also
expressed their shock and distress at the Darwin tragedy.
In a letter to the Minister for Defence, Sir Morrice James
offered the use of an R. A. F. Hercules to help in evacuating
people from Darwin and in carrying relief supplies into
Darwin. He further offered to make available any Royal
Naval ships in the vicinity to help in relief work. These
include two frigates, two tankers and a stores ship. Sir
Morrice said he hoped that many of these expressions of
willingness to provide, or investigate the possibility of
providing, help from British resources will be translated
into positive action as a tangible expression of the
sympathy of the British people for their friends in Australia. 



Press Release No. 4126
DARWIN DISASTER MESSAGES OF CONDOLENCE
The Prime Minister today released the texts of
further messages of condolence on the Darwin cyclone.
People's Republic of China
" Shocked to learn that the city of Darwin wa~ s hit
by a terrific cyclone with disastrous consequences. On
behalf of the Chinese Government and people, I wish to
express our heartfelt sympathy and solicitude to you,
and through you, to the Australian Government and the people
in Darwin. Chou En-lai, Premier of the State Council of
the People's Republic of China."
Lesotho " It is with the deepest sense of shock and sorrow
that I and the. Government and people of Lesotho hasten to offer
to you, your Government and the people of Australia our
heartfelt condolences on the tragic devastation which has
overtaken the city of Darwin and its people. Our sincere
sympathy is extended to you and all those who have been
bereaved and rendered homeless by this disaster. Please be
so gracious as to accept the sum of R1000 from the Kingdom
of Lesotho as a token of relief to those in need.
Leabua Jonathan, Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Lesotho."
Arab Republic of Egypt
" On behalf of the Government and people of the
Arab Republic of* Egypt, of all Egyptian residents in Australia,
of the members of the Embassy and my family and in my name
I wish to express to you, to the Government and people of
Australia our deepest sympathy at the tragedy which struck
Darwin. We were shocked by the severity of the valuable human loss.
Your efforts will undoubtedly alleviate the intensity of
the disasters. A. W. Marzouk, Ambassador of Egypt",.
Papua New Guinea ( additional message)
" As further news reports of the extent of the
devastation in Darwin reach me, my sympathy for the people
in the devastated city of Darwin is deepening. Please be
assured that Papua New Guinea is only too willing to assist
in aiding in the rehabilitation of the effected area. You
are aware of our limited resources. However, I would be only
too pleased to assist if possible in any way you might care
to suggest. Once again please convey the sympathy of the Papua
New Guinea Government and all Papua New Guineans on this tragic
C eent M. T. Somare, Chief Minister." 
Bangladesh " We are deeply grieved to hear about the
extensive damages to life and property caused to Darwin
City by one of the worst cyclones in the living memory
of Australia. Please accept the deepfelt sympathies
from my own behalf and on behalf of the Government and
the people of Bangladesh. -Sheikh Muribur Rahman,
Prime Minister of the
People's Republic of
Bangladesh."
Canada " I have been shocked to learn of the tragic
loss of life and destruction of property suffered in
Darwin on Christmas Day. My deepest personal sympathy
a!-d that of all Canadians goes to those who have suffered
so cruelly and at a time when most thoughts are directed
in the Christmas tradition to the joys of home and family.
-Pierre Elliott Trudeau,
Prime Minister of Canada"
Seychelles " On behalf of Chief Minister, Government and
people of Seychelles, please accept our sincere sympathy
in cyclonic disaster which has struck city of Darwin
where number of Seychellois reside.
-Allan, Governor of Seychelles"
Pakistan " We have been deeply shocked and grieved at the
news of heavy loss of life and utter devastation caused by
the cyclone which hit the north Australian port of Darwin.
We in Pakistan share with Your Excellency and the people
of Australia your deep sense of loss. I offer on behalf
of the Government and the people of Pakistan and on my own
behalf our sincerest syr. athies and heartfelt condolences
to Your Excellency, to the people affected by the cyclone
and to the people of Australia. -Zulfikar Ali Bhutto,
Prime Minister of Pakistan"
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF BURMA
" I am greatly distressed to learn about the loss
of life and damagje caused by the disastrous cyclone in
Darwin. I extend to Your Excellency and through you to
the people of the affected area heartfelt sympathies.
-U Sein Win, Prime Minister" 
3.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OP GERMANY
" With deepfelt sorrow I received the news about
the cyclone which has struck the area around Port Darwin.
May I, also in the name of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Germai-y, express my deepest sympathy for the
victims of this unexpected catastrophy. -Helmut Schmidt,
Federal Chancellor
29 December 1974 



5* 7
NATIONAL BROADCAST AND PRESS CONFERENCE
ON DARWIN DISASTER, SYDNEY, 30 DECEMBER 1974
PRIME MINISTER:...... will have the responsibility for looking
after-the people of Darwin, most of whom, of course, have been
now evacuated from the city. And the Minister for the
Northern Territory, Dr. Rex Patterson, will have prime responsibility
for the reconstruction of the city. As you know, it
had already been decided that there should be a payment of
special benefits to families which were evacuated from Darwin
for the two weeks after they left, that there should be free
accommodation in hostels for those few weeks. We have now
decided that the special benefits, $ 31.00 per week and $ 5.50
per child will also be paid for the first two weeks also
free of means test for the wives and children who have remained
in Darwin and we have also decided that special benefits will be
paid for women who have been evacuated for Darwin after the
first two weeks for a further month. Mr. Hayden will be
responsible for the general question of the movement, and
the return of the evacuees and former residents. As you know
the Government has undertaken the expense of evacuation and will
undertake the expense for return. And Mr. Hayden will look
aftex the we! lfare of the evacuees and the former cititens
while they are still away from Darwin.
To deal with the reconstruction of the city, its been
essential to create some new structure. The existing
Departments and instrumentalities, both those which are
Federal Departments and instrumentalities and those which were
set up in the Territory itself, are obviously unable to cope
with the new situation, the most serious natural disaster ev. cr
to strick Australia. We have decided to establ. sc a Par-,: 1n
Reconstruction Commission, It will be composed of representatives,
of the Department of the Northern Territory, of Urban and
Regional Development and Housing and Construction, of nominees
of the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly and the
Darwin City Council and there will be a Chairman, I~ m very
happy and proud to announce that Sir Leslie Thiess has accepted
the Chairmanship of the Commission. It will be established by
Statute as soon as the Parliament reassembles on the 11
February. We would hope for the co-operation of both sides of 
-2-
in seeing that the legislation is passed promptly. It will
be essential that the legislation take effect early, so that
plans and performance can go ahead for the new city without
any delay at all. We are appointing the members of the
Commission as an interim commission forethwith. Dr. Patterson
is in~ touch this afternoon with both the Legislative Assembly
and the City Council asking them to appoint their nominees
the Ministers concerned, Dr. Patterson himself, Mr. Uren,
Mr. Johnson, are appointing the nominees of their Departments
forthwith. and Sir Leslie Thiess has accepted as I have mentioned
to you, the appointment. He is one of Australia's great
achievers. You remember when a quarter of a century ago the
Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority was established,
the only people who were able to fulfill the contracts which
the Authority was le~ tting were overseas companies, Americans,
British, French, Norweigen, and consortions of such companies.
And at last Sir Leslie Thiess, in that world-wide competition
secured contracts and carried out some of the largest of the
operations on the Snowy. He has, of course, been a pioneer,
in the North, in very many areas, discovering, developing the
natural resources of our country. He's harness skilled from
all around the world, he has lead consortions of Australian as
well as overseas companied in that respect. I believe that
there is no man in Australia who would be better fitted to
bring together the whole strain of Departmental and representative
people who will be involved in reconstructing this city,
planning-and achieving this new gateway to Australia. * And he is
a very great man in the engineering and the management field
and a man who has the respect of everybody in Australia and
particularly in the North. He's done very many great things in
his life. This will be one of the greatest.
Now until the Act is passed. early next month, the
interim Commission can be advisory only, but nevertheless, we
expect that all the bodies concerned, the National and the
Territories instrumentalities and Departments will co-operated
with getting the plans underway very quickly indeed. 
-3-
It will be necessary of course to have regard to
, the whole use of the land in the Darwin metropolitan area.
The Commission will have in its Charter the best use that
can b6 made of the land of the public buildings, which in
general are still standing, in sound condition, and also
the type of new domestic construction which is required.
It's too glib to say, as some people have, that the houses
in Darwin were gerry-built. They wereno more gerry-built
than the houses in any other Australian capital. Unfortunately
however they were not appropriate to a cyclonic coast and
so therefore we rely on the experience of many authorities
as the CSIRO building research unit, there is the faculty
of engineering in the James Cook University,* and there aremany
professional organisations which have offered their
services in planning the new Darwin, to see that it is a
place where people can go back and resume their lives with
confidence. The Commission, the Reconstruction Commission, the
Darwin Reconstruction Commission, we expect will be established
for a period of five years. We want to give confidence to
* people who have lived in Darwin and-to those who are iminded
* to work-and live there, that this job will be seen throughto
completion, but we also want to give confidence that. we
expect the job will be able to be fully and satisfactorily and
6o~ undily achieved within a reasonable space of time.
There has been a very great deal-of public support
for vairious appeals. The Australian Government will naturally
accepL its proper responsibility in rehabilitation of the
families and reconstruction of the structures. Fortunately
most of them were insured. They were covered by normal insurance
policies, by contrast with the situation at the time of the
Brisbane floods, whe'n mozt of tfi. private structures were not
covered by insurance. There have been a very great number of
contributions, Lord Mayors, Premiers appeals and the whole
range of charitable, voluntary organisations * in Australia. 
-4-
I should imagine that there has never been an appeal which
has drawn supportfrom so many regions in Australia as well
as the whole garnet of voluntary organisation. To give
the first instance which came to my notice between midday
on Thursday and 11 p. m. on Friday, the citizens of Alice
Springs, about 13,000 in number contributed $ 105,000 in a
radio appeal. If that is repeated throughout Australia
then the people of Darwin will know directly and promptly
the feelings that their fellow citizens throughout the
nation have for their plight. The Minister for Northern
Territory, Dr. Patterson has been asked to co-ordinate the
various appeals. There are many foreign countries which
have contributed, some European, large nations, some quite small
African nations. Throughout our neighborhood, all the island
states in the Indian ocean and the South Pacific have sent us
messages. Now the Cabinet was particularly wanting to place on
record its appreciation of the Natural Disasters Organisation
under Major-General Alan Stretton. He's a major-General,
because hes career hitherto has been in the Armed Forces, but
he is Ddrwin'in a civilian capacity. There is not martial
law in Darwin, the whole of the organisation in that city has,,
been on civilian lines but the authority is exercised by civilian
police and all the citizens of Darwin who remain there have
contributed towards the rehabilitation of families the
reconstruction of the city. It's a great civilian effQrt.
Now the Natural Disasters Organisation was only authorised
last February. It came into operation on the 21 October. This
is been it's baptisimal fire, and I believe that all Australians
can be proud indeed of the way that this organisation under the
Director-General, Major-General Stretton has responded. This
disaster happened on Christman Day in the most remote part of
Australia and relief was under way in record. time. Over 7,000
people were evacuated by air alone at the height of the
evacuation exercise and we want to place on record the
improvisation, the tireless efforts of the Armed Forces and of the
airlines, Qantas, Ansett and TAA have never carried so many
people in such difficult conditions. And many of you will have
seen, as : I did at Mascot, and at Adelaid, the way they were 
received on arrival by Government Departments and by the
whole range of volunteer organisations. So the Cabinet
wanted to record its appreciation which we believe is
shared by the whole Australian people, at the performance in
extraordinarily remote difficult conditions of Australia's
newly established Natural Disasters Organisation.
Are there any questions you wish to ask me about the
Darwin situation?
QUESTION: Yourvisit to the airport yesterday was obviously
well recieved. And provided comfort to the refugees who were
there. In view of the fact don't you think that in time of
distress your continued presence in Australia would. be moreappreciated
by the-refugees and Australians-generally than a
return to Europe?
PRIME MINISTER: No I do not. I've told you the Ministers
who will have prime responsibility in these matters. I have
committments on behalf of the nation with seven governments
in Europe and two in Asia. Obviously I should honour those
conmmittments. The arrangments have now been made for
Australia and the evacuees from Darwin by air have nearly all"
arrived now. They' re in good hands.
QUESTION: Could not your Foreign Minister handly that work
equally as well?
PRIME MINISTER: As I have said before there are many things
that can only-be done at the level of Head of Government, that
is understood in every other country, it should be understood
in Australia.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, are you aware that there has been
some breakdown in the services and the handling of people when
they have actually been arriving in places like . Sydney, for
instance, baggage has come in unlabled, there's been a suff it
of funds which has be en operating, in fact overlaping one another,
we' ye also had the situation of too many goods being demanded and
accommodation probably knocked back by people who were originally 
-6-
prepared to offer it. Do you think in the light of that there
. should be some sort of post mortem in the operation, not from
Darwin where it seems to have been excellent, but in the
capital cities themselves?
PRIME MINISTER:* I believe your questions would give a completly
wrong impression. I saw hundreds of people in. Sydney, at
Mascot yesterday, I saw many scores, some hundreds at Adelaide
on Saturday night and my impression was that the people
waiting for relatives and friends and the people who were
arriving were very pleased indeed with the arrangements which
had been made by the airlines, by the Departments and by the
Civil Voluntary Organisations. it was a remarkably effective
effort at co-ordination.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Sir has it been determined yet whether
Darwin will be built in situe or, making use of existing
infra structure or will the town be built elsewhere. Will some
of the northern suburbs be bulldozed as Dr. Patterson is
reported to have suggested. Have any important decisions along
these lines been decided yet?
PRIME MINISTER: In general terms Darwin will be reconstructured
where it i's. The particular places where installations or
suburbs will be built or rebuilt iill of course be left to the'
Darwin Reconstruction Commission. There is a very valuable
infra structure in Darwin. The public buildings are basically
quite sound, they can be restored quite promptly. It still
has to be ascertained how many people will want to live in
Darwiin and also it has to be ascertained in what areas they can
be most appropriately housed. So in general terms Darwin will
be reconstructured where it is. After all it is a big port, it
is a big airport and everywhere in the tropics people like to
live on the coast. It's true that you don't get cyclones 100
kilometres from the coast, but people don't like the climate
100 kilometres from the coast. So Darwin, as a general area
will be reconstructured. No question about thAt, but of course
I wouldn't I specify which suburbs will be rebuilt or which
new suburbs would be built. That will be decided, 1 ~ u2hupe
after proper consideration by this representative Reconstruction 
-7-
Commission which we're establishing within the next couple of
days in an interim form and which I hope will become a
Statutory body in the middle of February.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, quite apart from the location of
Darwin, will the decision on what kind of city Darwin will
be in the future, be a matter for the Government or for this
newly constituted authority?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it will be finally of course to the
Government like all these decisions, but it will be on the
advice, after investigation and report by the Darwin
Reconstruction Commission.
QUESTION: Will any attempt be made to repopulate Darwin t o the
extent that it was prior to the cylcone, Does the Government
regard the population of Darwin previously to have been adequate
in excess,-or what size.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, this is a matter for people themselves
to decide.. Nobody can be made to leave Darwin or to go to Darwin
3or to go back to Darwin, That is for people themselves to
decide. one of the things I would imagine to be ascertained
is how many of the people who have left Darwin want to go back.
I found some yesterday quite determed to go back they love
the place. There are others who, somewhat fewer in number it
seemed to me, who would not go back.
QUESTION: One of the persons who I talked to in Darwin who
was sticking with his house, said that he didn't want to leave
until such time as he was assured or had some information that
the Government and his insurance company would help him rebuild
it. The insurance companies, we were told in Darwin yesterday,
have agreed that they're going to pay out on these claims
on the normal claims, but have you had any information as to
whether they are under strain in meeting the size of the claims
that will be made from Darwin, the insurance companies that is?
PRIME MINISTER: I have no doubt whatever that-the insurance
companie will honour the contracts which householders and 
-8-
business people have with them. I would also expect that all-
' the insurance companies would be in a financial position to
meet the claims. After all within the last year the Government
has passed legislation guaranteeing the soundness of insurance
such as there has been for the last 30 years, guaranteeing the
soundness of banks. So that nobody should be in any doubt that
hisinsurance company will honour the claim. The Minister for
Repatriation and Compensation. Senator Wheeldon is investigating
the whole of this matter. It i's of interest, of course,
that in Darwin there were a very great number of people who
were injured who under the law as it stands, including all the
forms of compulsory insurance that there are inAustralia for
third-party insurance on the roads, or workers compensation
insurance in shops and factories, all those people that in
Darwin wouldn't have been covered thatway,. this was a natural
disaster. Senator Wheeldon says you can't sue a cyclone,
but under the legislation which he's introduced in the Senate
it's gone through the House of Representatives already as you
know, the National Compensation Bill, anybody who is injured
in Darwin, for any cause whatever would be assured of a proper
income as long as he remained injured. This is a very clear
example of the necessity of having a National Compensation
Scheme. QUESTION; Did Cabinet receive an estimate of the total cost of
Government assistance to Darwin.
PRIME MINISTER : No none whatever, there will two Bills brought
before Parliament when it meets on the 11 February. One will be
to-establishthis Darwin Reconstruction Commission. The other
will be to made a special appropriation for all the expenses
of one kind or another for the remainder bf this financial year
for Darwin. and some of these matters will be expenses for
personal propoerty, some will be for social service payments,
as many of these payments are being made on more generous
conditions that apply at the moment, without means tests, and
so on. And all the matters which the Government will have to
finance will be in that appropriation Bill and I would expect
that within the four weeks the Cabinet we'll be having thenA,
all those amounts will be quantified for the remainder of this 
-9-
financial year. So there was not an estimate made today
-but arrangements were made for the estimates all to be in
hand within four weeks. and there will be an appropriation
Bill Introduced to meet all those expenses.
QUESTION; Will the people of Darwin be allowed to go back and
rebuild as soon as they feel they are able to, or will they
need prior permission from the Reconstruction Authority?
PRIME MINISTER: The Reconstruction Commission will clearly
have the responsbility where it is best to have houses, what
sort of houses. It would be quite irresponsible to allow
people to build houses of the type which didn't withstand the
cyclone and it would be no comfort to some people to rebuild
in areas which may be developed for other purposes. Clearly
the whole question of the use of land is one of the things
which will have to be scrutinised and determinied much more
carefully than in the past.
QUESTION; Will that include the timetable for the people
to be allowed back into the area?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm only concerned with where the houses wo~ ild
be built. After all nobody can be prevented from going anywhere
in Australia. Nobody can be compelled to go anywhere in Australia.
There are at the moment-, for the next week or so, some
limitati ons on movrement into Darwin because theairfield can't take
all the movements required of it. Incidentally, I should have
mentioned to you that Major-General Stretton and the Natural
Disasters Organisation will hand over their responsibilities on
Thursday. The Governor-General will be up there at that time
I expect and the Department of the Northern Territory will
resume its normal role in administering the city.
QUESTION; Are you aware that politics has entered into this
situation with your Minister for the Media, Senator McClelland
refusing to co-operate in helping TV commercial networks get
film back to Sydney, becau . se quote" They opposed! his change of
Media control in the Senate" 
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe this. I brought some films
back yesterday, the previous night, on Saturday night, for
various commercial things and Senator McClelland was
up there, and so also was the Head of his Department and the
head of the ABC. I don't appreciate aspertions being made
about my Ministers like this. I have no reason to believe
th allogation you make has any foundation whatever.
QUESTION; Does the answer to the question before the last,
about the appropriation this year, mean the the Government
intends to finance the rehabilitation of Darwin without
cutting back other programmes?
PRIME MINISTER: At this stage welfare payments, I wouldn't
think there's any justrification for cutting back on
expenditure. After all no expenditures were cut back on the
Queensland floods. There may later clearly have to be some
postponement of other structural expenditure, for instance
there's a limited number of town planners available and one
then has to determine the priority for their services. But
the immediate matters, the matters which I was stating would
be in thz Appropriation Bill introduced on 11 Februrary are
of the welfare character. Now just because you have to make
unexpected payments to people who have to be evacuated from
Darwin or who are homeless in Darwin, is no excuse clearly for
reducing welfare payments for which Parliament has already
made provision.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, at a different political level
from the one raised earlier, to what extent do the Government's
plans to reconstruct Darwin and rehabilitate its citizens
depend upon the aquiscence of the Opposition on matters such
as Senator Wheeldon's Compensation Bill, the establishment of
-it1!. rities etc.' Have you been in touch with Mr. Snedden and
Senator Withers for instance? Have they indicated that they are
quite wLiling to go ahead with...
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that either have expressed a
view about the National Compensation Bill. I won't assume
they';; ,-oe IL. It's been referred unamimously by the
J I t r 
-11
Senate to a Senate Conmmittee I think the arguments for the
National Compensation Bill are overwhelming, not the least
of the arguments is the fact that so many people as the law
stands now everywhere in Australia have no compensation
at all for injuries which they suffer in events such as this.
Now if the Bill was already in then people would be entitled
to this compensation forethwith, you wouldn't have to make any
special provision whatever.
QUESTION: Surely it's going to take some time for the Darwin
Reconstruction Commission to get down to the nitty-gritty of
actually building houses. What temporary arrangements are you
making for accommodation for the people who want to stay in
Darwin? PRIME MINISTER: There are some buildingsthere such as motels
which can be fairly quickly habitable. But I would think that
this Commission will produce results as quickly as is possible
to do so. There are a great number of people who have to
contribute to its deliberations and Sir Leslie Thiess will get
them working together quickly and effectively. 



STATEMvENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER DR J. F. CAIRNS
The Acting Prime Minister Dr Cairns said today
he had been in communication with the Director-General of
the Natural Disasters Organisation, Major General Stretton.
General Stretton advised Dr Cairns that in his opinion the
emergency situation in Darwin was at an end and that it was
appropriate that the administration of the city be handed back
to the normal authorities.
General Stretton advised Dr Cairns that Darwin was
secure and was functioning in an orderly way. Dr Cairns said
he had authorised General Stretton to make the arrangements
necessary to hand over to the administrator of the Northern
Territory, Mr Jock Nelson, and to make the arrangements necessary
for General Stretton and his staff to leave Darwin.
" The work of General Stretton has been a great credit
to himself and to his staff," Dr Cairns said. " A tremendous
amount has been achieved in a shorter time than could be
expected. I express to General Stretton and to his staff
the gratitude of the Australian Government and of the Australian
people." Dr Cairns said he was satisfied with General Stretton ' s
advice to him that the job of the N. D. O. had been done and that
the normal authorities could resume responsibility in Darwin.
CANBERRA 31 December 1974. 



rt)
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 427
31 December 1974
DARWIN RELIEF: NAURU CHEQUE FOR DARWIN RELIEF
President Hammer de Roburt of Nauru has presented a
cheque for $ A100p, 000( to the Australian Government for Darwin
relief purposes. President de Roburt made the presentation yesterday to
Australia's representative in Nauru, following a ministerial
statement to Parliament.
The President's statement said: " The House will be
aware of the shocking disaster caused by a cyclone which struck
the city of Darwin early on Christmas Day.
On behalf of the Government and the people of the
Republic I have sent a message of sympathy to the Governor
General. Since then more revelations of the magnitude of the
disaster have been coming in and it is now clear that seldom,
if ever, has Australia been stricken by a catastrophe of such
intensity. Many people have lost their lives many others are
missing and thousands are homeless and have had to be evacuated
from the city.
The consequences in termins of material damage and broken
lives are incalculable and the Cabinet hasodecided that the
Republic should offer material assistance in addition to our
heartfelt sympathy."
Nauru has also offered the use of its Government aircraft
for evacuation purposes.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



The Netherlands
Speech by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, MrJoop den Uyl,
at a dinner given in honour of the
The Hagueon 4January 1975
The honour and the pleasure of receiving you in
the Netherlands, Mr Prime Minister, Mrs
Whitlam and our other distinguished Australian
guests, is due, no doubt, to the close relations
between our countries and co-operation in various
international fields. May I add that the
pleasure of receiving you at this very moment
has perhaps also something to do with the fact
that there are similarities in the situation of your
Government, Mr Prime Minister, and that of
mine. I am not referring to the fact that some people
have written to you in the past few months that
we had a crisis every week. And I will not suggest
that you are having the same experience.
But there are some resemblances in the situation
of your government and that of mine and I
will point those out later on.
Well, the relationship between our countries
goes back much further than the recent past. I
need not remind you of this. You all know the
Dutch discovered Tasmania, and well we know
you had at least discovered this country before
your present visit, and I am very happy about
that. Well, turning to the Australia of today, we
know that about 150,000 Netherlands
nationals have settled there since 1950, and
have forged even closer ties between us than in
the past. These Dutch immigrants face with you
the tremendous challenges of terrain, climate
and distance in the development of national
resources. If I am not mistaken we were the first
non-Commonwealth country to conclude an
immigration agreement with you. And to be
frank, I feel a little proud that most of my fellow
countrymen have succesfully adapted themselves
to their new surroundings. In fact-I
think-the greater part have adopted Australian Prime Minister of Australia in
citizenship. And, well, some people think that a
Dutchman begins to be a very noble man if he
stops being a Dutchman, so there must be every
hope for you, having so many Dutch people
naturalised as Australians today. I hope and
trust these people continue to be an asset to
both our countries. Important as this may be,
there is more to link our countries in the
present-day world, in spite of the physical distance
that separates us.
With the advent of regular air communications
shortly after the end of the second World War,
there have been numerous contacts during the
period when both our countries were undergoing
a fundamental economic, political and social
transformation. For all the gaps and misconceptions
that inevitably remain, we do know in this
country that Australia is no longer primarily an
exporter of agricultural produce and wool. And,
even, not only the country of kangaroos. We
know that, in addition to strengthening its position
as a supplier of raw materials, Australia has
developed a powerful and sophisticated industrial
base, able to hold its own with other leading
industrial nations.
Dutch enterprise and capital have had a part in
this development. We realise it has been a
modest part. Perhaps too modest. We would
welcome a greater participation in your economy
and this morning we have already discussed
ways to achieve that goal. Both our
countries have had to meet serious challenges.
Australia's outlook and interests were conditioned
by its ties with the British Commonwealth,
its vast geographical area and the
tremendous hardships encountered and overcome
in its initial development. The 33 
Netherlands outlook was conditioned by its
position as a geographically small but densely
populated country in Europe with extensive
overseas dominions. The very fact that we are
such a densely populated country may explain
for example why conservation policies, environ
mental pollution, our concern about scarcity of
national resources, our conviction that new
ways should be opened up in that field are so
much stressed in this country and in its policies
today. Looking to the future from our present postition,
we find ever increasing commercial and political
links within the European Community, of which
the Netherlands forms an intrinsic part. Yet
mental attitudes and world-wide economic
interests inherited from our recent past make us
pay special attention to the relations of Europe
to the outside world. We-I venture to say-we
can always be counted upon to oppose trends
that would make Europe into a closed entity,
turning a blind eye to the problems of others. Hence our special concern for developing countries,
but also for countries like Australia, which
feel that their interests are bound up with those
of the world community.
Both our countries are seeking today a new
social order in our domestic policies and in international
policies. The Government you lead,
Mr Prime Minister, came to power as a result of
the elections of-I believe it was-2 December
1 972. Well, that is something to be jealous of.-
You took over on 5 December. The Government
I represent in the Netherlands was a somewhat
delayed result of the elections of 29 November
1 972, three days before yours, but it took
nearly six months, it was 11 May, before I could
say: I have achieved the same results as you did
after three days. Well, what we might have in
common is a desire to reform and remould society,
but perhaps also a sense of instability.
You had to face the electorate again in May of
last year. I only had to face criticism in Parliament
and in the press but I watched you, you
The Prime Minister of the Netherlands, Mr den Uyl, presiding over talks in The Hague.
M' VC. a I
F . K7~ 7I
34 
are accustomed to peril like me. You have
brought about quite a few changes in the
foreign policy of Australia. You have embarked
on the work for a wider and genuinely represen
tative regional association. In the United
Nations you have adopted an attitude on ' apartheid'
in South Africa broadly in line with that of
Third World countries. You have speeded up
the process of national independence for Papua
New Guinea. The Australian Labor Government
has committed itself to an aid target of 0.7 per
cent of Australia's GNP in the coming decade.
Australia has joined with India, Sri Lanka and
other countries of the region in pressing for the
Indian Ocean to be declared a Nuclear Free
Zone. You have emphasised to the world that
there are Nations of the Pacific and that as such
they have a direct interest in the purpose for
which the ocean is used. You have recognised
the Chinese People's Republic and the North
Viet-Nam government.
In summing up all this, all these changes you
were striving for in foreign policy, I recognise
much of what the Government I represent is
striving for. And it is in many ways surprising to
discover that your Government-acting as it did
from December 72-and my Government acting
from May 73, have been striving to achieve
the same goals in international development.
The Dutch Government has committed itself to
a development aid target of 1.2 per cent of GNP
to be reached in 1976. We are conscious that it
is a very hard road, it is a very ambitious target,
but we think it is necessary to reach it, in our
position in Western Europe and in the world.
We seek to create a critical solidarity in crossing
the bridge between industrial and developing
countries. We want to be a critical member of
NATO, accepting our fundamental partnership
in the Western world and pressing at the same
time for common goals in co-operation with
non-aligned and Third World countries. We
know that there are limits to change. Limits to
change in foreign policy, too, and in the possibilities
of international co-operation. You, Mr
Prime Minister, have been working in political
life for more than a quarter of a century. You
were a Member of Parliament for twenty years
and people experienced in parliamentary life
know that policies of change can only be
realised within small margins. And for my part, I
think that that is political reality and we have to be aware of it. We in this country often speak
about the controversy between North and
South in the world, as being of no less importance
than the controversy between East and
West. It is a good thing ( for us) to know that in
the South there are Western countries-Australia,
New Zealand-which might contribute
substantially to overcoming that controversy
between North and South.
I might add a few words about what that might
mean in our present situation. Today a very
serious challenge faces us both. I am referring to
the energy crisis and the problems connected
with it. Both your country and mine are in a
relatively favourable position as regards energy
resources. But we do not propose to make use of
this position in a grasping, selfish way. It is our
conviction that no country can be permanently
prosperous in a world where the great majority
live in poverty and even in acute hardship. The
same principle of fair shares for all which guides
us within our national boundaries will guide us
in our efforts to lessen the gap in prosperity between
us and the developing countries. That is
why, whatever the difficulties facing us, we
shall not relax our efforts to contribute to the
development of the Third World.
Mr Prime Minister, we have worked closely
together as nations on numerous issues, in the
United Nations and in other international
organisations, with a view to creating conditions
for a better world for all humanity to live in.
When you return to your own country I should
like you to take back this message: There is a
country in Europe, far away across oceans and
continents, which looks upon the world much as
you do, which has stood by at the birth of your
nation and which values numerous precious ties
with it. A country, in short, which is and wants
to remain a friend: the Netherlands. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands in The Hague on
4 January 1975
I have had frequent occasion on my visit to
Europe to stress the traditional friendship that
Australia enjoys with the countries of Europe. In
few countries are such sentiments more
appropriate or more soundly based than here in
The Netherlands. I greet you, Prime Minister,
not only as a fellow Head of Government and as
the head of a fraternal party, but as the leader of
a nation with an exemplary record of generosity
and goodwill in her dealings with the world. In
few countries is there a keener and more practi
cal conception of the responsibilities of a small
or medium power towards the maintenance of a
stable world order.
The Netherlands has made a contribution to the
less fortunate peoples of the world and to the
welfare and progress of the international community
out of all proportion to her size. An Australian
Prime Minister comes to your country,
seeking not merely a reaffirmation of our bonds
of friendship, but a good example-indeed a
measure of inspiration-to guide us in our own
search for a wise and constructive role as an
independent nation in an increasingly troubled
world. In the history and traditions, and in the contemporary
circumstances of our countries, there is
much to provide a basis for greater co-operation
and understanding. Dutch navigators discovered
the Australian continent in the early
17th century-more than a century before the
British. True it was they found little to interest
them in those days. It was another 300 years
before the Dutch came to Australia in significant
numbers. Since World War II-a conflict in
which Dutch and Australian soldiers fought side
by side-more than 160,000 Dutch migrants
have settled in my country. Their contribution to
the development and enrichment of Australian
society has been immense and irreplaceable.
No migrants are more valued or respected by
the Australian people. Today, the populations of
our two countries and our national incomes are
almost identical. We are both great trading nations. With our common western traditions of
law, social justice and Parliamentary democracy,
we share similar ethical and cultural
values. Each of us aspires to a robust national
independence, to a distinctive voice in world
affairs, yet each of us acknowledges an important
role, and important responsibilities, in international
and regional communities.
I mention these things, not just to illustrate the
strength of our own relationship, which is longstanding
and secure, but to show how two
nations, geograpically remote and with widely
different regional interests, can demonstrate the
growing interdependence of all nations. I believe
this interdependence to be the cardinal
reality of modern international relations. Only
by recognising their interdependence will
nations overcome the complex and daunting
problems confronting us all. Interdependence
implies much more than co-existence, more
even than co-operation: it requires us to acknowledge
that no nation can live to itself, that
the world's problems are global in their nature
and origin, and that solutions will never be
found-they will indeed be made much more
difficult-if nations pursue narrow, inwardlooking
policies, whether in trade or in economic
matters, in military or defensive postures or in
their attitudes to the developing nations. There
has never been a greater need for international
discussion, for the exchange of views, for the
strengthening and enlargement of the world's
agencies for co-operation and consultation. The
survival of the western world-with its free
institutions and its manifold material blessings
-may well depend on the ability of nations to
talk and work together.
I believe this spirit of co-operation must be
sought through a new respect for international
law. It is appropriate that I mention these
thoughts in The Hague, for it is here in your city
that one of the paramount instruments for world
order and international law is based. Australia
has given her warm support to the principles 
and objectives of the International Court of
Justice. We believe we must continue to promote
the development of international law. We
must promote its acceptance, not merely as a
means of ending disputes, but as a standard for
international conduct, as a positive embodiment
of the principles of international justice
and human brotherhood. The re-ordering of
political and economic relations which is occurring
throughout the world will inevitably give
rise to strains between states. The challenge
facing us at present is to rise above self-interest
and accept with generosity, with grace and with
responsibility the need to resolve our
differences by peaceful means. It is for these
reasons that I spoke last year in the United
Nations General Assembly of the need to give
greater attention to the role of the International
Court. I urged that the Court's jurisdiction
should be widened and that jurisdiction should
become compulsory and universal. In helping
the Court to enhance its role, our countries share
much common ground. Our delegations at the
United Nations have worked closely together to
this end.
In international affairs, there have been many
other areas of fruitful co-operation between
Australia and the Netherlands. We both give
high priority to the United Nations. We have
effectively co-operated in the General Assembly
on such questions as non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament: Korea and South-East
Asia: the strengthening of the International
Atomic Energy Agency: the Law of the Sea and
the Environment. We have rejected apartheid
and worked for the elimination of racism and
colonialism, of anarchy and terrorism. We share
a similar outlook on the problems of the under-
The Prime Minister makes an address in The Hague. developed world. We are dedicated to the
independence and development of those countries
which history once made our colonies.
Australia's new emphasis in her foreign policy
on a more outward-looking and independent
role, our greater involvement in Asia and our
region, in no way represents any break with our
history or with our traditional friends and allies
in the Commonwealth, in Western Europe or
the United States. Nor has our vital interest in
their well-being diminished. Western Europe,
for example, is more important than ever in our
vision of the world. The nations of the European
Economic Community now constitute
Australia's second most important trading partner.
We believe a united Europe will strengthen
the democratic forces in the world, and that
Europe's continuing prosperity is essential to
the welfare and progress of all nations.
The Netherlands, as one of the founding states
of the European community, has an essential
and continuing role in the new Europe and in
Australia's relations with Europe. Your great
ports are the essential gateways for our trade
with the whole of this continent. Your businessmen
and investors are deeply involved in
Australia's economic development. Dutch
people have risen to the highest positions of
eminence in Australian commerce, industry
and public life. I think of G. D. Delprat, a former
manager of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company,
Australia's largest corporation, a man
who established our first steel works in Newcastle.
I think of G. J. Dusseldorp, founder of the
Lend Lease Corporation, one of the greatest
development companies in Australia. In this
context I mention a recent initiative to establish
an Australian-Netherlands Association in
Australia which will complement the successful
Netherlands' Australia Institute already established
in this country. I pay tribute to the efforts
to establish the new association and offer my
full support. It will symbolise and strengthen
the long-standing and cordial friendship between
our two countries. That friendship, Mr
Prime Minister, has been deepened and
enriched by my visit to your historic capital and
by our talks together. Australians attach the
highest importance to our good relations, and
honour your nation and its people for their contribution
to a saner, more civilised, more just
and peaceful world. 
The Prime Minister speaks at his official welcome to Paris at the Hotel de Ville. 



JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE
GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM
AND PRIME MINISTER OF THE NETHERLANDS, MR. J. M. DEN UYL,
IN THE HAGUE, 6 JANUARY 1975
Well, Ladies and Gentlemen, our Australian friends are very
short of time, therefore we will immediately start and make your
questions very short.
DEN UYL: Well only a very few introductory remarks as to have
as much time as possible for Mr. Whitlam and your questions. Let
me say how very glad we are to have the opportunity to have this
exchange of thoughts. We dealt with the position of Australia
in the world, the position of Holland in the European community
the way Australia looks upon the European community and the role
of Holland in it, questions of co-operation in development aid
and in the relation, of course, thepolicies towards Indonesia.
And besides that we dealt with a number of bilateral questions.
Well, I would think that is enought introduction and I would
like Mr. Whitlam to put forward a few introductory remarks.
WHITLAM: You will see from what the Prime Minister has said
the range of matters which we discussed. It has been a very
fruitful weekend and the Prime Minister, his wife too, may I
say, and his Ministers and his officials have spent very many
hours witht he Australian party. It has been very easy for us to
exchange views because our countries are exceptionally similar.
Sure we are remote in geography, we are disparate in size, but we
have the same population we have the same average income, we
are among the most highly industrialisedcountries in the world,
we are among the largest trading countries in the world and of
course the Governments are fraternal ones. Six years ago I
was in the Netherlands and met Mr. Den Uyl for the first time
and we since have become Prime Minister at the same time.
DEN UYL: I became so just a few months after the elections.
WHITLAM: Yourelection system is confusing to other people and
ours is confusing to other people. Your election took place
some days before ours in 1972, but it took some months to
achieve a decision as to who was to be Prime Minister. 
Last May we had an election and it was three months before we
knew who were to be the members of the Parliament. So it is
indicative of the stress under which all western societies,
even those with the benefit of social democrat Governments,
Labour these days. It has been a very fruitful weekend and
since the Netherlands makes a quite exceptionally disproportionate
contribution to the EEC, the OECD, to International bodies in
general. It has been valuable to us not only for the understanding
of the world as a whole and particularly of the
countries with which we compare ourselves. So thank you very
much for what you have done in the party, in the Government,
among officials, over Friday, Saturday, Sunday and now Monday.
QUESTIONE Were any decisions taken during the negotiations
during the weekend?
DEN UYL: You might not call them decisions, because we did not
have a particular agenda on which to negotiate but we made
some appointments on wider consultations, on migration problems,
on co-operation and development fields, on questions of uranium,
and the ultracentrifuge installationswe have in Holland
just appointments for wide a prolonged consultations.
QUESTIONS: Mr. Prime Minister, there is a quite big rumour
that there is a big contract for Australia selling uranium to
either the EEC. ( Sic). Whtat is true about this rumour and is
Holland interested in uranium or what?
WHITLAM: As I understand this situation the EEC cannot
collectively enter in to contracts concerning uranium. Obviously
the Australians will be discussing the general situation of
uranium in each of the EEC countries they visit and we will be
visiting half a dozen of them. Any specific contracts have to
be made with individual countries as things stand at the
moment. Nevertheless the development of Australia's vert great
uranium resources it is believed we posses one-fifth of the
proven uranium resources in the world the development of these
is a matter of international concern and negotiation because
Australia does not have the technology and Australia by herself
does not have the capital to develop these resources as far as 
-3-
they have to be developed and as far as we would like them to
be developed in Australia. The Netherlands is associated with
Britain and West Germany I have already visited Britain and I
shall be visiting West Germany in one particular process
for enriching uranium. Very naturally Australia and Japan,
which are conducting a feasibility study into the question of
enriching Australia's uranium, will be interested in the
attitude of these three countries which have this particular
process. QUESTION: There were no appointments made about selling uranium
to the Netherlands?
WHITLAM: There were no contracts mabe, no, no, no.
QUESTION: Prime Minister was there any specific discussion on
provision of technology?
WHITLAM: The provision of technology was very obviously one
of the matters discussed.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister we understand that you discussed
the need for Great Britain to stay in the Common Market. Can
you elaborate on that in any way please?
WHITLAM: I do not want to give the impression that I would be
telling the British what they should do and I am sure my
colleague does not wish to give that impression either. But
nevertheless it is relevant for Australia to express her attitude
about Britain's membership of the community since traditionally
Britain was Australia's biggest trading partner. She is by no
means Australia's biggest trading partner now. We look at
questions of trade these days in terms of the Community and the
Community is the largest trading partner of Australia now. I
can say that there is no possible advantage, in the Australian
Government's view, in Britain leaving -the Community. Previous
Australian Governments may have given that impression. I fear
they did give that impression not only in Britain when the
Conservatives and Labor has sought to join the Community,
but they also gave that impression among the six who then
constituted the Community. They gave the impression that 
Australia resented Britain joining the Community and they gave
the impression that they wanted to frustrate any such accession
by Britain and now my Government takes no such attitude and
certainly should leave no such impreesion. There is in our
view no possible advantage to Australia in Britain leaving
the Community. I suppose I can go further and say that these
days so many things depend on international co-operation.
It is absurd for the west to be so divided as it is. We are
in our social and economic and political habits in Australia,
a western country, and we believe it strengthens our sort of
societies, the mixed economies the hitherto affluent countries
of the world, the countries which trade and manufacture for
them to work together. Accordingly, I suppose, I hope it is not
regarded as too muck out of place that we believe that the
west in general will be much stronger, happier, more effective
if it works together. And that includes Britain working with
her neighbours on the continent.
DEN UYL: May I add one word to what Mr Whitlam said about
Britain. It was rather peculiar to discover that I would think
that there are hardly any other countries inthe world that
would be so eager to see Britain within the European Community
than Australia and the Netherland. That was our experience of
discussing these affairs.
QUESTION: Could I reverse that question in other words would
you that Australia might be worse off if Britain were to
leave the Common Market?
WHITLAM: I do not want to speculate on whether Britain will
leave the Common Market. I cannot tell what would happen if she
did. QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, changing the subject somewhat, we
are in a part of the world which particularly felt the effects
of the Arab oil embargo and which has felt the effects of the
increase in oil prices. Can you spell out here Australia's
attitude to American initiatives for an oil-sharing scheme and
also can you tell us now whether Australia will attend the
conference of consuming nations which America proposes? 
WHITLAM: Well no arrangements have been made yet. Obviously
I have discussed in each of the European countries I visited this
general question, that is, the possibility of disrupting the
whole infra-structure upon which trading countries have relied
up till now and the access to resources. Australia's situation
is not entirely the same as that of western Europe. Quite
obviously that must be the case because we do have ample energy
resources ourselves in general and we are situated on the other
side of the oil-rich lands.
QUESTION: Do you have any other...
WHITLAM: No I will not elaborate at this stage.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, can I ask a question on
immigration? I was tlaking to Dr. Moss Cass, Minister for the
Environment and Conservation. He said zero population was for
the time being the policy of Australia because that would give
an example on how to keep population down on the planet,
while Mr. Tom Uren said the one percent population increase
was his policy, but the one percent population increase, as the
average is 1.9, cancels out the 0.8 percent increase in immigration.
Has any commitment been made during your visit? Did you discuss
the question or can you give any information on the immigration
policy as far as the Dutch...
WHITLAM: I will not respond to your kind references to my
colleagues. My practice is not to comment in terms of what
other people are reported or thought to have said. So I
therefore overlook what you said them. You will accept that I hope
with good grace. Now on the question of immigration that is,
you asking my views. Well, that is fair enough. There has been
a diminution in migration from western Europe since the 1950' s.
There have been for very many years now migrants from, say the
Netherlands to Australia. There are about 160,000 people in
Australia who migrated from the Netherlands, but most of them
came in earlier years. With increasing prosperity and security
in western Europe we have found that the number of people from
the Netherlands and other western European countries has declined. 
-6-
Most of the migrants to Australia now come from Southern
Europe from Italy, and Malta, Yugoslavia, Greece, Cyprus.
There has been a reduction in the target of migrants which the
Australian Government has sought. The immediate reason for
that has been the extent of unemployment in Australia. It is
no kindness to the people coming to Australia or the people
who are already there to have people competing for too few
jobs. Also there is probably an overall situation: migrants
particularly in the last ten years or so, have settled in Sydney
and Melbourne which are already growing too much. And
furthermore we were finding the Australia was losing a great
number of migrants becuase Australia's socialservices, health
service, housing facilities, were not as good as those for
instance in western Europe. Our social services can't compete
with those of the Netherlands although they have been improved
immensely in the two years of my Government. And furthermore
we have now made the payment of social services to people who
have earned them in Australia available to them anywhere in the
world. In the Netherlands particularly, we found that there
were a great number of people who had worked and settled very
happily in Australia but as they became older, decided to
retire in the Netherlands because the social services were very
much better. Our prime objective now is to make people who
have migrated Australia or people who from now on migrate to
Australia happy in Australia. And while we are bringing
fewer migrants to Australia the number of migrants who are
staying is very much larger. The net gain is as great as it
used to be and the number of people becoming naturalised as
Australian citizens has almost doubled in the two years that we
have been a government. We are now concerntrating on the
migration of peoplewho have relatives in Australia or who have
skills for which there is an un-fulfilled demand in Australia.
Some figures I notice havebeen quoted in the Netherlands of the
reduced numbers of migrants those figures are an extrapolation
of a small period. They are greatly exaggerated.
QUESTION: Can we expect the Australian dollar to align with one
of the stronger European currencies in th e months ahead? 
-7-
WHITLAM: You don't find Heads of Governments commenting on
matters of currency but our alignment is with a basket of
currencies among which of course are some European ones.
Roughly the basket is proportionate to the extent of our trade
with the various countries concerned.
QUESTION: ( Indistinct, but about discussions in Paris)
WHITLAM: Well this obviously should wait until I have spoken
with the French. Our general attitude has been up till now
that it is proper for us to make arrangements for the disposal
of uranium with those countries whic h accept the IAEA
safeguards.
QUESTION: In answer to my earlier question you clearly said
that uranium technology had been discussed, And I asked you
if in fact there had been a specific offer of technology
Could you answer that?
WHITLAM: There was an exchange of views on it. I mentioned
earlier that the Netherlands is involved with two other countries
the West Germans and the British in one particular form of
enrichment. And as you know the Head of the Australian
Department of Minerals and Energy has been visiting the site and
holding discussions himself there.
QUESTION: Mr. Den Uyl, would the Netherlands have reservations
about Japan being tied in with Australia as far as any uranium
deal is concerned because of Japan's constitutional position
whereby it is not allowed to withhold secrets from the public?
DEN UYL: Well, it is one of the points which should be considered
if consultations proceed and we would have to consider any
agreement. But what is happening now is just as Mr. Whitlam
already pointed out, that we are looking at possibilities.
QUESTION: Can I ask a question about dominance in the Indian
Ocean and the change of the strategic centre in the world from
western Europe towards the Indian Coean. You want Diego Garcia 
not to be included in the security system of the United States
but by now, as the order becomes more contented, even Dr.
Kissinger is talking about not taking the Arab oil fields.
Does Australia feel that the whole strategic situation is
changing and is tis cabinet adjusting its position?
WHITLAM: There again, do you mind if I take the same attitude
in you conmments on Dr. Kissinger as I took on your comments
about Dr. Cass and Mr. Uren. This may be your technique, it
is not mine, Now you asked me quite legitmately about the
Indian Ocean and about Diego Garcia. It is not the wish of the
Australian Government not of any government in the Indian
Ocean that there should be a confrontation or escalation by the
United States and the Soviet union in the Indian Ocean or
anywhere. But of course, you ask about the Indian Ocean.
We don't want the Indian Ocean, which has been ahppily free of
this super power rivalry, to become the centre of it.
QUESTION: But didnot you in the United States especially talk
about having your own self-realisation and that it does not
only mean not having a confrontation between the Great Powers
byt having a say of your own.
WHITLAM: I have in the United Nationsand my foreign minister
has in the United Nations supported:' the various proposals to
have a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. That is the attitude
that my Government takes and it is the attitude which all the
countries around and in the Indian Ocean also take.
QUESTION: Obviously a lot of your talks so far have contained
a lot of discussion on the world economy. Could you tell us
how you seee the short and long term future and how you think
European countries are going to fare in the next twelve months?
WHITLAM: The universal feeling in the countries I visited
has been and the reports that they give me of the feeling in the
other countries of western Europe is that of the two great evils
which beset us all to an unexpected and unprecedented extent
inflation and recession-the latter is the greater threat to our
society and our economy. And they are of course doing what they 
-9-
can to reduce the inflation but they are more worried immediately
about the recession.
QUESTION: Are they pessimistic?
WHITLAM: They are apprehensive but not pessimistic. Obviously
one hopes that the efforts which we are all making will succeed.
Speaking for myself, I think they will.
QUESTION: Mr. Whitlam, is it the view of the European leaders
you have spoken to so far the President Ford has accepted bad
advice and exaggerated the problem of recession? If so, do
you agree with them or not?
WHITLAM: The general feeling, if I may say so, has been that the
advice that President Ford had been receiving had been contrary
to the feeling which I have just stated as being that of the
western Europeans. But I would not presume to say what adivce
the President is now receiving or taking. There seems to be some
feeling that the advice which he was given and was known to have
been given earlier might not be accepted by him and the Congress.
QUESTION: Mr. Dne Uyl, have you made any specific arrangments
on migration or has there been any proposal?
DEN UYL: Mr. Whitlam pointed out Australian migration policies.
For our part we have stressed the significance that Dutch
emigration to Australia could be continued and we have underlined
that there are some aspects of present Australian migration
policies that stress in particular the entry conditions being
relatives or having special qualifications. There might be some
points which would be worthwhile to discuss further, as
spontaneous emigration always has played a great part in the
Netherlands. But our feeling is that by having consultations
in this field there are real prospects for emigration being as it
was in recent years.
QUESTION: Can you be more specific on this point?
DEN UYL: No. 
QUESTION: Mr. Whitlam have you felt like a farmer who took a
holiday and had his barn catch fire because of what has happened
in Darwin and now Tasmania? What is yourfeeling about this
and does it strike you as something to marvel at?
WHITLAM: Well the thought had not occurred to me.
QUESTION: The OECD I believe has decided to jointly remain
open for trade and capital movement. But I believe Australia has
not as yet signed this agreement. I s there any reason why
they have not?
WHITLAM: The general question of investment in being considered
by us and some aspects of it such as double taxation agreements
have been discussed in most of the countries we visited.
QUESTION: Plr. Den Uyl, has any decision been made about uranium?
DEN UYL: You know that in the project for producing the technique
of enrichment for uranium by ultra centrifuge you need to have
uranium to have the process realised commercially so at any time
the three countries which are co-operating in the project will need
uranium. QUESTION: ( indistinct)
DEN UYL: I cannot make statements at this moment on the
amount we need or about the time at which we will need uranium
but the so-called troika, the three countries co-operating in the
project will need uranium, that is quite sure.
QUESTION: A domestic question. Have you been advised what
caused the Hobart tragedy? What action are you prepared to
take?
WHITLAM: I sent a cable to Mr. Reece, the Premier of Tasmania, I
suppose twelve hours ago and I got a, I received a message of
thanks from him. Now you have the text I think. I expect there
will be an inquiry into how such a ludicrous happening took place.
It's beyond my imagination how any competent person could steer 
-l4-
a ship into the pylons of a bridge, and But I have to restrain myself
because I would expect the person responsible for such an act would
find himself before a criminal jury. There is no possibility
of a Government guarding against mad or incompetent captains
of ships or pilots or aircraft. 



France Speech by the Prime Minister of France, M. Jacques Chirac, at a
dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in Paris on
6 January 1975
Through one of those unexpected incidents
such as are often met in the lives of individuals
and peoples, the circumstances of these recent
days make your presence amongst us specially
significant. Indeed how could I fail to mention,
at the time when we have the honour and the
pleasure of welcoming you, the ordeal which
has just struck Australia? You were already in
Europe when you had to return to your country
and face the consequences of the Darwin disaster.
That you should have wanted against all
other considerations to keep to our joint plans,
that you should be in Paris today as previously
agreed, gives us an even better appreciation of
the importance of your visit to France and must
have consequences for our two nations and our
two States.
Our awareness that Australia and France have,
despite space and distance, very real common
interests-in many regards fundamentally
so-is further reinforced by a coincidence of
dates which is of symbolic value. We are in
January 1975: So it is exactly 60 years since
the first volunteers from the southern continent
first took part in the battles of the great conflict
which then divided the world. In the hardest
struggles at Vimy, as on the steep slopes of
Gallipoli, the Australian soldiers, with their heroism
which was to become legendary, bore witness
that to defend human liberty and the
independence of peoples, solidarity between
old Europe and their new country remained
essential. You may be sure, Mr Prime Minister, that the
French people have not forgotten. Sixty years
have gone by since those days in 1915 when
men of our two people discovered what a terrible price they had to pay for the right to retain
their identity. Another war tore our universe,
and your country, even more than in
1914-1918, experienced its dramas, bore its
effects and played its tragic part. Thirty years
ago, almost to the day, one of your predecessors
declared, so close was the threat: ' Australia
belongs to the Australians and it must remain
so. Neither you, nor we, have forgotten the lessons
of those years of anxiety. We know that peoples
must remain independent for men to be free.
We know that to remain independent peoples
must be capable of assuring their defence and
be determined to assure it. But we also know
that the will to remain independent and free
requires that men should also experience, in
their daily life, the value of independence and
the meaning of freedom. In modern industrial
societies this necessarily means that everything
must be done to provide everyone, whatever his
social or economic status, with a full share in
decisions, in choice and thus in responsibility.
We know, Mr Prime Minister, how well you
have perceived this. We know with what determination
you have laboured for Australia's
further evolution and to develop new forms of
economic action and social innovation.
Frenchmen are all the more attentive to your
efforts because for their part and in accordance
with conditions deriving from their own history,
they are pursuing with perseverance an undertaking
which is in many ways comparable to
yours, for French society to transform itself
without chaos and modernise itself without
breach. Tomorrow is not the contrary of today,
rather it is its development. 
The growth of your country is a fine example of
this. For nearly two centuries men from Europe
have established themselves on its soil, have
organised themselves there into a new society
which is neither a copy nor the reverse of the old
world which they had left. Australia has known
how not to be an antipodean Europe without at
the same time forgetting or neglecting anything
essential from the European heritage.
On that immense continent at the far end of the
Asian world, on the Indian ocean and the
Pacific, a new people has taken shape. Australia
has seen the development of a distinctive culture
and civilisation and become an industrial
power; its very geographic position as well as its
resources of raw materials confer on it a situation
of first importance in the world of today.
Europe, which is now in the process of constituting
itself, intends for its part to maintain in
the world affairs the position assigned to it by its
history and economic weight; to say this is to
say how much it is in the interest of our two
countries to draw closer together and to understand
each other better.
You could have with France a close dialogue an
even a special relationship. This is why to receive
you in Paris, Mr Prime Minister, is not only
an honour for us, it is also a responsibility, for we
must now determine what Australia and France
can henceforth do together. It seems to me that there is between our two
peoples, despite distance, a manifest propensity
to co-operate with each other and there are
elements within our two economies which are
so complementary that to fail to draw them
together would be to fly in the face of both logic
and the mutual interest of our countries. In the
industrial and scientific sectors vast fields could
be opened for close co-operation between our
firms, our scientists, our engineers; for a pooling
of our techniques and resources, our ambitions
and our capabilities. This can contribute to meet
the economic challenges of the last few years of
the millennium and to bring our two peoples
closer together. Our national interests command
us to place no limits on our imagination
and to defer no decisions.
I want you to know, Mr Prime Minister, that
there is on our side the political will, if you so
wish, to go a long way together. France wants to
be, before long, amongst Australia's principal
associates. Your stay in France is thus not only
the occasion to note that, despite all hazards,
our countries are close to one another in their
view of international life, of democracy and
social progress. It will enable us to give new
bases to our joint actions so as to reinforce between
Australia and France, between Australia
and Europe, ties which are not only those of
memory but those of a concerted effort for
growth, independence and peace.
Mr Whitlam talks to Madame Chirac. wife of the Prime Minister of France, at an official dinner in Paris. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of France in Paris on 6 January 1975
My wife and I are honoured by the welcome you
have given us. It typifies the cordiality and
graciousness we have come to expect from your
country and her people. No one who visits the
capitals of Europe-certainly no politician-can
escape the feeling that Paris is the high point of
his mission, that all his expectations, all his energies,
indeed all his anxieties, reach their
keenest pitch in the capital of France. In Paris
we renew our contacts with one of the great cities
of the world, with the capital of the French
Republic, with the city that uniquely symbolises
the spirit of Europe itself. Nowhere are the history
and culture of Western Europe so closely
and visibly identified with her present economic
and industrial power and her future political
aspirations. I declare Australia's firm support for the ideals of
the European Community and the promise it
holds for the peace of the world and the happiness
of mankind. Many nations have had a part
in shaping the European experiment, but
France is rightly seen, and will rightly be judged
by history, as the founding spirit and guiding
force in the movement for European unity. For
all her national pride and for all the intensity of
her national ambitions, France has put Europe
first. There have been times when Australia, in
pursuit of her own interests or in defence of her
traditional trading links and partnerships, may
sometimes have seemed reluctant to give her
full support to Europe. We have no such reservations
today. The Common Market is
Australia's second largest single trading
partner. We cannot ignore it; still less do we
under-estimate its importance as a force for
enlightenment, for universal prosperity and for
the general progress of humanity. The prosperity
of France and the prosperity of Europe are
indivisible. Equally, the prosperity of Europe
and the prosperity of the western world are
indivisible. Without the friendship and goodwill
of France, the friendship and goodwill of Europe
are an illusion. I would be less than frank, Prime Minister, if I
failed to acknowledge that Australia's relations
with France have been strained in recent years. I
would be equally lacking in sincerity and candour
if I apologised for the actions on Australia's
part which contributed to the difficulties between
us. You know the record of our
differences. I stress that the course we took
was not motivated by any hostility from our
people towards the people of France. Nor was it
inspired by any narrow political ideology: it was
in fact supported by all political parties in
Australia. It is sufficient to say now that the
main cause of our differences has been largely
removed, and I am bold enough to believe that
whatever France may have said of our attitudes
at the time, our policy would have won some
respect in a nation renowned for the vigilant defence
of her own national rights and interests. I
believe there are no longer any outstanding or
lasting problems between us. Here in your capital,
as the guest of your Government, as a long
standing friend and admirer of your country, I
proclaim Australia's desire and Australia's
readiness to strengthen and enlarge her relations
with France. We want to build on the great
traditions of friendship and co-operation that
have guided our relations in the past. I am confident
that we can do so. I believe, Prime Minister,
that you share my confidence.
It is a happy precedent, a happy omen, that the
traditional contacts between our countries-the
basis on which we must now build together-go
back to the very foundations of Australia. I hope
the French people will come to know more of
Australia's standing as a modern and highly
industrialised nation; a nation that has made,
like France, important contributions to art, to
industry, to science, to social organisation and
other fields of endeavour; a nation sharing with
France the historic Western values of liberty,
law and parliamentary democracy. Australians
are well aware of their historical and cultural
affinities with France. They are well aware of the 
vast reservoir of goodwill and shared experience
that exists between us, as former allies in war
and as great trading partners in peace.
I give two examples of the range of contacts between
us. An exhibition of Australian art has
lately been seen in Paris. Only four weeks ago,
in Canberra, I opened a French language school
and a new local headquarters of the Alliance
Francaise. These are small and recent things. I
mention others more important-for example,
the many discussions which Australians have
had with French officials of DATAR, from which
we have learnt much of value from French experience
in urban and regional planning. Or
again, the record of business contacts-on both
a corporate and personal level-between
Australia and France. On such foundations a
great structure of trade and economic investment
has been built. France buys annually
more than a billion francs worth of Australian
exports. French aircraft are the backbone of the
Royal Australian Air Force. The French construction
company, Citra, is responsible for
many works and projects in our cities. Renault
assembles cars in Australia. Yet even these
links, substantial as they are, fall short of
what our countries can achieve together. France has much to offer to our region, as she
has to the world at large. Australia has much to
offer France. We share, like every other country
in the Western world, difficult economic and
social problems. Your President, a statesman
fully seized of the gravity and complexity of the
problems of the modern world, stated his views
of few weeks ago in these sombre terms: ' The
world is unhappy. It is unhappy because it
doesn't know where it is going and because it
guesses that, if it knew, it would discover that it
was heading for disaster. It is an unhappy world
that statesmen have to lead and that the men of
the media have to enlighten'. I believe the cooperation
we seek between France and
Australia will make some contribution, perhaps
a useful contribution, to the easing of our problems.
May I say, Prime Minister, how much I
have valued the opportunity to talk with you.
We have renewed and strengthened the friendship
between France and Australia. I express
my firm hope, my unwavering confidence, that
our countries will move forward together in a
renewed spirit of trust into a new era of friendship
and accord.
The Prime Minister laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
P'. C i P 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 4
6 January, 1975
TASMAN BRIDGE TRAGEDY
The Prime Minister's Office has released the text of the
message sent by the Prime Minister to the Premier of Tasmania
following last nights Tasman Bridge tragedy.
" I am shocked by the news of the disaster in
Tasmania. While details of the loss of life are not fully clear
it is plain that Australians have suffered another grievous
and unexpected tragedy. The city of Hobart has lost a vital
link for transport and communications. The whole of Tasmania
has been dealt a heavy blow. My deepest sympathy goes out to
all families and relatives of the victims. I pledge the full
and ready co-operation of the Australian Government in
restoring the bridge and making good the loss and disruption
suffered by the Tasmanian people. My Government stands ready,
in consultation and co-operation with the State authorities, to
do everything possible to alleviate this disaster and irv-estigate
its causes. E. G. Whitlam."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 429
7 January, 1975
OFFER OF INDONESIAN ASSISTANCE TO DARWIN
The Prime Minister's office today released the
text of the Prime Minister's response to President Soeharto' s
offer of Indonesian assistance t-o Darwin.
" Thank you very much indeed for your kind message of
sympathy about the Darwin disaster. It was the worst natural
disaster we have suffered in our history. The prompt expression
of the sympathy of the people and government of Indonesia will
be long remembered by those in Australia most affected by the
disaster. I have been informed by our Charge d'Affaires in
Jakarta * of Indonesia's generous offer of two C-130 aircraft to
assist with the emergency operation. I personally very much
appreciate this gesture coming from our closest and largest
neighbour. As I understand has been explained to your
foreign ministry the immediate evacuation crisis in Darwin is
now over, and with it, the immediate need for additional
airlift capacity. It is possible that the demand for aircraft could
0 increase again as the reconstruction phase gets underway, and,
if so, I hope that we will be able to avail ourselves of your
most helpful offer which I deeply appreciate. E. G. Whitlam."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



t 41
The Acting Prime Minister, Dr J. F. Cairns,
released the following statement after today's Cabinet
Meeting in Sydney.
The Cabinet today considered the distribution of
funds donated by the people of Australia to assist the people
of Darwin. The Prime Minister in his statement of 30 December,
1974, indicated that the Government was concerned to ensure
that the money so readily donated by sympathetic and
concerned Australians was distributed in a responsible manner,
to relieve the hardship of the people of Darwin, recognising
that the majority of them are no longer in Darwin.
The Cabinet noted that a Committee has been formed
comprising representatives of the Red Cross, the Salvation
Army, the Aborigines, the women and children of Darwin, the
Australian Council of Churches, and of the Northern Territory
Legislative Assembly, the City of Darwin Corporation, and
Government institutions.
The committee will be responsible for the
distribution of funds channelled into it.
Commenting on today's Cabinet meeting, the Acting
Prime Minister Dr J. F Cairns, said the Australian Government
would assist the Committee to the full, not only in
co-ordinating the activities of the Committee with the
activities of Government Departments, but would also ensure
that the funds are used for the purposes for which they were
donated. 
-2-
Dr Cairns said that while he understood the desire
of Darwin's political leaders to exercise responsibility in
the use of donated funds, the matter could not be left to
them alone. This was partly because the majority of Darwin's
residents are not in Darwin at all, and partly because
there can be much duplication in the distribution of funds
unless the Committee handling the funds is aware of all
allocations made by Government Departments, voltntary bodies,
and others. Similarly, some persons could be left out altogether.
Dr Cairns stressed the positive and non-political
stand taken by himself, the Australian Government, and the
Leader of the Opposition and called on all concerned to
re-establish the spirit of co-operation that has prevailed so
far throughout Australia.
Dr Cairns said the Australian Government did not
require that funds be handed over to it, nor did it want to
deprive local political leaders of a full role in deciding
what is done. But equally, he said, the Government would
not abdicate its own responsibilities, not only to Darwin
residents, still in Darwin, but to the majority of them who
are elsewhere. " I say to Darwin political leaders, to Premiers,
Mayors, sponsors of funds and to all others: Let us work
together in ensuring that the generosity of the Australian
people is properly used for the benefit of the people of
Darwin." 7 January, 1975
Note: Donations etc collected in various Darwin appeals can
be sent. to Mr John McDonald, Executive Officer, Darwin
Relief Appeal, Darwin; or to the Minister for the Northern
Territory, Parliament House, Canberra. 



ANI AF AIR
N 00
AN1 AA
NQ DATE 0
PRIME MINISTERES PRESS CONFERENCE PARIS
7 JANUARY 1975
The following is the transcript of a press
conference given by the Prime Minister, The Hon.
E. G. Whitlam, in Paris at 1800 hours on 7 January 1975:
Begins: Are there any questions ladies and gentlemen?
uestion: Mr Prime Minister, would it be possible to ask if
in principle a tripartite uranium deal with Japan and France
has been decided upon? U. AANtM-t
Prime Minister: As you are aware Japan and Australia are
conducting a feasibility study into the enrichment of
Australian uranium deposits in Australia. Neither of us has
the technology required. You have also been informed, a couple
of days ago, that there will be British officials visiting
Australia in a couple of months time in this connection. They
may be accompanied by West German and Dutch officials because
Britain, The Netherlands and West Germany share one particular
form of uranium enrichment. Any discussion with French officials
would take place after that.
Question: May I ask a supplementary question my Prime RENcA
Minister, the French Consul in Australia is a nuclear physicist * AL.
and has been carrying on discussions with the Australian Atomic
Energy Commission for some two years. Is this irrelevant?
Prime Minister: I didn't know this..
Question: Could you tell us the main points of your talk
with President Giscard d'Estaing?
Prime Minister: The President's and my conversations were
purely tete-a-tete and I therefore would rather not list subjects
we discussed. Also, you will notice I answered the
' question outside any context of discussions I had with
itue Prebident in particular. I think it ought to be sufficient
for me to say that in the tete-a-tete with Prime Minister Chirac
yesterday and President Giscard d'Estaing today a wide range of
matters of common interest was discussed. I mustn't specify
clearly what the subjects were or were not.
Question: Could you tell us Why you made a public apology
to the skipper of the Illawarra? sm
Prime Minister: An explanation by the Captain was brought to VPU
my notice.
Question: Do you intend to ask Mr Chirac to come to
Australia. 
-2
. CL wMt.
Ji 41NCN~ Prime Minister: I'm having dinner with him tonight and I
did have this in mind.
Question: . Mr Prime Minister has any progress been. made
during your visit to establishing a cultural or scientific
agreement between France and Australia?
Prime Minister: This was raised in the talks between the two
sides yesterday afternoon and I'm confident that the preparation
of both cultural and scientific agreements will proceed
quite rapidly. We would be very happy indeed to have such
agreements with France because France's cultural pre-eminence
has been known for centuries and her scientific achievements
for some decades.
Question: Does Australia maintain a continuing objection
to French nuclear testing even if its not in the atmosphiere.
Would you state precisely what that objection is and will that
be a factor in any uranium deals of whatever sort between
Australia and France?
Prime Minister: Australia would rather there were no nuclear
testing at all. Nevertheless nuclear testing does proceed
underground and has for some years.
Question: Will it affect Australia ? 7
Prime Minister: I have nothing to add to the answer I gave to
your colleague from the Australian Financial Review.
Question: Would Australia sell uranium to any country if it
were using that uranium to make nuclear weapons?
Prime Minister: I've got nothing more to say on this than I've
already said. You know quite well what the Australian Government's
attitude is to sales of uranium in one form or another.
Question: Could you elaborate on this for the French... .0
Prime Minister: Well what I've said previously is that all the
sales we've made up till now have been within the terms of the
IAEA safeguards. 4
Question: Since France has not signed the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty and does not accept the IAEA safeguards
does that rule out the possibility of Australia selling
uranium to it?
Prime Minister: No further comment.
Question: Could you tell us why you won't comment o~ n
that rather crucial and controversial aspect?
Prime Minister: It appears quite clearly from the first quaestion
I was asked today and the answer I gave to it.
Question: Could you please state again why you won't
answer this question? 
-3
Prime Minister: I said that any discussions on this matter
would take place " any", " ol" take plage after those
that have already been arranged. . Aol-
Question: Are you considering reconstructing the Atomicwto
Energy Commission in Australia along American lines by aplit-( SM11100M
ting it so as to diversify the defence aspects and the economic
energy aspects?
Prime Minister: No consideration has been given to this so far
and I won't speculate as to what may be done.
Question: Have you no worries about the powers given to
the Atomic Energy Commission under the present Act?
Prime Minister: No consideration has been given to altering those
powers. Question: The question about the tripartite cooperation
between France and between Australia and Japan in fact has been
discussed before the Labor Government camne into power.
Prime Minister: Not I think with Japan had it?
Question: Yes I believe it had.
Prime Minister: Oh well I didn't know that.
Question: ( unclear0 why are you so secretive about these
discussions?) Prime Minister: We have made arrangements for some discussions
and any further discussions would take place after the discussions
which have already been arranged. Those are the only discussions
which have been arranged0
Question: Did you explai.. your views on the future of the
South Pacific region with the e'renich leaders? What did you say
and what were their comments?
Prime Minister: This wasn't discussed yesterday or today. It
was recently discussed about a month ago when Mr Froment Meurice
was in Canberra0
Question: Could we know a bit more about what you said to
him? Prime Minister: I'd rather you aske4( ne a specific question as to
attitude on any particular aspect. There again I don't believe
it appropriate for me to detail discussions which have been
tete-a-tete.
Question: What is the future of Franco/ Australian
relations? Prime Minister: I believe there will be a considerable increase
in relations between France and Australia. M. Segard, the
Secretary who deals with Overseas Trade is soon to visit
Australia and -he is interested, I believe, in the whole range
of matters which can come within trade between the two countries0 
-4
C4AJW' 7A. 4" L-
4. cAoumwnIC Question: Do you envisage any cultural exchanges
between the two countries?
Prime Minister: I certainly hope so. One of your
colleagues asked a question about Cultural and Scientific
Agreements between France and Australia. We are anxious
to have such Agreements. My Government has made cultural
agreements with several countries and scientific agreements
with some countries in the two years that we have
been in office and we were very happy indeed at the : prospect
of such agreements with France.
Question: In your discussions with M. Chirac did you
discuss the development of the situation in Southern
Africa and the difference in Australia's and France's
approach to South Africa?
Prime Minister: This wasn't raised.
Question: Could you tell us what is exactly the
~ 4N&amp; OJ~ oah') Australian stand on non-prolif eration and what do youL thin]
of the French stand France not joining the Treaty butsa
ing it would comply with the clauses of the Treaty.
Prime Minister: There is a prospective conference to review
the Treaty and I believe it is in that context that these
matters may be discussed and promoted. W
Question: Did you re eor did you ask during your
discussions with the Frenc IA ister the firm guarantee that
French atmospheric nuclear testing in Pacific has now ended?
Prime Minister: No
Questions: Can I ask you why?
Prime Minister: I rely on public statements by the President
and his Ministers.
Nfcmo of Question: Did you discuss the problem of Australia buying
Lj oot some aircraft from France?
Prime Minister: Yes. There is active consideration being n
to the purchase of further aircraft for Australia's dcmest*
airlines and there is competition in particular between the
Tristar and the Airbus and it is a very difficult decision for
us to make. The domestic airlines which are not as confident
in Australia, any more than domestic airlines seem to be in
any other country, that there will be such an increase in
business as there was in recent years, are not really urging
the acquisition of these aircraft as much now as they ' were
several months ago. Therefore the whole question is not as
urgent at the moment as it was say in the middle of 1974 but
it's very difficult to make up our minds between these two
exce' Lent aircraft. I'm not a technical man so it might be
invidious for me to compare the qualities which appeal to us
in these matters.
Question: Can you explain to us the Australian position
on the French proposals for tripartite Energy Conference. 
Ar Prime Minister: We are attracted to the French proposals F'C(. Y
that there be consultations rather than confrontation cowl( a4
in these matters and we were very interested indeed to
hear from the Prime Minister and his colleagues the proposals
for the preliminary conference and their views as
to how soon there could be a conference itself Australia
has however to await the agenda of the conference before
it would give further commitments to attending it, but the
general idea of having consultations is attractive to us
and I believe it has been a most valuable initiative by
the French Government.
Question: On the question of the Energy Conference
would it be true to say that you are more concerned with
transportation problems than supply problems?
Prime Minister: It would be true to say that transportation
is a bigger worry for Australia than supply but it would be
quite wrong to say that supply wasn't also a worry but we
do not depend on other countries as much for supply as we
do for transportation.
Question: Do I gather that Australia has been or may
0 be invited to the Energy Conference ( unclear)
Prime Minister: That is to the major conference?
* Question: Yes
Prime Minister: I would think it's quite likely that we will
be invited to the major conference. We are not of course
invited to the preliminary one.
Question: Mr Prime Minister, were the declarations of
Dr Kissinger about possible military intervention in the
Middle East discussed during your talks in Paris and if
possible what is your point of view?
Prime Minister: I don't want to~ comment on this. Dr Kissinger
was asked a hypothetical question and it seemed to me he was
at pains to give a very guarded answer to that question. Now
I don't believe that it helps if I elaborate on this matter or
if I speculate on it.
Question: Mr Prime Minister in your discussions with
C-P0001A Mr Sauvagnargues, the Foreign Minister, did the question of
Cambodia come out particularly French ( unclear)
Prime Minister: There was no specific discussion with
Mr Sauvagnargues on this matter. There was obviously an
interest expressed by us in the contributions which France
can make in those territories for which over 100 years she has
had a particular interest. French contributions in that part
of the world could clearly be of great value and therefore of
great interest to us who live near it and who have had unfortunate
involvements in it.
At~ IrD O Question: ( Unclear concerning Australian aid for Africa).
AfovecA Prime Minister: Australia as a relatively developed country of
course has a very great concern for the developing countries.
This was particularly true because of all the developed countries 
-6
# P A IR.
V JVT NA Pt
za S. s -T
CLVZ9 Australia lives closest to developing countries. North,
East and West of Australia there are tens, in fact
hundreds of millions of citizens of developing countries.
Australia for two generations has had the responsibility
for one such country which this year will become independent
and which last year became self-governing, Papua New Guinea.
So quite naturally Australia is interested and has been
involved in this question. My government recently established
an Australian Development Assistance Agency to specialise
in these matters. We accept the general United Nations objective
of having 0.7 per cent of the national product devoted
to international assistance and we have already reached
over 0.6 per cent of that figure. we would in general give
more assistance to countries in our neighbourhood, South
East Asia and the neighbouring countries in the Indian Ocean
and in the South Pacific than to the African countries.
This is not because we are unaware of the problems of the
African countries or unsympathetic towards them. They do have
Far acnocnet inanudi ngB riatsasionc iaatnido ni, n tfhaecyt sottihlelr Ecuormompaenadn thceo unitnrtieerse, s t buCW
the sheer history and proximity means that Australia is more
involved with the countries of South East Asia and the Indian
and South Pacific Oceans. My government also stresses that
assistance can be given to developing countries not ontly by
aid but by trade. We probably have devoted our aid more thaW
most countries, or perhaps any countries, to outright grants.
In general we do not require the repayment of advances, we
make or any interest payments on those advances. We have had
a fairly elaborate system of trade assistance to the
developing countries.
Question: Are you aware of reports that the American
Seventh Fleet is off the coast of Viet-Nam in a show of
strength? If so what is your reaction to this buildup?
Prime Minister: I wasn't aware.
Question: I understand that in your speech yesterday
at the dinner party with M. Chirac you said that Australia
did have some hesitation in the past towards a united JZur
but these reservations have now gone. I wonder if you couW
tell us why the attitude of Australia has changed and in what
way a united Europe is beneficial to Australia's interests?
Prime Minister: The big reason for the change of attitude has
been that there has been a change of government in Australia.
I'm sure that in France in particular you now recognise the
Second of December as not only the Anniversary Of Austerlitz
or the coup d'etat but also of political liberation of
Australia, There have been some other incidental reasons
and that is that the pattern of trade has changed in the twelve
and a half years perhaps a bit longer since a British
Government, that cf Mr McMillan, formally applied to join the
European Economic Community.
Question: ( Unclear -concerning whether prospects for
resuming beef sales to Europe improved in Paris)
Prime Minister: Yes, but not for some months. 
QuesioSni: rW, h ehno w many months?
Prime Minister: No, I wouldn't specify, I wouldn't
make any particular forecasts, because we've received
different estimates in different member countries of
the community with whom we have discussed this matter.
Question: Due to the present economic situation
* in Australia, do you consider you will have a raise in
tariffs for trade in the near future?
Prime Minister: Well, there may be but if there were
increases in tariffs in Australia I would expect they would
be within the context of the international arrangements
that Australia has made and the legislation that the
Australian Parliament has passed. In other words it would
be, if the increases in tariffs were due to temporary
factors then the increases also would be temporary.
Tariffs in Australia, in general, are lower now than they
have been for probably over forty years, but there has been
a very great increase in imports into Australia and some
of the imports have adversely affected some Australian
industries, so therefore we are persuading the importers
to reduce the amount of imports closer to what they were
before my Government took action which, by tariffs and by
currency revaluations, to promote imports. Perhaps it
would be useful for me to say in this context that Australia
is a very considerable trading country. It's the twelth
largest trading country in the world. There are very few
countries where there is a larger percentage of the
national product involved in international trade than is
the case in Australia. Therefore the prosperity of
Australians depends very greatly on international trade
and it is for this reason that it is very distressing and
disheartening for Australians that some of the most
affluent countries in the world, some of the biggest trading
countries in the world, shoi.-. 1 have suddenly, without any
pretence of justification, or warning, have cut down on
some of the exports which Australia can make in very
economic and attractive terms, such as beef exports. The
Common Market, just cancelled Australia's beef exports.
Japan just cancelled Australia's beef exports. The United
States is now pressing Australia to reduce beef exports.
Now in many of these cases the countries had previously
urged us to increase beef exports. There is no question
that our beef exports are of good and dependable quality,
and very competitive price. It is very disheartening,
discouraging that affluent trading countries such as those
I've mentioned, the only countries in the world, among the
few countries in the world which eat meat, among the still
smaller number of countries in the world which can afford
from time to time to import meat, should take so retrograde
and selfish a step. It is disappointing, it is reprehensible,
I would say, that for domestic political reasons great trading
countries, affluent countries should set such a bad
example. Australia tries, even at the cost of some hardship
to herself and her people, to have good trading relations.
We would expect other countries, bigger ones in
Question:
L 
-8
most cases, to be no less principled and progressive
in matters of trade.
Question: Having noted the reaction of the Shah of
Iran to the joint statement emerging from the meeting
between Giscard d'Estaing with President Ford, particularly
on the question of revaluation of gold reserves, do you
sympathise with the Shah of Iran on this question and what
is Australia's attitude?
Prime Minister: I don't want to make any comment at this
stage on this. I'm very interested in what the Shah says
on this and many other matters. As it mightn't bE! generally
understood here, the Shah recently visited Australia last
September, and it was interesting to us that this visit should
have been regarded as appropriate by him before he! made it,
and we have every reason to believe regarded as well worth
while after he'd made it.
Question: Prime Minister, you've now been on the oad
for three weeks and it's been a fairly strenuous, as th
of us who've been travelling with you know. W
Prime Minister: You're bearing up quite well.
Question: How are you feeling, Sir?
Prime Minister: Likewise. 



17
^ FPO
J1, A Us. I'H A1.1 A /, u
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 430
8 January, 1975
TASMAN BRIDGE
The Prime Minister's Office has released the text of the
Scable sent last night to Captain B. J. Peic in the Royal Hobart
Hosoital. o r " I have seen your explanation of how the catastrophe
occurred. I withdraw unreservedly any imputations against you
and extend my apologies. E. G. Whitlam."
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
0 



Italy Speech by the President of the Council of Ministers, Professor Aldo
Moro, at a luncheon in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in
Romeon 8January 1975
Mr Prime Minister. In extending to you on behalf
of the Italian Government and on my own
behalf a most warm welcome, I want to tell you
how pleased I am about this meeting which
allows us to have a frank and cordial exchange
of views on various problems of common
interest.
I would like also to take the opportunity to express
to you once again the deep sympathy of
the Italian people for the disaster which only a
few days ago so gravely struck the city of Darwin,
prompting the unanimous and sincere sorrow
of the whole world.
Our discussions and the other meetings that
you will have on the occasion of this your first
official visit to our country fit into a pattern of
personal contacts between members of the
Governments of our two countries which has
become richer in recent years and which I sincerely
hope may continue to develop in the
future. I still remember well your preceding visits to
Italy, in other capacities but always with a
genuine friendship for our country and in continual
search for further points of contact and
dialogue. In our meetings, Mr Prime Minister, we have
been able to confirm the excellent state of the
relationship existing between Australia and
Italy and the proximity of our points of view on
many political and economic problems of the
present time. Above all we have been able to
ascertain with satisfaction that Australia and
Italy are united in the hope of increasing detente
and international political stability with the conviction
that only in this way can humanity reach higher levels of social progress in safe-guarding
the values of democracy and freedom.
It is exactly this identity of purpose which has
led our two countries to work together on numerous
occasions and to carry out a common
action in the United Nations and in the principal
international organisations where they have
been able to emphasise repeatedly the importance
of the ideals which our peoples share. At a
time like the present when the international
scene is troubled by so many serious problems,
a meaningful understanding between states
sharing particular affinities and common
interests acquires an, if possible, even greater
significance. I hope therefore, that our collaboration
on both the multi-lateral and bilateral
levels may become even deeper in the future.
The climate of trusting friendship between our
two countries has also a solid foundation in the
presence, in Australia, of an important Italian
community which constitutes a link between
our two peoples. This community represents a
fundamental element in our relationship which
deserves being carefully valued and watched.
On the bilateral level, I am pleased to underline
that the present good state of our economic and
commercial relations, notwithstanding some
difficulties connected, for example, with the
distance between our two countries, will be able
to develop even further in the furture. The
economies of Australia and Italy are in fact gen
erally complementary.
The sector where the co-operation between the
two countries can be especially advantageous is
that of energy, a sector in which only the concerted
effort and solidarity of all will allow us to 
face up the difficulties of the present time. In
this context, the contribution which Australia
can give to Italy, in the development of those
alternative sources of energy on which the
economic and social progress of our two peoples
will increasingly depend, assumes particular
importance. Mr Prime Minister, the desire to contribute to
the solution of the great problems of our time
which unites Australia and Italy also guarantees
the expansion of our relations and closer human
and cultural contacts between our two peoples.
The Prime Minister signs the Cultural Agreement between Italy and Australia with the Prime
Minister of Italy, Professor Moro. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given in his
honour by the President of the Council of Ministers in Rome on
8 January 1975
It is a particular pleasure to be in Rome again. I
was here for a day in April 1973, but this is my
first official visit since becoming Prime Minister.
I am visiting a number of the EEC countries and
other European countries. The Community is
now Australia's second largest trading partner.
Europe, moreover, is the foundation of
Australia's cultural heritage. The advanced
state of European technology and culture make
it imperative for leaders to keep in touch with
events in Italy. It is therefore an important duty,
as well as a special pleasure, to be with you.
I doubt if there has ever been a time when consultation
and co-operation between national
leaders was more urgent or important. Australia
and Italy have great cultural and social traditions
in common: more significantly, we share
with all countries of the Western world great
social and economic problems. Inflation and
unemployment pose a grave and growing threat
to democratic values and social order and cohesion.
If Western nations are to solve these
problems without a recourse to authoritarianism
or without a relapse into anarchy, they will do so
only by restoring faith in the democratic system.
I believe it is time for governments, for politicians,
for all free political parties, to renew their
commitment to the forms and values of a democratic
society. There is no more urgent task for
modern statesmen than to lead, to inspire, to
nourish this commitment. The breakdown of
democracy in one country, attacks on democracy
in one country, must be recognised as an
attack on democracy everywhere. I believe the
leaders and peoples of Italy and Australia, two
nations with democratic systems, can play a
part in rebuilding the world's faith in the
flexibility and strength of democracy.
The Italian community is now the biggest of the
national groups in Australia. More than
380,000 Australian residents were born in
Italy, and Italians have had a profound impact
on Australia's way of life. Many of our major
developmental projects since the last war would have been impossible without Italian workers
and engineers. Your great state enterprises,
such as IRI and ENI, have been an example and
an inspiration to me and my Government in the
work we are doing. I mention one matter of
great interest to Italy-the sale of Australian
uranium. The Australian Government recognises
the importance of uranium to Italy. We will
ensure that Italy gets an equitable proportionalong
with our other major trading partners-of
the uranium we have to export.
I am grateful for the welcome you have given
me and for the valuable talks we are having
together. There are important bilateral issues
between our countries, but the most urgent and
enduring interests we have in common encompass
a wider field-a closely shared and
deeply felt commitment to the ideals of peace,
security and rising living standards for all
peoples. Perhaps we will come to see that
higher living standards do not necessarily
mean-and can no longer mean-more
material goods. For many nations, expectations
of greater prosperity of this kind have had to be
postponed. Whether they will be restored depends,
I believe, on the restoration of faith in the
democratic order, of confidence in our society
and in ourselves. For my part, I believe the
world will overcome its present problems. I am
confident that in the meantime the cultural, and
indeed the spiritual, traditions of Italy and her
people will help sustain mankind in its adjustment
to a new social order, to a new scale of
human values, that will be more just, more humane,
more generous and more selfless than
those we have known before. 
F-a -n T me 7
President Tito and Madame Tito welcome MrWhitlam. 



Yugoslavia Speech by the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, Mr Dzemal Bijedic, at a
dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in Belgrade on
9 January 1975
It gives me particular pleasure to have this opportunity
to greet in our midst, on behalf of the
Government and the peoples of Yugoslavia, and
in my own, the highly prominent statesman and
Prime Minister of friendly Australia, His Excellency
Mr Edward Gough Whitlam, Mrs Whitlam
and the distinguished members of his party,
and to wish them a sincere welcome and an enjoyable
stay in our country. We will endeavour,
at least partly, to reciprocate the hospitality extended
me and my associates during our visit to
the beautiful country of Australia.
I am confident that I also share your views in
saying, Mr Prime Minister, that our relations
have been developing ever more successfully
during the past years and that your visit will encourage
their further promotion, enrichment
with new forms and substance and extension to
new fields. We wish such a development of
relations and we will, on our part, exert efforts in
that direction. Yugoslavia has consistently
adhered to its policy of co-operation with all
states on the basis of respect for independence,
sovereignty, non-interference and mutual
interests. We are convinced that along these
bases it is possible to develop diversified and
long-term co-operation between our two
countries.
Your visit is taking place at a time when in many
quarters of the world, despite substantive
results achieved in the sphere of the policy of
relaxation of tensions and negotiation, the situation
is becoming more complicated, and is
seriously deteriorating. The danger of a new
outbreak of conflict in the Middle East is
imminent due to the persistent aggressive and
expansionist policy pursued by Israel, which constitutes a direct dramatic challenge to world
peace. For this reason it is vital for the international
community to exert efforts, as a matter
of utmost urgency, towards having the crisis in
the Middle East resolved on the basis of the sole
possible premises which, for that matter, have
been widely accepted: Israel's withdrawal from
all the occupied Arab territories and the full realisation
of the legitimate national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including the right to
establish a state of their own, a right enjoyed by
all the peoples in the world. In fact, this right has
received broad support during the past session
of the United Nations General Assembly. This is
the only possible way to achieve peace in this
part of the world on just and lasting foundations
and to ensure independence and security of all
the peoples and countries in the region.
As regards the Cyprus crisis, we are of the
opinion that the implementation of the resolution
of the United Nations-which was supported
by all member states of the United
Nations-constitutes the only basis for finding a
durable settlement acceptable to both ethnic
communities. The slow progress in solving the
Cyprus crisis and its persistence constitutes a
source of danger both for Cyprus proper and for
peace in the broader area.
In Viet-Nam, the Paris Agreements continue to
be violated by the Saigon regime. It is in the
interest of stability and peace to secure full and
strict implementation of the provisions of the
Paris Agreements and respect for the right of
the people of Viet-Nam to decide their own
future in sovereignty, freedom and independence. 
In the present-day ever more complex and
increasingly uncertain international situation,
the co-operation of all forces of progress, peace
and liberation is vital so as to consolidate and
render international relations more democratic,
to resolve outstanding international issues and
obtaining crises by giving substance to the
legitimate aspirations of all peoples toward freedom,
independence and establishment of equitable
international co-operation. It is only on
such premises that a durable and just peace for
all countries and peoples can be reached. The
non-aligned countries which, in co-operation
with other developing countries, have rendered
an invaluable contribution to such a development,
are willing to co-operate with all countries
and with all forces having identical goals.
The world-wide easing of tensions in specific
spheres of international relations is in the
interest of all countries. Detente, however, in
order to evolve into a world process and lead to a
genuine peace, must extend to all parts of the
world. Likewise, it is essential that all countries
should participate on an equal footing in the
resolution of international problems.
Mr Prime Minister, the special session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations has
demonstrated the necessity for establishing a
new economic order and equitable economic
relations in the world. The prevailing situation
clearly indicates the untenability of existing
economic relations in the world based on exploitation
of the majority of mankind, on
inequity and privileges of the developed countries.
All this testifies to the indispensability of
essential changes in the existing system along
the lines accepted by the entire international
community. The non-aligned and the developing
countries have offered a constructive program
pledging necessary changes while
respecting the interests of all countries and taking
into account the growing interdependence
in the world. Regrettably, all international factors
have not accepted the outstretched hand
and are attempting to preserve obsolete relations
and existing privileges through imposition
and confrontation.
We are following with keenest attention the activity
of your country and your personal endeavours
on the international scene. Yugoslavia
highly appreciates the constructive role which Australia is playing in the efforts to achieve assertion
of the principles of equitable cooperation,
and your contribution to the constructive
approach in dealing with international
problems, by recognising the new realities in
the world and the necessity of its continuous
change. We feel that these are sound bases for
our co-operation.
Dear Friend, the large number of Yugoslav emigrants
living in Australia, represents a special
link between Yugoslavia and Australia. They
have found in your country a home away from
home and, as loyal citizens of Australia, by
working diligently, are making their contribution
to its development and prosperity.
During our visit to Australia we were able to see
for ourselves that their work and role are held in
high esteem in Australian society, as well as
their contribution to the promotion of friendly
relations between our two countries.
It is no secret, however, that there are also extremist
elements who oppose such cooperation.
I take this opportunity to reiterate
that the Government of Yugoslavia values the
efforts by the Australian side which have been
made towards curbing fascist-terrorist activities
of small groups and individuals in the Australian
territory. We hope that these efforts will continue
and that they will be intensified as this terrorism
is directed not only against Yugoslavia,
but also against Yugoslav-Australian friendly
co-operation and all the democratic forces in
the world. As an expression of the past it constitutes
a vestige of the fascist forces which had
been condemned by the international community
and whose activity is a subject matter
being dealt with by the United Nations. Turning
ourselves towards the future, it is our wish to
build new bridges so that our mutual cooperation
may become even closer. I wish particularly
to emphasise that our migrants should
be a link of friendship and co-operation between
our countries. Our bilateral relations are
becoming increasingly comprehensive. However,
there still exist numerous unexploited
possibilities for their further and more meaningful
expansion both in the sphere of political and
scientific-technical and cultural co-operation.
In particular, in the economic co-operation
which is lagging far behind the real possibilities. 
In the prevailing conditions of an ever greater
interlinking in the world, every constructive and
fruitful co-operation between countries,
regardless of how distant they may be, constitutes
a positive and effective contribution to the
improvement of overall international relations. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia in Belgrade on
9 January 197
It gives me great satisfaction to come to
Yugoslavia and reciprocate the historic visit
which you, Mr Prime Minister, paid to Australia
in March 1 973. Your visit was the first to
Australia by a Prime Minister of Yugoslavia:
mine is the first by an Australian Prime Minister
to your country. Yet sixty years have passed
since our soldiers first fought together in World
War 1. Australia's involvement in the Balkans
led to one of the most significant military actions
in our history. Australians admire the proud tra
ditions of independence of the Yugoslav
peoples. We admire the heroism with which
you resisted great power domination in the First
World War and fascist aggression in the Second.
We admire the determination with which
you have continued to assert your independence
under the leadership of President Tito. I
salute your President as one of the outstanding
statesmen of our time-the builder, the inspira
tion, not only of a nation, but of a great world
movement for peace and human brotherhood.
Under his guidance, your country has become
an authentic symbol of the hopes of millions of
people in the developing world for peace,
progress and independence.
When my Government took office in December
1 972, it was faced with a world in which dramatic
changes in international relationships had
created not only new complexities in international
affairs, but also new opportunities and
challenges. At that time I stated: The change of
government provides a new opportunity for us
to reassess the whole range of Australian
foreign policies and attitudes. our thinking is
towards a more independent Australian stance
in international affairs and towards an Australia
which will be less militarily oriented and not
open to suggestions of racism: an Australia
which will enjoy a growing standing as a distinctive,
tolerant, co-operative and wellregarded
nation not only in the Asian and
Pacific region but in the world at large.
The basis of Australian policy remains the com mitment to independence, to the right of all
countries to manage their affairs in their own
way, without interference. It is because of this
commitment that Australia, while maintaining
its traditional friendships, has recognised the
need to develop its own contacts with all countries,
regardless of their political systems, and
take account of their views in formulating its
own policies. Independence does not mean the
assertion of purely national self-interest. In our
increasingly complex and interdependent
world, no state can seek to impose its own views
on others. With the right to independence and
equality goes the duty of international cooperation,
the duty to strive for the removal of
the causes of tension and conflict in all fields
and in all regions.
Perhaps no country has supported and practised
these principles more than Yugoslavia.
You have made an outstanding contribution to
international co-operation both in the United
Nations and elsewhere. Indeed there can be few
countries which, in their national Constitutions,
have committed themselves so firmly to the
principles of the United Nations Charter.
Yugoslavia's approach in international relations
seems to be best manifested in its commitment
to non-alignment, a concept which embodies
the principles of independence and international
co-operation: a concept which President
Tito was instrumental in formulating and in
which he remains the dynamic force.
There are encouraging signs that the world,
community is beginning to work for global solutions
to the problems of poverty, hunger,
economic deprivation and the threat of war. The
United Nations Sixth Special Session and the
World Food Conference demonstrated a
renewed international commitment to the problems
of the disadvantaged. This impetus
towards international co-operation, this retreat
from isolationism, must be sustained. Too often
in the past, opportunities for peaceful development
have been passed over by the inter-
national community. We have failed to grasp
opportunities to set the world on the path to
peace: We have failed to eliminate the threat of
war: we have failed to regulate the development
and proliferation of the instruments of war. The
threat posed by the production and proliferation
of nuclear weapons is the most awesome ever
posed to the future of mankind. The development
of measures to eliminate the threat of
nuclear war is therefore the most pressing issue
which confronts us.
The issues which symbolise the change in Australian
foreign policy under my Governmentand
the increasing similarity of approach between
Australia and Yugoslavia-are
colonialism and racism. It is my conviction that
the most significant historical trend since the
Second World War has been the struggle to end
imperialism, colonialism and racial discrimination.
One of my first actions after coming to
power was to instruct our representatives at the
United Nations to add Australia's voice to the
international condemnation of colonialism and
racism. We have supported all actions in the
United Nations against the illegal racist regime
in Rhodesia and against the infamous policy of
apartheid. Recently Australia voted in the
Security Council for the expulsion of South
Africa from the United Nations for its twentyeight-
year-long flouting of the most basic principles
of the Charter: we have joined the United
Nations Council on Namibia: reactivated our
membership of the United Nations Committee
of Twenty-four: and are providing assistance to
subject peoples in their fight for liberation.
In pursuing more independent policies, my
Government has sought to identify the common
interests which Australia shares with a broad
range of countries. Australia straddles many of
the categories which are often used to distinguish
countries-namely, the developed
from the developing, the rich from the poor, the
second from the third world, the producers from
the consumers, the aligned from the nonaligned.
Ours is a developed country, yet the
foundations of much of our prosperity on primary
production and the export of minerals has
made us conscious of the problems faced by
both producers and consumers. As a
predominantly European community in the
Asian and Pacific region, we are conscious of
the pressing requirements of our neighbours. As a comparatively rich country, we accept the
responsibility of extending asistance to the
developing countries. Bound by treaty to the
United States, we nonetheless respect and seek
to understand further the views of those
countries which have chosen to espouse nonalignment.
The bilateral relations between Australia and
Yugoslavia are strong and cordial. My visit will
help to strengthen them. Many migrants of
Yugoslav origin live in Australia. Their skills and
initiative have contributed to Australia's
progress and form an enduring bond between
our nations. I believe, Mr Prime Minister, that
after your visit to Australia you were satisfied
that my Government is determined to do all in
its power to prevent and punish criminal acts of
terrorism directed against Yugoslavia by a small
minority of malcontents and undesirables. You
may be assured that we will hold firmly to our
commitment. Trade between our countries is growing and
there is every sign that it will grow further. It is
my hope that we shall soon enter into long-term
agreements for increased trade. I hope to see a
greatly increased flow of private business,
officials and experts between our two countries.
Recent negotiations leading to the conclusion of
a bilateral civil aviation agreement covering
flights of your national airline to Australia and
ours to Belgrade is a positive contribution to this
goal. Negotiations for the conclusion of a
Cultural Agreement are well advanced.
The relationship between Australia and
Yugoslavia is based on an affinity of views on
the fundamentals of the international order. An
interdependent world demands co-operation
rather than confrontation: and no state, however
great, should threaten the independence of
another state, however small. These shared beliefs,
and the opportunities and demands presented
by a troubled world, form the basis of a
friendship that will be healthy and beneficial for
our two countries, and a constructive contribution
to the wider needs of peace and understanding
in the world. 
Speech by President Tito of Yugoslavia at a luncheon in honour of
the Prime Minister of Australia in Belgrade on 10 January 1975
I would like to express the great pleasure, of my
wife, Jovanka, of myself and of all of us, to have
you all here as our guests today. You have come
from a far-away country geographically but one
close-by in terms of aspirations and outlook on
the world, in terms of efforts for the best possible
relations throughout the entire world, in
terms of eliminating, as soon as possible, the
various negative features which even today are
still burdening our world.
Many of our countrymen live in your country...
some arrived before the last war, and
others immediately after that war, but these are
two categories of people who differ in many ways. Those who originally left Yugoslavia to go
to your country did so because of economic
need, because they lived in great poverty. But
among those who went immediately after the
last war, there were those who were traitors,
who had collaborated with the occupiers and
committed terrible crimes-crimes you and
your people did not know about. Naturally these
two categories of our people who found a home
in your friendly country had to come into conflict
and to hate each other, to a situation which was
not in the interest of our two countries. I know
that you, personally, Mr Prime Minister, and
your Government, have done a great favour to
us by realising that it is not all the same who
The Prime Minister in talks in Belgrade with the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia. Mr Bijedic
K." t 



NQ DATE
D13 ~ 17
PRIME MINISTER'S CONFERENCE BELGRhADE
JAUARY 1975;
The following is the text of the Prime Minister's press
conference held in Belgrade on 10 January 1975.
Vitorovic. Radio Belarade
Q. Would you like to comment on the talks with President
Tito this morning-We didn't have a chance to read the toast
yet,
A, You are referring to the fact that a recording was
made of the President's speech in proposing a toast at the
lunch he gave us and also I suppose there was a recording taken
of my response. But we did spend an hour and a half before the
lunch discussing a wide range of matters.. It was naturally a
matter of the greatest interest to the Australians to have such
a full and free discussion with so eminent a leader of his
country and, I think I can say, inspiration to the world in war
and peace as your President The President showed a great
interest in Australia and also a very great appreciation of
the attitudes that my Government has demonstrated over the two
years that we have been in office,. He is one of the world's
great men and has been for a generation, We thought it a great
occasion. ( Name Indistinguishable)
Q-Mr Prime Minister I am from Nova Macedonia near
Macedonia, I have two questions,~ The first question refers
We would like to have your ideas and views.. How do you look
upon the fact that you have 250 thousand Yugoslavs in Australia?
What do you think of their contribution and their work towards
the prosperity and the development of your country, especially
w ith respect to their contribution to the promotion of friendship
between Australia and Yugoslavi-* a. The second question we would
appreciate having your views with respect to the efforts that
are being made at present to have the Indian Ocean become a Zone
of Peace and security. 12... 
A, Australia has been interested in Yugoslavia for two
full generations. We were allies throughout the First World
War. At one period during the Second World War, Yugoslavia
was the only country in the whole of the continent of Europe
which was fighting for the same cause as Australia. Accordingly
the quarter of a million Yugoslavs who have come to Australia
have come to a country which was disposed to regard them highly
indeed. They have proved very sturdy citizens in Australia.
I can testify to that myself because there are a very great
number of Yugoslavs who live in my constituency out of Sydney.
Any Yugoslavs who come to Australia can be assured that they
will find friendship and prosperity in Australia.
You asked also about the Indian Ocean. Like every
country round the Indian Ocean Australia deplores any prospect
of a confrontation in the ocean between the United States and
the Soviet Union. We do not want the Indian Ocean, which has
been the freest of all the world's oceans from this rivalry
between the two superpowers, to become infected by it. I have
put this point through diplomatic channels and also directly
to Washington. I have put it through diplomatic channels to
Moscow and will do so directly in Moscow next week. Our concept
is one which has the support of the President and the Government
of Yugoslavia.
Malcolm Browne, New York Times
Q. Mr Prime Minister in your toast to Prime Minister
Bijedic the other day you mentioned that your country had a
growing similarity in position to that of the non-aligned
countries of the world and certainly your administration has
demonstrated that. Do you feel that at some point that a
non-aligned Australia could have n7' oblems of conflict with the
ANZUS Treaty arrangement?
A. Also in my speech last night I pointed out that we were
an ally of the United States, There has never been any question
oi' that, We are not a non-aligned country. Nevertheless we have
supported, whereas the preceding Government of Aus-tralia did niot
support, many of those concepts for which the non-aligned countries
have fought for very many years. For instance the nonaligned
countries have fought against colonialism: they have
fought against racism: they have fought for development. The
Australian Government now takes the same attitude on all those
three matters. It would be astonishing if an Australian
Government were to act hereafter otherwise since Australia is
surrounded by countries to which the question of development,
racism and colonialism are crucial. I would not believe that
there is any real interest of the United States adversely
affected by any of those policies. If ANZUS doesn't stand. for
the three attitudes I have expressed then ANZUS is not ass
wholesome as we believe it is. / 3. 
Stn Zi] vkovic. Radio Belgrade
Q. ( Inaudible)
A. We can best contribute to this by understanding each
other's attiti,-es in preparing for those wider gatherings where
these subj4aots arise. There have been many occasions in the last
two years and one a month for the last three United Nations
General Assemblies where, for instance, Yugoslavia and Australia
have clearly shown that they have each other's attitudes in mind..
There was a completely new matter in the economic deal where
we cooperated quite closely, namely, the International Bauxite
Association. I think that is the answer, It is not that we would
do so many things, just the two of us, but that we should be aware
of each other's attitudes at wider gatherings where we are each
present. Perhaps I could give another instance. There has been
a serious economic affect to one of our industries and also the
same industry in Yugoslavia through the precipitate, incons-iderate
action of some of our trading partners, namely, our cattle
indi~ stry. Now here is something -that we can't solve just the two
of u~ s but we have discussed dealing with it in a wider context
and that is something which was mentioned today.
Z ivkovic Q. My second question is what are other spheres in which
Yug.) slav/ Australian relations can be most successful, in the
bileateral field. I am not sure I can answer tY*.' t question satisfactoriLy.
T t'Lnk you have good instances in your first question and I don't
know offhand what other fields I would add to those that you mentioned0
ZirSFovi c
Q. My third question0 Being twice in this count; ry you
know this country better than most. May we therefore ask you for
you-~ impressions of this country.
A. Well I can't really claim to have any wide knowledge of
Yugoslavia0 I know something of Belgrade and of the Dalmatian
Coast so all I can say is that I am impressed by the growth and
modernity of the Capital and the beauty of the coast.
Mr Jost, Melbourne Age
Q. Since you last went to the United States has anything
occurred to make you believe that ANZUS is not as wholesome as you
thought it was'?
A. No. / 40.0 
Dusko Doder, Washington Post
Q. Mr Prime Minister as you know, the Ustashi is a very
active organisation in Australia.
A. Not as active as it was believe me.
Q. I want to ask if the question of Ustashi has come up
in your talks with Mr Tito and Mr Bijedic.
A. Well let me say as you will understand, the Washington
Post is my favourite newspaper.
In the discussions that we had this morning with
Mr Bijedic and his colleagues and with the President I don't
think the word was mentioned. There was reference from the
Yugoslav side of appreciation for the way that my Government had
been vigilant in this matter. It is clear that the Yugoslav
Government appreciates the fact that there have been no outrages
from this quarter in Australia since the Government of Australia
changed.
Mr McKendrv. Australian Broadcasting Commission
Q. My question follows that of my colleague from the
Washington Post.
A. You don't expect me to name my favourite station.
r Hi hfield, A. B. C.
Q. Prime Minister, during youlr discussions with Mr Bijedic
did you raise the question Sir of &amp; Lleged activities of the
Yugoslav Secret Police and, secondly Sir, could I ask you what
progress has been made on the question of dual nationality.
A. Neither of these matters arose in my discussions with
Mr Bijedic last night or this morning, nor in the discuE: sions
with the President. Now I want to make it plain that in giving
that answer I am not in any way confirming any impression you may
have that Yugoslav Secret Police do operate in Australia. I am
not making any reference to that matter at all,
Now on the second matter you raised. There has been
for some time discussions through the normal diplomatic channels
of one of the consequences of dual nationality. It was not
discussed in my discussions with Mr Bijedic or with the President.
I think the officials accompanying me might have discussed this
aspect to which I refer of the question of dual nationality, the
matter for which we are concerned is the right of persons in
YugosLavia who hold Australian passports to have access to the
AustrrLlian Consular services. Now progress has been made on this
question. I don't think that one ought to express it in the 
wider question of' dual nationality becuase this is obviously
a very complex legal matter which effects any countries which
have different legal systems. Australia has the English Common
Law where in effect your citizenship depends on your choice of
country. Yugoslavia and most European countries have the IUS
SANGUINIS that is your citizenship depends on your ancestry. So
there 2Inevitable conflict between the IUS LOCH and the
IUS-SAI4GUINIS. Now we can't really solve this for the whole
world. What we are concerned with is that Australians who have
passports should be able to have access to Australian Consuls.
Roy Gutman, Reuters
Q. I am wondering in your speech and also in articles in
tVhe International Review in Yugoslavia you said you would like
Australia to be a representative at the next.-non-aligned conference.
I am wondering has Yugoslavia agreed to back the Australian desf-re
to be an observer or have they told you that there is some criteria
that you must first meet and if so do you think you will be able
to meet them. The second question on the Consular International
area is do you expect that there might be a Consular agreement ' n
the near future and could you give an outline of what it might be
like.
A. Australia would welcome an invitation to attend the next
non-aligned conference as an observer or as a guest. We discus. Sed
this matter both with Mr Bijedic and his Ministers and with the
President. I think I can say they were sympathetic in the matter0
I was not wanting to give the impression that there
would be anything so formal as a Consular agreement between
Australia and Yugoslavia to deal with the question of AustraliJ. an
Consuls having access to bearers of t4ustralian passport11s in
oo~ antries where those passport bear,. rs were still regarded as
citizens by birth. I expect that this matter can be settled by
an arrangement following an exchange of notes. It is a matter
which may in due course come within a wider international convention
it concerns a great number of Common Law countries, counit--ies
whi-' ch have derived their basic laws from England such as not only
Australia but also Canada, the United States and New Zealand silica
each of those countries have accepted hundreds and thousands of
migrants from countries which have the IUS SANGUINIS the old
Napoleonic Roman system of law.
Peter Barron, Sydney Daily Mirror
Q. When you go to Moscow from Yugoslavia will you raise with
the RussLafi leaders your attitude to political prisoners in Russ3ia
and if soi what will you say.
A0 Well I have already answered that in the affirmative on
several previous occasions.
R. Schneider, Australian
Q. Are you able to say with confidence that training of anti-
Yugoslav terrorist on Australian soil has ceased. 
A. I can't be absolutely confident that I believe that the
practice is very much less likely to be carried on in Australia
now than was previously the case. The fact is that since t~ he*
change of government in Australia there have been no further acts
of overt terrorism from Ustashi quarters in Australia befJore
that there had been every year around the 10th April for about
years. Perhaps I could add that there may be still in
Australia some clubs where the portraits of Ante Pavelic anad
the Croation Republic flag with the letter are still
displayed. This of course causes as much resentment among
Australians, both those who were born in Australia and those
who have come to Australia from other countries including
Yugoslavia, as would the display of Hitler's portrait or the
Swastika flag. This is not illegal. in Australia but it is
greatly offensive.
John Jost NeJbourne Age
Q. You left me in doubt with respect to your answer
on the non-aligned conference as to any conditions being
placed.
A. There has been no discussion among the members of
the non-aligned movement on this question. Accordingly one
can't say that there would be any conditions lai~ d down. All
I. can say is that in discussions in Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia
which are leading members of the movement and have been since
its foundation that no such conditions were suggested.
Roy Gutman, Reuters
Q. There were reports that while you were in Paris and
Rome you received assurances from the governments of the
countries that they would soon sign and ratify the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Pact and that this was one of the conditions
which Australia would sell uranium oxide. Could you say
whether this is true or not.
A. If there have been such reports they are not based
on anything that I have said. So I have no comment to make
on such reports if there have been such.
Waters, U. P. I.
Q. The balance of trade is very heavily weighted between
Yugoslavia and Australia in favour of Yugoslavia. Was there any
agreement reached today to try to adjust that balance arid in
relation to that was there any decision to try and coordLinate
the Yugoslav and Australian positions with regard to meat
exports to the EEC.
Both matters were probably discussed by the officials
of both sides in the Working Party on Economics which met while
I was with the President. There was some discussion as I
indicated earlier during the discussions with Mr Bijedic and
his colleagues this morning concerning the sudden closure of
EEC meat markets to our two countries. I am not sure that 
7.
whether you suggested that this matter should be discussed in
the EEC context but if you were suggesting that, that wouldn't
be adequate because to take Australia's position, it has been
similarly affected by a similarly precipitate and inconsiderate
closure of the Japanese market to Australian meat and one of
the repeated inconsiderate threats by the United States to
Australia., It is rather in the GATT context, in the discussions
with Mr lbijedic, it was suggested that this be handled. It is
unfortunate that such instances do occur at the expense of
countries which have developed a capacity to export products
which other countries themselves also produce but not in
sufficient quantity, and it is deplorable that such affluent
countries as the European Economic Community, Japan and the
United States should be such bad internationalists when local
political pressures from primary producers become uncomfortable
for them. They all adopt a very moralistic and patronizing
tone when their own manufacturing exports are affected. One
carn imagine the howls of outrage from Western Europe, Japan
or the United States if Yugoslavia or Australia would dare to
cut off manufactured exports in the way that each of them has
cut off or is threatening to cut off meat exports from
Australia. 0 There was in the discussions ' between Miniso-. eis some
brief reference to the imbalance of trade between Australia and.
Yugoslavia. This is another matter which was probably discussed
in the Economic Working Party. Australia does give Yugoslaviia
special status as a developing country Australia is very likely
to agree to the Yugoslav suggestion for a double taxation
agreement. I did myself make a passing reference in conversatiorn
with the President that most of Australia's exports to Yugoslavia
are wool and hides. These are the basis of highly estkeemed and.
I trust thriving Yugoslavian industries and crafts. : believe
that much of Yugoslavia's export i. K. ome comes from products
based upon imports of Australian wool and leather into
Yugoslavia. 0 Well, we meet in Moscow. 



œ y ,94f^^/^ fl
M, t Good oing Mr. Prime Minister.
P. M. i Good morning Mr. Mirkovio.
M. s I am very happy that you have found time to say a few words for our
television. I know you are very occupied with the problem of the cyclone
which is disastrous.
P Oh yes, this is the worst natural disaster that has happened to
Australia. It is, in our terms, it is what happened to Skopje a few years
ago. 14. The people, let us say scientists, have found how to go to the moon
but still on earth many problems have to be solved.
P. M. I The disastemto which mankinjwas subject before any sciontific
discoveries were made are still there to beset mankind.
M. I We have first to solve problems here on earth.
Mr. Prime Minister, 205 years ago James cook came to Australia with the
Ship Endeavour' the Australian Prime Minister has not been to Europe for
years. Aftor 15 years you are one of the first Australian Prime
Ministers who have come to Europe. That means that you are somehow the
Australian ship to travel to Europe.
P. M. i You are suggesting that an Australian Prime Minister is now setting
out to discover Europe. You put it in a very romantic, poetic way. It is
true that no Australian Prime Minister has officially visited the Contient
of Europe for about 15 years but in that time most Australian Prime
Ministers visited England. The significance of my visit is that I am
visiting a very great number of countries in Europe.
M. i I saw in some English newspapers that the British were a little, how
to say, not very satisfied that the Australian Prime Minister first went
to Brussels and not to London, maybe because Brussels is now a very
important economic centre of Europe. Is it so 
-2-
P I It is symbolic and significant that I made my first call in Europe
in Brussels which is the capital of the European Economic Community. In
frevious years this would have been unthinkable. Any Australian Prime
Minister would have made his first visit to London and in fact probably
would not have visited Brussels at all. It is significant now of course
to us that Britain is part of the Community and accordingly you should
visit the capital of the Community first and so that is what I did.
M. i I see. Does it, for you as an Australian country whose econwny has
been blooming for many years, and with today's political situation in
Europe a little bit gloomy with inflation and unemployment and everything,
seem to you pessimistic.
P. M. a These two scourges of unemployment and inflation, which are afflicting
Wpstern Europe now and of course Northern America are also afflicting the
countries of that type of political or economic system in our region, for
0 instance Japan and Australia and New Zealand are also afflicted by unemployment
and inflation. In each case we are worse affected than for 40 years and that
is the case of unemployment; and this is the case of all these mixed
economies, those western style economies! Australia is being affected the
same way as those other countries and it is very important that I should
exchange views with the leaders of the Governments in those other countries
about how they are tackling these two problems which are affeoting us at the
one tivae and all of us together. -t
M. I Somebody told me that Australia lived for many years in isolation. I
do not know whether you like such a kind of# how do you say, of describing
the problem, may I say so
P. M. t It is a correct description, I suppose, in two ways. Until 25 years
ago, or les than 30 years ago, every country near Australia was ruled from
Europe. The United Statesruled the Philippines, France ruled Indo-China,
the Dutch ruled Indonesia, the British ruled Bnrmaq Indiap Pakistan and Sri
Lanka, and the French ruled several islands in the ' outh Pacific, and
Portugal still has two small oolonies, and then all the ports of China were
ruled by Japan or by European countries and the only countries in the whole
of our region which ruled themselves were Japan, which ruled herself 0./ 3 
-3-
completely, she was already a great power, and Thailand, although thee
were some limitations on the application of Thai laws to Europeans.
So that meant that in Australia the only other Governments which people
ever had to bear in mind wee Governoenta in Eurapel in the case of the
Philippines in Washington, and then there was Japan. Japan was the only
significant Asian country. All our neighbours we" ruled from Europe and
if Australians travelled from Australia to England they would call at
ports or airports which were ruled by Britain.
M. The situation is completely changed which evidently
P. M. s In less than 30 years the position has completely changed. Also
until much more recently in foreign affairs Australia followed the lead
given by Britain and iore recently by the United States.
M. i So this is the reason why your Government is very much engaged in
Asian affairs, may I say, to make this region more stable and to have
friendly relations with these countries. One would think you should have
donefor instance, recognized the People's Republic of China, withdrawn
your troops from Vietnam which, if I may say sot represented the kind of
important steps towards good friendship with Asian countries.
P I There was a great deal of leeway to be made up. It was neoessary
for Australia to have normal relations with all her neighbours and-my
Governmont has now established diplomatic relations with every country
in Asia, every country, and, at the same time, we have established
diplomatic relations with all the countries in Europe, with which we did
not have relations. There is only one country in Europe with which we do
not have diplomatic relations, and we have diplomatic relations with every
country in Asia. We are not categorizing nations as to those that are
favourable or unfavourable, the goodies, the badies, we want to have normal
diplomatic relations with every country with which we would have dealings.
M. Now normally comes the question of non-alignment. On Aginn soil may
I say, somehow, the roots of non-aligmaht are the deepest if you start from
Bandung Conference, the Conference in the role of India$ Indonesia and
other countries which are in that region. Your country and your Governent
express the wish to collaborate, to approach non-aligment. What does it
mean 7 What does it mean exactly What is your attitude towards non-.0/ 4 
-4-
alignment as a political and eoonomio movement# may I say
P. M. Australia is not a non-aligned country herself. There is an
alliance, there has been since the last war, between Australia, New
Zealand and the United States. The initials, the acronym ANZUS| but
very clearly the matters which concern all our neighbours, the whole of
our region are matters which are identified with the non-aligned movement.
The question of developing economies, colonialism, racism, the confrontation
between great powers in our region, all these are matters which are involved
in a non-aligned movement and accordingly if Australia is to have a proper
understanding of Australia, then Australia must be aware of the objectives,
the preocoupationsp the aspirations of the non-aligned countrieos.
S Accordingly, we would be very happy in Australia if we were to be accepted
as guests or observers at non--aligned meetings.
M. I If I understand you well does it specifically mean non-alignment
0 in your case, particularly in Asia, somehow to say " Go out big powers from
this region", somehow to leave the peoples of this region to arrange their
affairs by themselves.
P i We do not want any escalation of military installations or operations
in the Indian Ocean.
M. s This is @ at Aleast
P. M. i We do not want a confrontation to be promoted between the Soviet
Union and the United States in the Indian Ocean.
M. i So, one of the very important points of the non-aligned countries is
concerned with ran materials. This, may I say, redistribution of goods. Your
country is one of the biggest world exporters of certain very important
raw materials. Do you intend to join this movement for redistribution, may
I say so, or more equalitarian, may I say, prices on the world market with
non-aligned countries.
P. M. i We, of course, do export a very great variety of mineral and primary
products and we therefore sympathize with the situation of so many
developing countries which export some of those products but not the same 
variety as we exportl and we are very much aware that they want to have
a stable market for their eporte and of course we want to have a stable
market fo our exports as well. It is completely unsatisfactory where
conditions can be changed without our being involved. The best thing of
course ip to have some arrangements between the producers and the consumers
and in the past the advantaes have bean too much with the consumers. Th4v
have been able to pick off the producers one by one and the consumers very
often have been themselves exporters of manufactured goods or the providers
of services and as rantfaoturers or as entrepreneurs they have had no
compunction to put up the price of their products or their services and
they have been very much more reluctant to adjust thhrices of the goods
upon which they depend on other countries I the primary products, the
mineral products. So our objective would be to get the producers and the
consumers making a prbper marketing agreement, trade agreement between them
for the space of some years. We have Joined, for instance, the International
Bauxite Agreement where ) hgoslavia and Australia each have considerable
izuterests. We have consulted concerning the formation of APEF, the
organization for exporters of iron ore but no agreement, no association
has yet been formed there.
M. i Concerning the Australian-Yugoslav relations, you were two years ago
in Yugoslavia, a few years ago
P. M. 3 3 years
M. v and you know Yugoslavia. Wen you mention Yugoslavia to an ordinary
Australian, you ] mow, the voter, what kind of country does it ( Yugoslavia)
represent
P. M. i The main thin the Australian think about when the word Yugoslavia
is mentioned is the considerable number of migrants, very sturdy migrants,
who have come from Yugoslavia, I think I would be correct in saying that
physically the mot powerful migrants who have come to Australia have come
from the Coast and the mountains of Yugoslavia. There are other people,
older people, who would remember that during the First World War and the
Second World War the heroism of the people of Yugoslavia, and at one time
of course Yugoslavia was the only country in the whole of Europe which was
fighting Hitler and Mussolini and Yugoslavia was the only ally that / 6 
Australia had in the whole of Europe. Now that is over 30 years agog now, but
there would be people iho would remember and value this association and of
6ourse earlier still in 1914p Australians remember how staunch the Serbs
were.
M. m During the Second World War you were enlisted in the Air Force, you
were of this generation
P. M. i Yea, Flight Lieutenant Captain.
M. i Oh yes, important
P. M. 1 ( jokingly) Very important, so important to
M. a Concerning the politiCal and economical relations, what more could be
done for the development of Yugoslav Australian relations. What more could
be done
P. M. s Well this is the sort of thing that I want to be discussing when
I am in Yugoslavia. I am accompanied by the Head of the Australian Department
of Overseas Trade and by the Head of the Australian Department for minerals
and energy, and there are also of course very senior officials from our
Foreign Office, and 3o ong so these are matters which I will be very pleased
to disciss because your Prime Minister was in Australia 21 months ago so
we will pursue these matters.
M. a You think we could increase our trade in exporting more to Australia
because
P. M. i Well, I think this is quite likely but I do not know enough about
what you could supply or what we could supply. Now it is one of the advantages
of visiting a country, it is a visit by a Head of Government to another
country, everybody's mind are concentrated on the community of interests
between those two countries.
M. t To say on the very spot how the things could be done.
P. M. Yes, that is right. 0 
-7-
M. i Mr. Prime Minister, maybe I should ask you much a question. I know
you have won twice on elections but the Opposition is very strong still in
States, in the Senate too. They are somehow accusing you of driving too
leftp is it true that you are driving Australia apart
P. M. i Oh, we have made a very great rnumber of changes in Australia, that
is true. These changes would have caused no surprise in most countries.
Australia had the one Government for 23 years, an extraordinary long period.
We have the seame system of Government that one has, say, in West Germany,
or in Britain, or in the United States, and it is quite exceptional to
have a Prime Minister, or a President, or a Bundee Chancellor belonging
to the one party for 23 years. So, naturally, the changes had to be made and
they would surprise many people, But we have quite a good majority in the
House of Representatives, in the Senate; because of our particular method
of electing the Senate, it is evenly divided and this means that very often
bills do not get through the Senate because they can only be carried if there
is a majority. And, if there is a vote, an even vote, a tied vote, they are
not carried, so that is where the difficulty lies and there are also
You mentioned the States too, we have a federal system and federal systems
are very difficult to operate, as you know in Yugoslavia, ca people know
in the United btates or Canada or WVest Gernany. In Australia in particular
the States' Parliaments are not elected on a democratic system.
M. 1 As this interview is going to be on the air the day before your visit,
the Yugoslav TV audience, the man watching your interview, I am going to
S make a fault,-might say, here is an EnJsiohnan from the South, an Englishman
S from the outhern Hemisphere.
P. M. Oh well, Australia was founded by Englishmen, that is true, but
there... most Australians were born in Australia. Three quarters of the
people there were born int Australia, the other quarter would have migrated
to Australia since the last war from Britain and from most countries of
LEurope.
M. From Yugoslavia.
P. M. t Yes. In recent years moat of the migrants to Australia have come from
Italy and Malta and Yugoslavia and Greece increasingly. So anybody from / 8 
8
Yugoslavia would be able to find a great number of people with a common
baokground on common interests in Australia. But they would tell you
. that it is very easy to fit in in Australia; there is no segregation.
M. i About Australia, what is an Australian
P. M. t Ah well, we were founded from Britain but that is last century and
nowadays I would think that people from Yugoslavia or from Europe would
regard Australians more like Canadians or Americans, or at least as much
like Canadians and Americans as like British people and there is a very
great number of people from Europe now living in Australia, and the climate
is much warmer, it make. for a muah more informal style of life*
Mo So it makes somehow, how to say, a warmer hearted people.
P. M. t Yes, we are informal, friendly, relaxed people.
M. i I know that you have a lot of things to do. Thank you very much
Mr. Prime Minister, really you were very kind.
P. M. s I have enjoyed talking to you and I am looking forward to doing so
in your own country.
M. s Thank you very much. 



Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given
in his honour by the President of Yugoslavia in Belgrade on
lOJanuary 1975
It is, indeed, a very great honor for us to have
been received here by you, to have talked with
you at such length and to have been shown
such hospitality and kindness. Our countries
have ties between them which reach back
across two full generations. We began our cooperation
back at the start of the World War I,
and this co-operation was continued later during
the course of World War II when Yugoslavia
represented the only country in the whole of
Europe which rebelled and fought against the
occupiers. You, Mr President, belong to a group of older
statesmen, distinguished men, who in their day
rebelled with determination and who, in the
end, won freedom for their people. This obligation
you took on has been understood by you
not just as an obligation to your people, but as
one to the whole of mankind because you are
among those who have demonstrated by your
example and your acts, and, in the end, proved,
the way in which freedom can be preserved and
must be defended.
Mr President, you have mentioned the hundreds
of thousands of Yugoslavs who today live
in Australia and you have also made note of certain
problems which, from time to time, have
come up in Australia itself and been the cause of
difficulties in relations between Yugoslavia and
Australia. These difficulties were created by just
one, very small, group of people who betrayed
their country during its most difficult moments,
and then came to make difficulties in the country
where they had chosen to make their homes.
However, I want to assure you that the majority
of Yugoslavs living in Australia today are very
solid citizens. They are proud of their earlier
homeland and they are loyal to their present
country. Of course, the largest group of people
in Australia's present-day population are of British
descent. Next are those of Italian descent,
and then, just behind, the Yugoslavs.
Because increasingly intensive relations and
co-operation exist between our two countries and because hundreds of thousands of your
people already live in Australia, I am convinced-
entirely sure-that all this must lead to
better understanding and the development of
better relations between our two countries.
Yugoslavia is a highly diversified country.
Different parts of your country were at different
times under the occupation of different powers
and countries. You have had different internal
administrations within the framework of the
country itself, and quite a few differences, likewise,
in cultures. However, I must state that
among the Yugoslavs living in Australia today a
pride and satisfaction is to be noted at belonging
to one unified Yugoslav community which was
achieved thanks to your leadership. 
comes from Yugoslavia, by realising that the activity
of those people who had done much harm
here must be thwarted, at least in your country
in order to provide peace for those who went to
work there honestly as citizens of Australia.
You have helped greatly to improve the situation
in this respect. It goes without saying, Mr
Prime Minister, that all those who emigrated
soon after the war are not negative, many
people wish to forget the past and to work
peacefully in your country. We have no objection
to such people. Today, too, some of our
people leave for your country. We put no obstacles
in anybody's way, each may go where
he wishes. These are Yugoslav citizens, honest
people, and I am convinced that they, in your
country too, will be equally good citizens, who
will work in the interest of their new homeland
-Australia. Many of them will return. You said,
a while ago. that some of these people have vacation
homes, small villas, on the Dalmatian
Coast, and I think this is very nice. Such people
are a bridge of friendship between our two
countries. I would like to take this opportunity to express
my satisfaction with the fact, also, that on many
international questions we hold identical views.
Our co-operation at the United Nations is very
good. I think that many more possibilities exist,
too, in other areas such as, let us say, the economic,
to expand our co-operation. We import
many raw materials from you, and Yugoslavia,
for its part, has many things that it can export to
your country. It would be a good thing for us to
export more, too, because the economies of our
two countries are complemetary and possibilities
really do exist for us to expand this cooperation.
Your visit to Yugoslavia, unfortunately, is very
short. Furthermore, the weather at present here
is not pleasant. Therefore, we hope that you will
come to Yugoslavia when it is more at its best,
warmer weather, and when you will be able to
see more, including the beauties of our Adriatic.
It is our hope, also, that as many as possible of
your citizens will come to Yugoslavia.
Yugoslavia today is a tourist country, very attractive
to many, and so it will be a pleasure for
us to have as many guests as possible from
friendly Australia. In ending, I would like, Dear
Friend, to emphasise once again how happy we are to have you with us today. I, myself, have
wanted to meet you, to see you, because I had
heard a great deal of the best about you, and I
know that you are a friend of our country, as are
your wife and associates. May I express the
hope, Dear Friend, and Mrs Whitlam, that you
will take the very best impressions with you
when you leave our country. Australia is known
in Yugoslavia as a friendly and progressive
country whose aspiration it is to build as good
and happy a life as possible where many people
from Yugoslavia are working and making their
contribution. 
Speech by President Tito of Yugoslavia at a luncheon in honour of
the Prime Minister of Australia in Belgrade on 10 January 1975
I would like to express the great pleasure, of my
wife, Jovanka, of myself and of all of us, to have
you all here as our guests today. You have come
from a far-away country geographically but one
close-by in terms of aspirations and outlook on
the world, in terms of efforts for the best possible
relations throughout the entire world, in
terms of eliminating, as soon as possible, the
various negative features which even today are
still burdening our world.
Many of our countrymen live in your country...
some arrived before the last war, and
others immediately after that war, but these are
two categories of people who differ in many ways. Those who originally left Yugoslavia to go
to your country did so because of economic
need, because they lived in great poverty. But
among those who went immediately after the
last war, there were those who were traitors,
who had collaborated with the occupiers and
committed terrible crimes-crimes you and
your people did not know about. Naturally these
two categories of our people who found a home
in your friendly country had to come into conflict
and to hate each other, to a situation which was
not in the interest of our two countries. I know
that you, personally, Mr Prime Minister, and
your Government, have done a great favour to
us by realising that it is not all the same who
The Prime Minister in talks in Belgrade with the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia. Mr Bijedic 
national community. We have failed to grasp
opportunities to set the world on the path to
peace: We have failed to eliminate the threat of
war: we have failed to regulate the development
and proliferation of the instruments of war. The
threat posed by the production and proliferation
of nuclear weapons is the most awesome ever
posed to the future of mankind. The development
of measures to eliminate the threat of
nuclear war is therefore the most pressing issue
which confronts us.
The issues which symbolise the change in Australian
foreign policy under my Governmentand
the increasing similarity of approach between
Australia and Yugoslavia-are
colonialism and racism. It is my conviction that
the most significant historical trend since the
Second World War has been the struggle to end
imperialism, colonialism and racial discrimination.
One of my first actions after coming to
power was to instruct our representatives at the
United Nations to add Australia's voice to the
international condemnation of colonialism and
racism. We have supported all actions in the
United Nations against the illegal racist regime
in Rhodesia and against the infamous policy of
apartheid. Recently Australia voted in the
Security Council for the expulsion of South
Africa from the United Nations for its twentyeight-
year-long flouting of the most basic principles
of the Charter: we have joined the United
Nations Council on Namibia: reactivated our
membership of the United Nations Committee
of Twenty-four: and are providing assistance to
subject peoples in their fight for liberation.
In pursuing more independent policies, my
Government has sought to identify the common
interests which Australia shares with a broad
range of countries. Australia straddles many of
the categories which are often used to distinguish
countries-namely, the developed
from the developing, the rich from the poor, the
second from the third world, the producers from
the consumers, the aligned from the nonaligned.
Ours is a developed country, yet the
foundations of much of our prosperity on primary
production and the export of minerals has
made us conscious of the problems faced by
both producers and consumers. As a
predominantly European community in the
Asian and Pacific region, we are conscious of
the pressing requirements of our neighbours. As a comparatively rich country, we accept the
responsibility of extending asistance to the
developing countries. Bound by treaty to the
United States, we nonetheless respect and seek
to understand further the views of those
countries which have chosen to espouse nonalignment.
The bilateral relations between Australia and
Yugoslavia are strong and cordial. My visit will
help to strengthen them. Many migrants of
Yugoslav origin live in Australia. Their skills and
initiative have contributed to Australia's
progress and form an enduring bond between
our nations. I believe, Mr Prime Minister, that
after your visit to Australia you were satisfied
that my Government is determined to do all in
its power to prevent and punish criminal acts of
terrorism directed against Yugoslavia by a small
minority of malcontents and undesirables. You
may be assured that we will hold firmly to our
commitment. Trade between our countries is growing and
there is every sign that it will grow further. It is
my hope that we shall soon enter into long-term
agreements for increased trade. I hope to see a
greatly increased flow of private business,
officials and experts between our two countries.
Recent negotiations leading to the conclusion of
a bilateral civil aviation agreement covering
flights of your national airline to Australia and
ours to Belgrade is a positive contribution to this
goal. Negotiations for the conclusion of a
Cultural Agreement are well advanced.
The relationship between Australia and
Yugoslavia is based on an affinity of views on
the fundamentals of the international order. An
interdependent world demands co-operation
rather than confrontation: and no state, however
great, should threaten the independence of
another state, however small. These shared beliefs,
and the opportunities and demands presented
by a troubled world, form the basis of a
friendship that will be healthy and beneficial for
our two countries, and a constructive contribution
to the wider needs of peace and understanding
in the world. 



JANUAiR--Y 10,17
The Ac t 4ng Prime Dlllinisl er an6 T-,-asucor, Dr. J. P. CaiL: r. E
SZaid todc-y that he-hone-d s; oon be able to meet State-c P-nrlcr23
to dis-cuss -o~ elt-~ aefinanrceiall ati onships
especially as th1ey affecctecc empl. lymnt-Dr. Cai. rnus
comu" Tenl ing o17 a st-Item,: t -tile Premier of N. S, 14., ilr-. ei,
that 3"' 000 State public S -_-vants faced dismissal becaalse o'!
~ 213: t9. of finance..
fie said he hopEd th1at ' che planll(-tc discussions aith Lhe
P'remniers would be held in a * esponsible, non-poliLical
~ N. Lew. is ' s st~ atement: inaJca-', ef3 the de-gree of dcpendencre
StategoLr1-cc now ha~ ve c)) i Th-e Aust-alian ~ aeoeK.
Dr. Cairns said.
w1~ ouldC havo expe: ' Cv: ad tha 1. E Mr. I, ewi** s se~ riou'slythak
tlhat hr' -Laces t~ hedimisa o. F 3000 people-, he would have
coiaa directly to iti ari. d no-L-to the Press,.
" It is unrcason VIble cor poli'-ical pressure_ tLo IxD used to
t a problem'. Of tChi i; n : tur
vouiLd hocpc that 1-r. . L wc\ uld prefe(-r tlhie sort-LS of
discussion. s T p2: or-0sc. to comnaigthrough the
Pres Dr. Cairns Lad tha. L 2. stralian governmtent Ti easuryv of-ficials
wIould met:-with SLuteL-c-C'ove rnmeic-nt Tpreasury of ficials in the)
next -melk or so.
Kc. ioulc. 12eeI-StaIte Labocr leaders aL-Ki : ribilli H~ ouse,, Syclnc:,,
on J2. m.' ory 



Joint Communique issued at the conclusion on 1 2 January 1 975 of
the visit to Yugoslavia by the Prime Minister of Australia
At the invitation of the President of the Federal
Executive Council, Dzemal Bijedic, the Prime
Minister of Australia, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
accompanied by Mrs Whitlam, paid an official
friendly visit to the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia from 9 to 12 January 1 975.
The President of the Republic, Josip Broz Tito,
received Prime Minister Whitlam, and held a
long and friendly talk with him on topics of
mutual interest relating to international relations
and bilateral co-operation. The Prime
Minister extended an invitation to the President
to visit Australia. The President accepted the
invitation with pleasure.
Prime Minister Whitlam and his party visited
Belgrade, Mostar and Dubrovnik.
In the course of the visit, detailed and extensive
discussion took place between the President of
the Federal Executive Council, Dzemal Bijedic,
and Prime Minister Whitlam and their associates.
The Yugoslav side at the talks was represented
by: Mr Milos Minic, Vice-President of the Federal
Executive Council and Federal Secretary
for Foreign Affairs;
Dr Emil Ludviger, Member of the Federal
Executive Council, Federal Secretary for
Foreign Trade;
Mr Miljan Komatina, Assistant Federal Secretary
for Foreign Affairs;
Mr Uros Vidovic, Ambassador of the SFR of
Yugoslavia to Australia;
Mrs Milica Ziberna, Assistant Federal Secretary
for Foreign Trade;
Mr Milan Manojlovic, Assistant Chairman of
the Federal Committee for Work and Employment;
Mr Nikola Cicanovic, Adviser to the President
of the Federal Executive Council for
Foreign Policy Matters;
Mr Ismet Redzic, Director of the Department for the Far East, Indochina and Pacific, Federal
Secretariat for Foreign Affairs; and
Mr Bozidar Crnjak, Head of Group for Pacific
Department for Far East, Indochina and
Pacific.
The Australian side at the talks was represented
by: Hon. L. F. Bowen, Special Minister of State
and Minister assisting the Prime Minister;
H. E. Malcolm Booker, Ambassador of
Australia to the SFR of Yugoslavia;
Sir Lenox Hewitt, Secretary, Department
of Minerals and Energy;
Mr D. H. McKay, Secretary, Department
of Overseas Trade;
Mr G. J. Yeend, Deputy Secretary, Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet;
Mr R. A. Woolcott, Deputy Secretary, Department
of Foreign Affairs;
Mr J. Spigelman, Principal Private Secretary
to the Prime Minister;
Mr R. J. Greet, Assistant Secretary, Department
of Foreign Affairs; and
Mr J. S. F. Bowan, Counsellor of the Embassy
of Australia
Separate talks were held in the Federal Secretariat
for Foreign Affairs and in the Federal
Secretariat for Foreign Trade between the
officials of these . two institutions and members
of the Australian delegation.
All discussions took place in a friendly atmosphere
and in a spirit of mutual understanding
and respect. Views were exchanged on wideranging
current international issues and on the
possibilities for promoting diversified forms of
co-operation between the two countries.
The two sides paid particular attention to the
expansion of mutual trade. It was noted that the
level of economic relations lags behind the
actual possibilities. They expressed their belief
that there exist favourable conditions for the
further development of economic co-operation
in various fields and agreed that it was necess-
ary and in the mutual interest to make joint
efforts to enhance trade and economic cooperation
in both directions.
The Australian side would welcome a greater
engagement of Yugoslav commercial interests
in the Australian market and to this end recommended
to the Yugoslav side the intensified
use of the market assistance facility of the Australian
Department of Overseas Trade.
The Australian side agreed to give careful consideration
to the Yugoslav wish to conclude an
agreement on the elimination of double taxation.
The two sides welcomed the conclusion of an air
service agreement between Australia and
Yugoslavia and the early introduction of regular
scheduled services between Australia and
Yugoslavia by Qantas and JAT.
The two sides consider that the Yugoslavs living
and working in Australia represent a special link
between Yugoslavia and Australia. The
Yugoslav side expressed its appreciation for the
efforts which Australia has made to promote the
welfare of Yugoslavs in Australia. The Australian
side reiterated its concern that they
should enjoy the same conditions as other
members of the Australian community. Both
sides believed that there could be value in the
conclusion of a Social Welfare Agreement between
Australia and Yugoslavia.
The Yugoslav side notes with appreciation the
efforts which the Australian Government had
made to prevent terrorist activity by extremist
emigr groups aimed against Yugoslavia
and designed to obstruct the development of
friendly relations between the two countries.
The Australian side confirmed its determinaton
to prevent such activity.
The two sides also examined possibilities to
intensify cultural co-operation and agreed to
conclude a Cultural Agreement at an early date.
Prime Minister Whitlam set forth his assessment
of the situation in the Pacific and Asian
region. Prime Minister Bijedic acquainted Prime
Minister Whitlam with his view of the situation
in Europe, particularly in the area of the Mediterranean.
The Yugoslav side informed the
Australian side in detail of the activities and the
forthcoming program of the non-aligned countries.
The two sides noted that the strengthening
of the role of the non-aligned countries,
which had become an important political and material factor in the world, contribul: es considerably
to the democratisation and stabilisation
of international relations and to the settlement
of outstanding international issues;.
The Yugoslav side took note with interest and
appreciation of the desire of Australia to take
part as observer or guest at the next summit
meeting of the non-aligned countries and welcomed
its positive attitude towards the
increased role of the non-aligned policy as well
as its interest in co-operation with tile nonaligned
countries.
In regard to the situation in the Middle East, the
two sides pointed out the need to make intensive
efforts to find a just and durable solution on
the basis of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.
The two Prime Ministers consider that the
implementation of the Resolutions of the United
Nations constitutes the appropriate approach for
a just and lasting solution to the Cyprus crisis
and expressed their willingness to make efforts
to this end.
With respect to the situation in Viet-Nam, the
two sides agreed that it was necessary to secure
the full and strict implementation of the Paris
Agreements. In welcoming the progress made by the peoples
of Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and Angola on
their road to liberation, and the adoption by the
United Nations General Assembly of the
Resolution on decolonisation as the expression
of the successful struggle against colonialism,
the two sides emphatically condemned the policy
of racial discrimination and apartheid and
expressed their belief that the peoples subjected
to racial oppression would soon attain freedom.
The two Prime Ministers emphasised the particular
importance of the United Nations
organisation, pointing to the need for further
strengthening its role and efficacy in dealing
with fundamental international political and
economic problems, as well as in the development
of all-round international co-operation
and safeguarding peace in the world. The
importance and usefulness of co-operation between
representatives of Yugoslavia and
Australia in the United Nations and in other international
organisations were also
emphasised. During the conversations, views were exchanged
on the current economic situation in the
world. The two sides stressed the need to find 
more durable solutions to economic problems
through broad international co-operation which
would take into account the interdependence of
all states while respecting their sovereign
interests. The two sides accentuated the importance
of the decisions of the Sixth Special Session
of the General Assembly of the United
Nations and the need for their early implementation.
They concurred in the belief that disruptions
in the world economy could be overcome
only through substantial changes in existing international
economic relations and the establishment
of a new economic order based on
equality between nations. Only thus would it be
possible to improve substantially the position of
the developing countries, which constitute a
key issue in international economic relations.
The two sides stressed that the problems of raw
materials and economic development could be
resolved through the introduction of more just
terms of trade in the exchange of primary and
industrial products, while at the same time
recognising the right of all nations to freely
manage their own natural resources. The two
sides voiced the need to undertake concrete
steps in the directon of halting the arms race
and bringing about general and complete disarmament,
in particular nuclear disarmament.
The two Prime Ministers expressed their readiness
to support all efforts aimed at consolidating
international co-operation based on the principles
of equality, non-interference and respect
for the independence and sovereignty of all
states. They evaluated positively the results so
far achieved in the promotion of detente, as a
contribution to peace. They stressed that, in
order to become a universal and lasting process,
detente must spread to all areas of the world, so
facilitating the resolution of outstanding international
issues and acute crises with the participation
of the international community as a
whole. The Prime Minister expressed his deep appreciation
for the warm cordiality and generous hospitality
extended to him and his party by Mr
Bijedic and the Yugoslav Government. 
1: ' ls " I S..  4? k
The opening of talks in the Kremlin between Mr Whitlam and Mr Kosygin. -1
; rr IF(
* 141", 04"--



vOR PnpsS 13 January 1975
COIN7, NT BY! THE PTZIMT? MI'TITE" I T1IF IION. V l W! T'~
MP., ON F'IPN\: Ty NOLAN'r 0117T Op
PAT '. TIT( 1;
I spetik for all Australians in expressing the
Government's profound gratitude for Mr. NZolan's gift
of paintings and our appreciolion of ' his splendir examn-ino
of -enerosity. Mr. S olAn' ift will he an invaluable
addition to ther national collection. It will add
immeasurably to the artistic hevritauo or the ination
whose reputation he has done ! o much to enhance ; ind
whose landscape and distinctive tr-ditions of folklore
and mythology lie has unrorpettably preserved in his PrTt.
LU" MINGT? A D, I5 SP 



USSR Speech by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR,
Mr Aleksey Kosygin, at a dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of
Australia in Moscow on 14 January 1975
The official visit of Prime Minister Whitlam to
the Soviet Union and Soviet-Australian talks
which have begun in the Kremlin today are a
very signal event in relations between our
countries, not only because this is the first visit
by a Head of Government of Australia to the
Soviet Union in the history of our relations. This
visit culminates, as it were, the positive work
carried out to date in many areas of cooperation
between the Soviet Union and
Australia, and, on the other hand, enables both
countries to outline ways and means to raise
these relations to a higher level. The talks just
opened show that both sides have a desire to do
this. Regrettably, we cannot yet say that the history
of Soviet-Australian relations is rich in traditions.
I think the reason for this was not a lack
of interest in each other or of a real basis for
development of our relations. Anyway, as for
the Soviet Union, we have invariably shown
readiness to develop equitable and mutually
beneficial co-operation with Australia. I am not
of course saying this to recapitulate the past. It is
much more important that Soviet-Australian
relations today are marked by new positive tendencies
and shifts, which at the same time are a
significant feature of international relations in
general. Major changes are under way in the world.
There is an ever more active search for solutions
to problems facing not only individual countries
but all mankind. These are above all the problems
of war and peace, of improving international
relations on a just and democratic
basis. These are the problems of economic and
scientific-technical development and social progress, the solution of which is a key to a more
secure and better future for peoples.
It is possible to say with confidence today that
the world on the whole is evolving in a direction
encouraging for all champions of peace and
progress, and this consolidates the people's
faith in the future and in the possibility to make
life on earth worthy of man.
This is demonstrably shown by many facts. If
we take the sphere of international relations,
there are above all the current assertion of the
principles of peaceful co-existence of states
with different social systems, the emergence in
the world arena of many new states as active
members of international intercourse, the continuing
process of the relaxation of international
tensions and the development of peaceful cooperation
among states. There is also the overall
strengthening of the positions of those forces
which stand for the settlement of the historical
contest between different social systems on the
lines of peaceful co-existence, rather than on
military lines. The Soviet People has an extensive
plan of action in the field of domestic and
foreign policies, which we are consistently putting
into practice. It is the decisions of the 24th
Congress of our Party and the plenary meetings
of its Central Committee and the Congressendorsed
peace program, on whose basis we
build our relations with Australia as well. We are
working for the realisation of the aims of our
peace-loving foreign policy not by opposing
some states to others, but are striving to do
everything possible to join efforts in this direction
with as large a number of states as possible
which are also interested in strengthening
peace. This approach is clearly visible in the 
position of the Soviet Union on the questions of
enhancing security and co-operation in Europe,
in our proposals concerning collective security
in Asia and in many other foreign-policy initiatives
of our country, such as the holding of a
world disarmament conference. We stand for
making the process of detente irreversible and
safeguarding a lasting peace for all nations by
promoting broad and equal international cooperation
and by strengthening mutual understanding
and trust between states. ' Everything
possible should be done,' said General
Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee
L. I. Brezhnev, ' to ensure that the peoples of the
world live free from war, live in security, cooperation
and intercourse with each other. Such
is the urgent call of our times.'
During the talks with the Australian Prime Minister
we intend to devote serious attention to the
questions of bilateral co-operation between the
two countries. I think that unutilised possibilities
and great reserves are available in many areas
of our relations-in economic, scientific, technical,
cultural and, last but not least, political-in
the matter of strengthening our co-operation in
the interests of peace and the security of
nations. It appears to us that the Soviet Union and
Australia can more effectively join efforts, in
particular, in solving such important international
problems as the ending of the arms
race, disarmament, the implementation of the
Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the total prohibition of all nuclear
weapon tests, the solution of the questions of
maritime law and a number of other problems.
The foundation for the further deepening of
Soviet-Australian co-operation in international
affairs is seen by us in that the Governments of
both countries adhere to close positions in
evaluating the significance of the relaxation of
international tension, in understanding the
need that detente should spread to all areas of
the world.
Both the Soviet Union and, obviously, Australia
are interested in peace and stability ensured in
Asia, too, particularly in those regions of the
continent where the situation continues to be
tense and fraught with war danger.
This concerns primarily the situation in the Middle
East. A just and lasting settlement in that region can be achieved only on the basis of the
Security Council and UN General Assembly
Resolutions, on the basis of the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories,
on the basis of the exercise of the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
including their right to self-determination and
their own statehood, and the safeguarding of
the security and independence of all states in
the region. We believe that the way to a stable
political settlement there passes through the
earliest reconvening of the Geneva Middle-East
Peace Conference.
To ensure peace in Asia means also to bring to a
conclusion the political settlement in Indo-
China, to secure undeviating compliance with
the Paris Agreement on Viet-Nam by all parties
to it, to put an end to the armed provocaticns of
the Saigon regime against the Republic of
South Viet-Nam and to its attempts at undermining
the foundations of a political settlement.
The Soviet Union will continue doing everything
possible for the solution of the problems of
peace and security in Asia, just as, naturally,
elsewhere. At the same time, we respect the
proposals of other states aimed at attaining this
goal. We do justice to the foreign-policy sl: eps of
the Australian Government in support of the
process of easing tensions, and we are prepared
to develop co-operation with Australia in the
matter of ensuring international security on an
acceptable basis.
In recent years, the Soviet Union and Australia
have secured, through joint efforts, a certain
progress in the development of mutual economic
relations. We shall strive to make our trade
with Australia, our economic ties with it, stable
and long-term. For this, Australia's business
circles and Soviet foreign trade organisations
should know better the markets and possibilities
of each other; they should be able correctly
to appraise the prospects for the economic
development of our countries, their role in the
international division of labour not only today,
but also tomorrow. The great importance of this
is borne out, specifically, by the big shifts and
upheavals that have of late taken place in the
West in international trade and in economy as a
whole. Apparently, Australia with its natural resources,
great territory and possibilities in industry and 
agriculture will be acquiring a new importance it seems to us, testifies to a mutual aspiration to
in the world as one of the promising and big ensure success of Soviet-Australian talks and
participants in international economic co-give a new impetus to the further development
operation. And we would like to wish success in of Soviet-Australian co-operation.
this to the Australian people for whom the
Soviet people entertain the kindest sentiments.
We have always respected the people of
Australia, doing justice to their capacity for
work, persistence in overcoming difficulties,
and to their mastership of industrial and agricultural
production. Our people remember that
in the years of World War II we were bound by
ties of allied relations and that Australian soldiers
contributed to the rout of the fascist
enemy. The 30th anniversary of this victory will
be celebrated by the peoples and Governments
of the Soviet Union and Australia, in
strengthening peace as the objective basis on
which our countries can build and extend their
co-operation for the benefit of both peoples and
in the interests of peace and progress.
I would like to express satisfaction with the fact
that our talks with the Prime Minister and other
Australian statesmen began in an atmosphere
of mutual understanding and frankness which,
A march -past in honour of the Prime Minister at the War Cemetery in Leningrad. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR In
Moscow on 14 January 197
It is a great pleasure to be in Moscow as the first
Australian Prime Minister to visit the Soviet
Union. Australians admire the immense
achievements of the Soviet people in building
and rebuilding their great nation. As wartime
allies we admired the strength, the stamina, the
solidarity, the sheer courage of your people in
defending their motherland from fascist aggression.
In the past two days my party and I
have been vividly and poignantly reminded of
the heroism of your countrymen in the defence
of Leningrad, in the defence of Moscow, in the
defence of Volgagrad. No country has suffered
more in war, no country has fought in war with
greater valour, no country has survived the
devastation of war with greater strength and
resolution. I believe these experiences and
these great qualities have strengthened your
determination to work for a peaceful world.
Here in the Kremlin, here in this splendid hall, I
am nearing the end of a pattern of visits to the
major powers which I commenced shortly after I
became Prime Minister and which reflects the
independent and diversified foreign policy
which my government has proclaimed. Since
we came to office my Foreign Minister and I
have between us visited every continent. We
have visited the capitals of the five permanent
members of the United Nations Security Council.
This global context of our diplomacy is
important, first because we consider it necessary
to demonstrate to other governments and
leaders the important new directions of
Australia's policies. Secondly, the global context
is significant because I believe it is the
proper perspective in which to view our relations
with your Government. Your huge, diverse,
multi-national state occupies one-fifth of
the world's land surface, stretching from the
Baltic Sea to the North Pacific. The Soviet Union
is one of the world's two strongest powers. Our
policies acknowledge this fact. We recognise
that your interests, like your responsibilities, are
global. Australia believes that as a vigorous and forward
looking middle power, it is essential for us
to make what contribution we can tc the
strengthening of detente between the Soviet
Union and the United States. We must do more
than that. We must do our best to make dEtente
both irreversible and universal. As I said at the
United Nations General Assembly last September,
the Australian Government wAholeheartedly
endorses the progress towNards
detente which we have witnessed so far. We
recognise that detente is a continuing and a cooperative
endleavour. We would like to see it
widened to include relations between all the
major powers. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to
record in both capitals Australia's warm appreciation
of the progress made and cour encouragement
for further achievements.
I said this in Washington last October. I said it
today in Moscow, because in the final analysis
the peace of the world depends on Moscow and
Washington. Like other medium and smaller powers,
Australia welcomes detente, not oni' t for the
relative stability and freedom from fear which it
promises, but because it has helped create the
conditions in which middle powers like ourselves
can pursue more independent policies.
The old rigidities of the cold war have passed,
not least because so many ideological barriers
have been dismantled. My Government has
now established diplomatic relations With every
state geographically placed between the Soviet
Union and Australia. This is a mark of the new
realism in our policy. Just as we have diversified
our relations with the United Sates, so in
different ways we are diversifying our relations
with you.
Your country's military and indlus-irial might,
like that of the United States, places you in a
pre-eminent position to influence the future of
our planet. I have acknowledged the global 
extent of your interests. Such power, such
interests, bring with them great responsibilities.
Australia looks to the superpowers to maintain
the utmost mutual restraint in their relations
with each other and towards other nations. On
such restraint peace and progress ultimately
depend. We look to you for responsible leadership
and action to meet the urgent global problems
of human need and suffering. Thus we
hope, for example, that the Soviet Union and
the United States will co-operate in an adequate
international system of grain reserves to
alleviate the uncertainties and shortages of
supplies in world food resources.
The other great area of responsibility which
attaches to the great powers is the nuclear arms
race and the increasing risk of the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I expressed Australia's
deep concern on these vital issues, and outlined
some positive steps which the international
community could take to meet these challenges,
in my address to the last session of the
United Nations General Assembly. Statements
by many other leaders reflected the same grave
apprehensions and concern. My Government
has declared its commitment to practical and
effective international disarmament measures.
We have ratified the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and subsequently concluded the Mandatory
Safeguards Agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Yet we observe some
flagging of international concern over the
consequences of nuclear proliferation. We are
disappointed by the lack of universal support in
our own and other regions for the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, which we consider the
essential foundation for a safer world. Perhaps
we have lived in the shadow of mutual destruction
for so long that we have become accustomed
to it. Can we dare to be complacent about
our very survival?
Since raising our concern for these issues at the
United Nations I have visited each of the three
depository powers of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. In Washington three months ago, in
London in December, and now here in Moscow.
I have made the same point. We look to the depository
states to maintain international interest
in the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to promote
and enlarge its membership. In this year of the
NPT Review Conference we see a special opportunity to revitalise the commitments undertaken
in this treaty, to strengthen the basis of
peace and awaken us from the nightmare of a
world in which nuclear weapons are widespread.
I was glad to note that in the historic
Vladivostok communique of 24 November,
Comrade Brezhnev and President Ford stressed
the importance of increasing the effectiveness
of the Treaty. We therefore look confidently to
the Soviet Union for constructive leadership on
this issue, not only by virtue of your special position
in relation to the Treaty, but because of
your important role as Co-Chairman of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament.
Mr President, I have spoken frankly on matters
of great consequence to us all. Nothing less
would have been appropriate to the dignity of
this unique occasion. Nothing less would adequately
have reflected the true nature of our
relations. These relations are now-though unhappily
they have not always been-characterised
by greater frankness, by greater realism,
by greater seriousness, by greater understanding.
My visit will serve to strengthen this understanding
and bring our peoples much closer
together. For example, I shall be signing agreements
between the Soviet Union and Australia
on science and technology and on cultural
exchanges. We have much to learn from you in
the scientific and technical fields, you I hope
may have something to learn from us. We
warmly welcome the prospect of a Cultural
Agreement between us. Australians deeply
respect and admire the culture of the Soviet
people-the glorious fruits of which I have seen
and heard at first hand during my present visit
to the Soviet Union.
In these and other ways we shall develop the
range of contacts between us. A world in which
states, regardless of their different social systems,
can communicate their views and
interests clearly and confidently is a world more
amenable to peaceful change and peaceable
policies. I regard the relations between our
countries as a constructive element in the creation
of such a world. I regard my visit to your
country, and the warm hospitality you have extended
to me and my party, as an important
contribution to the strengthening of friendship
between the Soviet and Australian peoples. 
Joint Communique issued at the conclusion of the visit by the Prime
Minister of Australia to the USSR on 16 January 1975
At the invitation of the Soviet Government the
Prime Minister of Australia, the Hon. E. G.
Whitlam, paid an official visit to the USSR from
12to 16 January 1975.
During his stay in the Soviet Union Mr Whitlam
and his party visited Moscow and Leningrad.
They had an opportunity to see how the Soviet
people live and work, as well as to acquaint
themselves with their achievements in the fields
of economics, science, education and culture.
The Prime Minister of Australia laid wreaths at
the Tomb of the Unknown Solider in Moscow
and at the Piskarovskoye Memorial Cemetery in
Leningrad. The Prime Minister and his party were everywhere
accorded a warm welcome and generous
hospitality. The Prime Minister of Australia, E. G. Whitlam,
was received by the Chairman of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, N. V. Podgorny.
In the talks which took place between the
Chairman of the Soviet of Ministers of the
USSR, A. N. Kosygin, the First Deputy Chairman
of the Soviet of Ministers, K. T. Mazurov
and the Prime Minister of Australia, E. G.
Whitlam, there took part:
On the Soviet side-the First Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, V. V. Kuznetsov;
the First Deputy Minister of Foreign
Trade of the USSR, M. R. Kuzmin; and other
officials. On the Australian side-the Special Minister
of State, the Hon. L. F. Bowen; the Ambassador
of Australia to the USSR, Sir
James Plimsoll; the Secretary of the Department
of Minerals and Energy, Sir Lenox
Hewitt; the Secretary of the Department of
Overseas Trade, Mr D. H. McKay; the
Deputy Secretary of the Department of
Foreign Affairs, Mr R. A. Woolcott; and the Deputy Secretary of the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr G. J. Yeend.
During the talks which were held in a businesslike
atmosphere and in a spirit of mutual understanding,
the parties had a constructive
exchange of opinions on major international
issues of mutual interest as well as on matters
concerning Soviet-Australian relations and the
prospects of their development.
Both sides noted that the positions of the Soviet
Union and Australia coincided or were close on
a number of important international problems.
They noted the significant developmenls which
had taken place in recent years towards
strengthening international peace and cooperation
and consolidating the spirit ol detente
in international relations.
Both sides agreed to make every effort ' o ensure
that relaxation of tension spread to all regions of
the world and that the steady progress towards
detente became irreversible.
Both parties noted the importance of the agreements
and arrangements concluded between
the USSR and the USA, directed at the further
improvement of the international climate and,
above all, the importance of the agreements on
the prevention of a nuclear war and the limitation
of strategic arms.
The Soviet Union and Australia note with satisfaction
the considerable advances towards
strengthening security and developing peaceful
co-operation in Europe and expres: s their hope
that the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe will be successfully
concluded in the near future.
The Soviet Union and Australia attach great
importance to strengthening peace and stability
in Asia and expressed their determination to
contribute in every possible way to relaxing
tensions further, to ensuring security and to
creating conditions for making Asia a continent 



S A A II A:
n&gt; li7 r. r FPRESS STATEMENT January 1975
SIGNING OF SCIENCE AGREEMENT WITH U. S. S. R.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, and Soviet
Prime Minister, Mr. Kos( gn, today signed in Moscow an
agreement between the Australian and USSR Governments
for scientific and technical cooperation. The agreement
will facilitate increased cooperation in both the natural
and social sciences. In the first instance five fields are to be given
priority for cooperation. They are: earth sciences, plant
industry, radioastronomy, etomology and textile technology.
Small groups of experts in these fields will e; change visits
so that long-term programs for cooperation can he prepared.
The first of these visits has been made by an
Australian group of earth scientists which toured the USSR
in December 1974, for discussions with their Soviet counterparts.
Soviet groups in textile technology and radi. oastronomy will
visit Australia in February for talks with Australian scientists
and inspections of laboratories. Other exchanges will take
place in subsequent months.
As a result of the prior negotiation of the
agreement there has already been a strengthening of
scientific cooperation between Australia and the USSR in
some of the priority areas. It is hoped that the agreement
will benefit scientific development in both countries, and
thereby contribute to furthering bilateral relations between
Australia and the USSR.
MOSCOW 



Joint Communique issued at the conclusion of the visit by the Prime
Minister of Australia to the USSR on 16 January 1975
At the invitation of the Soviet Government the
Prime Minister of Australia, the Hon. E. G.
Whitlam, paid an official visit to the USSR from
12to 16 January 1975.
During his stay in the Soviet Union Mr Whitlam
and his party visited Moscow and Leningrad.
They had an opportunity to see how the Soviet
people live and work, as well as to acquaint
themselves with their achievements in the fields
of economics, science, education and culture.
The Prime Minister of Australia laid wreaths at
the Tomb of the Unknown Solider in Moscow
and at the Piskarovskoye Memorial Cemetery in
Leningrad.
The Prime Minister and his party were everywhere
accorded a warm welcome and generous
hospitality.
The Prime Minister of Australia, E. G. Whitlam,
was received by the Chairman of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, N. V. Podgorny.
In the talks which took place between the
Chairman of the Soviet of Ministers of the
USSR, A. N. Kosygin, the First Deputy Chairman
of the Soviet of Ministers, K. T. Mazurov
and the Prime Minister of Australia, E. G.
Whitlam, there took part:
On the Soviet side-the First Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, V. V. Kuznetsov;
the First Deputy Minister of Foreign
Trade of the USSR, M. R. Kuzmin; and other
officials. On the Australian side-the Special Minister
of State, the Hon. L. F. Bowen; the Ambassador
of Australia to the USSR, Sir
James Plimsoll; the Secretary of the Department
of Minerals and Energy, Sir Lenox
Hewitt; the Secretary of the Department of
Overseas Trade, Mr D. H. McKay; the
Deputy Secretary of the Department of
Foreign Affairs, Mr R. A. Woolcott; and the Deputy Secretary of the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr G. J. Yeend.
During the talks which were held in a businesslike
atmosphere and in a spirit of mutual understanding,
the parties had a constructive
exchange of opinions on major international
issues of mutual interest as well as on matters
concerning Soviet-Australian relations and the
prospects of their development.
Both sides noted that the positions of the Soviet
Union and Australia coincided or were close on
a number of important international problems.
They noted the significant developments which
had taken place in recent years towards
strengthening international peace and cooperation
and consolidating the spirit of detente
in international relations.
Both sides agreed to make every effort to ensure
that relaxation of tension spread to all regions of
the world and that the steady progress towards
detente became irreversible.
Both parties noted the importance of the agreements
and arrangements concluded between
the USSR and the USA, directed at the further
improvement of the international climate and,
above all, the importance of the agreements on
the prevention of a nuclear war and the limitation
of strategic arms.
The Soviet Union and Australia note with satisfaction
the considerable advances towards
strengthening security and developing peaceful
co-operation in Europe and express their hope
that the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe will be successfully
concluded in the near future.
The Soviet Union and Australia attach great
importance to strengthening peace and stability
in Asia and expressed their determination to
contribute in every possible way to relaxing
tensions further, to ensuring security and to
creating conditions for making Asia a continent 
extent of your interests. Such power, such
interests, bring with them great responsibilities.
Australia looks to the superpowers to maintain
the utmost mutual restraint in their relations
with each other and towards other nations. On
such restraint peace and progress ultimately
depend. We look to you for responsible leadership
and action to meet the urgent global problems
of human need and suffering. Thus we
hope, for example, that the Soviet Union and
the United States will co-operate in an adequate
international system of grain reserves to
alleviate the uncertainties and shortages of
supplies in world food resources.
The other great area of responsibility which
attaches to the great powers is the nuclear arms
race and the increasing risk of the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I expressed Australia's
deep concern on these vital issues, and outlined
some positive steps which the international
community could take to meet these challenges,
in my address to the last session of the
United Nations General Assembly. Statements
by many other leaders reflected the same grave
apprehensions and concern. My Government
has declared its commitment to practical and
effective international disarmament measures.
We have ratified the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and subsequently concluded the Mandatory
Safeguards Agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Yet we observe some
flagging of international concern over the
consequences of nuclear proliferation. We are
disappointed by the lack of universal support in
our own and other regions for the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, which we consider the
essential foundation for a safer world. Perhaps
we have lived in the shadow of mutual destruction
for so long that we have become accustomed
to it. Can we dare to be complacent about
our very survival?
Since raising our concern for these issues at the
United Nations I have visited each of the three
depository powers of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. In Washington three months ago, in
London in December, and now here in Moscow.
I have made the same point. We look to the depository
states to maintain international interest
in the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to promote
and enlarge its membership. In this year of the
NPT Review Conference we see a special opportunity to revitalise the commitments undertaken
in this treaty, to strengthen the basis of
peace and awaken us from the nightmare of a
world in which nuclear weapons are widespread.
I was glad to note that in the historic
Vladivostok communique of 24 November,
Comrade Brezhnev and President Ford stressed
the importance of increasing the effectiveness
of the Treaty. We therefore look confidently to
the Soviet Union for constructive leadership on
this issue, not only by virtue of your special position
in relation to the Treaty, but because of
your important role as Co-Chairman of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament.
Mr President, I have spoken frankly on matters
of great consequence to us all. Nothing less
would have been appropriate to the dignity of
this unique occasion. Nothing less would adequately
have reflected the true nature of our
relations. These relations are now-though unhappily
they have not always been-characterised
by greater frankness, by greater realism,
by greater seriousness, by greater understanding.
My visit will serve to strengthen this understanding
and bring our peoples much closer
together. For example, I shall be signing agreements
between the Soviet Union and Australia
on science and technology and on cultural
exchanges. We have much to learn from you in
the scientific and technical fields, you I hope
may have something to learn from us. We
warmly welcome the prospect of a Cultural
Agreement between us. Australians deeply
respect and admire the culture of the Soviet
people-the glorious fruits of which I have seen
and heard at first hand during my present visit
to the Soviet Union.
In these and other ways we shall develop the
range of contacts between us. A world in which
states, regardless of their different social systems,
can communicate their views ano
interests clearly and confidently is a world more
amenable to peaceful change and peaceable
policies. I regard the relations between our
countries as a constructive element in the creation
of such a world. I regard my visit to your
country, and the warm hospitality you have extended
to me and my party, as an important
contribution to the strengthening of friendship
between the Soviet and Australian peoples. 
of peace through the co-operative efforts of the
states of the region.-
Both sides emphasised the necessity of strict
observance by all parties of the Paris Agreement
on ending the war and restoring peace in Viet-
Nam. They welcomed concrete measures to
implement the Agreement on restoring peace
and achieving national accord in Laos and
expressed themselves in favour of a just settlement
of the Cambodian problem with full consideration
of the national interests and legitimate
rights of the people of Cambodia without
any outside interference.
The parties noted that on the sub-continent of
South Asia progress has been made in the normalisation
of the situation in this region, which
corresponds to the interests of consolidating
peace and security, and establishing true good
neigh bourliness in South Asia.
Both sides expressed their readiness to participate,
together with all interested states on an equal basis, in seeking a favourable solution to
the problem of making the Indian Ocean an area
of peace in accordance with the principals of in
ternational law.
In the course of the exchange of opinions on the
situation in the Middle East, the parties
emphasised the necessity to achieve as soon as
possible a just and stable settlement in that
region on the basis of the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations Security Council, including
realising the legitimate national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, as well as on the basis
of ensuring the security and independence of all
states of the region.
The parties express their hope that the Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East will
resume its work as soon as possible.
The Soviet Union and Australia proceed from
the assumption that the cessation of the arms
race, the achievement of general and complete
disarmament covering both nuclear and conventional
weapons, under strict and effective
MrWhitlam and Mr Kosygin sign the Scientific and Cultural Agreements 
international control, would be of paramount
importance for a fundamental improvement of
the international situation.
They believe that the convocation of a world
disarmament conference may contribute to the
practical solution of the pressing problems of
disarmament. Both parties reaffirmed their commitment to the
Treaty on the Non -Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and their determination to work for its
effective and universal implementation.
They share the opinion that it is necessary to
agree as soon as possible on the full ban of all
tests of nuclear weapons by all states, and also
on the ban on chemical weapons.
The Soviet Union and Australia attach great
importance to the conclusion of a convention on
the prohibition of action to influence the
environment and climate for military and any
other purposes incompatible with the maintenance
of international security, human wellbeing
and health.
The parties noted that their positions on the
main issues of the law of the sea were close.
Considering the conference on the law of the
sea to be of great importance they expressed
themselves in favour of adopting constructive
decisions in this field on an international basis
with due regard for the interest of all states.
Both sides declared their resolution to promote
the increased effectiveness of the United
Nations on the basis of strict observance of its
Charter.
They believe that the main eff orts of the United
Nations must be directed to promoting the con
solidation of the relaxation of international tension,
to strengthening international peace and
security, and to the development of fruitful cooperation
among states.
During the talks, questions of Soviet -Australian
relations were thoroughly discussed.
Both sides expressed their satisfaction with the
favourable development of relations between
the USSR and Australia in recent years and
reaffirmed their determination to widen further
mutually advantageous co-operation on the
basis of the principles of peaceful co-existence, respect for sovereignty, non -interference in
internal affairs, equal and mutually beneficial
co-operation.
The parties attach great importance to expanding
contacts between state and political leaders
of both countries.
They underlined the usefulness of further political
consultations at various levels on matters
concerning both bilateral relations and international
problems of mutual interest.
It was agreed to continue this practice in future.
The parties consider that there are favourable
possibilities to increase the volume of trade and
the range of goods to be exchanged in both di.-
rections to mutual advantage.
The two sides acknowledged the advantages
which have flowed from the Trade Agreement
signed in 1973.
They noted particularly the part which the
mixed Commission, set up under that Agreement,
is playing in developing trade and economic
relations between the two countries.
The parties exchanged views on prospects for
the development of co-operation in other fields,
including agriculture, energy and mineral
resources, fisheries, maritime navigation, air
communications and also in the field of Antarctic
and world ocean studies.
During the visit, the parties signed an Agreement
on scientific and technical co-operation.
They noted that preliminary steps had alreedy
been taken towards identifying particular areas
in which co-operation would be developed
under the Agreement.
A series of mutual visits by scientists of both
countries was already in progress.
The parties also signed an Agreement on cultural
co-operation between the two countries
which will establish a sound foundation for
further development of Soviet -Australian ties in
the fields of culture, education and sports.
The Soviet and Australian sides noted with sat
isfaction that the talks and discussions which
took place during the visit of Prime Minister
Whitlamn to the Soviet Union were useful and
would make a considerable contribution to the 
I'
The Prime Minister with the Mayor of Bonn. Mr Kraemer.
LIN 
further development of friendly relations between
the Soviet Union and Australia.
On behalf of the Australian Government, Prime
Minister Whitlam invited the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, Mr A.
N. Kosygin, to make an official visit to Australia.
The invitation was accepted with satisfaction at
a time to be agreed upon. 



PRIM E MINISTER 16 January 1975
4
PRESS STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, DR. J. F. CAIRNS
HOBART TRAGEDY
The Acting Prime Minister, Dr. Cairns, announced today
that he had sent a message to the Tasmanian Premier, Mr. Reece,
informing him that the Australian Government would reimburse
the State for the full amounts of expenditure incurred by it
and its authorities as a result of the Hobart Bridge disaster.
This had been agreed to by the Cabinet at its meeting in Sydney
today. Dr. Cairns recalled that, immediately on hearing of
the disaster, the Prime Minister had assured Mr. Reece of the
full and ready co-operation of the Australian Government, and
this had been followed up with an offer to provide up to
$ 13 million for reconstruction of the bridge, upgrading the
road through Bridgewater and ferry terminals.
Dr. Cairns said that the Australian Government's
commitment was subject to the various expenditures being
accepted by it as attributable to the bridge collapse, and
reasonable. It was not possible at this stage to estimate the
ultimate level of Australian Government assistance. * In the
event that the State were to make any successful claims on the
A. N. L. and/ or their insurers, the Australian Government's
assistance would be correspondingly reduced.
The Australian Government is preparing legislation -to
authorise the provision of this assistance to the State.
It will be introduced as soon as possible after the Australian
Parliament re-assembles in February.
Dr. Cairns also announced that a Committee of officials
is to be established with the-responsibility for co-ordinating
Australian Government assistance. He had suggested to Mr.
Reece that he might like to consider establishing a similar
body for the State.
" I re-affirm that the Australian Government will do
everything in its power, in co-operation with the State
Government, to ensure that Hobart's immediate problems are
overcome, and the bridge restored, as quickly as possible,"
Dr. Cairns said. / 2 
-2-
Cabinet resolved that the Minister for Repatriation
and Compensation inquire into the adequacy of compensation
payments for death and personal injury resulting from the
Hobart Bridge disaster.
The Minister would then make recommendations to
Cabinet as to whether an additional compensation would be
paid by the Australian Government.
His recommendations would be in line with the Government's
approach to the aftermath of the Darwin cyclone, its policy
on the provision of compensation for victims of-natural
disasters, and its proposed national compensation scheme.
SYDNEY 



16 January 1975
PRESS-STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, DR. J. F. CAIRNS
STATE RAILWAYS
The Australian Government will start negotiations on the
transfer of responsibility for the operation of the South
Australian and Tasmanian railway systems from the States to the
Federal Government. The Federal Cabinet meeting in Sydney decided this today.
After the meeting, the Acting Prime Minister, Dr. J. F.
Cairns, said that Cabinet had decided to inform the two State
Governments that the Australian Government was ready to start
high level negotiations on the transfer.
Dr. Cairns said that detailed proposals would be put
before the State Governments with a view to an early conclusion.
" Today's Cabinet decision resulted from discussions
yesterday between myself, as Treasurer, and the Premier of
South Australia, Mr. Dunstan, and the Premier of Tasmania,
Mr. Reece." " Cabinet has made an immediate response to the propsals
Put by Mr. Reece and Mr. Dunstan."
In his 1972 policy speech, the Prime Minister, Mr,
Whitlam. said:" A Labor Government will accept the offers of the
New South Wales and Victorian Premiers for a transfer of their
State railways systems and 411l accept such an offer from
any other State."
South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania and New
South Wales agreed to discussions without commitment. Victoria
and Queensland refused to discuss it.
SYDNEY 



* 4AUSTRALIA. L
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 431
16 January 1975
AUSTRALIA/ USSR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION
The Prime Minister, Mr. E. G. Whitlam, and
Soviet Prime Minister, Mr. A. N. Kosygin, yesterday signed in
Moscow an agreement between the Australian and USSR Governments
for scientific and technical co-operation.
In the first instance five fields are to be given
priority for co-operation. They are: earth sciences, plant
industry, radioastronomy, entomology and textile technology.
Small groups of experts in these fields will exchange visits
so that long-term programs for co-operation can be prepared.
The first of these visits has been made by an
Australian group of earth scientists which toured the USSR in
December 1974, for discussions with their Soviet counterparts.
Soviet groups in textile technology and radioastronomy will
visit Australia in February for talks with Australian
scientists and inspections of laboratories. Other exchanges.,.
will take place in subsequent months.
As a result of the pri6r negotiation of the agreement
there has already been a strengthening of scientific cooperation
between Australia and the USSR in some of the
priority areas. It is hoped that the agreement wil'l benefit
scientific development in both countries, and thereby contribute
to furthering bilateral relations between Australia and the USSR.
The agreement will facilitate increased co-operation in both the
natural and the social sciences.
The text of the agreement is attached.
CANBERRAi A. C. T. 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA AND THE
GOVERHIMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
ON SCIENTIFIC-TECHNICAL COOPERATION
The Government of Australia and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Expressing satisfaction with relations established in
the sphere of science and technology between various organizations
of both countries, Taking into consideration the cooperation of both
countries in international scientific programs,
Desirous of facilitating further growth of scientifictechnological
cooperation and exchangcs between government
scientific, technical and indruLtrial research organizations of
both countries, Convinced that the implementation of such cooperation
will contribute to the development of mutual understanding between
tho Australian and Soviet peoples and the strength6ning of good
relations between the two countries,
HAVE AGREED on the following:
Article I
The Government of Australia and the Government of the
Union of -Soviet Socialist Republics will facilitate-the development
of scientific-technical cooperation between government research
organizations of both countries on the basis of mutual benefit and
reciprocity. Article II
With the consent of both Governments, such cooperation
may be implemented in the following forms: 
-2-
the exchange of visits of scientists, technical
specialists ' addelegations with the aim of carrying out scientific
research or for familiarization with the scientific-technical
achievements in each country;
the organization of bilateral conferences and
symposia on current problems in the development of science and
technology; the exchange of scientific-technical information
and documentation; the pursuit of joint research activities and any
other joint activities for the furtherance of scientific and
technical cooperation; Ce) other forms of cooperation, which will be mutually
agreed upon. Article III
In the spirit of the agreement, both Governments will
facilitate thie establishment of direct contacts and cooperation
between scientific and technical organizations of both countries
and the conclusion where necessary of separate implementinG
arrangements. Such implementing arrangements will be concluded in
acc'orlance with the laws of both countries.
Article IV
1. Both governments will, as far as possible, seek to create
favourable conditions for the carrying out of visits and of exchanges
of scientific and technical specialists within the fra ' mework of the
Agreement. Such visits and exchrinjes will be implem~ nted on the
b'-nrf reciprocity in accordance witCh the laws of each country. 
-3-
2. Programs, itineraries of trips, times and dates of
arrival, an&amp; other details of such visits and exchanges will be
agreed upon in advance, in principle no less than 30 days beforehand.
3. Expenses connected with the implementation of visits
will be paid by the Government of the sending country unless some
alternative arrangement is agreed by the organizations concerned
on other bases of funding. Supplementary financial arrangements
will be determined where necessary for the support of other forms
of cooperation. Article V
The present Agreement does not preclude visits and
exchanges, outside the scope of the Agreement. The Government
of one country shall inform the other, by diplomatic channels,
of such visits and exchanges with the aim of rendering necessary
assistance in their organization.
Article VI
Subject to consultation between the two Governments
suintif~ c information, obtained as a result of joint scientific
research, carried out within the framework of the Agreement, may
be passed to international scientific organisations.
Article VII
Wherever necessary, representatives designated by the
r, 3_ pc : 7vernronts will meet to Jiscuss areas and specific
prco&amp;' Tms of scientific-technical op-ratio., stages in the
mij. lerinta'ion ot agreed measu es and ; ther -relating
to t. ie pres:;-. n Aremt. 
-4-
Article V111
The present Agreement shall enter into force on the
date of signature;
The present Agreement shall remain in force initially
for four years, and thereafter shall remain in force until
such time as either Government has received the written
notification of the Government of the other side of its
intention to terminate the Agreement, in such case the
Agreement will cease to have effect 180 days after the receipt
of such notification. Moscow fifteenth
Done at of
January seventy five
one thousand nine hundred and
in two copies each in the English and Russian languages,
both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government For the Government of the
of Australia Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics
E. G. WHITLAM A. N. KOSYGIN 



Federal Republic of Germany
Speech by the President of the Federation of German Industry,
Dr Guenther Sohl, on the occasion of informal discussions with the
Prime Minister of Australia in Cologne on 16 January 1975
It is a special honour for me to welcome you, Mr
Prime Minister and the gentlemen of your team,
here at the House of German Industry.
As President of the Federation of German
Industry and on behalf of the representatives of
the German economy gathered together here,
I offer you a very warm welcome.
I wish to thank you for your readiness to undertake
this informal exchange of views, and in
order to leave as much time as possible for discussion
I shall confine myself to some brief
words of introduction.
Many of the gentlemen present in this circle
know your country at first-hand-as indeed I
myself do. The tremendous riches of the Australian
continent, above all in natural resources-
a most enviable asset in today's raw
material situation-is known in German economic
circles, and valued accordingly.
Developments in the past year have made it
clear to all of us that we must in future utilise our
available resources in a more careful and
rational manner than hitherto. The energy crisis
which co-incided with a scarcely controlled
bout of worldwide inflation and further aggravated
this phenomenon, has created problems
for the world economy which individual nations
can no longer master alone.
Australia is, admittedly, largely independent
from importing energy and other important raw
materials. At any rate it is less dependent than
most other industrial nations. But a collapse of
the existing world trading system with a retreat
into nationalism would hit the entire world
economy and call into question advantages already achieved through international cooperation.
If this is to be avoided, then in my
opinion only the co-operation of all nations participating
in the international economic process
can lead us out of the present situation.
A high degree of co-operation already exists
between Australia and the Federal Republic.
However, up to now this has been confined primarily
to an exchange of investment goods from
the Federal Republic against raw materials
which we obtain from Australia. Just last year
there was a marked expansion in German-
Australian trade. It is pleasing to note that both
our countries pursue a liberal foreign policy.
Free access to world markets is of vital importance
equally to Australia and to the Federal
Republic. In our own interest we should
endeavour to maintain and strenghten the system
of free world trade based on GATT.
Admittedly, the European action in banning
imports of beef, which affects Australia, is a blot
on the picture of free trade. I can as3ure you that
there is little support for this measure in the
German business community. At the same
time, however, German exporters are concerned
about certain tendencies in Australia to
protect some industrial sectors either by tariff
increases or, in some cases, by import restrictions
against foreign competition. From the experience
of German industry over the past decade
I can only say that a wider access for foreign
competitors is the best spur to the development
of domestic productive capacity.
But quite apart from an exchange of goods, a
closer co-operation between enterprises in
Australia, a country with such tremendous 
reserves of raw materials, and enterprises in the
Federal Republic, one of the large industrial
processors, offers itself as an eminently sensible
proposition. I am glad to say that connections
between Australian and German companies are
already numerous.
So far as I am informed, more than eighty German
companies are engaged in Australia to date
through direct investments.
The industrial interest in Australia led early in
1971 to the visit of a German economic delegation
to your country under the chairmanship
of my predecessor, the former President of the
BDI. This visit brought about a number of promising
new contracts. Even so, I have the impression
that the existing possibilities for German-
Australian co-operation above all in the sectors
of coal and iron ore, have not yet been utilised to
the extent that might be desirable. And certainly
the total engagement of German companies
in your country to the extent-up to
now-of about 275 million deutschmarks is not
as high as could be expected in terms of
Australia's importance.
There are several explanations for this. From the viewpoint of German companies, Australia's
distance from Europe and the delays and costs
of transport connected therewith, play an
important role: also the relative limitation of the
Australian market so far as the production of
manufactured goods is concerned.
The double-taxation agreement, which will
now come into force within a few weeks will
very likely improve conditions in this regard
since the absence of such an agreement has had
a disturbing effect in the past.
On the other hand, the uncertainty as regards
Australian investment policy has contributed to
the fact that German enterprises have hesitated
in recent years to invest in Australia. As regards
raw materials in the energy field, foreign investments
were completely excluded until
November 1974. The liberalisation decreed in
the meantime and the new rulings which are directed
more stongly towards joint projects, have
been welcomed by German industry. But even
now, there is still some uncertainty over here
regarding the freedom of action available to
foreign companies in the case of investments on
a longer term.
The Prime Minister in talks in Bonn with the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Mr Schmidt. 
Prior to engaging in investment abroad, a German
industrialist naturally desires to be able to
calculate on a fairly reliable basis the possibilities
and also the limitations for placement of his
capital and for making business decisions. This
is one of the pre-requisites for long-term planning,
and in the case of investments in basic
products, such as would be offering themselves
in Australia, it is indeed mainly a question of
long-term planning.
We would thus be grateful, Mr Prime Minister, if
you could explain in a few words what Australia
in her economic policy expects of foreign
investments in the natural resources and the
processing industry field.
We hope, Mr Prime Minister, that your visit to
Germany may contribute to a strengthening of
the good relations between our countries and to
the initiation of new links. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia on the occasion of
informal discussions with the President of the Federation of German
Industry in Cologne on 1 6 January 1 975
In large measure the economic relationship between
Australia and the Federal Republic
reflects the basic complementarity of our two
economies. Australia is a prosperous country
with a strong and technologically sophisticated
industrial base. On a per capita basis our gross
national product approximates yours. At the
same time Australia is in an unusual position
among industrial countries, for we are well
endowed with raw materials. By contrast the
Federal Republic is substantially dependent on
imported raw material. The pattern and growth
of the trade between our two countries and the
increased interest that you have shown in
investment in Australia clearly reflect this economic
complementarity.
The result has been a healthy growth in our
trade. Australia's exports to the Federal
Republic are increasing and are now valued at
over 700 million deutschmarks a year. The
principal items are raw materials and agricultural
commodities. Your exports to Australia
have been rising even more rapidly, now
amounting to over 1 1 20 million deutschmarks
a year. The major components are motor
vehicles, electro-technical products,
pharmaceuticals, plastics and chemicals. German
direct investment in Australia over the
years has amounted to around 260 million
deutschmarks and is increasing, I think you said
some other figure somewhat likely.
Let me say a few words about foreign investment.
We have become more selective in determining
which types of foreign investment are
welcome in Australia. This in no way amounts
to hostility to foreign capital as such. Indeed at
the moment there are very few restrictions at all
on worthwhile capital investment. We recognise
that Australia has a long-term need for
capital from abroad. Foreign investment has
undeniably made a significant contribution to
the rapid development Australia has enjoyed in
the past and will continue to do so in future. We
welcome your interest in investing in Australia and are happy to consider any proposals you
wish to make. We are convinced, however, that
we must promote Australian control of Australian
resources and industries and aim at the
highest possible level of Australian ownership.
When we social -democrats came to office two
years ago we found that foreign control extended
to some 26 per cent of the manufacturing
sector and at least 60 per cent in mining;
that is, the energy resources for instance and
mineral resources which held out so much hope
for Australia's future prosperity were in fact
predominantly controlled from overseas.
I'm sure you can understand that we considered
this an unsatisfactory situation. It was certainly
unsatisfactory to public opinion in Australia,
and I believe unsatisfactory to any Australian
Government which would ever be elected from
now on. We are committed to redressing this
situation, but I stress that whenever it may be
necessary to change a rule we shall do so
responsibly, fairly, with ample notice and with
due regard to the interests of all concerned. 11
would be irresponsible and disruptive to acd
otherwise. The promotion of Australian control oli
Australia's own resources and industries must
be viewed as a long-term objective. Our aim is
to rectify the situation in two ways:
( 1 We are trying to increase the already
high rate of capital accumulation iii
Australia itself. The extension of the
activities of the Australian Industry'
Development Corporation which was
established about four years ago by the
previous Australian Government and
the establishment of a national investment
fund should be seen in this light.
In screening more carefully proposals
for foreign investment we have in mind
a number of criteria: whether t[ he
investment will be in partnership with
Australian capital, the degree of foreign 
participation already existing in the
industry concerned, the importance in
terms of the national interest of Australian
control of the industry itself, the
size and location of the proposed project,
the extent to which a project uses
advanced technology for which
Australia has a need, marketing arrangements,
environmental aspects,
labour relations and the interests of
Australia's Aboriginal people. The last
matter concerns some mineral deposits
but not in general secondary inustry.
All foreign investment proposals will be considered
on their merits in terms of these criteria.
There are some cases in which I can specify
more closely what our attitude is likely to be.
Restrictions on foreign investment in some sectors
have been of long standing. This is the case
in banking, in radio and in television, and in civil
aviation. My Government has retained these
bans. We don't generally favour foreign investment
for the establishing of new insurance
companies and non-bank financial institutions.
Foreign investment in real estate will not normally
be approved other than investment which
is purely incidental to other purposes, such as
the establishment or extension of a factory.
This reflects an important principle in our policy,
that foreign capital should be associated with
productive investment adding to Australia's real
resources and bringing real additional benefits.
This is also the reason behind the legislation
dating back to September 1972, that is three
months before we were elected, designed to
control takeovers by foreign concerns of Australian
enterprises.
All these things have been there for years. We
haven't introduced them, although we haven't
altered them or criticised them. Since January
1973 my Government has assumed control of
all mineral exports. Now, this was not to stop
mineral exports as some people thought. You
work under a Federal Government, a Federal
System, so does Australia. And to control
exports was the only method open to the Federal
Government in Australia to achieve certain
other purposes. These purposes were to ensure
that export prices for Australian minerals are at
a reasonable level in relation to export prices of other countries and that in future the Government
has full knowledge of all details of export
contracts. I think it is clear that many of the contracts
which had been made before we were
elected to government were not very farsighted
indeed. And also it must be clear it was
astonishing that the Federal Government didn't
know the details of export contracts in Australia
and until we brought in these export controls we
were not able to find this information. And I
think also it must be said that in Australia many
of the States, the Laender, had competed
against each other for short-term objectives and
had not taken due regard to the overall national
long-term interest.
Now let me illustrate our approach by taking the
case of uranium: The era of cheap uranium has
ended. Some have thought equity participation
in Australia's energy is a means of guaranteeing
supplies. My Government has an objective of
full Australian ownership of this vital national
resource. The amount of uranium exported to
any country will not depend on whether that
country sponsors exploration in Australia. We
have constanty assured our trading partners
that they will receive supplies from our available
exports and I give this assurance again to you,
Gentlemen. Continuity of supply can be adequately
safeguarded through long-term contracts.
There were several contracts when we
came into office. We will see that every one of
these contracts is honoured in future.
In future the Australian Atomic Energy Commission
as the agent of the Australian Government
will participate in the mining and treatment
of uranium locations in the Northern Territory
of Australia. The Atomic Energy Commission
was established by an earlier Australian
Federal Government in 1953. There have been
no amendments to the Act since we came in.
And why I emphasise the Northern Territory is
that it is totally within Federal jurisdiction. The
Laender don't have anything to do with it and
most of the uranium in Australia so far discovered
has fortunately-we would regard itbeen
found in the Northern Territory. Now the
Commission will be the sole exporter of
uranium. It will also undertake all the new
uranium exploration in the Northern Territory.
Australia is making joint studies with Japan of
the enrichment of uranium in Australia. 
The world has been irreversibly altered by the
oil crisis which emerged in the last quarter of
1973. This has led to some discussion of the
role of other groups of countries exporting raw
materials. Some have banded together to seek
increased revenues for their exports. Australia
has participated in the development of some
mineral producer groups, such as the International
Bauxite Association. And in this last
week officials of our Government and the other
iron-ore exporting countries have been discussing
an iron-ore exporting association.
The Australian view is that such groups, while
different from the earlier international commodity
agreements, are not necessarily disruptive
and exploitative international resource cartels.
Though this dosen't apply to Australia, it is
worth remembering that many of the countries
concerned in the bauxite and copper cases for
instance, while rich in these raw materials, are
rich in virtually nothing else. They are developing
countries with an understandable concern
to receive reliable and fair returns for their
scarce resources. Clearly a balance must be
achieved between the interests of both groups
and a few countries who purchase the finished
product. I don't pretend this will always be
easy. I believe however that in achieving the
required balance countries like Australia have a
special role to play. Australia is one of the few
countries combining the interests of both sides
and therefore in a position to exercise a moderating
influence.
Finally a word about our tariff policy. Let me say
at the outset that international trade is of fundamental
importance to the Australian economy.
It would clearly not be in Australia's interest to
look upon trade as a one-way street. Our economy
requires a wide range of imported capital
goods and materials to maintain our expanding
manufacturing sector. My Government's attitude
to tariff policy is clearly flexible. In July
1973 we reduced practically all Australian
tariffs across the board by 25 per cent. Nevertheless
it must also be stressed that Australia
relies almost solely on the tariff to protect domestic
production. I need hardly add to a group
such as this that there are other countries or
economic groupings in the world today where
various devices, such as import prohibitions,
quotas and other quantitative controls are used
74 to supplement tariffs to protect local industries.
In view of this it is hardly surprising that in some
cases Australian tariffs are higher than in other
larger, longer established countries. This is not
intended to imply that all Australian tariffs will
always remain high. Our Industries Assistance
Commission is undertaking a tariff review which
will cover an appreciable segment of Australian
manufacturing industry and is expected to be
completed within four years.
A special feature of the Australian tariff system
is the provision for entry of goods either dutyfree
or at concessional rates under our by-law
procedures. This generally provides for concessional
entry for goods where Australian industry
cannot make available suitably equivalent
goods. In 1972-73, 25 percent of the value of
all goods imported into Australia was covered
by the by-law system. I'm sure many German
manufacturers were included in the list of those
benefiting from this procedure.
You will see that in all our policy Australia
remains flexible, co-operative and responsible
in her dealings with her trading partners. We
welcome the co-operation of German industry
and investment in the development of our
country and we trust that this partnership will
strengthen and develop. 



PRII4E MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE,-
BONN, 17 JANUA RY, 1975
Ladies and Gentlemen; On behalf of the Chairman of the
Bundespressekonferenz and on behalf of the Federal Press Office,
it ismy personal honour and my privilege to present to you,
the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Whitlam.
Mr. Whitlam:
Q. Did you have an appointment with Mr. brezhnev in Moscow?
If you did, could you say what * was discussed? If not,
were you given any explanation why not?
A. No appointment with Mr. Brezhnev had been arranged.
Each day there was a message given to me from Mr. Brezhnev.
I was told on the second day that he had a cold and was
out of towvn.
Q. Following your talkcs with the Soviet leaders, what prospects
do you feel there are for a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean?
A. The Soviet leaders state that they would like a zone of peace
in the Indian Ocean. They also add that they would like a
zone of peace in every one of the world's oceans. You will
know that Australia and, I believe, every other country
around the IndianOcean has voted at the United Nations General
Assembly in favour of such proposals which have come,
originally, from Sri Lanka and Malaysia, and more recently
from Pakistan and Iran. There might have been other sources
as well.
Q. Inaudible question but referred to the Prime Minjtster' s
attitude to the United States' use of Diego Garcia as a base
in the Indian Ocean?.....
A. Australia, like every other country bordering the Indian Ocean
or situated in the Indian Ocean, has objected to the developmenft
of Diego Garcia. Australia and, I believe, every other
country in the Indian Ocean and around it, has deplored the
possibility of an increase in forces by the two Super Powers
the United States and the Soviet Union. They have all sought
to eliminate any possibility of confrontation between them.
Some of you mightn't be aware that I was asked a question
previously on this by an Australian correspondent who would
have hadf the text. But, of course, the correspondent who
just asked this question and others too might not have the
text of the Communique which 11r. Kosygin and I issued yesterday
on this subject. It states: " Both sides express their
readiness to participate together with all interested States
on an equal basis in seeking a favourable solution to the
problem of making the Indian Ocean an area of peace in
accordance with the principles of international law." 1
/ 2) 
-2
Q. Do you believe the assurances given to you by Mr. Kosygin
that Russia does not have any bases in the Indian. Ocean?
A. Mr. Kosygin did state that and I have no comment to make
on it.
Q. This morning you had a talk with the Federal Chancellor.
Did you discuss economic problems and particularly the
question of Australia's supply of uranium to the Federal
Republic of Germany?
A. The Bundeskanzler and I discussed many economic matters.
Obviously, Germany's economic experience is of great
significance to any western country because the Federal
Republic's success has been by far the greatest, economically,
of all western countries. Wie did discuss the supply of
uranium to European countries. Also, of course, we
discussed the supply of beef to European countries. We
discussed the general question of what commodities,
primary and mineral, can be supplied by Australia to
European * countries and the general terms on which such
supplies could take place. This was. the * seventh visit
that my colleagues and I have made to member countries
of the European Economic Community. In each case we have
found some embarrassment over the fact that the Community,
a pursuant to the has cut off imports of meat
from Australia. Nobody has justified that exclusion of
Australian meat from the European Market. It is true,
we haven't visited Denmark and Luxembourg. We don't know
thei~ r views. It is possible that Luxembourg and Denmark
control the C. A. P. In every country, however, we did find
a very great interest in the supply of uranium and coal
because the Community requires energy sources. Australia
has considerable energy sources. Australians, quite
legitimately I believe, want to develop those ' energy sources
as far as possible in their own country. So, quite clearly,
there were many matters that we were able to discussv
the Bundeskanzler and I. We didn't get around to another
subject which I suppose would be of interest here. I'm
told there is not enough sugar available for consumption
in the Community. Australia would be able to supply sugar.
to theCommunity. ] But, in this case, the Community says:
" Oh no, we'll increase the production of our own sugar."
The wonders of the C. A. P. never cease to amaze me.
Q. While you were in Moscow, Prime Mi nister, the trade Agreement
between the U. S. and the Soviet Union was ' cancelled by the
Soviet Union. Would you consider this to be a fundamental
change of course on the part of Soviet policy or would you
consider this to be a kind of temporary embarrassment?
A. I do not believe that this represents any fundamental change
of course by the Soviet Union at all. The whole of this
question was discussed with us by Mr. Kosygin on Tuesday
afternoon. He stressed both before, during, and after the
discussions of this item, that the Soviet Union was committed
to reinforcing the policy of detente with United States
and, in fact, between all countries. I am confident that 
-3
that is settled Soviet policy. At the same time, it was
quite clear to us that the Soviet Union would not accept
the Jackson Amendment which the United States Senate
attached to the Administration Agreement between the
United States and the Soviet Union. To use an Australian
. phrase; it was clear to us last Tuesday afternoon, that
the Soviet Union would not cop this amendment.
Q. During your discussions with Herr Schmidt this morning,
were any other problems discussed?
A. There were some political or diplomatic matters which we
discussed of interest to our two countries, of course.
Q. Did you get the impression that reports of Mr. Brezhnev's
illness were a sign of a power realignment in the Kremlin
were inaccurate, or did you see some signs indicating that
they were correct?
A. I am not going to speculate on such matters. I've already
told you all I know.
Q. As a result of your visit to West Ger'many,, will we now see
increased uranium exports to West Germany?
A. We've never made any exports to West Germany yet and I don't
believe that West Germany has sought to buy any uranium.
But,-in March or maybe at the end of February, there will
be a visit by British and very likely associated Dutch and
German officials to Australia to discuss this question of
enrichment of Australian uranium in Australia. This is.
pursuant to an arrangement which was made between Australia
and Japan in November for a feasibility study Into this
very question.
I have just been reminded by our Staatssekretdr fUr
Nineralien und Energie that there have been some approaches
by German companies to buy uranium from Australia. But no
sales have been made. That is, no contracts were made
under the earlier Australian Government or by the present
Government.
Q. Prime Minister, Bonn marks the end of your European visit.
Summing up, Sir, what do you think you have achieved in
the various countries? Has there been one point of interest
that Europeans Leaders collectively have had in Australia?
A. This has been my first visit to the Federal Republic as
Prime Minister and, except for a visit I made some 20 months
ago to Britain, it has been the first visit I have made
as Prime Minister to ten European countries. My colleague,
Mr. Lionel Bowen, who, as you know, i's the Mi. nister assisting
the Prime Minister, also visited Malta while I had to go
back to Australia in connection with the Darwin cyclone
disaster. In the eleven countries we haye visited, there
has been a more comprehensive and thorough presentation
of the Australian point of view than has ever taken place
at any time in the past. it is . very clear to us in each
/ 4) 
-4-
country that by making a comprehensive visit of this
character the interest in every country was enhanced in
every case. There was anticipation and review of what
we had done already in the earlier visits or that we
would be doing in the visits which still had to take
place. There can be no question that by making a
comprehensive visit of this character at Head of
Government level, one achieves a concentration of interest
in evory cuuntry viaite,. . ln e. vory case, ( if' c: ourse, we
have visited the Head of State, the Head of Government,
and senior Ministers and senior Secretary-Gencrals and
Director-Generals, and it is quite clear to us that
Australia means inr It's more significant, to eacl
of these countriet. than was the case before.. Wie are,
of course, very appreciative of the reception we Lave
had in each case, but we believe Australia now is known
and understood better than had ever been the case before.
" Thank you very much, Prime MLinister. 



DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM O. BN1556 HU3
TOR 091 18.1.75
0.3NI1556 2.015 17. 1.75 UNC
TO. PP CANBERRA/ 1523
RP. PP ISLMABAD/ 03 DACCA/ 6O
FM. BONN
U N CL A S S I F I E D
PRESS CONFERENCE.
FOLLOWING TEXT PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE, BONN, FRIDAY
17 JANUIJAY.,
BEGINS LADIES AND GENTLEMEN ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
B'I. DESPRESSEKONFERENZ AND ON BEHALF OF THE FEDERAL PRESS OFFICE,
IT IS MY PERSONAL HONOUR AND MY PRIVILEGE TO PRESENT TO YOU,
THF PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, MR WHITLAM.
MR WHITLAM
Q. DID YOU HAVE AN APPOINTMENT WITH MR BREZHNEV IN MOSCOW? IF
YOU DID, COULD YOU SAY WHAT WAS DISCUSSED? IF NOT, WERE YOU GIVEN
ANY EXPLANATION ' HY NOT?
NQ APPOINTMENT WITH MR BREZHNEV HAD BEEN ARRANGED. EACH DAY
THERE ' AS A MESSAGE GIVEN TO ME FROM MR BREZHNEV. I WAS TOLD ON
TH'-SECOND DAY THAT HE HAD A COLD AND WAS OUT OF TOWN.
Q. FOLLOWING YOU TALKS WITH THE SOVIET LEADERS, WHAT PROSPECTS DO
YOU FEEL THERE ARE FOR A ZONIE OF PEACE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN?
A. THE SOVIET LEADERS STATE THAT THEY WOULD LIKE A ZONE OF PEACE IN
THE INDIAN OCEAN. THEY ALSO ADD THAT THEY WOULD LIKE A ZONE OF PEAC
I' EVERY ONE OF THE WORLD'S OCEA. S. YOU WILL KNOW THAT AUSTRALIA
A( D, I BELIEVE, EVERY OTHER COUNTRY AROUND THE INDIAN OCEAN HAS
VOTED AT THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN FAVOUR OF SUCH
PROPOSALS WHICH HAVE COME, ORIGINALLY. FROM SRI LANKA AND MALAYSIA,
MORE RECENTLY FROM PAKISTAN AND IRAN. THERE MIGHT HAVF BEEN OTHi
SOURCES AS WELL.
INAUDIBLE QUESTION BUT REFERRED TO THE PRIME MINISTER'S ATTITiL.
E TO THE UNITED STATES' USE OF DIEGO GARCIA AS A BASE IN THE
INDIAN OCEAN? / 2 
DEPARTNIEINT 0F [ O( R lIGN AFF., I RS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 2-0. I' 3NI556
~* tLSTRALIA. LIKE EVERY OTHER COUNTRY BORDERING THE INDIAN OCEAN
OR SITUATED IN THE INDIAN OCEAN9 H, ' S OBJECTED TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF
DIJ3O GARCIA. AUSTRALIA AND,, I 9ELIEVE, EVERY OTHER COUNTRY IN THE
INL) 16N OCEAN AND AROUND IT! 7 HAS. DEPLORED THE POSSIBILITY OF AN
i'NCRE4SE IN FORCES BY . THE TWO SUPER POWERS THE UNITED STATES AND
THE SOVIET UNION, THEY HAVE ALL SOUGHT TO ELIMINATE ANY POSSIBILITY
OF CONFROINTATION BETWEEN THEM, SOYIE OF YOU MIGHTN'T BE AWARE THAT
IASASKED A QUESTION PREVIOUSLY ON THIS BY AN AUSTRALIAN CORRFSPOfJENT
WHO WOULD HAVE HAD THE TFXT. BUT, OF COURSE, THE CORRESPO'NDENT
WHO JUST A3KED THIS QUFSTION-AND OTHERS TOO MIGHT NOT HAVE
THE TEXT OF THE C0MMUtI'QUE WHICH MOR ' AOSYGIN AND I ISSUED YESTEot-
L ON THIS SUBJECT. IT STATES ' BOTH SIDES EXPRESS THEIR READiNES3
TO PP'RTICIPATE TOGETHER WITH ALL INTERESTED STATES ON AN
E) UAI. BPASIS IN SEEKING A FAVOURA3LE SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF M AKHLN~
3 THE INDIAN OCEAN AN AREA OF PEACE IN ACCORD AMCF WITH THE
PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIO . NAL LAW.'
9. DO YOU BELIEVE THE ASSURANCE.) GIVEN TO YOU BY MR KOSYGIN THAT
RUSSIA DOES NOT HAVE ANY BASES IN THE INDIAN OCEAN?
A M3 KOSYGIN DID STATE THAT AND I HAVE NO CO ' 1ENT TO MAKE ON IT*
THIS MORNING YOU HAD A TALK WITH THE FEDERAL CHANCELLOR. DID
YOU DISCUSS ECONOMIC PRO3LEMS AND PARTICULARLY THE QUESTION OF
6USTRALIP'S SUPPLY OF URANIU111 TO THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY?
A. THE BUNDESKANZLER AND I DISCUJSSED MANY ECONOMIC MATTERS.
OB3VIOUSLY, GER-MNANY, 3.; ECONOMIC EXPERIENCE IS OF GSREAT SIGNIFICANCE
TO0 6-NY 4ESTERN COUNTRY BECAUSE T) 11-FEDERAL REPU! 3LIC S SUCCESS HAS
BEEN BY PAR THE GREATEST, ECONOMICALLY, OF ALL I-JESTERN COUNTRIES.
WE DID DISCUISS THE SUPPLY OF URANIU1M TO EUROPEAN COUMTRIE3.
ALSC, OF COURSE, I. E DISCUSSED THE ' SUPPLY OF BEEF TO EUROPEAN
CU N TR I ES. WE DISCUSSED THE GENERAL QUESTION OF WHAT COMMODITIES. 1
PRlr ARY AND YIINER. L. CAN BE SUPPLIED 3Y AUSTRPLIA TO EURO0PEAN COUiq-\\
TRIES AOJD THE GENE RAL TERMS OF WHICH SUCH SUPPLIES COULD TAKE PLACE.
THIS 14PS THE SEVENTH ViSIT THAT MY COLLEAGUES AND I HAVE MADE TO
MEMBER COUJNTRIES OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMM~ UNITY. IN EACH CASIE
IoE H,, VE FOUND SOME EMB RRASSMENT OVER THE FACT THAT THE COMrUNITY,
SPURSUANT TO THE HAS CUT OFF IMPORT. S OF MEAT FROM AUSTRALIA.
NOBODY HAS JUSTIFIED. THAT EXCLUSION OF AUSTRrL16N MFAT FRO', THE
EUROPEAN MA. RKET, IT TS TRUE, WE HAVEN'T VISITED DENMARK AND LL: XEMBO0U
RG WE DON'T KNOW THEIR VIEWS. IT IS POS3193LE THAT LUXEMBOURG
t* ND D) ENMARK CONTROL THE C. A. PO IN EVERY COUNiTRY, HOWEVER, 1" 1E
DID FIND A VERY GREAT -INTEREST IN THE SUPPLY OF URANIUM AND COAL
BECAUSE THE COMMUNITY REQUIRES ENERGY SOURCES. AUSTRALIA HAS
CONSIDERABLE ENERGY SOURCES. AUSTRALIANS. QUITE LEGITIMATELY I
BELIEVE,'% INT TO DEVELOP THOSE ENERGY SOURCES A5" FAR AS POSSIBLE IN
THEIR O' 4N COUNTRY. SO. QUI. TE CLEARLY, THS9E WERE MANY MATTERS THAT
Y. E WERE ABLE TO DISCUSS: THE ! 3UNDESKANZLER AND I. WE DIDN'T GET
AROUNJD TO ANOTHER SUBJECT WHICH I SUPPOSE W-OULD B3E OF INTEREST HEIRE.
999 / 3 
DEPARTrMI: N' 0O: FOREIGN Ak-I.-XIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM 3-O. BNI55r
CI'OMM MTUONLIDT Y. T HERAEU STISR ALNIOAT WENOOUULDG H BESU GAABRL E ATVOA ILSAUPP-. PLLEY FS ) URG ACRO NTSOU MTPHTEIO NC OMINM -THE N
U0 I TY. BUT, IN THI' CASE. TH{ E 70' MU41Ty r-Ay! S ' OH h! O. WE'LL
I~: apFTHE PRODUCTION OF OU'? S; UGAR.'' THE WONDERS OF THE
P. N" EVER CEASE TO AMAZE ME.
Q. W~ HILE YOU YEREF IN MOSCO'. i, PRIME MINISTER, THE TRADE prREEtel* NT
3F~' T'TTllH U. S. AND THE SOVIET UNION WAS CANCELLED BY THE SOVIET
U ' 1 N. 1, OL'LD YOU CONSIDER THIS TO BE A FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE OF
COU" NS" ON THE PART OF SOVIET POLICY OR WOULU YOU CONSIDER THIS * TO
'( IND OF TEMPOIARY EMfAi. Sv~ mr?
4. 1 DO NOT BELIEVE THAT THIS R PRSLE T N UDMNA HNEO
CO11IE 3Y THE SOVIET UNION . T THE Wd-OLE OF THIS QUESTION WAS
DPU3L~',.' IT. 4rl UU3ISEN AGB, j, Y MARND KOASFYTGEIRN~ J TOHNq TDUISECSUDISASYI CNA4FLT ERON OOmH. SIETHE STRESSED
r i! SOVI ET UNION I, ftc3 COMY. IITTFP TO RCIiNORCIVC TH7? POI ICY OF
D7-* P -NT' ' o.' ITH UNITED;' TATIES ! 3' I ! I FACT, BEr4EEN ALL COUt'TRIES. I
CCP0~' ~ F I DE " T THAT TI16T IS SFTTL D SOVIET POLICY. AT THE 3AX. E
IT .' vS QUITE CLEAR TO LS THAT ThE SOVIET UNION WOULD MIOT
~ Z~ r H' JACKSON AMENDMENT WHICH THE UNIITED S3TATES SENATE ATTACHEDp
TL;, THE ADMINISTRATION AGREEMENT 3ETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE
.3U~ l'WiT IJNIO-N. TO uSE AN AU3TRALI AN PHR. ASE : IT WAS CLEAR TO US
LAS* T TUzSDPY AFTERNOON, THAT THE SOVIET UNION WOULD NOT COP THIS
AlylI~ l~ lI7 T.
Q-D1) IRINC-YOUR DIC53IN WITH HERR. SCIDrT. i THIS MviNING"', WER ANY
OTHER PROB3LEMS DISCUSSED?
A THF-! i ! OERE SONIE POLITICAL 03 DIPLOMATIC MA~ TTERS5 WHICH WE DISCUSSZE7'
OF INTFIREST TO QIUR TWO COUNTRIFS, OF COURSE.
Q. DID YOU GET THE PIPRES31ON! TIIAT REPORTS C-F M9 9REZH4NEV'S ILLNJ;
S1WE RE 6 SIG N OF A POWEVIR 9 EPLlC NimENT P11 TIOm ( nR ElL IN WERE
I N * 1 CCUR ATl, OR DIDO YOU SEE SOME S [ G NS INKDI CAT I NG THAT T HEY WERE:
A* I AM NOT GOI~ rW TO SP7ESCCHLTTR. IV rL~ UYTL
Y0' J 6 L L I KNOW.
A 3 ARESULT OF YOUR VISIT TO ', JEiT ,)'" EIL'NL WE NOY SEE
1:" 1CREASED LIRANIU'i EXPORTS TO WEST CE'? rv'. ANY?
Y,' E'VE NJEVER N-' 1DE ANY EXP~ ORTS TO WE9ST ( 19MANY YET I DON'T
9!--LIEVE TNitT WEST GERMANY HAS SOju'SHT TO BUY A'JY URANIUM. FiUT, 9
MARCH OR MAYBE AT THE ENE) OF FEPRIJARY, THERE WILL OF A VISIT 9Y
13 R[ ITI: Sii I D VEFRY L I KE L Y 4.3, SOCrI ATED DU11T CHII A ? I N 0OIICI A. LS TO0
ISI 13f'RALIA T10 DIS CUSS THIS QUESTION OF ENTICHM 6iNIT OF AUSTLR"-LIAN
URA'. JIUM~ IN AUSTRALIA. THIS IS PUI? SUJAllT TCO AN 4Y? RANGEME! T WHICH WAS 
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM it B N! 55.5
frjDF SET'-' EESPAUST'? tLlIA ANT' JA-PP,-It" ', OVEMlSEF? FOR~ A FEA~ SIBILITY STUDY
11' m THIS. VERY rOUE5TIONJ. I Hg4VF JL'ST BEAJl REN) INDEI) BY OUR ST. AATNi
FUR MlINFRALIEN UND FNE ) OIE THAT TH( ER) E HAVE BEEN SO0ME
no-' 16CH( ES BY GER[ . At COMPANIES TO BUY URANIUM FROM AUSTRAL IA. 13LUT
NO 3 L. FS HLPVE BEEN MlADE. THAT IS, NO CONTRACTS WERE MADE UNDER THE
EA;? LIE4 AUSTRALIAN GOVERNNENT OR BY THE PqWSC(, lT GOVERNME MT.
PRIMIE MINISTER, BONN MJARK53 [ HE-END OF YOUR EUROPEAN VISIT.
SUA-IWC3 UP, SIR, 141( 4T DO YOU THINK( YOU HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE VARIOUS
COUP~ fRIES HAS THERE BEEN QAIE PCIU. T OF INTEREC-ST THAT
EUROPE0~ LEbDERS C0LLECITIVE. LY i. AVE HAD IN AUSTRALIA? MNl
P. THIS HtS BEEN M~ Y FIRST VISIT TO THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC A3
1)) iE I~ i TER AND. ECEPT FOR A VIS3IT I MADE SOME 20 MONTHS AGO TO
B33jITfj. IT HAS BEEN THE FIRST VI *: 1T I HAVL" MADE A. P-' IMF MINISTER
TN 7T11! PR FE. N CCPNT3IES. M-NCYO LLEAGUE, MIR LIONEL BOWEN, 4IO AS
You 13OT'H, E~ rNI-,. STER ASSISTIPJG THE PRIME IIISTER. AL3O
Vlilf D LTt WHILE I HAD TO (; Or E) ACK T) AL ST3PLIA IN CONNECTION W 1. TH1
TH: rrl a CYCLONE DSTE. IN THE ELEVEN COUNTRIEs WE HAeVE
VISI1TED, THERE HPS SEEN A ,' ORE COMP'REHENSIVJE ATD THOROUGH PRESENT-N
PT[ O~ l OF THE AUSTRALIAN POINT OF VIEW THAN HAS EVER TAKEN PLACE
6T 6% Y TIME IN THE PAST. IT IS VcERY CLEAR TO U'S IN EACH COUNTRY
THA T 3Y ; AING A CMPREHEN-SIVE VI: 31T OF THIS ICHARACTER THE INTEREST
IN EkVERY COUNTRY '~ 3ENHANCED IN EVERY CASE. THERE l~ kfAfITCPTJO
ANI) EVEIOF YHAT YE HAD DONE ALREADY IN THE EARLIER VISITS r THAT
1'.' Ig! OEU LI) BE DOING IN THE VISITS WHICH STILL H! 0 TO TAKE: PLACE.
TH! IF C-10 BE NO IE-SrION~ TH. IAT ; Y 110'( ING A COMPREH-tENsivE VISI1T OF THI
CHA,?. CTER AT HEAD OF GOVEr NMEI1T LF'JEL, ONE ACHIE-VES A CONCEN'TATION
UF PKETIN EVERY COUNTlY VISITED). IN EVE! R: Y CV3E, OF COUR-SE:,
'. H'VE VISITED THE HEAD OF ST THE HEAD OF rCOVERNIMENT, A D SENIlOR
N; Iv,, 1STF. qs ANJD SENIOR SECRETARY-CKJERALS AATu I'' IRECTOR-GENCRAL-S, A Air
I r I sn wr E CLE AR T 9 US THAT 4IJSTR AL IA M EANS MORE, 9 IT' S MORE F
' 3IG3'-. TFIC~ llNT, TO EACH OF THEFSE COUNIT*:. c THAPI ! N-s THE CASE B3EFORE.
WE -PE. OF COURSE, VIERY APPRECIATIVE OF THEP ETO WE HAVE HAD IN
EA11 RUJT WE 9ELIEVE P. U13T1LI NOW U* KrNOINi AN UM b-STOO)
sEi'fEi THA'~ HAD) FVE 3EEM T CASE3F E ORE.
i'HVJK' YOU V! F-Y MUCH, Plilt E 1NI NISTER.' sN 



Lmom
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 432
17 January, 1.75
ASTRALIA/ USSR CULTURKL CO-OPEkATION
The Prime Minister's Office has released, the text of
the Agreement on Cultural Co-operation between Australia and
the USSR which was-signed in Moscow on January
CANBERRA A, C. T. 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA
* THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
ON CULTURAL CO-OPERATION
The Government of Australia and the Union of the.
Soviet Socialist Republics desirous of strengthenin~ g
mutual understanding and friendly relations betw4can the
Soviet and Australian peoples, guided by a common aim to
promote closer co-operation in the field-of-c-ulture'have
agreed as f ollows: ARTICLE 1
The two Parties shall facilitate the development
of cultural relations on the basis of mutual respect of
sovereignty, equality and non-interference in internal
affairs and in accordance with the laws and regulations in
force in their respective countries.
ARTICLE 2
The two Parties shall encourage co-operation
between their respective countries in the fields of education
and professional and technical training, especially by means
of: the exchange of professors, teachers and experts;
the exchange of students and postgraduate students;
assistance in studying each other's language and
literature; 
2*;
the exchange of scientifc and educational
publications and educational and visual aids; and
other forms of contact and exchange which may be mutually
agreed upon ARTICLE 3
The two Parties shall encourage the exchange of
information-about their respective systems of education in
order to assist in the interpretation and evaluation of
degrees, diplomas and certificates of education which are
conferred or-awarded by competent institutions of the respective
countries.
* ARTICLE 4
Each party shall encourage in its own country
understanding of the literature, theatre, music, fine art,
craft and. other cultural activities of the other country.
To this end the two Parties shall facilitate:
exchange visits by performers, writers, publishers,
composers, 7rtists, architects and other persons
engaged in creative activities;
tours by groups of artists, performing groups and
individual performers;
the organisation of exhibitions of mutual interest;
translation and publication in their own country
of works of artistic and scientific distinction
originating in the other country. 0 
ARTICL. E5 1
The two Parties shall encourage co-opezration-between
museums., libraries, archives and other cultural institutions I
by facilitating the exchange of books, publications and microfilms
of a social, cultural and scientific character.
ARTICLE 6
The two Parties shall promote co-operation between
the two countries in the field of cinema by means of:
festivals and premieres of films made in the.
other country; I
the exchange of feature, documentary and newsreel
films; the joint production of films;
facilitating one Party to produce films and film
materials in the territory of the other;
the exchange of individuals and groups of persons
. engaged in the field of cinema;.
participation in international film festivals
held in either-country.
ARTICLE 7
Both Parties encourage co-operationobetween the two
countries in the field of television and radio, in particular
by: 
4.
the exchange of television and radio programs;
joint production of television and radio material;
facilitating one Party to produce television and
radio materials in the territory of the other;
the exchange of delegations and individual
specialists working in the field of television
and'radio. ARTICLES 8
Each Party may invite from the other country
specialists in the fields of social science, education, culture
and the arts to congresses, conferences, festivals and other
national and international events which may take place in
its ow country. ARTICLE 9
The two. Parties shall encourage better. understanding
between them by promoting co-operation and the exchange of
visits between youth and youth organisations as well as
between sportsmen and sporting organtisations of their
respective countries. ARTICLE
The two Parties shall encourage and facilitate
tourism between their respective cou ntries so as to promote
a mutual understanding of the life, work and culture of thei. r
peoples. 
ARTICLE 11
The two-Parties shall encourage exchanges and
visits between professional, trade union, cultural social
and welfari, organisations.
The two Parties shall also encourage the development
of cultural links between Soviet and Australian cities,
bearing in mind tnat the practical realisation of this is
primarily the concern of the municipal authorities involved.
RI%. L" 12r
To implement the aims of this Agreement two
yearly programs of exchange shall be agreed upon. This
shall not exclude any other measures which may be agreed
upon by the Parties in the spirit of the agreement.
ARTICLE 13
The two Parties hereby establish a Mixed Commission
which shall consult on the implemenration of the Agreement,
devise the two-yearly programs envisaged in Article 12 of the
Agreement and shall agree on the technical and financial cc ' ditions
of their impl mentation. The Mixed Commission shall be
convened at least once every' two s, alterately in Moscow
and in Canberra. 
ARTICLE 14
The Agreement shall come into force on signature
and will remain in force until the 180th day after the day
on which either party has given notice to the other
through the diplomatic channel of its desire to terminate
the Agreement. DONE at Moscow this fifteenth day of January,
one thousan nine ' u re: and seventy five in two copies
each in the English and Russian languages, both texts being
equally authoritative.
E. G. WHITLAM KOSYGIN
For the Government of For the Government of the
Australia. Soviet Socialist Republics. 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERI-IMIEIT OF AUSTRALIA AND THE
GOVER1, LEET OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
ON SC I'' ITIFIC-TECIUI CAL COOPERATIOIT
The Government of Australia and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Expressing satisfaction with relations established in
the sphere of science and technology between various organizations
of both countries, Taking into consideration the cooperation of both
countries in international scientific programs,
Desirous of facilitating further growth of scientifictechnological
cooperation and exchanges between government
scientific, technical and industrial research organizations of
both countries, Convinced that the implementation of such cooperation
will contribute to the development of mutual understanding between
the Australian and Soviet peoples and the strengthening of good
relations between the two countries,
HAVE AGREED on the following:
Article I
The Government of Australia and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will facilitate the development
of scientific-technical cooperation between government research
organizations of both countries on the basis of mutual benefit and
reciprocity. Article II
With the consent of both Governments, such cooperation
may be implemented in the f'ollowing forms: 
-2-
the exchange of visits of scientists, technical
specialists and delegations with the aim of carrying out scientific
research or for familiarizaition with. the scientific-technical
a3chievemnents in each couintry;
the organization of bilateral conferences and
symposia on current problems in the development of science and
technology; the exchan,-e of scientific-tEchnical information
and documentation; the pursuit of joint research activities and any
other joint activities for the furtherance of scientific and
technical cooperation; other forms of cooperation, which will be mutually
agreed upon. Article III
In the spirit of the agreement, both Governments will
facilitate t~ ae establishment of direct contacts and cooperation
between scientific and technical organizations of both countries
and the conclusion where necessary of separate implementing
arrangements. Such implementing arrangements will be concluded in
accordance with the laws of both countries.
Article IV
1 Both governments will, as far as possible, seek to create
favourable conditions for the carrying out of visits and of exchanges
of scientific and technical specialists within the framework of he
Agreement. Such visits and exch:., iies will be implemented on the
basis of reciprocity in accordance with the laws of each country. 
-3-
2. Programs, itineraries of trips, times and dates of
arrival, and other details of such visits and exchanges will be
agreed upon in advance, in principle no lessr than 30 days beforehand.
3. Expenses connected with the implementation of visits
will be paid by the Government of the sending country unless some
alternative arrangement is agreed by the organizations concerned
on other bases of funding. Supplementary financial arrangements
will be determined where necessary for the support of other forms
of cooperation. Article V
The present Agreement does not preclude visits and
exchanges, outside the scope of the Agreement. The Government
of one country shall inform the other, by diplomatic channels,
of such visits and exchanges with the aim of rendering necessary
assistance in their organization.,
Article VI
0 Subject to consultation between the two Governments
scient'-ifi'c information, obtained as a result of joint scientific
research, carried out within the framework of the Agreement, may
be passed to international scientiffic organisations.
Article VII
Wherever necessary, representatives designated. by the
respective Governments will meet to discuss areas and specific
progr~ tms of scientific-technical cooperation, stages in the
implementation of agreed measures and also other questions relating
to the present Agreement. 
-4-
Article V111
The present Agreement shall enter into force on the
date of signature;
The present Agreement shall remain in force initially
for four years, and thereafter shall remain in force until
such time as either Government has received the written
notification of the Government of the other side of its
intention to terminate the Agreement, in such case the
Agreement will cease to have effect 180 days after the receipt
of such notification. Moscow fifteenth
Done at this.... day of
January one thousand nine hundred and seventy five
in two copies each in the English and Russian languages,
both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government For the Government of the
of Australia Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics
E. G. WHITLAM A. N. KOSYGIN 



Speech by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany,
Mr Helmut Schmidt, at a dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of
Australia in Bonn on 17 January 1975
Three years ago I was a guest of your country
and I am therefore delighted to be able today to
reciprocate your hospitality in our little capital.
On that occasion in Australia I had talks with
you as the Leader of your Party. You were still in
opposition. We have had a number of talks in
the last decade, some in Bonn. Today it is gratifying
to renew and deepen our personal contacts,
this time in your capacity as Prime Minister
of Australia.
Your visit to some degree is overshadowed by
the catastrophe recently inflicted upon the
people and the town of Port Darwin. Allow me
once again to express my deep sympathy, Sir. Our two countries are separated by oceans and
continents, yet they are closely and firmly
linked by a network of relations and common
basic political concepts: internally a democratic
order based on the rule of law and a federal
structure, externally the political and economic
potential or our countries is aimed at international
division of labour and aimed at cooperation.
Under your leadership, Prime Minister,
Australia is making intensive efforts to help
resolve the world's political problems confronting
us. You set an example of the attitude that is
needed to secure humanity and justice in our
time by using our common sense and by appreciating
reality.
Mr Whitlam with Mr Scheel, the President of the Federal Republic of Germany. 
Your visit to our country comes at a time of
change. The old international economic order
has been called in question more and more. But
we must find a relationship between the industrialised
states and the countries of the third
world and as well between the raw material
countries, oil-exporting countries on the one
hand, the industrial countries on the other. Also
a new relationship between Europe and extra-
European countries like yours and like, for
instance, New Zealand, is to be established.*
And there is no mistaking the fact that nations in
their economic performance are becoming
increasingly interdependent. Nobody can secure
lasting advantages for himself or for his
own national economy by taking unilateral
measures or by embarking on mercantilistic
autonomous economic policies.
World economic problems are a central theme
of our talks today. I would feel that in this very
year of 1975 there is hardly any problem of
such overriding importance in terms of foreign
policy, in terms of world policy, as is the complex
of economic problems in which we find
ourselves entangled.
The main prerequisite for restoring stability and
achieving progress is, we feel, and I think I can
say this not only for the German Government
but also for the great mass of thinking people in
our country, irrespective of their political lean
ings, co-operation and partnership between the
industrialised countries; between the producers
and the consumers of oil, raw materials; between
the third world and the industrialised
world.
The past few months, I might as well say the
past few weeks, have shown that it is not
impossible to find a basis for common action.'
The danger of solutions to these problems being
found in unilateral protectionist measures
seems to be a little smaller now since everybody
has recognised the negative effect they will
have on the world economy and thereby on
national economies and on the individual.
Prime Minister, we have the impression that
Australia has seized the opportunity of the
present time and that Australia is making a contribution
both in the Pacific and also on a worldwide
basis which natural resources and the
achievements of its people permit it to make. We welcome in particular the contribution
which Australia is making in her own regions
towards the development of neighbours in need
of help in other Asian states. I also very warmly
welcome your effort in strengthening
European / Australian ties by your present tour
of the Old Continent, and, of course, we very
heartily welcome you on the soil of our country.
The history of your country enables you to
understand our European problems. I thank
you, Mr Prime Minister, for this understanding,
and I would like to endorse what you-at least
by the reports I have seen-seem to have said at
the beginning of the month here in Europe. You
are reported to have said you believed the West
would in general be much stronger, happier and
more successful if Western countries cooperated
with each other and that included cooperation
between-I dare say-Great Britain
and its neighbours on the Continent. In spite of
all strains the spirit of European co-operation
has so far withstood the tests.
We have found our way to pragmatic solutions
and have not capitulated in the face of problems.
We will continue to intensify our political
co-operation and proceed along the road to
European integration.
Prime Minister, we agree that the foreign policies
of our two countries have one overriding
aim, namely to safeguard peace. The Federal
Republic of Germany on her part will continue
the present policy of detente steadfastly and
consistently. This policy seems to us to be the
best way to achieve a stable peace in Europe
and throughout the world in which the German
people too can regain-even if we have a long
way to go-can attain or regain their unity in
free self-determination. Detente policies in the
multilateral sphere are a necessary supplement
to our bilateral efforts. We also know that the
political solidarity and the defence potential of
the West are indispensable prerequisites for any
process of detente. We appreciate your coming
here at a time of such crucial importance for
both world peace and the world economy. Your
visit marks an important phase of relations between
our two countries, and I am confident
that you take home the impression that
German -Australian co-operation continues to
develop on the basis of lasting friendship. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given in his
honour by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany in
Bonn on 17 January 1975
I have been touched, Mr Chancellor, by the
warm welcome and the generous hospitality
you have extended to me and my party during
our stay in the Federal Republic. My visit to
Germany is the culmination of an extensive visit
I have made in recent weeks to several countries
of Europe. It is fitting that I should conclude my
European tour in the nation that best symbolises
two of the broad themes I have sought to
develop and explore. The first of these is
Australia's wish to strengthen her trade and
economic links with the European community.
This message has a special significance in Germany.
As the richest and most powerful nation
in Western Europe, you have a strong, and
perhaps decisive, voice in shaping the future
prosperity of Europe and the Western World.
My second theme has been the interdependence
of nations, the overriding need for cooperation
and understanding in solving our
common problems. No nation has set a better
example in this than Germany, a vigorous and
co-operative member of the European Community,
and the nation whose wise and farsighted
initiatives did much to set in train the
great movement of detente, on which depend
so much of the hopes of mankind for a better
and more peaceful world.
Germany, then, has a central and crucial role in
the shaping of a more rational world order. I
know you will accept the responsibilities for
which your great economic and industrial
strength have prepared you. The achievements
of the German people in rebuilding their nation
during the past thirty years have been an example,
an inspiration, to the world. I believe
Australia is well placed to work with you in
strengthening the economic foundations of the
Western Nations. We are both highly
developed, highly industrialised countries.
Australia is rich in resources and raw materials,
and I have been at pains to stress, during my
visit to Europe, our readiness to make these
resources available on fair terms to the nations
that need them. I repeat that assurance today. At the same time Australia needs Germany's
exports and manufactured goods to develop her
own industrial economy. We also need and
welcome your capital investment.
The interdependence of our two economies is a
source of strength to both of us. It is equally
important that we recognise and encourage the
same interdependence among all nations.
Economic co-operation must be thorough, it
must be universal, if the world is to overcome
the complex and daunting problems that confront
it. In every Western country I have visited
national leaders face the same problems of unemployment,
inflation, energy shortages, social
unrest and incipient recession. There has never
been a time when international consultations
and co-operation were more necessary. There
has never been a time when generosity and farsightedness
were more necessary There has
never been a time when it was more important
for nations to keep their nerve and keep their
faith in calm and rational solutions. It is a
crowded world. It is a complicated world. It is a
dangerous world. Nothing will be gained if
nations live for themselves. Nothing will be
gained by the wealthier nations-like Germany,
like Australia-if our policies on trade or
resources or foreign aid fail to take account of
the needs of less fortunate peoples.
In particular, I believe there is scope for greater
co-operation between producers and consumers
of raw materials to build a better framework
for the orderly and rational development of
production and trade. There is a greater need for
freer, more open trade policies among all
nations. Australia in the past two years has
sought to promote these conditions through her
own policies. We warmly and wholeheartedly
support the ideal of European unity and the
spirit of international co-operation embodied in
it. We applaud Germany's constructive and
creative role in Europe. We seek to be a partner
of a vigorous and outward-looking Europe-a
Europe with the widest possible membership, a 
Europe offering the widest and fullest access to
its total market.
During my visit to Europe I have sought the
understanding of Australia's friends for the new
independent role Australia is following in the
world. I believe we have a rather special and
fortunate place in international affairs. Relatively
remote from the scenes of historic rivalries
and conflicts, we are trying to see political questions
objectively, free from the passions of
alignment, though remaining loyal to our traditional
alliances and staunch in our friendships.
As major exporters of food, fibres and
minerals, we have much in common with the
developing countries. We share their concern to
secure a just return for producers and stable
terms of trade. We believe in the right of states
to sovereignty over their natural resources.
Yet, as an industrialised country, we understand
the needs of the exporter of manufactured
goods. We seek to play our full part in the main
tenance of international peace and security.
Like Germany we support the efforts of the
United Nations in the pursuit of justice and
world order. Guided in large measure by the
Federal Republic's contribution towards the
promotion of detente and the achievement of
peace in Central Europe, Australia will cooperate
towards the same end in the Indian
Ocean and in our region of South-East Asia.
Our common interest in peace and world security
is inseparable from our common interest in
stable economic growth and the rising prosperity
of all nations.
There are good reasons, Mr Chancellor, why
Australians and Germans are well fitted to work
together and develop their friendship. Our
countries are both federations. We understand
each other's problems of economic management,
of federal -state co-operation, of regional
development. Our bilateral trade is growing.
Australian manufacturers exhibit more and
more frequently in your remarkable trade fairs.
The already close links between German and
Australian industry will, I hope, be further
promoted by an agreement on co-operation in
science and technology. The flow of German
migrants to Australia continues, though at the
reduced level made necessary by the uncertainty
of employment. I pay tribute here in your
Federal Capital to the hundreds of thousands of German migrants who have helped to
strengthen and diversify our cultural traditions;
and develop our important industries. In recerN
years the Stuttgart Ballet has come to Australial
and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra has
played in German cities. We want to increase
the range and frequency of these cultural
exchanges. Mr Chancellor, my visit to Germany is only the
second which an Australian Prime Minister has
paid to the Federal Republic. Sir Robert Menzies
made a short, informal visit to your country in
19g59. Another visit was overdue. I am grateful
for the warmth and cordiality of our talks and for
the frank understandings we have reached
together. I have sought in recent weeks to dispel
the impression-a common impression in Australia-
that Europe no longer matters to
Australia, that our interests, our destiny, lie exclusively
in Asia and the nations to our north. All
I have seen and heard convinces me that
Australia's future and prosperity are
inseparable from yours. The Common Market is
our second largest trading partner. I shall leave
Germany knowing that our two countries can
make an important contribution together to the
solution of our problems and the strengthening
of our f riendsh ip.
I shall leave Europe convinced that Australia can
never turn aside from this ancient centre of
power and ideas, that with reason and goodwill-
and above all with peaceful co-operation
-the nations of the West will triumph over their
present difficulties and embark on a new phase
of progress and enlightenment. 111 16/ 75-L R74/ 1 589 



NOTES FOR A SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THEFON, E, G. 1ITLAM,
Q. C. IN REPLY TO A WELCOME BY THE BURGERMEISTER OF HAMPURG, SATURDAY,
18 JANUARY 1975
1. MY VISIT TO HAMBURG COMES AT THE END OF A LONG AND BUSY PROGRAM
IN EUROPE. I CAN THINK OF NO HAPPIER CONCLUSION TO MY VISIT THAN
A DAY SPENT IN YOUR CITY, THE TRADITIONAL ' GATEWAY TO FUROPE'
IS FOR ME A DEPARTURE GATE, NOT AN ENTRY GATE. TT WILL BE THE AST
MEMORY I CARRY WITH ME OF MY PRESENT JOURNEY, I THANK YOU, MR PURGERMEISTER,
AND THE SENATE FOR THE CORDIAL WELCOME YOU HAVE GIVEN TO ME AND MY WIFE,
2. THIS IS MY VISIT TO HAMBURG; MY WIFE'S SECOND, VF ARE DELIGHTED
TO BE AMONG PEOPLE WHO HAVE LEFT THEIR MARK INDELIBLY ON MY COUNTRY'S
HISTORY AND CULTURE, PY THE MIDDLE OF THE .1TH CENTURY, GERMAN
MERCHANTS, ESPECIALLY THOSE FROM HAMBURG, WERE WELL ENGAGED IN TRADE
WITH AUSTRALIA. HAMBURG CONSULATES WERE ESTABLISHED IN AUSTRALIA
IN THE 1.84I AND ONE OF THE FIRST GERMAN SHIPS TO VISIT " ELBOURNE BORE
THE NAME OF THE OLD HAMBURG MERCHANT FAMILY GODEFFROY. SINCE .1ø 4 MORE
THAN lT., ry GERMAN PEOPLE HAVE MIGRATED. TO AUSTRALIA. NE OF THE
EARLIEST GERMAN IMMIGRANTS WAS THE HAMBURG MATHEMATICIAN CARL LUDWIG RUMKER
THE FIRST GOVERNMENT ASTRONOMER OF NEW SOUTH ! ALES. PF DISCOVERED
IN THE SOUTHERN SKIES FOUR NEW COMETS, AND PREPARED A CATALOGUE OF
17, fln HEAVENLY BODIES BEFORE RETURNING HOME AS DIRECTOR OF THE PAMBURG
OBSERVATORY. 
-9-
3, QNE OF AUSTRALIA'S BEST KNOWN LANDSCAPE PAINTERS, FANS IHFYSEN,
WAS BORN IN HAMBURG. HE EMIGRATED TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS A CHILD IN
1884. ANOTHER EARLY IMMIGRANT FROM HAMBURG WAS PERNARD HALTERMAN.
HE DISCOVERED THE WORLD'S LARGEST SPECIMEN OF RFEF GOLD, AND MORE
IMPORTANTLY HE WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR INTRODUCING GERMAN LAGFR PFER
TO AUSTRALIA. SUCCEEDING GENERATIONS OF AUSTRALIANS HAVE HONOURED
HIM AND HIS HOME CITY FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTION TO OUR NATIONAL LIFE.
4. HAMBURG HAS BEEN PROMINENT IN AUSTRALIA'S TRADE WITH THE FEDERAL
REPUBLIC. MANY GOODS FROM AUSTRALIA ENTER GERMANY THROUGH THE
PORT OF HAMBURG AND AN EVER INCRFASING PROPORTION OF YOUR EXPORTS
TO AUSTRALIA GO THROUGH THIS PORT. HAMBURG HANDLES APPROXIMATELY
PER CENT OF ALL AUSTRALIAN TRAFFIC THROUGH GERMAN PORTS,
SHIPPING AND SHIPBUILDING HAVE LONG BEEN SIGNIFICANT IN THE
ECONOMIC RELATIONS BETWEEN US. IN 1888 THE GERMAN-AUSTRALIA STEAMSHIP
COMPANY WAS FOUNDED', AND ITS SUCCESSOR, THE HAMBURG AMERICA I. INEo HAS
CONTINUED THE SERVICE TO THE PRESENT DAY, MANY OF THE CONTAINER SHIPS j
WHICH NOW PLY BETWEEN EUROPE AND AUSTRALIA, WERE BUILT IN HAMBURG
SHIPYARDS.
6. I KNOW OF HAMBURG'S LONG HISTORY OF FREEDOM AND INDEPENDENCE.
THE WORD ' FREE ' OCCURRED IN THE EARLIEST CHARTERS OFYJOUR CITY FROM
THE EMPEROR: RARBAROSSA, AND HAS CONTINUED TO THIS DAY IN THE TITLE
OF THE ' FREE AND HANSEATIC CITY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE THIS
SAME FREE AND INDEPENDENT SPIRIT, LIKE YOU WE ATTACH GREAT IMPORTANCE
TO THE RESPONSIBILITIES WHICH FREEDOM PLACES ON OUR CITIZENS.
VOLUNTARY MUNICIPAL SERVICE WHICH I UNDERSTAND IS ONE OF HAMPURG'S
OLDEST TRADITIONS, IS A FEATURE OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE, 
7. MY WIFF AND I ARE MOST GRATEFUL FOR THE INVITATION TO VISIT YOUR
GREAT CITY AND FOR THE HOSPITALITY YOU HAVE SHOWN US, I LIFT
MY GLASS TO THE SENATE AND STATE OF PAMBURG AND INVITE YOU ALL TO
DRINK TO THE CONTINUING FRIENDSHIP AND COOPERATION BETWEEN OUR PEOPLES. 



Address to the Nation
by the Prime Ministeron 22 January 1975
I'm taking the earliest opportunity to report to
you on the mission abroad which I have just
completed in company with some principal
members of the Australian administration. This
was very much a representative mission because
of the complexity and diversity of the task
we undertook on Australia's behalf. So as well
as my colleague, Mr Lionel Bowen, the Special
Minister of State. I had with me the heads of the
Overseas Trade Department, the Minerals and
Energy Department and the Attorney-
General's Department and senior men of the
Prime Minister's Department, The Department
of Foreign Affairs and the Treasury. The composition
of the team itself indicates something of
the scope of our task.
The really remarkable thing about Australia's
relations with Europe for the past fifteen years
has been the relative lack-almost total absence-
of contact at the highest level. We visited
seven of the nine members of the European
Economic Community. The Common Market as
a whole is our second largest trading partnerafter
Japan. It buys-or refuses to buyagricultural
products as a unit; it acts as one on
our beef or our sugar. Yet we have never before
had head of government contact with the Community.
More than one and a half million Australians
have come to us from the countries we
have visited in Europe. Those countries have
been ignored by Australian Prime Ministers for
fifteen years. One of the countries-
Yugoslavia-is a founder and leader of the nonaligned
world-a significant grouping with
which every country around the Indian Ocean,
except South Africa, is associated. The Soviet
Union is one of the two super powers which
principally hold the fate of all of us in their hands. No Australian Prime Minister had visited
Yugoslavia or the Soviet Union or most of the
other countries visited by my mission; no Australian
Prime Minister had visited the rest since
the fifties.
Only a visit by the head of government enables
us to put our case, our views-to cover the
whole range of policy-as fully and forcefully as
possible. Only a visit by the head of government
compels the countries visited to clarify and coordinate
their own policies towards us. There
has been a decade and a half of mutual neglect
at this level. It was certainly time that we ended
that neglect-stopped taking each other for
granted-and this was very much the time to do
it.
The countries of Europe are among our chief
trading partners, most of them are in every
sense comparable countries. We share trade,
culture, standards and attitudes, technologyand
we share the same economic problems. It is
because we are a great trading nation, because,
like Europe, we are highly industrialised and
highly urbanised that we cannot insulate ourselves
from Europe's economic problems. There
is scarcely another country whose economy depends
more on the trade which passes through
its ports. Most Australians live in cities which
are trading ports. We cannot isolate ourselves
from the world and its problems and particularly
not from Europe and its problems. Economic
isolationism is not an option for Australia. The
impact of world problems is making its presence
in Australia. Australia must have her presence
felt in the world.
The overall result of my mission has been that
we have been able to present Australia's view 
thoroughly, comprehensively and authoritatively
on issues that matter in nations that matter.
I don't believe that any sensible Australian
who cares about our standing in the world, our
reputation, our interests, our influence, our
welfare, would question that this work is a crucial
part of the task of any Australian Prime Min
ister. Australia's economic strength-and this is just
the time when we should be concentrating on
our strengths-lies in our resources. It is a matter
of history that a great deal of these resources
fell under overseas control in the 1 960' s. There
is one resource that is still predominantly in
Australian hands-uranium. I found immense
interest amongst the industrial nations of
Europe in the purchase of Australian uranium,
and therefore, deep interest in the policy of the
Australian Government. I made it clear that we
are anxious to ensure that we are able to
develop our resources with the maximum Australian
ownership. A number of European coun
tries are keen to co-operate with us in the
uranium enrichment process as, of course, is
Japan. Australia's top officials have now been
with me to each of these countries. Our policies
ensure that very soon Australia will be earning
more from her energy resources than she ever
got from wool.
Everywhere I stressed Australia's support for
international co-operation in reducing world
tensions and for the exercise of restraint by the
great powers. I urged the widening and
strengthening of the great movement for
detente. I urged fuller and wider support for the
Nuclear Non -Proliferation Treaty which a
number of countries have yet to ratify. I urged
this course particularly in countries seeking to
buy our uranium. I stressed out belief-strongly
shared by the three Indian Ocean nations I visited-
that the Indian Ocean must not become a
scene of competition or confrontation between
the great powers.
I do want Australians to understand the
remarkable transformation in Australia's standing
and place and prestige in the past two years.
We are in the extraordinarily enviable situation
of having warm, meaningful, mature relations
with all the powers and groupings of relevance
to us. This has been achieved without damaging
old friendships. It has been achieved not by being all things to all men, but precisely because
we put our views clearly and firmly and
stood by them. This visit was necessary to com
plete the pattern-it was a crucial part of the
pattern of relationships we have built over the
last two years. Of course my reception abroad
was personally gratifying, but one just cannot
fail to be heartened by the warmth, the reality of
the interest and respect towards Australia. It
was, for instance, made very manifest again
and again when I resumed my visit after coming
home at the time of the Darwin disaster.
And, of course, the interest in Australia isn't
lessened by the fact that these countries, those
of them who share similar systems and economies,
are experiencing exactly the same
difficulties we are now passing through. Just
before I visited the EEC, the heads of government
of the nine member countries had met to
discuss together their economic problemsunemployment
and inflation-the very same
problems I discussed with seven of them separately.
With all the Western leaders I shared this
common concern. And always the underlying
theme was the recognition that the greatest
danger is loss of nerve on the part of leaders or
peoples. I am confident that the Australian
qualities universally admired abroad will
guarantee that there will be no breakdown here.
During the past five weeks the Parliament was
in recess; the Government certainly was not. It
has been active and alert and will continue to
be. The whole economic measures I announced
in November are now in operation, though the
effect won't show in the figures this month or
next month. We've got under active consideration
the whole range of options open to us, but
it needs cool, steady judgment. We will be applying
it in the weeks and months to come,
strengthened in the knowledge, confirmed by
my visit, that in no sense is Australia alone-not
alone in the diff iculties of the time and above all,
not alone in the world-a world where we enjoy
immense goodwill. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE FEDERAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY,
TERRIGAL, 5-FEBRUARY 1975
It is only 18 months since we last met in Conference
at Surfers' Paradise. We set this time for the Conference in
the belilef that given the normal operation of our system,
given the normal rules of the game, we would-here be
preparing the program for our first election after the
victory of 1972. The fact that it hasn't worked out that way
is just one example of the extraordinary task imposed upon
the Party and upon the Australian Labor Government. We now
know that our opponents will tear up the rule-book and write
new rules whenever they think it suits them. Fortunately,
in May last year, they seriously misjudged the temper of the
people and the spirit of the Party. We can always look back
with great pride at the campaign of 1972. But the victory of
1974, in circumstances of enormous difficulty, was no less
a splendid achievement. The Party was aroused; its
determination, its purposeful anger about the-fraud being
attempted by our opponents3 carried us through and carried us
back into Government to continue to carry out the programa
three-' year program for which we have now twice been
elected. It's too easily said that 1974 was a bad year
for Labor. True, it was an extraordinarily difficult year,
but the fact remains that in circumstances of world-wide
difficulty, we won an election against great odds. For only
the second time in our history, we won a second consecutive
election. The war of nerves waged by our opponents continues
unrelenting. They no more accept the verdict of 1974 than
they did the verdict of 1972. So the pressures on the Partyon
our nerve, our resources, our organisation, our loyalty
remain tremendous. We need the crusading spirit of ' 72 and
the deep determination of ' 74 to carry us through 1975 and
far beyond. We've seen over the last two years how very rapidly
circumstances can change. In every sense they have been two
years of great change. Most of all, and best of all, there
have been the positive changes which we as a Labor Government
have made in the Australian ' society and in Australia's position
in the world. There have been rapid and unpredictable changes
in economic and political realities. In going about its
business Conference must bear this in mind. Our task here
is to draw up the conti-nuing program a program for the next
election and beyond. Our task is to revise the existing
platform and to make the platform even more relevant to the
future of Australia as we see it. We cannot be preoccupied
with one issue or one problem, and certainly not just this
week's or this month's most topical issue. We can't write
the platform in terms laid down by today's headlines. 9./ 2 
-2-
Of course, each conference reflects the mood
and need of the times. Throughout the period covered by
the three great conferences of 1967, 1969 and 1971 we were
always deeply concerned about Vietnam. Yet, crucial as
that issue was, if we had allowed ourselves as a Conference,
as a Party, to be completely preoccupied with it, if we
had not used those Conferences to transform the whole of
the platform, to revise and modernise it, we would not be
in Government today. Now, as always, Conference must build
for the-future. That is what makes great and memorable
Conferences. Conference and the whole Party should also bear
. this in mind when assessing the work of the Government and
judging our actions. There has been a great deal of talk
in recent weeks about reversing policy. Don't fall for
the line. We are not going into reverse; we are not
abandoning the program; we are not going back on the mandate.*
It's true we are going through times of great economic
change and economic uncertainty. All the mixed economies,
all the democracies, all our trading partners, all the
industrialised countries, are sharing the same experience.
From the time we cime in we've made economic decisions
relevant to the needs of the time and the problems of the
time.. It would of course be grossly irresponsible to refuse
to budge from a decision, correct enough in one set of
circumstances, when a completely different set of circumstances
* arose. Of course, we are adjusting; of course we are prepared
to adjust. But the underlying direction, the overriding
objective remains constant, unchanged, unchangeable to carry
out the program, to fulfil the mandate.
Jim Cairns has spoken here, and around Australia,
about the difficulties of economic management in a mixed
economy. It raises special difficulties for a democratic
socialist party. As Jim Cairns has said, we find ourselves
now in a position of seeking ways of restoring profitability.
We have to do that if we are to restore full employment.
I will have something more to say about this in
detail in relation to our particular economic problems and
unemployment and inflation. But don't let's forget that
we have always recognised the relationship between the prosperity
of the private sector and our ability to carry out the program.
We should not think there is something shameful or demeaning
about it. There is no sell-out involved. Indeed, in the
1972 Policy Speech, I laid particular stress on this the
relation between our ability to carry out the proqram and
the strength of . all sectors of the economy including the
private sector. I said: " Our program particularly in education,
welfare, hospitals and cities, can only work successfully
within the framework of strong uninterrupted growth." / 3 
We have to ensure those conditions of else abandon
the program. The fight against unemployment and the fight
for the program go hand-in-hand. Behind any temporary measures
and changes we have made and may make lies the great continuity
and the great consistency our determination to carry out
the program, the program based on the decisions of Conference,
the program twice put to the Australian people and twice
endorsed by them.
And what a mighty work it has been, and yet there
is still so much to do. Delegates will now have a copy of
the document called " Report 74" which sets out the achievements
in a single year. There's been only one year to rival it
for achievement 1973.'
I find there a re frequent complaints on two scores.
One is that we have done too much too soon. The-other is
that we have failed to communicate. As to the first, we have
to ask: which of our achievements all of them in pursuit
of the platform and in fulfillment of our pledges should we
have abandoned or deferred? We have, in fact, deferred some,
such as our schedule for the abolition of the means test, but
in everything we've done there has been a clear priority
the priority of greatest need. We have acted, urgently because
the need has been urgent. We couldn't have delayed in
rebuilding the ramshackle structures and systems we inherited.
We had to act urgently to clear away the accumulated deadwood
of 23 years, and we are doing so. Of course this upset the
vested interests, those who had it so good for so long.
And this gets to the second question communication.
The people whom our program is designed first and most to
benefit are not in general the most articulate, or the best
organised sections of the community. The interests and-. groups
who may feel disadvantaged or feel that their privileged
position is in some way threatened are of course, the most
articulate, influential and powerful sections of the community.
We can't really expect the press to take up the cudgels on
our behalf. The cudgels are thoroughly employed in bashing
us. And it is a myth that the Government has built up its
own vast propaganda machine this is just not true.
In the final analysis we will have to rely on
ourselves to get our message across. We do have in our ranks,
as members, as supporters, some of the most articulate people
in Australia. * We must not allow the media to, dictate the
terms of debate. We cannot sit back supinely. I It is time
to go on the offensive as we did in 1972. Of course it is
easier to attack from the advantage of opposition, particularly
an opposition as irresponsible as this present contemptible
rabble. / 4 
-4-
But the record of the achievement of our Government
is there. If we ourselves are apologetic about it or silent
about it, or if we fight just on the terms and issues laid
down by others then we have no chance of getting the essential
messg across. That's the real problem about communication.
The Labor program the program of this Government
is to ensure that the services and opportunities which the
community must provide are made more abuhdant and more equal
for all Australians wherever they live, wherever they choose
to live or wherever they are obliged to live.
I. don't expect to see in my time a total transformation
of the political and economic systems. I don't expect it to
occur in the lifetime of delegates here. But we can achieve
in our time the situation where anybody who has the will can
get a proper education to the limit of his ability, where
anybody who has the need can have the best medical attention
and hospital treatment, where anybody who has to live or
work in a city can have decent transport, a decent environment
and decent means df recreation.
Wages and salaries are becoming less and less the
dominant factor in determining a family's real welfare. No
longer is a person' s income the sole measure of the quality of
his life or the opportunities he can provide for his family.
They depend on things which the community acting as a whole
provides for its individual members, and which the community
alone can now adequately provide. Increasingly, a family's
standard of living is determined not so much by their income
but by where they live and by the community services provided
by the community in which they live. Their health, children's
education, opportunities and leisure, sense of security and
real security increasingly depend on the community's ability
or will to provide for them to provide for the needs 6f
individuals by collective decision and collective action.
Thes6 general thoughts are very relevant to any
consideration of unemployment and inflation. There is a
link between wages and inflation and there is a link between
inflation and unemployment. There are certain facts which
I'm bound . to state, not just as Prime Minister but as Leader
of the Labor Party, because they go to the heart of our
present problems. Don't let's have this childish accusation,
any time one of my colleagues or I state the facts, that we
are union-bashing. I will not mis-state the facts, over-state
them or under-! itate them. And the fact is that we cannot beat
inflation or unemploymfent if there are wage increases this
year on the scale of last year' s increases. I certainly
expect union officials and advocates to try their hardest
for their members. But the over-all task is to ensure
that gains are real and lasting. 
There must be a l * imit . to the increases of wages
which the economy can stand in any one year. Only so much
extra can be provided from the growth of the economy or
re-distribution from profits. Wage increases beyond such
limits must inevitably cause price increases and thus attempts
to improve the living standards by wage claims are frustrated.
I believe there is evidence that in recent times wage
increases have gone beyond the present limits of the capacity
of the economy to pay. We have a very rapid increase in the
share of GNP going to wages and salaries. Wage and salary
increases have been much greater than the rate of price increases.
I will give some examples. In our first: two years
of office, the Consumer Price Index increased by 31 percent.
Average weekly earnings increased by 40 per cent. Minimiumn
award rates for men increased by 47 per cent. Minim~ um award
rates for women increased by 70 per cent. With the taxc cuts
we brought into operation on the 1st January, real average
weekly earnings after tax have gone up by 7.5 per cent.
But its support for indexation, the Government
has indicated clearly its determination to protect the
real level of wages.
Australians should-be clear what the opposition's
attack on indexation means every wage earner would have
his living stan~ dard reduced.
And here again, let's be clear about the alternative.
Take Malcolm Fraser. He makes no secret either of his
ambitions or his intentions. You Might take notice of him
as Mr Snedden's rival and challenger. You might take notice
of him as Mr Snedden's appointee as Shadow Minister for Labour.
He has tried to sack Snedden but Snedden has not dared to
sack him, nor has he repudiated the industrial policy which
Mr Fraser unveiled in his speech to the ANZAAS Congress two
weeks ago. And there it is in all its horrendous detail
a promise of a return to the penal clauses, goal sentences
not just for officials but for erring members, a complete
wage freeze, an entire apparatus of union intimindation. There
is one great difference between Mr Snedden and Mr Fraser.
Mr Fraser is at least his own man. You will remember when
Mr Snedden was Minister for Labour he supported the idea of a
Prices Notification Tribunal. When he became Treasurer-he
opposed it. When he changed his advisers he changed his policies
and since he has been Leader of the Opposition the same
process continue! s different advisers, different policies.
Mr Fraser has at least come clean; employees now know exactly
what is in store for them, under any Government in which he
might have any say. ./ 6 
-6-
I do hope the Party and the Trade Unions will make
the connection between real living standards and the Government's
programs. Inflationary wage settlements this year would
threaten both real living standards and the program. And, of
course, we have to bear in mind the alternative. It has been
highly instructive to see the reaction of our opponents to
our curz'ent difficulties. They have shown themselves in
their true colours. Trendyism has had its little day. The
forces of the right have reasserted themselves with a vengeance
even Mr Hamer has dropped his trendy image so carefully and
expensively cultivated and hopped on the Petersen Bandwaggon.
For an example of sheer bloody-mindedness, what could excel
the Victorian challenge to the High Court on the validity of
the Australian Assistance Plan a pioneer experiment in
community involvement. If anything disposes of the idea that
the Liberals are concerned about so-called centralism, about
community involvement, it's that. The list of benefits
imperilled by this challenge is terrifying and goes far beyond
the Australian Assistance Plan.
It includes such matters as assistance for isolated
children, pre-school teacher education allowances,
Commonwealth Technical Scholarships, grants under the new
program for child care and pre-school education, national
apprenticeship schemes, grants to community agencies inolved
in migrant welfare, local aid for aboriqinas, grants fox
aborigine community development, protection of aboriginal
sacred site%, aborigiftal community enterprises, aged pc. 0z'
homes and hostels, sheltered employment assistance, handicapped
children's assistance, homeless persons' assistance, meals
on wheels, home nursing subsidies, nursing homes' ass' t nze
and many, many more. I am advised that in all, soMe 56
separate programs of assistance from the Australian Govw nment
not all of them the creation of our Governraent (. ould he
affected if the challenge were to succeed.
What on earth have these matters to do with t1
question of State rights or centralism? The degree of
misrepresentation on this question is astonishing. We oughtn't
to allow ourselves to succumb to it. We have had uhis
extraordinary spectacle of Mr Bjelke-Petersen and Sir Charles
Court descending on poor, beleagurered London breathing
fire against the Australian Govenment in general, and me in
particular. It is amazing how these super patriots, Mr Snedden
included, feel free to'denigrate and downgrade Adstralia abroad,
to foul the nest. Mr Bjelke-Petersen alleges that I set out
in London to abolish the Agents-General. Whatever I might
think about the anachronism and pretension of Agents-General,
I have never raised the issue. / 7 
-7-
The only time I have been asked to raise any matter
concerning the Agents-General was by themselves in 1969. They
had a terrible problem and petitioned me in London to help
them. They were terribly upset by their low rating at official
functions. Under the order of precedence they lay somewhere
under the Mayor of Manchester and just on top of the Dame of Sark.
So you see the weighty problems that the Agents-General have
to deal-with. But I have not raised the issue. The only matter
I have raised with the British Government is the question of
Appeals to the Privy Council that the Australian High Court
would be the final Court of Appeal. This does not involve any
question of State rights, because in matters between the States
and the national Government, the High Court is the final
court of Appeal. It should be so for all matters. It is what
I believe I am sure it is what most Australians believe and
in particular it is what the platform says.
In London I did, however, say in a public speech
in very general terms something about the responsibilities of
the national Government and the State Governmen * ts. I pointed
out that in the two Australian States with the largest
populations it was obvious that only through the involvement
of the national Govenment could the people be provided with
essential public services like health, public transport and
education. In the States with-the largest areas, only the
national Government could safeguard a control of the vast
new natural resources discovered in the last 10 years.
Later this year we will be concluding a new
five year financial agreement with the States. I should stress
this: no reimbursement formula would solve the financial
difficulties of the States as permanently and successfully
as acceptance by the National Government of responsibility
for hospitals and railways. It is not enough to say thdt
because these are traditionally fields for the States, nothing
can be done. Where would our universities be if we had
accepted the traditional argument?
And of course, over the whole range of policy,
the traditionalist argument is one that should not wash with
our Party the Party of change, the Party of reform. It
has been by-breaking with tradition, by seeking new methods
that we have been able to achieve so much in so short a time.
We shall go from this Conference with our program
refreshed and I believe, with our determination refreshed.
I don't disguise the difficulties. The real difficulty is
purely political this notion that an election may be held
every 6 months at the whim of half the Senate. The opposition
is characterised by an extraordinary combination of irresponsibility
and arrogance. Mr Snedden talks as though it were his
prerogative to decide when the next election may be. That is
a fantastic assumption for any Leader of the opposition, but
doubly fantastic for this one a man with the shakiest hold
on the leadership of his own party, a man who cannot commit
his own Senators, on this issue or any other. 
-8-
He cannot commit them to bad conduct or compel
them to good conduct. The Parliamentarv system everywhere
is being challenged as never before. The irresponsibility
of the Opposition injects a new poison, a further uncertainty
into the Australian system. For our part, we are determined
to' work on the basic assumption of elections that in 1974
the people elected us for a further three years and we have
a mandate to carry out our program during the full term for
which we were elected.
Any other approach would. be to succumb to the
tactics and the propaganda of our opponents. We should not
get unnerved about difficulties. Politics is by its nature
a difficult business. None know it better than we in
this room. We did not get an armchair ride into office
and we could not have expected an armchair ride once we were
in office. Government is about solving problems. Because
these are always human problems, they'don't lend themselves
to perfect, complete solutions. Difficulty is the name of
the game. Don't be fazed; don't be panicked. The people
of Australia placef a high privilege upon us. It is a great
honour to have been twice entrusted with the conduct of
their affairs. I am confident we shall emerge from this Conference
further strengthened in our ability to carry out that trust. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 442
February 1975
NEW MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE
The Government has decided to establish a special
committee of ministers which will be concerned primarily
with the Australian Government's relations with the States.
The ministerial committee will comprise the
Prime Minister, the Treasurer, the Minister for Social
Security and the Minister for Urban and Regional Development.
The committee will be supported by a group of officials
drawn from their Departments, working as a task force.
The Australian Government will negotiate a new
five-year financial assistance agreement with the States
before the present agreement expires at the end of the
current financial year.
The Treasurer's consultations with the State
Treasurers which-are now underway, are preliminary steps
towards the negotiation of the new five-year agreement.
As well as being concerned with the Australian
Government's relations with-* the States overall, the
ministerial committee will examine programs of direct
assistance to regions, local Government and local communities.
The Australian Government has laid considerable
stress on the adoption of a regional approach to planning
and decision-making.
It is now time to consolidate the Australian
Government's initiatives. This consolidation involves
further co-operation with State administration.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



JjAUST ALI( Ao
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 443
7 February 1975
4
NATIONAL ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR
THE HANDICAPPED
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
the names of the members of the National Advisory Council
for the Handicapped. Mr Whitlam announced in December that the Council
was to be established to advise the Government on all
aspects of its policies affecting the rehabilitation
of the injured and the handicapped, including the
implementation of the rehabilitation aspects of the
Woodhouse Report on Compensation and Rehabilitation in
Australia. Its Chairman is Mr Justice C. L. D. Meares,
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales and the Chairman
of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
The members are:
Dr R. Andrews, Director, Schonell Educational
Research Unit, University of Queensland.
Dr G. Bedbrook, Director, Spinal
Injuries Unit, Royal Perth Hospital.
Mr W. A. Catanach, O. B. E. Managing Director,
Catanach's Jewellers, Melbourne, and former
Vice-President, Australian Council for
Rehabilitation of Disabled.
Mr J. F. Fitzgerald, former Senator for
New South Wales.
Dr Bruce Ford, Director, Rehabilitation
Services, Alfred/ Caulfield Hospitals, Melbourne.
Dr R. M. Gibson, Regional Geriatrician,
Hunter Health Region, Newcastle.
Mr P. T. Hill, Deputy Chairman, Social
Welfare Commission, Canberra.
Mr K. T. Jenkins, President, Australian Council
for Rehabilitation of Disabled and Director,
Bedford Industries Vocational Rehabilitation
Association, Adelaide. / 2 I 
-2-
Dr J. O. Miller, Principal, N. S. W. College of
Paramedical Studies, Sydney.
Mrs Norma Rigby, Executive Director,
Australian Association for the Mentally
Retarded, Canberra.
Those members associated with organisations have
been appointed in their own right, and not as representatives
of those organisations.
The Prime Minister said that the Council members
were among Australia's leading authorities in the
rehabilitation field, and included members of major
voluntary organisations as well as some handicapped
people. The Government was grateful to them for agreeing
to serve on the Council.
The Council will be responsible to the Special
Minister of State, Mr Bowen. Its terms of reference
are attached.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



Ministerial Statement
in the House of Representatives by the Prime Minister on
11 February 1975
I wish to report to the House and to the Australian
people on my recent mission abroad. It
was, I believe, the most arduous and comprehensive
overseas visit ever undertaken by an
Australian Prime Minister. It was also among
the most necessary and productive. From
Australia's point of view it was long overdue; in
each of the countries I visited it was welcomed
without reservation. It enabled me to put
Australia's views, to hear the views of our
friends and trading partners and to strengthen
our goodwill in regions of undoubted importance
to us. I count it an unqualified success.
Between 14 December and 21 January I visited
Sri Lanka, Belgium, the headquarters of the
European Communities in Brussels. Britain,
Ireland, Greece, the Netherlands, France. Italy,
Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Pakistan and
Bangladesh. I had intended also to visit Malta,
but because of my return to Australia after the
disaster in Darwin. the Special Minister of State,
Mr Lionel Bowen, who accompanied me
throughout my mission, visited Malta in my
stead. Mr Bowen and I were accompanied by a
team of senior officials, including the Secretary
of the Department of Minerals and Energy, the
Secretary of the Department of Overseas Trade,
the Deputy Secretary of my own Department, a
Deputy Secretary of the Department of Foreign
Affairs and for part of our visit, a First Assistant
Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of
the Attorney-General's Department.
It will be seen from the duration of my trip, from
the number and range of the countries visited
and from the number and seniority of the
officials who accompanied me, how highly I
rated the importance of this mission and the tasks I undertook on Australia's behalf. No Australian
Prime Minister had visited the Soviet
Union in the 33 years since diplomatic relations
were established between the Soviet Union and
Australia. Many of the other countries I visited
had not previously been visited by an Australian
Prime Minister. Yet the nations of the European
Economic Community constitute Australia's
second largest trading partner after Japan. The
Soviet Union is one of the world's two superpowers-
one of the nations whose policies
determine the fate of all mankind. More than
one and a half million citizens have come to
Australia from the nations of continental
Europe. We share with many of the countries I
visited economic and social problems which it
was clearly in our interests to discuss together.
I saw my mission as an essential part of my duty
as a head of government. It had already been
postponed for six months because of the action
of the Opposition in refusing Supply and forcing
an election last May. I did not believe it should
be postponed again. Quite apart from the
inconvenience and disruption this would have
caused to the Governments I visited, the issues
we discussed were so important, so pressing, so
central to Australia's immediate and long-term
interests, that a further postponement could not
be contemplated.
I stress that point because, for some weeks, the
Australian people witnessed a persistent and
often unscrupulous campaign by sections of the
media to deter me from my visit, and when I was
not deterred, to disparage what I did. The
specious view was put forward that a Prime
Minister's duty is to stay at home at a time of
economic difficulty. Now however serious our
own problems and however acute my concern 
about them-and I trust my concern is not in
question-I believe a Prime Minister, in the
nature of his office, has a special and at times an
overriding duty to promote Australia's place in
the world. This is not to say that our economic
problems are unimportant. I agree that domestic
matters, inflation and unemployment,
have a greater priority in our thinking and are
more important to the nation's welfare than any
of the matters with which I had to deal overseas.
The point is really this: while it was possible for
my colleagues to deal with our domestic problems
in my absence, it was not possible for anyone
other than the Prime Minister to deal with
the matters that arose during my mission.
That is the crux of the matter. In all the denigration
of my visit I have not seen this point
acknowledged, let alone refuted. Only a visit by
a head of government enables Australia to put
her point of view at the highest level and in the
most forceful terms. Only a visit by a head of
government obliges the countries visited to
clarify and co-ordinate their policies towards us.
Only a visit that includes all European countries-
or at least the majority of those of importance
to us-can generate a cumulative impact
and promote Australia's advantage on the
widest scale.
Our economic problems, far from being irrelevant
to the matters discussed on my trip, in
fact bore closely upon them. One of the themes
of my mission was the essential and growing
interdependence of nations in dealing with their
economic problems. It would have been curious
indeed if I had given the impression to our
friends and trading partners, by cancelling or
again postponing my mission, that Australia is
the only country whose problems can be
isolated from the rest of the world. The whole
point of my mission, the point persistently
ignored by the critics, was that Australia cannot
isolate herself. Our inflation and unemployment
are to a large extent linked with the present
economic recession in the United States and
much of Western Europe. I left Europe with the
feeling that despite our temporary difficulties,
Australia's economy is healthier and basically
sounder than those of most of the countries I
visited. I left Europe with the sure knowledge
that the management of the western monetary
system and the western economy is, along with
the maintenance of peace, the greatest and most immediate problem of 1975. In meeting
that problem, Australia, like every other advanced
industrialised nation, has a part to play.
For the information of honourable members I
shall give a brief outline of my itinerary and
official discussions before dealing with particular
issues.
I left Sydney on 14 December and made an initial
stop in Sri Lanka, where I had talk: s with
President Gopallawa and Prime Minister Bandaranaike.
The following day I flew to Brussels
for a stay of four days, during which I was
received by their Majesties the King and Queen
of the Belgians and had discussions with Prime
Minister Tindemans. I had talks in Brussels with
the President of the Commission of the
European Communities, M. Ortoli, and with the
Vice-President, Sir Christopher Soames. I
addressed the International Press Centre there
on 18 December.
On 19 December I flew to London for a five-day
visit, which included an audience with Her Majesty
the Queen of Australia and discussions
with Prime Minister Wilson and the Leader of
the Opposition, Mr Heath. I sought to define
Australia's relations with Britain in my speech at
the Mansion House at a luncheon given by the
Lord Mayor of London.
On 23 December I paid a short visit to the Irish
Republic for talks with the Taoiseach, Mr
Cosgrave, and other Senior Ministers. I was also
received by President O'Dalaigh.
On my return to Europe I visited Greece, where I
had talks on 3 January with the recently elected
Prime Minister, Mr Karamanlis. The same
evening I flew to The Hague for a two-day visit.
There I was received by Her Majesty the Queen
of the Netherlands and had talks with Prime
Minister Den Uyl and other senior Ministers
On 6 January I went to Paris for two days of
talks with President Giscard D'Estaing Prime
Minister Chirac and other French Ministers. In
Paris I attended a ground-breaking ceremony at
the site of the new Australian Embassy building
and a civic reception in the Hotel de \ lille. I had
talks with the Secretary-General of the
Organisation for Economic Co-opeiation and
Development, whose headquarters are in Paris.
From Paris I travelled to Rome, where I had discussions
with President Leone and Prime Minis-
ter Moro, the Foreign Minister, Mr Rumor, and
several other senior Ministers. During my visit to
Rome I signed a Cultural Agreement between
Australia and Italy.
I flew next to Yugoslavia, the first Australian
Prime Minister to visit that country. I had talks
on 9 and 10 January with Prime Minister
Bijedic and met President Tito.
On 12 January I flew to Leningrad and two days
later to Moscow where I had wide-ranging discussions
with President Podgorny and Prime
Minister Kosygin of the Soviet Union and signed
cultural and scientific agreements between the
Soviet Union and Australia.
I visited the Federal Republic of Germany from
16 to 18 January. In Bonn I met President
Scheel and had talks with Chancellor Schmidt
and other senior Ministers. I addressed a meeting
of bankers and industrialists at the Federation
of German Industry in Cologne on 16
January. On my way back to Australia I paid a brief visit to
Pakistan on 19 January for talks with Prime
Minister Bhutto, and Bangladesh, where I met
Prime Minister-now President-Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman. Joint communiques were
issued after my visits to Yugoslavia and the
Soviet Union.
The EEC-Uranium
It became apparent as my visit to the seven EEC
countries progressed that Western Europe's
demand for uranium in the late 70' s and the
will be very substantial. Our role as a
potential major supplier of uranium means that
Australia's importance to these countries will
increase.
In Brussels, London, The Hague, Paris, Rome
and Bonn, as well as in Moscow, I consistently
asserted Australia's wish to develop her own
enrichment capability so that as much uranium
as possible should be exported in an enriched
form. There are important policy issues to be
resolved, such as the choice of enrichment
technology, the capital investment required,
and the extent to which we may be prepared to
sell unenriched uranium both before and after
we have our own enrichment capability. I am
convinced that my visit, and the fact that the
Head of the Department of Minerals and Energy,
Sir Lenox Hewitt, accompanied me, has greatly facilitated the Government's consideration
of the total uranium supply and demand
situation over the next decade.
The obvious interest shown throughout Europe
in Australia as a supplier of uranium suggests
that we shall exercise considerable influence in
this important area.
The EEC-Beef
In each European Community capital I took up
forcefully the Community's current import restrictions
on beef. I left heads of Government in
no doubt about our attitude to the Community's
action in imposing restrictions without warning
or consultation. I pointed out the disruptive and
harmful nature of this action to the Australian
meat industry and urged on European leaders
the need for stable long-term marketing
arrangements. The response of individual
Governments was, in the main, apologetic and
sympathetic. I believe that my visit has made it
more likely that the Community market will be
re-opened to Australian beef, if not later this
year, then by mid-1976. I was informed that
the total market could return to about 400 000
to 500 000 tons by mid-1976. This total market,
of which we would have a share, would
mean that we would be still selling less beef
than we did before the market was closed, but it
would be an improvement. I also believe that
the strong stand which I took on this matter and
the interest of the European countries in Australian
uranium will make it much less likely that
such restrictive actions will be taken against
Australian commodities again.
Energy In a number of countries I discussed in some
depth the energy crisis and the Middle-East. I
assured European leaders that while we agreed
that an increase in the price of oil was justified,
we did not wish to see a confrontation develop
between cartels of producers and consumers. I
asserted strongly our attitude that while producers
have every right to negotiate with consumers
for fair prices for their resources, we will
also work to harmonise the interests of producers
and consumers with proper concern for
the international situation as a whole.
The Middle East
In my discussions on the Middle-East I asserted
the right of all countries in the Middle-East, 
including Israel, to secure and recognised
boundaries. I believe that Israel's integrity as a
State must be upheld. At the same time, a lasting
solution in the Middle-East wil' -? quire
withdrawal from occupied territories and
measures to meet the legitimate needs of the
Palestinian people. While I cannot go into the
details of private discussions, I was not discouraged
by my discussions in the Kremlin and
in Belgrade on this matter.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
I took the opportunity in a number of capitals to
urge greater support for the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty. In particular I did so in
Paris, Bonn and Rome. Australia wants to see
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
strengthened and all countries accept the
multilateral obligations which the Treaty
embodies. I sensed that there is a real possibility
of movement by the governments in Rome and
Bonn, which is most encouraging. In France I
explained frankly the problems of selling
uranium to countries which had not ratified the
NPT or adhered to the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards. Although France
has not signed the NPT, I believe that she too is
concerned about the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and I hope that she too will sign.
Meanwhile, France has said that she will behave
as if she were a party to the NPT and that
she already applies the safeguards adopted by
the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Non-aligned Movement
I discussed with Mrs Bandaranaike in Sri Lanka
and with President Tito and Prime Minister
Bijedic in Yugoslavia Australia's interest in the
Third World and the non-aligned movement.
Although Australia is an aligned country-and
there can be no doubt about this-we have
interests which overlap those of the Third
World. Many of the non-aligned countries-like Sri
Lanka-are within or on the borders of the
Indian Ocean. I explained to Mrs Bandaranaike,
President Tito and Prime Minister Bijedic our
interest in attending future meetings of the
non -aligned group either as a guest or as an observer.
I found all three appreciative of the
interest of Australia in the problems of the Third
World and the objectives of the non-aligned movement and sympathetic to our association
as a guest or as an observer with future meetings.
We shall in the future be examining further the
possibilities of our attendance in this capacity at
future meetings of the non-aligned countries
with other important members of the movement
in Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
The Indian Ocean
I had discussions on the Indian Ocean while I
was abroad. Honourable members will recall
that I raised this matter in the United States and
that the Government had raised it previously
through diplomatic channels in both Washington
and Moscow. I took the opportunity of my
visit to Moscow to refer to this matter at the
highest levels in the Kremlin. The Soviet
Government understands our attitude. In the
joint communique issued after my visit to Moscow
the Soviet Government endorsed ' its readiness
to participate' in ' seeking a favourable sol
ution to the problem of making the Indian
Ocean an area of peace'.
I believe that in urging mutual restraint on the
great powers we are on the correct course. To
support any further development of bases in the
Indian Ocean-or any long-term naval deployments
in the area-is to support escalation and
a heightening of tension in the region. We reject
that course.
Investment
While in Western Europe, and especially in
Bonn, I had full discussions on the question of
investment in Australia. I made it plain that the
Australian Government continues to welcome
foreign investment but that we wish as far as
possible to control our own industries and
resources. I agreed that a West German mission
should visit Australia in the near futuire to discuss
in detail all aspects of investment in
Australia. I agreed also to take up with the Australian
taxation authorities the strongly expressed
interest of the Belgian, Netherlands and
Italian Governments in negotiating a double
taxation agreement with Australia.
The International Court
Honourable members should know that I took
advantage of my visit to The Hague-the city in
which the International Court of Justice is
based-to refer to our warm support for the 
principles and objectives of, the International
Court and to urge that the international community
give greater attention to the Court as an
instrument for world peace and harmony. I
urged that the Court's jurisdiction should be
made compulsory and universal. Honourable
members will know that it has been the practice
of most countries, including Australia, to accept
the Court's jurisdiction only with reservations or
with the exclusion of certain categories of dispute.
I take this opportunity to inform the House
that, as an earnest of our respect for the Court,
Australia proposes to forgo her existing reservations,
and in any dispute which we litigate before
the Court, to accept its judgment unreservedly.
Relations with Britain
In London I had useful and cordial talks with
Prime Minister Wilson on important issues
including energy problems, unemployment,
inflation, the dangers of a world recession, British
attitudes to the re-negotiation of the Treaty
of Rome, and Constitutional issues including
the right of appeal to the Privy Council. I have
today introduced Bills to give effect to the
Government's policy on Privy Council appeals.
That policy can be stated simply: we do not believe
that Australians should litigate their disputes
before the Courtsof another country. I believe
that attitude is understood and accepted in
Britain to a greater extent, regrettably, than it is
in some quarters in Australia.
In case there are any lingering misconceptions
about the Government's approach to its relations
with the United Kingdom, at the Mansion
House I made it clear in a speech, which was
widely publicised and applauded by the British
media, that changes in the world situation had
naturally led to changes in Australia's traditional
relationship with Britain. I made it clear
that those who saw the Government's recent
actions concerning Britain as a manifestation of
strident new nationalism or anti-British sentiment
had completely misread the Government's
intentions. What we are seeking to do is
establish an independent Australian identity in
the world and especially in our region. We have
grown up. Our actions are in no way anti-
British; they are simply pro-Australian. Contrary
to a popular impression, I did not raise in
Britain the question of State Agents-General. I
made it clear that the traditional understanding and affection between Australia and Britain,
based on strong historical and family connections,
would deepen rather than diminish as
Australia assumed her rightful place as an
independent nation with a distinctive Australian
role and a distinctive Australian voice in the
South East Asian region, in the Commonwealth
and in the world at large. We see particular
value in our continuing associations with the
Commonwealth. With the majority of member
nations of the Commonwealth now lying in and
around the Indian and South Pacific Oceans,
Australia is geographically closer to the centre
of the modern Commonwealth than is Britain
herself. The Soviet Union
It is thirty-three years since a former Labor
Government established diplomatic relations
with the Soviet Union. When I spent more than
six hours in discussions with Chairman Kosygin
and President Podgorny in the Kremlin it was
the first time that Australia's views on a wide
range of important issues had been put at this
level. We discussed such matters as the situation
in the North Asian region, Japan, China,
Korea, detente and disarmament.
I was also able to raise a number of human
rights issues. While the Soviet Union maintains
that these are matters within its domestic jurisdiction
it is not insensitive to representations on
these matters. I raised the matter of Jewish
emigration. I raised the matter of ' Operation
Reunion', that is, the scheme under which persons
resident in the Soviet Union seek to join
relatives or friends in Australia. Prime Minister
Kosygin listened with courtesy to my presentation
and replied in some detail on the question
of Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union and
on the question of ' Operation Reunion'. The
Soviet Government takes the view that these
are matters of purely domestic concern.
Australia for her part, believes that on any matters
involving broad humanitarian rights
nations have a duty to put their viewpoints
strongly. No purpose is served if we avoid issues
where agreement is unlikely. The Soviet Union
has a better understanding of our views and, I
believe, a greater respect for our candour.
France In France I had substantial and lengthy discussions
with President Giscard D'Estaing and
Prime Minister Chirac. I believe it is true to say 
that my visit and my reception by my hosts in
Paris put the seal at the highest level on the
resumption of normal relations with France following
the strains which had developed over
France's atmospheric testing in the Pacific. This
testing has now ceased.
Arising from my visit to Paris, it was agreed that
a French trade mission should visit Australia in
the coming months to explore the possibility of
increasing commercial exchanges between our
two countries. Businessmen in Australia should
understand that there is no political constraint
upon their initiating contacts with France. It was
agreed also to negotiate a cultural agreement
between Australia and France and an agreement
on co-operation in science and technology.
It was further agreed to hold regular
consultations between officials of the Australian
Department of Foreign Affairs and the Quai
d'Orsay. The first round of these consultations is
likely to be held towards the middle of this year.
Bangladesh My visit to Dacca brought into focus the issues
involved in responding to Bangladesh's enormous
needs, especially for food. I explained the
great sympathy which the Australian Government
and people felt for the people of
Bangladesh in their struggle to feed their population.
However, I felt obliged to point out to
Sheikh Mujib that while Australia is willing to do
as much as we can for his country, it is not right
that the whole burden for supplying as aid, or
selling on credit, wheat for Bangladesh should
fall on the relatively few countries which produce
surplus grain. I suggested international
arrangements under which some of the
developed Governments with capital, such as
the Federal Republic of Germany or Japan, or
the oil-rich Middle Eastern countries, might use
some of their petrodollars to finance the purchase
of wheat on credit from the grain producers.
Detente I turn now to the broader issue of world peace. I
see the peace of the world as resting on the progressive
reinforcement of the network of accommodations
and understandings between
the two superpowers, the United States and the
Soviet Union. This network of understandings is
itself part of a wider balance of interests involving the other principal powers, China, Japan
and the enlarged European Community.
If peace is to be preserved-and in the ultimate
analysis nothing is more important than thatthe
interests of the United States, the Soviet
Union, Japan and China and those of the enlarged
European Community must be kept in balance
in Europe and in Asia. Each must live with
respect for the legitimate interests and aspirations
of the others. Only in this way will
detente become durable and global. Only in this
way will peace be secured.
It is the duty of the middle powers and the
smaller powers to make their views heard in
seeking to strengthen the structure of peace.
This must be a common collective concern, not
something left to the major powers alone. The
future belongs to us all and, as I said in my address
to the General Assembly last September,
the Government rejects a concept of a world in
which a handful of powerful men in charge of
the most powerful nations chart the course for
the rest of us to follow.
Some may ask what influence a country like
Australia has in the White House, in the
Kremlin, in the Councils of Europe, in th~ e Great
Hall of the People, or in Tokyo? I believe we can
and do have influence. I believe at the very least
we should not fail to try to exert some influence
for the causes in which we believe. We should
not permit our views on major international
problems like the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and access to markets to go by default.
I had a number of objectives in undertaking this
journey and I believe I fulfilled them all.
I wanted to emphasise Australia's continuing
and substantial interest in Europe and to
strengthen Europe's awareness of Australia. I
have done so.
I wanted to complete. as far as possible:, the pattern
of visits which my Foreign Minister and I
have been undertaking abroad to outline
Australia's policies in a number of areas following
the first change of government in twentythree
years. I have now largely completed that
pattern of visits.
I wanted to establish or strengthen personal
contacts with the heads of government of
important countries and exchange views with 
them on matters of international concern and on
common economic problems including inflation
and unemployment. I have done so.
I wanted to discuss at first hand Australia's
interest in long-term arrangements for the
access of our commodities in markets in Europe
and I have done so. It is less likely, I believe, that
Australia will ever again be subjected to summary
and restrictive closures of markets which
we have carefully nurtured.
I wanted to discuss at the highest level the international
energy situation and to form my own
assessments on the major policy issues involved
in the sale of Australia's bountiful mineral
resources, especially uranium and coal, to the
countries of Europe. I have done so, and I believe
the outlook for Australia in the area of energy
supply is immensely encouraging.
I wanted to discuss with those countries whose
people have contributed to Australia's cultural
heritage and economic development the
present attitude of the Government towards
immigration. This I did in Britain, Ireland, Italy,
Greece, Yugoslavia and the Netherlands.
I wished also to explain Australia's policies on
foreign investment and to remove any uncertainties
about these policies. I have done so.
Finally, I wanted to examine ways in which
Australia might make its contribution to
strengthening the fabric of co-operation between
Australia and Europe and to explore, at
the highest level, the attitudes of countries like
the Soviet Union, France and Yugoslavia to
detente and to the Middle-East, which are
essential to forming any sound assessment of
the prospects for world peace. I have done so.
I regret that many of these things, these
immense and tangible benefits for Australia,
have been obscured from the Australian people.
I do not resent fair criticism from the media.
Everyone in public life accepts such criticsm and
frequently benefits from it. Even my worst enemies
would concede that I have rarely
complained about the media's treatment of me,
that I have been more accessible to the media,
more frank in my dealings with them, than any
of my predecessors in this office. A free press
has an essential and constructive role in democratic
society. I regret however that on this
occasion the Australian public was not served by the media as objectively or as intelligently as
it deserved. Too often matters of substance
were subordinated to reports of trivia. It was
repeatedly suggested that much of my time was
taken up with sightseeing in visits to
archaeological sites and museums. Very little
time was taken up with these things and most of
it was during public holidays and weekends.
Such diversions, of course, are a normal part of
the hospitality extended to visiting heads of
government, and I make no apology for my
interest in the culture and histories of the countries
I visited, of the countries from which so
many of my fellow citizens have come.
We are not a nation of Philistines; we should not
be content with an image abroad based mainly
on Barry McKenzie. I take some pride in the
extensive and sympathetic presentation of my
mission in the media in all the countries I visited.
I found immense goodwill, not just for me, but
for Australia. This goodwill was expressed and
symbolised in many different ways. In
Bangladesh, for example, there was a warm appreciation
of Australia's food aid programs. In
the visits of the Special Minister and myself to
war cemeteries in France, in Belgium, in Crete,
in Athens, I found deep and genuine gratitude
for the contribution of Australian soldiers to the
allied cause in two world wars. In many countries
there was a ready understanding of the
links forged by our immigration program.
Everywhere in the media of the countries I
visited I found a full appreciation of the importance
and urgency of the matters I sought to
raise. I regret that I found much less understanding
in the media of my own country.
Over a year ago, on my return from China and
Japan, I had occasion to say that Australia had
at last got her relations right with the four
powers of most immediate concern to us-with
Indonesia, our nearest neighbour; with Japan,
our largest trading partner; with China, the
most populous nation on earth; and with the
United States, the world's most powerful nation
and our firmest ally. My visit to China ended a
generation of lost contact with a quarter of the
world's people. My visits to the United States,
Japan, Indonesia and India consolidated,
improved and matured existing relationships of
great importance to us. My visit to the Soviet
Union has marked a new stage in the development
of practical and realistic relations with the 
other powerful nation on earth. My visit to
Europe has reasserted our strong and continuing
interest in the European Community, and I
believe, rekindled Europe's interest in a strong,
progressive and independent Australia. Taken
together, we have begun to fashion a more contemporary
relationship with Europe-East and
West-more appropriate to the changed conditions
of our time. We can now say confidently
that Australia has got her relations right, not just
with the countries nearest to us but also with
most nations of importance, and regions of
importance, in the world. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 446
11 FEBRUARY 1975
THE LATE MR A. E. MONK, C. M. G.
I was deeply distressed to learn of the death
of Mr Albert Monk. The length, quality and devotion of
his service to the trade union movement were without
parallel in Australia. He served the A. C. T. U as its
president or secretary for 35 years.
His great achievement was to preserve the
solidarity and integrity of the industrial movement in
Australia at a time when ideological conflicts were
dividing it in other countries and threatening to divide
it in Australia. No one understood better the proper
relationship between the industrial and political wings
of the Labor movement and worked harder or more successfully
to maintain harmony and co-operation between them.
Millions of Australian employees are indebted to him.
On behalf of the Government I express my profound sympathy
to his widow and family.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 444
9 February 1975
APPOINTMENT TO THE HIGH COURT
The Attorney-General, Senator Lionel Murphy, Q. C.,
has been appointed a Justice of the High Court of
Australia. Senator Murphy, 52, has been Attorney-General,
Minister for Customs and Excise and Leader of the Government
in the Senate since 1972. He was appointed Queen's
Counsel in 1960.
He is the fifth Australian Attorney-General to
become a Justice of the High Court.
Senator Murphy became a Senator for New South Wales
in 1961 and was Leader of the Opposition in the Senate
from 1967 to 1972.
He was educated at Sydney Boys High School and
the University of Sydney where he graduated as a Bachelor
of Laws with honours and a Bachelor of Science with
honours. He was admitted to the New South Wales Bar in 1947.
Since he has been Attorney-General, Senator Murphy.
has introduced some of the most important legislation and
law reform measures to come before the Parliament.
This includes the Trade Practices Act, the Family
Law Bill, the Corporations and Securities Industries Bill
and the Racial Discrimination Bill.
As Attorney-General he led the legal team which
successfully argued Australia's first case before the
International Court of Justice to prevent further atmospheric
nuclear testing by the French in the South Pacific.
He established the Australian Legal Aid Office,
a project which ensures that all Australians will not be
denied access'to the courts because of lack of money.
He also introduced legislation establishing the
Law Reform Commission of Australia and a national
Legislative Drafting Institute.
His first legislative proposal was a Bill to have
the Death Penalty abolished for offences under Federal law.
Senator Murphy resigned as a member of the
Australian Senate this evening.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AU" 2HAL IA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 447
11 February 1975
THE SENATE
The decision of the N. S. W. Cabinet denies the
people of N. S. W. the representation for which they decisively
voted in May 1974. For the second time in nine months the
Liberal and Country Parties have attempted to set aside the
clear verdict of the electors. In April 1974 Liberal and
Country Party Senators set the dangerous precedent of refusing
the elected government the money it needs to govern.
Their counterparts in N. S. W. now propose to override the
unbroken precedent for filling casual vacancies in the Senate.
The Senate is elected by the system of proportional
representation. The system is specifically designed to ensure
that within each State the parties secure representation
in proportion to the votes cast in their favour. The grouping
of candidates according to party on the ballot paper is a
very specific acknowledgement of the party nature of Senate
elections. The N. S. W. decision completely undermines the
purpose of the proportional system.
In N. S. W. Australian Labor Party candidates for the
Senate polled 200,000 first preference votes more than
their Liberal and Country Party opponents 50 per cent of
the formal votes compared with 41.67 per cent for the Liberal-
Country Party. The effect of the N. S. W. Cabinet decision is
to give 50 per cent of the N. S. W. electors four senators and
41.67 per cent six senators. In Australia as a whole,
Australian Labor Party candidates polled 250,000 votes more
than the Liberal-Country Party candidates 47.29 per cent
against 43.42 per cent. The N. S. W. decision gives the 47 per cent
twenty-eight senators and the 43 per cent thirty senators.
This is a travesty.
The N. S. W. proposal would completely overturn the
intention of the electors of N. S. W. It would completely reverse
N. S. W. representation in the Senate. It would make the Senate
as a whole even less representative of the opinion of the
electors recorded in May. Instead of a Senate elected with
twenty-nine Labor senators, twenty-nine Liberal and Country
Party senators and two Independent senators there will be only
twenty-eight Labor senators. A further distortion of the
verdict of the people arises from today's announcement by
Senator Townley that he will join the Liberal Party. He was
elected as an Independent and very probably because he was
an Independent. Even without this N. S. W. move the opposition in
the Senate is able to defeat every piece of government legislation.
A Senate so composed is completely lacking in legitimacy.
It just does not reflect the will of the people. / 2 
-2-
It was astonishing for Mr Lewis to put forward so
outrageous a proposition. It is unbelievable that in the
sober light of day this " mad" act as Mr Gorton put it,
should receive the full backing of the N. S. W. Cabinet. It
is further astonishing that this support should be forthcoming
after the proposal has been repudiated by the Leader of
the Opposition, Mr Snedden. Very correctly Mr Snedden said,
" The convention has served us very well. You never know when
it might operate in reverse." Mr Snedden might well apply
this insight to an even older and more important convention
that the Senate does not refuse supply.
The fact is that the Liberal and Country Parties,
federal and state, have shown their readiness to tear up
the rules whenever it suits them. The parliamentary system
everywhere is under challenge. Throughout the world more
and more people are losing faith in that system. No system,
certainly not one so complex and delicate and difficult as
the Australian parliamentary system, can long sustain repeated
onslaughts on its basic assumptions and conventions. The
Conservative parties who used to arrogate to themselves the
title of defenders of the parliamentary system are now
subverting it.
This is an act of sabotage against the Senate, an
act of sabotage against the clear will of the people of
an act of sabotage against the Constitution and an
act of sabotage against the whole parliamentary system in
Australia. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



l~ A U STALIA Press Statement No. 449
12 February 1975
SENATE VACANCIES AND THE STATES
Earlier today I released the text of a letter
dated 10 January 1952, from the then Premier of Western
Australia, Sir Ross McLarty to the then Premier of
South Australia the Hon. T. Playford. Mr Eric Reece
has now confirmed that an identical letter was sent
to the then Premier of Tasmania, the Hon. R. Cosgrove,
M. H. A. Mr Cosgrove replied in the following terms:
" I thank you for your letter of 10th January
with regard to the vacancy whic. has arisen
in the Senate because of the death of
Senator Nash of Western Australia. I agree
with your opinion that, in view of the fact
that proportional representation is now the
method of election to the Senate, a member
of the same Party, nominated by the
Executive of the Party, should be appointed
when future vacancies arise, through death
or other causes."
I have sent a telegram to Sir Charles Court,
the Premier of Western Australia asking him to release
-the 1952 correspondence with all Premiers relating to
this matter. Over 23 years ago there was an agreement
among all the Premiers that casual vacancies in the
Senate would be filled by a member of the same party.
For 23 years State Governments of all political
complexions have honoured this agreement. Now, for the
first time, the new Premier of N. S. W. threatens to break
this Constitutional convention. This is not a matter
between the Australian Government and State Governments.
The agreement in question was made among the State
Governments themselves. The Premier of N. S. W. is
threatening to break an agreement which Premiers in every
State and of all parties have scrupulously observed
since 1952.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



lj,, AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER Pre-Statement No. 448
12 February 1975
SENATE VACANCY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released
the texts of two documents relating to the
question of the Senate vacancy.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
Telex Sent to Sir Charles Court,
Premier Parliament House
Perth, W. A.
IN JANUARY 1952 SIR ROSS MCLARTY WROTE TO ALL PREMIERS ON
THE OCCURRENCE OF THE FIRST CASUAL VACANCY IN THE SENATE
AFTER THE INTRODUCTION OF THE PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION
SYSTEM OF ELECTION. IN THIS LETTER HE PROPOSED THE ADOPTION
OF A CONVENTION FOR THE EXERCISE BY STATE PARLIAMENTS OF
THEIR POWERS UNDER SECTION 15 OF THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION.
THE PREMIER OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS INDICATED THE AGREEMENT
OF SIR THOMAS PLAYFORD WITH THE PROPOSAL OF SIR ROSS MCLARTY
TO ESTABLISH THE CONVENTION WHICH HAS BEEN ADHERED TO SINCE
THAT TIME. I BELIEVE ONLY THE FILES HELD BY YOUR DEPARTMENT
WOULD CONTAIN THE COMPLETE CORRESPONDENCE FROM ALL STATE PREMIERS.
IN ORDER TO CLARIFY THE STATUS OF THIS CONVENTION, I ASK YOU TO
PUBLICLY RELEASE THIS CORRESPONDENCE. E. G. WHITLAM
February 12, 1975 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE 11, FEBRUARY 1975
OPENING STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER
THlE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
WHEN WE MET IN JUNE AND AUGUST LAST YEAR WE WERE
AS lIE HAD TO BE PRE-OCCUPIED WITH INFLATION. AT OUR JUNE
MEETING, I TOLD YOU THAT IF TFE ECONOMIC SITUATION CHANGED
AND IT HAS CHANGED WE WOULD MEET TO LOOK AT IT AGAIN.
INFLATION IS, OF COURSE, STILL TO BE OVERCOME, BUT THERE IS
NOW A TOTALLY UNACCEPTABLE LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE
SECOND HALF CF 1974 THE ECONOMY TURNED DOWN DRAMATICALLY.
FROM THE BOOM CONDITIONS OF THE FIRST HALF OF 1974, ECONOMIC
ACTIVITY HAS DROPPED SHARPLY AT A R. ATE NON4E OF US COULD
HAVE ANTICIPATED. MOST OTHER DEVELOPED COUNTRIES HAVE, OF
COURSE, HAD A SIMILAR EXPERIENCE OVER THIS PERIOD. REGISTERED
UNEMPLOYMENT HAS RISEN FROM A SEASONALLY ADJUSTED 1 .4 PER CENT
OF THE LABOR FORCE IN JUNE 1974 TO 4.1 PER CENT IN DECEMBER,
THE HIGHEST LEVEL SINCE THE 1930' S. THE INFLATION RATE AS
MEASURED BY THE CHANGE IN THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX OVER A
YEAR EARLIER ROSE FROM 14.4 PER CENT IN THE JUNE QUARTER TO
16.3 PER CENT IN THE DECEMBER OUARTER OF 1974. SOME CHARTS I
HAVE HAD PREPARED TO ILLUSTRATE THIS SITUATION ARE BEING
HANDED AROUND. THE CURRENT INFLATION ORIGINATED IN EY'TRAORDINARY
AND UNPRECEDENTED DEVELOPMEITTS IN THE ECONOMY IN THE RECENT
PAST. THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, FOR ELECTORAL REASONS,
ALLOWED A RATE OF MONETARY EXPANSION WHICH WAS TOTALLY
UNJUSTIFIABLE IN ITS RAPIDITY AND WHICH WAS MAINLY RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE DEMAND INFLATION OF 1972-73* AND THE INEVITABLE
CONSEQUENCE OF THE CURRENT COST INFLATION. THIS IS SOMETHING
WHICH SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN AS WE ANALYSE OUR PRESENT 
-2
DIFFICULTIES. I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT OUR CURRENT INFLAT ION HAS
BEEN PUSHED ALONG BY WAGE INCREASES THAT HAVE FAR OUTPACj3' D
THE ABILITY OF FIRMS TO ABSORB THROUGH PRODUCTIVITY INCREASES
OR, IN THE PREVAILING ECONOMIC CLIMATE, TO PASS ON IN TER"-MS
OF EVEN HIGHER PRICE RISES. THE RESULT HAS BEEN A SUBSTANTIAL
SQUEEZE ON PROFITS WHICH HAS LED TO A CUT-BACK IN THE SCALE
OP' ACTIVITY AND THE POSTPONEMENT OF MANY INVESTMENT PROJECTS.
THUS THE INFLATIONARY MENACE REMAINS A PRIME CONCERN NOT LEAST
BECAUSE IT HAS BECOME INEXTRICABLY BOUND--UP IN THE PROBLEM
OF UNEMPLOYMENT. TO ACHIEVE A LASTING IMPROVEMENT IN THE UNEMPLOYMENT
SITUATION, AS WE ARE TOTALLY COMMITTED TO DOING, WE ARE
DIRECTING OUR ATTENTION TO THIS BASIC ISSUE. WE CAN, IN THE
SHORTER-TERM, MAKE SOME INROADS INTO THE UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM
AND THAT, OF COURSE, IS THE MAIN REASON WE ARE MEETING TODAY.
BUT IN MAKING DECISIONS TODAY WE MUST DO SO IN A MANNER THAT WILL
NOT MAKE THlE PROBLEM OF INFLATION MORE UNMANAGEABLE.
GENTLEMEN, THIS WAS THE CONTEXT IN WHICH IT WAS
AGREED TO PROPOSE THIS MEETING. LET M E REPEAT PART OF THE
MESSAGE I SENT TO YOU:
" IT IS ENVISAGED THAT DISCUSSION WOULD CENTRE ON:
THE AMOUNT AN) FORM OF ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE WHICH STATE GOVERNMENTS, STATE
SEMI-GOVERNMENTAL AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES
REQUIRE TO RETAIN OR RE-ENGAGE EMPLOYEES, AND 
-3
THlE REPORTS OF THE WORKING PARTIES OF
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
ON POSSIBLE JOINT ACTION TO RESTRAIN
INFLATIONARY PRESSURES...".
I PROPOSE WE CONCENTRATE FIRST ON DISCUSSION OF ITEM
THE WORDS WERE, I EMPHASISE, CAREFULLY CHOSEN TO INDICATE
ACCURATELY THE BASIS OF OUR APPROACH. IN THIS MATTER WE
ARE FOCUSSING ON UNEMPLOYMENT; ACCORDINGLY OUR PRIMARY
CONCERN IS TO ASSESS THE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF YOUR PROPOSALS.
MY GOVERNMENT HAS, AS YOU ARE AWARE, TAKEN
ACTION THROUGH MONETARY POLICY TO ENSURE THAT LIQUIDITY
IS MUCH FREER AND BANK LENDING CAN BE MAINTAINED AT A
LEVEL SUFFICIENT TO MEET THE IMMEDIATE NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY FOR FINANCE.
WE HAVE ADDED SUBSTANTIALLY TO OUR DIRECT
OUTLAYS IN A WAY THAT WILL ENHANCE EMPLOYMENT PROSPECTS.
PERSONAL INCOME TAX RATES HAVE BEEN SUBSTANTIALLY REDUCED
TO. ENCOURAGE CONSUMER SPENDING AND TO HELP OFFSET THE
PRESSURE FOR WAGE DEMANDS. COMPANY TAX RATES HAVE ALSO
BEEN REDUCED AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO DEPRECIATION
ALLOWANCES HAVE BEEN INTRODUCED TO IMPROVE COMPANY PROFITABILITY.
SPECIFIC MEASURES HAVE BEEN TAKEN TO ALLEVIATE THE IMMEDIATE
PROBLEMS OF CERTAIN INDUSTRIES INCLUDING IMPORTANTLY THE
MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY.
THE ACCELERATION IN COSTS THAT IS EVIDENT IN THE
COMMUNITY AT LARGE HAS, OF COURSI', ALSO CREATED LARGE PROBLEMS
FOR THE STATES AND) THEIR AUTHORITIES WHICH IMPINGE DIRECTLY 
-4
ON THE LEVELS OF EMPLOYMENT THEY CAN SUSTAIN. I ThI1NK
YOU WILL AGREE WITH THAT, AND ACCORDINGLY I THINK YOU
WILL AGREE WITH ME WIhEN I EMPHASISE THAT WE SHOULD
APPROACH THE IMMEDIATE PROBLEMS, AS FAR AS IS PRACTICABLE,
IN A WAY THAT WILL NOT EXACERBATE THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION.
WE HAVE TAKEN THAT AS AN ESSENTIAL FACTOR IN OUR CONSIDERATION.
AS TO THE UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM, IT IS NOT SIMPLY
A MATTER OF ALJLOCATING MORE FUNDS FROM THE BUDGET OR SIMPLY
TRYING TO SPEND MORE MONEY. THE SITUATION IS MUCH MORE
COMPLEX THAN THAT. INCREASED EXPENDITURE MUST BE AIMED AS
DIRECTLY AS POSSIBLE AT UNEMPLOYMENT. AT THE SAME TIME WE
WILL NOT ACHIEVE OUR EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVES IN THE LONGER
TERM IF WE CANNOT CURB INFLATION.
ON 28 JANUARY I ANNOUNCED THAT THE GOVERNMENT
HAS DECIDED TO ESTABLISH A SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS
TO REVIEW CONTINUING GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS AND
TO EXAMINE ALL FUTURE EXPENDITURE PROPOSALS WHICH COME
BEFORE IT. I QUOTE NOW FROM THE STATEMENT OF 28 JANUARY:
" THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED THAT THERE OUGHT TO
BE A GENERAL PRESUMPTION AGAINST FURTHER INCREASES OF
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE. ANY SUCH INCREASE MUST MEET
THE CRITERIA ADOPTED BY CABINET" AND FURTHER:
" THE COMMITTEE WILL GIVE CAREFUL CONSIDERATION
TO THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION.
IT WILL ENSURE THAT GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES ARE
DIRECTED TO THE EMPLOYMENT OR RE-EMPLOYM'ENT OF
PEOPLE WITHOUT AGGRAVATING INFLATIONARY FORCES. 
PROPOSALS AIMED DIRECTLY AT PREVENTING SIGNIFICANT
RETRENCHMENTS WOULD HIAVE A HIGH PRIORITY AND BECAUSE
MOST JOBS THREATENED ARE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR,
THIS APPLIED PARTICULARLY TO THAT SPHERE IN THE
ECONOMY." THE STATEMENT CONCLUDED AS FOLLOWS:
" SUPPORT FOR STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
WILL BE EXAMINED WITH CARE TO ENSURE THE CAPACITY AND
WILLINGNESS OF THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
TO USE FUNDS PROVIDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
WITHIN THE APPROPRIATE TIME SPAN."
THAT STATEMENT OF 28 JANUARY WAS NOT MADE LIGHTLY. IT
WILL ESTABLISH THE POINT IF I TELL YOU THAT ON THE BASIS
OF OUR LATEST ESTIMATES WE FACE A VERY HEAVY DEFICIT IN
OUR BUDGET FOR 1974-75. IT WOULD CLEARLY BE A COMPLETELY
WRONG ASSUMPTION FOR ANYONE TO MAKE, THAT THERE IS MUCH
LEFT TO BE SQUEEZED OUT OF OUR BUDGET THIS YEAR -ANY "-ONS",
AS THEY SAY, WILL NEED TO BE MATCHED BY " OFFS" -THAT WILL
BE PART OF THE ROLE OF THE NEW EXPENDITURE COMMITTEE. THE
POINT IS THAT ANY ASSISTANCE WHICH MY GOVERNMENT PROVIDES
TO THE STATES WILL HAVE TO BE ADDED TO OUR BUDGET DEFICIT.
IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES WE ARE ENTITLED TO HAVE THE CLEAREST
JUSTIFICATION FOR ADDING TO OUR DEFICIT. 
-6
THE NEXT DAY, ON 29 JANUARY, I ASKED IN MY MESSAGE
YOU COULD PROVIDE URGENTLY SUCH INFORMATION NOT
ALREADY AVAILABLE TO US AS WOULD ASSIST IN AN ASSESSMENT
OF YOUR STATE'S NEEDS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE INCLUDING
ASSISTANCE FOR ROADS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE CRITERION
OUTLINED" EARLIER IN THE MESSAGE.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF YHAT ASSISTANCE SEEMS APPROPRIATE
TO ENABLE YOUR GOVERNMENTS AND SEMI-GOVE~ RNMENTAL AND LOCAL
AUTHORITIES TO RETAIN OR RE-ENGAGE EMPLOYEES, HAS BEEN MADE
AS IT PROPERLY HAD TO BE MADE ON THE BASIS OF THE
INFORMATION YOU HAVE PROVIDED TO US IN YOUR LETTERS AND
YOUR DISCUSSIONS WITH THE TREASURER. WE DO READ THE
NEWSPAPERS, OF COURSE, AND THEY HAVE WRITTEN MUCH IN RECENT
DAYS ABOUT WHAT THE STATES NEED OR SAY THEY NEED. BUT I
THINK YOU WILL ALLOW THAT SUCH REPORTS AS THEY PURVEY COULD
SCARCELY BE A BASIS FOR SERIOUS CONSIDERATION BY US ALONGSIDE
THE INFORMATION YOU HAVE PROVIDED TO US DIRECTLY.
THE INFORMATION YOU HAVE ALREADY FURNISHED
REGARDING THE PROBLEMS YOU FACE IN THE MAINTENANCE OR
RESTORATION OF EMPLOYMENT MAKE IT CLEAR THAT ALL THE STATES'
BUDGETS HAVE SUFFERED FROM THlE EFFECT OF INCREASES IN WAGE
-AND SALARY RATES, AN~ n OTHER COSTS. IN ALL STATES, THE SEMIGOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAVE FACED THE SAME DIFFICULTIES ON
THIS SCORE AS HAVE THE STATES THEMSELVES; CLEARLY THEIR
COSTS HAVE RISEN MUCH MORE THAN THE 12 PER CENT INCREASE
IN THEIR BORROWING PROGRAMS WHICH THE LOAN COUNCIL AGREED
LAST JUNE. IN ALL STATES ALSO SPENDING ON ROADS HAS BEEN
AFFECTED 13Y RAPIDLY RISING COSTS. 
-7
OUR PROPOSALS WHICH I SHALL PUT TO YOU ARE IN
THEIR PARTICULAR FORM ANT) MAGNITUDE, A RESPONSE TO THESE
PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES. THEY DO NOT REPRESENT ON-GOING
ARRANGEMENTS, THE PROPOSALS RELATE TO THE PRESENT THEY
ARE TAILORED TO THE PRESENT UNEMPLOYMENT DIFFICULTIES.
THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA,
QUEENSLAND AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA HAVE PROPOSED THAT
$ 300 MILLION BE ALLOCATED TO THE STATES FOR REDUCING
CHARGES WHICH BEAR DIRECTLY ON THE COST-OF-LIVING. THIS
PROPOSAL, WHICH IS REALLY A REPETITION OF ONE DISCUSSED
LAST AUGUST, HAS BEEN CONVEYED TO ME IN A LETTER FORWARDED
TO ME BY THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA. I DO NOT THINK PREMIERS
WILL BE SURPRISED, PARTICULARLY IN THE LIGHT OF OUR EARLIER
DISCUSSION, WHEN I SAY THAT THIS PROPOSAL IS NOT ONE THAT
APPEALS TO US.
I RE-EMPHASISE THE POINT I MADE THAT WE ARE
PREPARED TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE
STATES WHICH WILL HELP WITH THE IMMEDIATE PROBLEM OF
UN EMPLOYMENT; AND WE ARE PREPARED TO ADD TO OUR ALREADY
LARGE DEFICIT FOR THIS FINANCIAL YEAR TO THAT END. WE DO
NOT SEE IN THE PROPOSED ALLOCATION OF $ 300 MILLION FOR
REDUCTION OF CHARGES, A POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE
SHORT-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT PRCBLEM WHICH WOULD JUSTIFY SUCH
AN ADDITION TO OUR DEFICIT.
AGAINST THAT BACKGROUND AND SUBJECT TO My
GOVERNMENT'S CONSIDERATION OF THE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
REQUESTED IN MY MESSAGE OF 12 FEBRUARY, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS PREPARED TO PROVIDE SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNTS OF 
-8
ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO THE STATES IN 1974-75 FOR EMPLOYMENT
PURPOSES. A DOCUMENT DETAILING O{ JR PROPOSALS WILL BE
CIRCULATED. VERY BRIEFLY, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
PREPARED TO SUPPORT THE PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR
THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES IN 1974-75 TOTALLING
$ 210 MILLION. THIS IS MADE UP AS FOLLOWS:-
ADDITIONAL GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS OF $ 60 MILLION;
ADDITIONAL STATE GOVERNMENT LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS
OF $ 60 MILLION;
ADDITIONAL BORROWING ALLOCATIONS FOR LARGER STATE
AUTHORITIES OF $ 40 MILLION;
ADDITIONAL EMPLOYMENT GRANTS OF
$ 30 MILLION FOR ROADS
$ 20 MILLION FOR GENERAL EMPLOYMENT PURPOSES.
THE PRECISE BASES ON WHICH THE ASSISTANCE WILL
BE MADE AVAILABLE ARE SET OUT IN THE DOCUMENT TO BE CIRCULATED.
THERE IS ONE OTHER STATISTIC I MIGHT MENTION HERE.
TAKING. INTO ACCOUNT THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO WHICH I HAVE
REFERRED, AGGREGATE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS TO THE
STATES IN 1974-75 ARE NOW ESTIMATED AT ABOUT $ 6,420 MILLION
AN INCREASE OF NO LESS THAN 47 PER CENT OVER LAST YEAR. I
SHOULD POINT OUT THAT THIS TOTAL INCLUDES A FURTHER ADJUSTMENT
OF $ 23 MILLION TO THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS, ARISING
FROM REVISED ASSUMPTIONS FOR POPULATION AND AVERAGE WAGES.
I CAN ASSURE YOU, HOWEVER, THAT IN IT WE HAVE
ENDEAVOURED AS EFFECTIVELY AS POSSIBLE TO MEET THE VARIOUS
NEEDS AND OBJECTIVES WITH THE MOST APPROPRIATE AMOUNTS AND
FORMS OF ASSISTANCE, TA KING FULLY INTO ACCOUNT TH-E COMPREHEl-NSIVE 
9-
DATA YOU HAVE SUPPLIED. WE HAVE ALSO KEPT IN MIND OUR
OVER-RIDING OBJECTIVE OF COMBATING EXCESSIVE INFLATION AND
EXCESSIVE UNEMPLOYMENT.
REPORT OF THE WORKING PARTIES ON INFLATION
I TURN NOW TO THE SECOND ITEM ON OUR AGENDA THE
REPORTS OF THE WORKING PARTIES OF AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS ON POSSIBLE JOINT ACTION TO RESTRAIN INFLATIONARY
PRESSURES. THIS SECOND AGENDA ITEM BRINGS US TO THE OTHER
MAJOR PROBLEM AREA FACING AUSTRALIA TODAY, THAT IS INFLATION
A PROBLEM WHICH M4AY IN THE LONG TERM BE MORE PERMANENTLY
DAMAGING TO OUR WAY OF LIFE THAN THE UNEMPLOYMENT LEVELS
WHICH ARE TROUBLING US SO MUCH TO-DAY.
TO SUCCESSFULLY TACKLE INFLATION WE NEED A NATIONAL
ALL-AUSTRALIAN EFFORT BASED ON THE CO-OPERATION OF ALL THE
PARTIES IN OUR FEDERAL UNION.
AT OUR CONFERENCE, HERE, ON 13 AUGUST LAST YEAR,
ALMOST EXACTLY SIX MONTHS AGO, AS PART OF OUR OVERALL STRATEGY
TO THIS END, WE ESTABLISHED FIVE WORKING PARTIES OF AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS TO EXAMINE AREAS WHERE JOINT
ACTION BY ALL OUR GOVERNMENTS MIGHT BE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN
INFLATIONARY PRESSURES.
THE WORKING PARTIES EXAMINED AREAS OF:
STATE LEGISLATION TO SUPPORT THE JURISDICTION
OF THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL.
TENDERING PROCEDURES FOR GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS.
THE POSSIBILITY OF INTRODUCING TAXATION PENALTIES
ON EXCESSIVE WAGE INCREASES. 
10
JOINT ACTION BEFORE WAGE FIXING TRIBUNALS TO LIMIT
WAGE INCREASES.
MEASURES TO REDUCE THE MULTIPLICITY OF WAGE FIXING
TRI BUNALS.
IN THE MAIN, THESE REPORTS WHICH WERE DISTRIBUTED
TO YOU BY 18 SEPTEMBER, REFLECT IN VARYING DEGREES AGREEMENT
BETWEEN OUR OFFICERS ON WAYS AND MEANS OF ACHIEVING CONCERTED
ACTION ON IMPORTANT NATIONAL PROBLEMS. THEY ARE, THEREFORE,
WORTHY OF OUR SERIOUS CONSIDERATION AS A POSSIBLE BASIS FOR
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN US IN THE FIELDS CONCERNED.
I HAVE RECEIVED COMMENTS FROM MOST OF YOU ( YOUR
RESPONSES ARE SUMMARISED IN A TABLE I AM CIRCULATING). IN
SOME CASES, YOU HAVE HAD LITTLE COMMhENT TO MAKE ON THESE REPORTS,
OR HAVE INDICATED THAT YOU WISHED TO DISCUSS THE FINDINGS OF
THESE COMMITTEES AT A PREMIERS' CONFERENCE. I VERY MUCH
APPRECIATE THE DETAILED CONSIDERATION THAT MANY OF YOU HAVE
GIVEN TO THE REPORTS.
ON THE BASIS OF YOUR VIEWS, I AM HOPEFUL THAT WE
WILL BE ABLE TO REACH AGREEMENT TODAY ON THE MORE IMPORTANT
CONCLUSIONS REACHED IN SOME OF THESE REPORTS.
ADDITIONALLY, ON 21 AUGUST THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA
WROTE TO ME SUGGESTING, INTER ALIA, THAT A WORKING PARTY SHOULD
BE ESTABLISHED TO EXAMINE THE PRACTICABILITY OF LEGISLATION BY
THE STATES TO EXTEND THE SCOPE OF THE LEGISLATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR THE CONTROL OF RESTRICTIVE TRADE
PRACTICES. I SUPPORTED THIS SUGGESTION AND IN TURN SUGGESTED
TO ALL OF YOU ON 16 SEPTEMBER 1974 THAT WE SHOULD ESTABLISH
SUCH A WORKING PARTY. THE PRlEMIERS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WVESTERN
AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA HAVE ALREADY AGREED TO THIS PRO1POSAL AND 
11
THE OTHER PREMIERS HAVE THIS MATTER STILL UNDER CONSIDERATION.
SOME WORK ARISING OUT OF THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE OF 10 MAY
1973 HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE IN THIS REGARD AND SUBJECT TO YOUR
AGREEMENT I PROPOSE THAT WE NOW ESTABLISH A WORKING PARTY TO
EXAMINE THIS QUESTION.
I REFER FIRST TO THE REPORT ON THE QUESTION OF STATE
LEGISLATION TO SUPPORT THE JURISDICTION OF THE PRICES
JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL. SINCE THIS REPORT WAS COMPLETED,
THERE HAD, OF COURSE, BEEN A MARKED, A ND LARGELY UNANTICIPATED,
CHANGE IN ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AS IS ILLUSTRATED IN THE CHARTS
I HAVE CIRCULATED. UNEMPLOYMENT HAS JUMPED TO A HIGH LEVEL
MAINLY AS A RESULT OF A SEVERE SQUEEZE ON PROFITS. THIS IN
TURN HAS ARISEN FROM THE RELATIVE SUCCESS OF THE MEASURES WE
HAVE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN THE GROWTH IN PRICES, IN THE FACE OF A
CCNTINUED ACCELERATION IN WAGES.
AS YOU WILL BE AWARE, LAST NOVEMBER I MADE A SUBMISSION
IN WRITING TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THlE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
TO INDICATE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMKENT'S VIEW THAT, IN PRESENT
ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES, THE TRIBUNAL SHOULD GIVE PARTICULAR
ATTENTION TO THE PROBLEMS OF SUSTAINING AND STIMULATING AN
ADEQUATE LEVEL OF PRIVATE INVESTMENT. I BELIEVE THAT THE
TRIBUNAL HAS BEEN DOING THIS AND, INDEED, THAT IT HAD ALREADY
TAKEN SOME STEPS IN THIS DIRECTION PRIOR TO MY SUBMISSION.
I CONSIDER THAT THE ADOPTION AT THIS STAGE OF PROPOSALS
TO STRENGTHEN THE TRIBUNAL'S ROLE COULD EASILY BE MISUNDERSTOOD
ANT) COUNTERPRODUCTIVE FOR OUR PRIME AIM OF RESTORING FULL
RvIP[ LOYMI. NT. RATHER THIAN PROCEED ING WITH ThE-IM NOW, 1. SUGGET WAfi'
LEAVE THEM FOR FUTURE CONSIDERATION IF CIRCUMSTANCES SHOULD SO
I 
12-
WARRANT. I WISH, HOWEVER, TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO RAISE
AGAIN WITH YOU THE SUBJE~ CT OF LAND PRICES, WHICH IS OF GREAT
CONCERN TO MY GOVERNMENT. AS EARLY AS 27 DECEM1BER 1972 I
WROTE TO ALL STATE PREMIERS SEEKING THEIR CO-OPERATION ON
TIS IMPORTANT ISSUE, WHICH IS AN AREA IN WHICH THE STATES
HAVE THE PREDOMINANT POWERS. YOU WILL RECALL THAT I RAISED
IT AGAIN AT THE FIRST PREMIERS' CONFERENCE I CHAIRED ON 10 MAY
1973 AND SOUGHT THE CO-OPERATION OF ALL STATES TOWA12DS THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE LAND COI% 2ISSIONS TO PARTICIPATE ACTIVELiY
IN THE LAND MARKET AND TO INCREASE THE FLOW OF RESIDENTIAL
LAND AT REASONABLE PRICES. I CONTINUE TO BE CONCERNED THAT ALL
POSSIBLE ACTION SHOULD BE TAKEN BY THE STATES TO INCREASE THIE
SUPPLY OF LAND AND LIMIT THE RATE OF INCREASE IN RESIDENTIAL
LAND PRICES. THE WORKING PARTY WHICH EXAMINED TENDERING PROCEDURES
FOR GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS NOMINATED SEVERAL AREAS WHERE EFFECTIVyE
ACTION COULD REDUCE THE LEVEL OR RATE OF INCREASE IN BUILDING
AND CONSTRUCTION COSTS FOR GOVERNMENT WORKS. MY GOVERNMENT S W'RONGLY
SUPPORTS THE WORKING PARTY RECCMYIENDATION THAT INCREASED
CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION AT THE GOVERNM4ENTAL, DEPARTMENT AND
INDUSTRY/ TRADE UNION LEVEL CAN ACHIEVE INTER ALIA:
AN AVOIDANCE OF INDUSTRY RESOURCE UTILIZATION
EXTREMES AND THE STIMULATION AND
RATIONALISATION OF COMPETITION IN THE FIELD
BY REGULATING THE VOLUME AND TYPE OF
CONSTRUCTION WORK. 
13
THIS, I SUGGEST HAS PARTICULAR IMNPACT WHEN
CONSIDERED ON A REGIONAL BASIS.
A REDUCTION IN INFLATIONARY EXPECTATION
ELEMENTS OF CONTRACT TENDERS FOR GOVERNMENT
WORKS. REDUCED OVERHEAD AND HOLDING CHARGES FOR
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS.
I SUGGEST THAT WE NOW ASK THE WORKING PARTY TO FRAME PRACTICAL
PROPOSALS WITH A VIEW TO AN EARLY MEETING OF RELEVAiNT MINISTERS.
WITH REGARD TO THE WORKING PARTY ON TAX PENALTIES
ON COMPANIES THAT GRANT EXCESSIVE WAGE INCREASES I SOUGHT YOlUR
COMMENTS ON THE REPORT PREPARED BY OUR OFFICIALS IN SEPTEMBER
1974. NOT ALL THE PREMIERS HAVE PROVIDED COMMIENTS. THOSE WHO
HAVE, HAVE EXPRESSED DIFFERING VIEWS. SOME OF YOU HAVE
RECOGNISED THE ADMINISTRATIVE DIFFICULTIES AND ANOMALIES BOUND
UP IN ANY SCHEME OF TAX PENALTIES.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ITSELF HAD THIS COMPLEX
ISSUE EXAMINED BY A CCMMITTEE UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF DR COOMBS.
THE CCMMITTEE'S REPORT, WHICH I MADE PUBLIC ON
21 OCTOBER 1974, UNANIMOUSLY EXPRESSED THE VIEW THAT A PENAL
TAX OF THE KIND ENVISAGED dOULD BE ADMINISTERED AT CONSIDERABLE
COST, BUT ONLY IF THE SCHEME WERE CONFINED TO A FEW THOUSAND
LARGE FIRMS. THE COMMITTEE WENT ON TO SAY THAT EVEN THEN THE
SCHEME WOULD INEVITABLY CREATE SERIOUS ANOMALIES AND INEQUITIES
AND WOULD CREATE DIFFICULTIES IN RELATIONS BETWEEN BUSINESS AND
TIHE TAX AUTHORITIES AND) ALSO BETI1IEN EMPLOYERS AN]) E,' PLOYEES A\)
TIAT COULI 1, I; AJ) ' rT O SON I UJSSr NI.-;: S; ' A TiUTI i 
14
THE GOVERNMENT'S VIEW IS THAT THE INTRODUCTION OF A
PENALTY TAX SCHEME WOULD BE INAPPROPRIATE IN PRESENT
CIRCUMSTANCES WHEN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IS AT A LOW LEVEL. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DOES NOT WISH TO TAKE ANY ACTION WHICH
WOULD DISCOURAGE THE EXPANSION OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
THERE WERE ALSO TWO WORKING PARTIES ON WAGES MATTERS.
ONE WAS ON ACTION TO LIMIT INFLATIONARY WAGE INCREASES; SOME OF
YOU HAVE ALREADY COMMENTED ON ITS REPORT. THE OTHER, ON PRACTICAL
STEPS TO REDUCE THE MULTIPLICITY OF WAGE FIXING TRIBUNALS, IS
STILL AT WORK, ALTHOUGH A SECOND INTERIM REPORT HAS NOW BEEN
PRODUCED. I SUGGEST THAT OUR LABOR MINISTERS MEET TO CONSIDER
THE REPORT AND I CONSIDER THAT WE SHOULD TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO AGREE TO URGE THEM TO EXPEDITE THEIR WORK IN THIS FIELD.
AS I SAID EARLIER, THE PRESENT SEVERE SQUEEZE ON PROFITS
AND THE RESULTANT UNEMPLOYMENT HAS ARISEN PARTLY FROM THE
RELATIVE SUCCESS OF THE MEASURES WE HAVE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN THE
GROWTH IN PRICES, IN THE FACE CF A CONTINUED ACCELERATION IN WAGES.
IN MAKING THAT STATEMENT WHICH I BELIEVE HAS
WIDESPREAD ACCEPTANCE I DC NOT SEEK TO APPORTION BLAME. THE
PRESENT SITUATION HAS ARISEN OUT OF OUR EXISTING INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS AND THE BREAKDOVN; OF ESTABLISHED METHODS OF WAGE
FIXATION. IT HAS OCCURRED WILLY NILLY OF THE GOOD INTENTIONS
CF THOSE ARBITRATORS AND EMPLOYERS, AS WELL AS UNIONS AND
INDIVIDUAL WAGE EARNERS WHO HAVE BEEN DIRECTLY INVOLVED. THE
PROBLEM HAS BEEN TOO LARGE FOR INDIVIDUALS TO DEAL WITH. OUR
ROLE, AS GOVERNMENTS, IS TO DO WHAT WE CAN TO RESTORE A FRAMEVORK
IN WHICH ORDER CAN BE RE-ESTABLISHED IN THE WAGES AREA.
IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE, TH]; E WORKING
PARTY WE ESTABLISHED) ON ACTION TO LIMIT INFLATIONARY VAGE INCIREAi::. 
15
TOOK THE INTRODUCTION OF WAGE INDEXATION AS ITS STARTING POINT.
WHETHER OR NOT WAGE INDEXATION WILL BE INTRODUCED IS OF COURSE
A MATTER WIICH IS BEING FULLY DEBATED IN THE PROPER ARENA
BEFORE THE ARBITRATION COMMISSION BY ALL THE INTERESTED PARTIES,
AND THE COMMIISSION WILL IN DUE COURSE ANN. OUNCE ITS DECISION.
NEVERTHELESS, WHATEVER THE NATURE OF THE COMMISSION'S
DECISION, WE M1ST ALL RECOGNISE THAT WE WILL STILL BE CONFRONTED
WITH A SERIOUS SITUATION ON THE WAGES FRONT. IF TIE COMMISSION
DECIDES TO INTRODUCE AUTOMATIC INDEXATION OR ADOPTS SOME
INTERMEDIATE COURSE, UNDER WHICH ADJUSTMENTS FOR PRICES WOULD
BE REGULAR BUT NOT NECESSARILY AUTOMATIC, THEN OUR PRIME CONCERN
MUST BE TO ENSURE THAT THIS DOES NOT JUST BECOME AN ADDITIONAL
TIER TO WAGE FIXATION. WE CANNOT AFFORD A FURTHER NEW ROUND OF
WAGE INCREASES ON TOP OF WAGE INDEXATION. ON THE OTHER HAND,
IF THE COMMISSION DECIDES TO MAKE NO CRANGE TO THE EXISTING
SYSTEM OF WAGE FIXATION, OUR CONCERN WILL BE TO ENSURE THAT THE
EXPERIENCE OF 1974 IS NOT REPEATED AND THAT WAGE INCREASES ARE
KEPT WITHIN BOUNDS THAT WILL NOT FURTHER EXACERBATE UNEMPLOYMENT
AND INFLATION.
REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS
BEFORE CONCLUDING, THERE ARE SOME POINTS I SHOULD MAKE
ABOUT THE REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS TO
WHICH WE ARE COMMITTED BEFORE THE END OF THIS FINANCIAL YEAR.
PREM1IERS WILL RECALL THAT I WROTE TO THEM ON 20 NOVIZ'IBER
LAST INVITING THEIR VIEWS. WE HAVE NOT YET HAD ANY SUBSTANTIVE 
16
SUBMISSIONS AND WE LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING THESE AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE SO THAT WE HAVE TIME TO CONSIDER THEM IN DEPTH.
IN FACT, I WANT TO MAKE IT CLEAR TO PREMIERS THAT WE
ARE REGARDING THIS REVIEW, AT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT END,
AS A MATTER OF IMPORTANCE; THAT WE WANT TO CANVASS ALL OPTIONS
OPEN TO US, AND THAT WE ARE AIMING TO CONDUCT THE REVIEW IN A
FULLY CO-OPERATIVE FASHION WITH THE STATES AND IN THE HOPE
THAT THE REVIEW WILL RESULT IN AN IMIROVEMENT IN RELATIONSHIPS
FROM ALL POINTS OF VIEW.
YOU WILL PROBABLY HAVE READ OF THE RECENT ESTABLISHMENT
OF A SMALL MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE TO WORK ON THIS. I EXPECT
THAT COMMITTEE WILL BE MEETING FREQUENTLY OVER THE NEXT FEW
WEEKS. WHAT WE WOULD THEN LIKE TO SEE HAPPEN IS A PROCESS OF
FULL AND FRUNK DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN OUR. TREASURY
OFFICIALS. SPEAKING FOR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, I CAN SAY
THAT WE WOULD WANT ALL THE OPTIONS TO BE DISCUSSED BETWEEN THE
OFFICIALS WITHOUT COMMITMENT, AND WE WOULD AUTHORISE OU] I OFFICIALS
TO ENGAGE IN SUCH DISCUSSIONS AGAINST THE BACKGROUND OF GUIDANCE
WHICH WE WOULD BE GIVING THEM. OUR AIM WOULD BE THAT OUR
OFFICIALS BEGIN SUCH DISCUSSIONS EARLY IN APRIL. IF THE STATES
ARE PREPARED TO CO-OPERATE IN THIS NEW APPROACH, I WOULD HOPE
THE RESULT WOULD BE THAT WHEN WE MEET TOGETHER TO REVIEW THE
GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS LATER IN THE FINANCIAL
YEAR WE WILL DO SO ON THE BASIS OF MUCH GREATER KNOWLEDGE, ON
BOTH SIDES, OF THE OPTIONS AVAILABLE AND OF ATTITUDES TO THOSE
OPTIONS. OUR DISCUSSIONS WOULD THEREFORE BE ( AS THEY OUGHT TO
BE FOR SUCH AN IMPORTANT MATTER) ON A MUCH MORE PREPARED AND
RESEIRCII BASIS I'JAN HAS (.; ENE. IZALLY bN,, N TEI, CASE IN Ti.' ., ASI.,
YOU MAY IAVE NOTICED ALSO THAT IN ANNOUNCING TlE 
17
ESTABIMICMhXT OF THE MIN ISTLI.: lAL. CO:&gt; IJTTEE I MADE SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO OUR POLICI ES TOWARDS PECI ONS, LOCAL AUT1tCE ITIFS
AND CONNIT': ITY PAjITICIPATION I WOUlD EXPECT THAT AS A RiKULT
OF THE WC! RK OF THIS COMMIP" TTEEf: THERR WOULD BE DISCUSSI ONS WiTH
THE STATES AT THE OFFICIAL LEVEL.
THE GENERAL MATTER? OF FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS lETWEEN
THE AUSTNALIAN GOVERNMENI! AIND STATE GOVERNM. ENTS WILL PE
DISCUSSYD WITHIN TPh E CONTEXT OF THlE REVIEW 0OF GENERAL REVEN: UE
ASSISTANCE. TIHE PURPOSE GF TODAY'S v;] EETING IS MORE SPECIFIC.
AS YOU WILL ALL BE AWARE, THE GOVERNMELNT HAS TAKEN A NUMB3ER
OF SPECIA\ L. MEASURES TO RJSTO. E FULL iPLOYMENT. FOR ENAMPLE,
THE GOVI: ENMENT MADE? A SERIES OF DECISTONS TO PREVENT
fETRENCHN11\ 11 : NTS IN TilE M1OTOR INDUSTRYV. SIMILARLY, TODAY WE ARE
SEEKING TO ENSURIE THAT STATE GOVERRN: NTS AND THEIR
INsTRUMEN: TALIT IES ARE ABLE TO MAKE TIII R CONTRi BUTION T: 0
THE RESTORATION OP FULL EMPLOY1MENT BY RE-ENGAGEMENT, BY TrlE
PREVENTION OF FURTHER RETRENCHMENT AND TO SOME EXTENT, BY
THE CREATION OF A) DITIONAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES. I
TRUST TIIEREFORE THAT BOTH DURING AND AFTER THE MEETING,
THE SPIRIT OP OUR DISCUSSICNS AND STATEnENTS ' V. ILL REFLECi'
A GREAT3, ER CO-OPERATIVE SPIT1' 1' THAW EAS BEEN TUE OF MA\ Y
OTHER PRE. MIJERS' CON. FElENCES.
OUR OFFER OF FINANCIAL ASS] KEANCE IS, I ASSU; E YOU,
CAREFULLY AND OBlJECTIVELY TA I LORE]) TAK1ING FULL ACCOUNT OF1-'
YOUR SUBMI: SSIONS ANI) GIVING DUE WEIGHflT TO TI TOTAL ECCNGMIC
AND SOCIAL CU( NTEXT. IT : S CFFERH) IN A SPIRiT OF
CO-OPERATION AND) UNJERSTA: ING. I UOPE YOU WILL READILY
ACCEPT ALONG ' IT rTE SPECIFI C PZOPCSAL I HAVE Yui
TO YOU. 
18
IF, AS I TRUST, W} E CAN REACH1 AGREEIMNT QUICKLY AT
THIS STAGE, I PROPOSE THAT WE ADJOURN TiHE PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE Sc THAT A BRIEF FORMAL MEE9TING OF THE'-LOAN
COUNCIL MA. Y BE COI'% WENED TO DEAL WITH OUR DECISIONS HA~ rING
LOAN COUNCIL IMPLICATIONS. 



i,,, AUSTHALIA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statmnt No. 453
14 February 1975
ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR THE STATES IN 1974-75
Following discussions at today's Premiers' Conference
thie Australian Government has undertaken to support the
provision of additional funds for the States and their
authorities in 1974-75 totalling $ 240 million. This is
made up as follows:
* additional general revenue grants of $ 60 million
* additional State Government Loan Council programs
of $ 60 million
* additional borrowing allocations for larger State
Authorities of $ 50 million
* additional employment grants of:
$ 30 million for roads
$ 40 million for general employment purposes.
A table showing the State by State amounts is attached.
The additional general revenue grants and State
Government Loan Council programs are being provided, and
the additional borrowing programs for State authorities
are being supported, on the basis of the States' firm
4W assurances that the funds will be used in such a way that
they have the greatest practicable effects within the
remainder of this financial year in terms of employment.
The additional employment grants for roads and for
general purposes will be subject to additional conditions
of an appropriate kind.
The employment grants scheme will be in addition to
the on-going Regional Employment Development Scheme.
These additional funds will have a substantial effect in
enabling the States to retain employees whose jobs would
otherwise have been at risk and in enabling them to take
on additional employees.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 450
14 February 1975
U. R. D. AGREEMENT WITH QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, and the Queensland Premier,
Mr. Bjelke-Petersel, today signed three agreements relating
to the Australian Government's Urban and Regional Development
program. The three programs will provide Queensland with up to
$ 15,462,000 in the 1974-75 financial year.
. one agreement will make available $ 12,050,000 to
Queensland for sewerage services; the second provides $ 2,500,000
for area improvement; and the third $ 912,000 for the national
estate. The Prime Minister said," The conclusion of these
agreements is evidence of the co-operative endeavours of our
two Governments in promoting our mutual objectives of sound
urban development and enhancement of the environment in
Queensland. I hope that we can look forward to an extension
of this co-operation in other fields."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



J,, AusrHA1.1A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 451
14 February 1975
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT WITH TASMANIA
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the Tasmanian
Premier, Mr Reece, today signed two agreements relating
to the Australian Government's Urban and Regional
Development program.
The two agreements will provide Tasmania with financial
assistance of more than $ 3 million.
Under the Sewerage Program $ 2,300,000 will be made
available to provide environmentally acceptable sewerage
facilities, and to protect water supplies from pollution.
A contribution of $ 450,000 will go to Hobart to assist in
preventing the discharge of raw sewage into the River Derwent.
The program also covers the treatment of industrial wastes.
Tasmania will receive a total. of $ 895,277 for National
Estate projects for the present financial year. Restoration
work will be carried out on many historic buildings including
St Georges Church, Battery Point ($ 20,000) the Theatre
Royal, Hobart ($ 15,000) and the Courthouse, Town Hall
and Old Goal at Oatlands ($ 20,000).
Conservation studies will be carried out at Longford,
Bothwell, Oatlands and Campbell Town.
one grant will go towards a photogr--phic study of the
wilderness and recreational aspects of tCe South West region,
and another will be for a conservation/ lcndscape study of
the Tasman Valley with particular reference to the woodchip
industry and industrial development in the region.
The Prime Minister said: " The conclusion of these
agreements is evidence of the co-operative endeavours of
our two Governments in promoting sound urban development
and enhancing the environment.
Tasmania has already set a fine example to the rest
of Australia in the preservation of historic buildings.
I look forward to visiting Hobart this weekend and
being able to see for myself the results of restoration work
already carried ? ut inh1e Hobar ctyvaaea seially at
the Theatre Roya lwhic hsJustrecieleaa grant-c
and ivni iitgne CL t( 1CL1HitU ABRR. ACT
and in the village ot Richmond. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPFFCII BY iIIF PRIME MINISTR,
T 1l i 1. FEI -G1 . iiI TlIAM, .1oC.. I, Po.
FOR THE OPENING OF TIHE NEPFAN DIT I PICT
AGRICULTURAL, ! iORTICUIIITIIHRALA ND INDIISTRIAI. . IITY'S
ANNUAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW,
PENRITII, 1 FEBRUARY 1975
I HOPE NO ONE WILL ACCUSE ME OF JUNKETING IF I
POINT OUT THAT THIS IS MY SECOND VISIT TO PENRITH IN THE
PAST FIVE MONTHS. I HAD THE PLEASURE OF OPENING A T. V.
FACTORY HERE LAST SEPTEMBER; NOW I AM OPENING YOUR
ANNUAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW. AND IT IS HERE IN THIS COMBINATION
OF LOCAL ACTIVITY OF PRIMARY PRODUCTION AND VIGOROUS
SECONDARY INDUSTRY THAT WE FIND THE GREAT STRENGTH AND
DIVERSITY OF YOUR CITY AND YOUR REGION.
PENRITH IS THE CENTRE OF A THRIVING AND PROSPEROUS
COMMUNITY RICH IN HISTORY, RICH ' IN NATURAL BEAUTY, RICH
IN NATURAL RESOURCES. IN YOUR ANNUAL SHOW WE SEE
BOUNTIFUL EVIDENCE OF YOUR RURAL PROSPERITY. IT IS
HEARTENING TO COME TO YOUR DISTRICT AND SENSE THE CONFIDENT
AND INDUSTRIOUS SPIRIT OF THE PEOPLE OF THE NEPEAN. OUR,
COUNTRY FACES PROBLEMS AS YOU ALL KNOW, BUT SO LONG AS THERE
ARE DISTRICTS LIKE YOURSAND SHOWS LIKE YOURS WE CAN BE
CERTAIN OUR PROBLEMS WILL BE BEATEN. THEY WILL BE BEATEN BY
A STURDY, CONFIDENT PEOPLE, WITH FAITH I. N THEMSELVES,
FAITH IN THEIR ABILITY TO PRODUCE THE GOODS WE NEED, FAITH
IN THE VAST NATURAL RESOURCES OF OUR COUNTRY, FAITH IN THE
BASIC STRENGTH OF OUR ECONOMY, FAITH IN A STRONG DEMOCRATIC
SYSTEM AT ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT A SYSTEM WE MUST STRIVE
TO PRESERVE. 
HERE IN PENRITH, IN THE NEPEAN DISTRICT, YOU ARE
. BUILDING UP THE STRENGTH AND RICHES OF OUR NATION. YOU ARE
MAKING A BETTER LIFE FOR AUSTRALIANS EVERYWHERE, AND THE
GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO MAKE A BETTER LIFE FOR YOU,
FOR THE FARMERS AND THE TOWNSPEOPLE IN OUR RURAL COMMUNITIES.
YOU HEAR A LOT ABOUT OUR WORK FOR THE-CITIES; YOU DON'T
HEAR SO MUCH ABOUT OUR WORK FOR THE COUNTRY TOWNS. THE
PURPOSE OF SO MANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES -OUR
GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT, OUT. AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS,
OUR CONTRIBUTIONS TO SPORT AND RECREATION, TO MENTION A
FEW IS TO MAKE LIFE IN COUNTRY TOWNS AS REWARDING, AS
PROSPEROUS, AS SATISFYING AS' LIFE IN THE MAJOR CITIES.
PENRITH IS TYPICAL OF THE CENTRES BENEFITING FROM
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT POLICIES FOR ASSISTING LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT. AS A DIRECT RESULT
OF OUR MEASUR~ ES MORE THAN $ 1,100,00 HAS BEEN ALLOCATED TO
ASSIST YOUR CITY'IS GROWTH AND RAISE THE STANDARD OF COMMUNIT?,*
SERVICES IN THE AREA. IN ADDITION, THE PEOPLE OF PENRITH
AND THE NEPEAN DISTRICT WILL BENEFIT FROM OUR ASSISTANCE
TO SCHOOLS, HEALTH SERVICES, ROADS, TRANSPORT.. DON'T OET
THE IDEA THAT THESE MAJOR GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS ARE FOR
CITY PEOPLE ONLY. OUR POLICIES ARE DESIGNED TO BENEFIT ALL
AUSTRALIANS, WHEREVER THEY LIVE, WHEREVER AND HOWE VER THEY
WORK. WE HAVE LONG BEEN AWARE OF THE-INADEQUACIES OF'OUR
CITIES. RECENTLY, IN THE INTERIM REPORT OF T-HE COMMISSION
OF INQUIRY INTO POVERTY WE HAVE* HAD STARK EVIDENCE OF POVERTY
AND DEPRIVATION IN COUNTRY TOWNS. @ 3 
-3-
ONE IN FOUR FAMILIES IN COUNTRY TOWNS LIVE IN POVERTY OR
NEAR-POVERTY. THERE ARE MORE POOR FAMILIES IN AUSTRALIA'S
COUNTRY TOWNS THAN THERE ARE IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE. YOU
CAN-BE SURE OF THIS: WE ARE DETERMINED TO MAKE COUNTRY
PEOPLE EQUAL PARTNERS IN A STRONG AND PROSPEROUS AUSTRALIA,
THE GOVERNMENT WILL GET THE FACTS OF RURAL POVERTY AND BASE
ITS PROGRAMS ON THE BEST POSSIBLE ADVICE. WE ARE GOING TO
MAKE SURE THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN HAS A DECENT STANDARD OF
LIVING, A DECENT WAGE, A DECENT JOB, A DECENT HOME; THAT
EVERY AUSTRALIAN IS PROUD'OF HIS COMMUNITY AND ITS LOCAL
AMENITIES; THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN HAS OPPORTUNIT'IES FOR
WORK, EDUCATION, RECREATION AND PERSONAL FULFILMENT EQUAL
TO THE BEST IN AUSTRALIA.-
I-WANT PENRITH AND THE NEPEAN DISTRICT TO SET AN
EXAMPLE. I WANT THEM TO SHOW WHAT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS
AT EVERY LEVEL CAN DO TO IMPROVE OPPORTUNITIES FOR COUNTRY
PEOPLE AND CITIZENS IN COUNTRY TOWNS. ONE OF OUR FIRST
INITIATIVES AS A GOVERNMENT WAS TO EMPOWER THE GRANTS
COMMISSION TO REPORT ON INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS AND
RECOMMEND GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES TO OVERCOME
SUCH INEQUALITIES. PENRITH CITY COUNCIL. HAS RECEIVED
$ 330,000 UNDER THE GRANTS COMMISSION'S FIRST RECOMMENDATIONS.
THESE ARE UNCONDITiONAL, NON-REPAYABLE GRANTS WITH NO
STRINGS ATTACHED. THEY WILL HELP PROVIDE MANY OF THE
ESSENTIAL SERVICES WHICH MODERN COMMUNITIES DEMAND. IN
THE WHOLE OF THE WESTERN REGI. ONS OF SYDNEY, INCLUDING THE
PENRITH DISTRICT, THE GRANTS TO LOCAL COUNCILS TOTALLED
MORE THAN $ 3.3 MILLION THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. 
PENRITH IS ONE OF THE REGIONS WEST OF SYDNEY
RECEIVING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE GOVERNMENT'IS
AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. THIS IS A PROGRAM TO IMPROVE
L IVING CONDITIONS BY EXPENDITURE ON RECREATION AND COMMUNITY
FACILITIES WHEREVER IT IS NEEDED.. LAST FINANCIAL YEAR~
PENRITH WAS ALLOCATED MORE THAN $ 800,000 FOR THE PURCHASE
OFE COMMUNITY LAND RESERVES, PLANTING TREES, WIDENING
ROADS, RESTORING BUILDINGS. MR. UREN A ND SIR CHARLES
CUTLER HAVE ANNOUNCED A-CONTINUATION OF AREA IMPROVEMENT
FUNDS-FOR THE PRESENT FINANCIAL YEAR. PENRITH WILL
RECEIVE NEARLY $ 300,000, AND IN ADDITION, $ 50,000 FOR
SPORTS OVALS AND AMENITIES UNDER A GRANT FROM THE DEPARTMENT
OF TOURISM AND RECREATION. TOTAL SPORT AND RECREATION
GRANTS TO THE NEPEAN AREA AMOUNT TO $ 250,000.
I MENTION OTHER EXAMPLES. OUR NATIONAL SEWERAGE
PROGRAM HAS BEEN EXPANDED TO INCLUDE CITIES AND TOWNS IN THE
20,000 To 60,000 POPULATION RANGE. THAT MEANS PENRITH
WILL BENEFIT FROM OUR PROGRAM TO OVERCOME THE-NATIONWIDE
SEWERAGE BACKLOG. WITH THE CO-OPERATION OF THE N. S. W.
GOVERNMENTI WE HOPE TO DOUBLE THE CAPACITY OF THE TREATMENT"
WORKS AT ST. MARYS TO SERVE 150,000 PEOPLE.* WE. DON'T
BELIEVE PEOPLE IN IMPORTANT COUNTRY TOWNS AND RURAL
COMMUNITIES SHOULD HAVE TO PUT UP WITH INFERIOR SERVICES
OF ANY KIND. WE ARE GETTING ON WITH THE JOB OF
IMPROVING PUBLIC TRANSPORT. a, i 
OUR PROGRAMS FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT WILL DIRECTLY
BENEFIT THE PEOPLE OF THE NEPEAN/ PENRITH AREA, WE ARE
PROVIDING FUNDS TO WIDEN THE GLENBROOK RAILWAY TUNNEL
AND QUADRUPLE THE RAILWAY LINE BETWEEN PENRITH AND GRANVILLE,
THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT HAS APPROVED ARTERIAL ROAD WORKS
IN THE PENRITH DISTRICT COSTING MORE THAN $ 2,5 MILLION, WE
RECOGNISE PENRITH'S UNIQUE PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN
SETTLEMENT AND ARE DETERMINED TO PRESERVE THE BEAUTIFUL AND
HISTORIC BUILDINGS OF THIS DISTRICT, OUR BUDGET FOR THE
NATIONAL ESTATE ALLOCATED $ 50,000 TO THE NATIONAL TRUST TO
HELP PURCHASE AND RESTORE TWO COTTAGES AT WINDSOR AND
$ 100,000 TO RESTORE THE EXTERIOR OF THE MACQUARIE ARMS
HOTEL,. IT IS A GREAT PLEASURE TO BE AMONG THE PEOPLE
PRODUCING THE PRIMARY WEALTH OF OUR COUNTRY AND
EXHIBITING THAT WEALTH IN SHOWS SUCH AS YOURS, WE DON'T
TAKE THE VIEW THAT BECAUSE PEOPLE LIVE IN RURAL COMMUNITIES
OR WORK ON FARMS THEY DESERVE SOMETHING LESS THAN OTHER
AUSTRALIANS, IF THE COMMUNITY HAS A DUTY TO PROVIDE
BETTER SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS, ROADS AND HOUSING IN THE CITIES
IT HAS THE SAME DUTY IN THE COUNTRY AREAS, I KNOW FARMERS
SOMETIMES THINK, OR ARE PERSUADED TO THINK, THAT THEY GET
A RAW DEAL FROM A-LABOR GOVERNMENT, BUT WE KNOW YOUR
PROBLEMS, AND THEY ARE PROBLEMS FACED BY FARMERS EVERYWHERE
IN THE WORLD, / 6 
YOU CAN TAKE GREAT HEART FROM THE FACT THAT THE
WORLD WILL ALWAYS NEED, AND INCREASINGLY NEED, WHAT
YOU PRODUCE. DEPENDABLE LONG-TERM MARKETS ARE THE KEY
TO YOUR1 PROSPERITY. No GOVERNMENT HAS WORKED HARDER
TO SECURE THOSE MARKETS AND DEVELOP THE INTERNATIONAL.
GOODWILL ON WHICH TRADE DEPENDS. BEING A GR AT TRADING
. NATION BRINGS OBLIGATIONS AS WELL AS BENEFITS. WE HAVE TO
BE SURE THAT IN PROTECTING OUR LOCAL INDUSTRIES WE DON'T
HARM OUR PROSPECTS AS AN EXPORTER OF FOOD OR RAW MATERIALS.
THESE ARE DIFFICULT DECISIONS, COMPLEX DECISIONS; BUT
SUCH DECISIONS ARE THE STUFF OF MODERN GOVERNMENT. IT IS
NOT EASY TO SAFEGUARD LIVING STANDARDS AND PRESERVE JOBS
IN A WORLD OF INFLATION AND'UNEMPLOYMENT. WE NEED COOL
JUDGMENT, A STEADY NERVE, A BALANCED AND RATIONAL SYSTEM OF
PRIORITIES. WE DON'T BELIEVE IN SHORT-TERM, PATCH-UP MEASUR~ ES
TO HELP THE FARMING COMMUNITY. WE WANT TO GET TO THE ROOTS
OF YOUR DIFFICULTIES. THAT'S WHY WE ESTABLISHED THE
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION TO GIVE EXPERT ADIVCE ON
THE PROBLEMS OR ANY INDUSTRY, PRIMARY OF SECONDARY, AND TO
RECOMMEND HELP AS NEEDED. THAT'S WHY WE CALLED FOR AN
EXPERT GREEN* PAPER INTO RURAL INDUSTRY THE MOST THOROUGH
INVESTIGATION OF FARMERS'I NEEDS AND PROBLEMS EVER MADE IN
AUSTRALIA. THAT'S WHY WE ARE STUDYING THE WHOLE QUESTION
OF FLUCTUATING RURAL INCOMES TO GIVE FARMERS A MORE
STABLE AND ASSURED EXPECTATION OF INCOME OVER A LONGER
TERM AND REMOVE MUCH OF THE HARDSHIP AND UNCERTAINTY OF
RURAL LIFE. ea. 17 
-7-
I CONGRATULATE THE ORGANISERS OF THIS SHOW. IT IS
AN INSPIRATION TO SEE THE WORK OF A VIGOROUS AND BUOYANT
RURAL COMMUNITY, TO SHARE THE OPTIMISM AND HOSPITALITY
OF COUNTRY PEOPLE. I WISH YOU WELL IN YOUR EFFORTS TO
DEVELOP THE AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL POTENTIAL OF YOUR
DISTRICT AND ASSURE YOU OF THE GOVERNMENT'S SUPPORT. I
HAVE PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN THE NEPEAN DISTRICT
AGRICULTURAL, HORTICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY'S
ANNUAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW. 



JAUSTHA[. IA. Y
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT No. 452
14 FEBRUARY 1975
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO HOBART
The Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam will visit Hobart
at the weekend.
They will leave Sydney at 12.15 pm on Saturday,
accompanied by the Government Leader in the Senate,
Senator Ken Wriedt and Mrs Wriedt.
On his arrival at 2.00 pm Mr Whitlam will drive to
the Bellerive ferry terminal and meet Eastern Shore
residents and councillors before catching a ferry to the
city. The Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam will attend a
reception given by the Lord Mayor of Hobart at 5.30 pm
in the Town Hall. They will dine privately and later in
the evening attend a performance of the Royal Shakespeare
Company production " The Hallow Crown" at the
Theatre Royal.
On Sunday the Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam will
drive from Hobart through Brigewater, Brighton and Tea Tree
to Richmond. Mr Whitlam will meet Hobart business and
press representatives at the home of Ray Sherry MHR,
Labor member for Franklin. He will hold a press conference
there at 10.30 am before attending a luncheon for 300
Hobart people.
The Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam will leave Hobart
for Sydney at 4'. 00 pm.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR THE HOBART CIVIC RECEPTION, 15 FEBRUARY 1975
1. IN 1803 LIEUTENANT JOHN BOWEN MADE THE FIRST
EUROPEAN SETTLEMENT IN TASMANIA AT RiSDON ON. THE
EASTERN SHORE OF THE DERWENT. THE SETTLEMENT
WAS NAMED HOBART AFTER LORD HOBART THEN BRITISH
COLONIAL SECRETARY. THE SITE WAS LATER FOUND
TO BE UNSUITABLE.
2. IN FEBRUARY 1804 19 FEBRUARY, 171 YEARS AGOLIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR DAVID COLLINS SELECTED A
SPOT FIVE MILES FARTHER DOWNSTREAM AT SULLIVAN
COVE AND TOOK POSSESSION FOR THE SETTLEMENT
PROPER OF HOBART TOWN. THIS NAME REMAINED IN
OFFICIAL USE UNTIL 1881.
3. GOVERNOR MACQUARIE VISITED HOBART TOWN IN 1811
AND FOUND BUILDINGS ERECTED IN A VERY IRREGULAR
MANNER AND WITHOUT ANY PLAN WHATEVER. HE HAD
A PLAN DRAWN UP SHOWING A MAIN SQUARE AND
SEVEN STREETS AND HE FORMULATED REGULATIONS
FOR FUTURE BUILDING. ON. HIS SECOND VISIT IN
1821, MACQUARIE WAS IMPRESSED BY THE
IMPROVEMENT MADE. 
-2-
14. IN 1838 A POLICE ACT WAS PASSED WHICH WAS THE
GENESIS OF HOBART'IS MUNICIPAL HISTORY. UNDER IT
THE SURVEYOR GENERAL WAS AUTHORISED TO SET OUT
THE LIMITS OF THE TOWN; OTHER SECTIONS RELATED
TO SUCH MATTERS AS THE MARKING OUT OF FOOTPATHS
AND THE BREADTH OF CARRIAGE-WAYS.
IN 18142, HOBART WAS CREATED A CITY. FROM 1846
IT WAS GOVERNED BY COMMISSIONERS ( ELECTED BY
THE RATEPAYERS) WHO PROVIDED FOR LIGHTING,
CLEANING AND PAVING. THEIR POWERS WERE LIMITED,
AND IN 1852 AN ACT WAS PASSED ESTABLISHING A
MUNICIPALITY. IN 1857 HOBART WAS INCOPORATED
AS A CITY, AND ITS MOTTO SIC FORTIS HOBARTIA
CREVIT THUS IN STRENGTH DOES HOBART GROW.
6. THE FIRST MAYOR OF HOBART WAS WILLIAM CARTER IN
1853. THE PRESENT LORD MAYOR, ALDERMAN SOUNDY,
HAS HELD OFFICE SINCE 1970. HIS FATHER WAS,
IN 1932,. THE LAST PERSON TO BE CALLED MAYOR
OF HOBART. By 1938 AFTER A PERIOD OUTSIDE THE
TOWN HALL, HE HAD BECOME THE SECOND LORD MAYOR
OF HOBART. SIR JOHN SOUNDY SET A FINE CIVIC
RECORD FOR HIS SON TO FOLLOW. THE SOUNDY
FAMILY HAS MADE AN EXTRAORDINARY CONTRIBUTION
TO THE GOOD GOVERNMENT OF THE CITY OF HOBART. 3 
-3-
7. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN FOR THE WELFARE
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SPEAKS FOR ITSELF. LAST YEAR
WE MADE GRANTS OF $ 56,345., 000 TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. OF THAT SUM,
$ 1,669,000 CAME To TASMANIA. IT WAS THE FIRST
TIME IN AUSTRALIA'S HISTORY THAT AN AUSTR'ALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAD MADE DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT.
8. MANY PEOPLE FOUND IT DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND
WHY NO GRANT WAS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE HOBART
CITY COUNCIL. THE GRANTS COMMISSION HAS GIVEN
A GREAT DEAL OF THOUGHT TO THE STATUS OF CAPITAL
CITY LOCAL GOVERNING BODIES, AND THE EVIDENCE
INDICATES THAT EACH OF THEM HAS A VERY
SUBSTANTIAL ABOVE-STANDARD CAPACITY TO RAISE
REVENUE. THE COMMISSION DECIDED TO RECOMMEND
THAT NO GRANTS BE MADE TO THE CAPITAL CITY
COUNCILS IN SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, PERTH
AND HOBART.
9. YOU WILL-ALL BE AWARE THAT A SPECIAL PREMIERS
CONFERENCE WAS HELD YESTERDAY IN CANBERRA.
WE RECOGNISE THE NEED FOR MORE. DIALOGUE BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES AND ONLY
LAST WEEK I ANNOUNCED THE FORMATION OF A SPECIAL
COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS TO BE CONCERNED PRIMARILY
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S RELATIONS WITH
THE STATES. eie/ 4 
THIS COMMITTEE WILL ALSO EXAMINE PROGRAMS OF DIRECT
ASSISTANCE TO REGIONS, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL
COMMUNITIES, YESTERDAY IN CANBERRA YOUR PREMIER, ERIC REECE,
AND I SIGNED AGREEMENTS BETWEEN OUR GOVERNMENTS
RELATING TO THE NATIONAL ESTATE AND NATIONAL
SEWERAGE PROGRAMS, THE TWO AGREEMENTS UNDER
THE URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ( FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE) ACT AMOUNT TO FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
OF MORE THAN $ 3 MILLION, TASMANIA'S GRANT OF
$ 895,277 FOR NATIONAL ESTATE PURPOSES WILL GO
TOWARDS THE PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS
AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONSERVATION STUDIES
AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS,
11. I AM DELIGHTED THAT $ 15,000 HAS BEEN ALLOCATED
FOR ASSISTANCE WITH MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION
WORK ON THE THEATRE ROYAL THE OLDEST AND
SURELY THE MOST BEAUTIFUL THEATRE IN AUSTRALIA,
I AM LOOKING FORWARD VERY MUCH TO THE ROYAL
SHAKESPEARE COMPANY'S PERFORMANCE THERE TONIGHT, 
12. THE HOBART CITY COUNCIL IS TO RECEIVE $ 6,000
FOR A STUDY OF THE FUTURE USES OF SALAMANCA PLACE
AND ITS REMARKABLY PRESERVED HISTORIC STONE
WAREHOUSES. THE FACT THAT THE AREA NOW PULSES
WITH LIFE THROUGH ITS SATURDAY OPEN-AIR MARKET
AND ITS RESTAURANTS, THAT THE ARTS ARE
ENCOURAGED AND THAT TALENTED YOUNG PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO TURN 63 SALAMANCA PLACE INTO A
FAVOURITE COMMUNAL RESOURCE CENTRE IS A
TRIBUTE TO THE IMAGINATION OF BOTH THE CITY
COUNCIL AND THE PEOPLE OF HOBART.
13, THE HOBART CITY COUNCIL HAS ALSO RECEIVED A
GRANT OF $ 175,000 THROUGH TOURISM AND RECREATION
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A SYNTHETIC ATHLETICS
TRACK. THIS IS IN ADDITION TO LAST YEAR'S
GRANT OF $ 60,000 FOR THE TRACK AND FIELD
CENTRE. IN VIEW OF MAX WALKER'S GREAT PERFORMANCE
ON THE MAINLAND IN THIS LAST TEST SERIES,
MAYBE SOME MORE INVESTMENT IN CRICKET PROMOTION
HERE WOULD BE MORE THAN JUSTIFIED.
14. LAST YEAR $ 300,000 WAS APPROVED UNDER THE CHILD
CARE ACT, BUT I UNDERSTAND THE COUNCIL HAS HAD
SOME DIFFICULTY IN FINDING A SUITABLE SITE FOR
BUILDING. I HOPE THAT WE WILL BE ABLE TO SEE
THAT GRANT AT WORK FOR THE BENEFIT OF HOBART'S
YOUNG CHILDREN IN THE NOT TOO DISTANT FUTURE. 
-6-
I HAVE DELIBERATELY LEFT UNTIL LAST ANY MENTION
OF THE'TASMAN BRIDGE ACCIDENT AND ITS AFTERMATH,
You WILL BE AWARE OF MY OWN DEEP CONCERN AT THE
EXTRAORDINARY MISHAP, AND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT PLEDGED FULL AND READY CO-OPERATION
IN RESTORING THE TASMAN BRIDGE ITSELF ANb
MAKING GOOD THE LOSS AND DISRUPTION SUFFERED BY
PEOPLE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE DERWENT,
LEGISLATION WILL BE INTRODUCED SHORTLY PROBABLY
NEXT WEEK TO HONOUR FULLY AND PROMPTLY THE
UNDERTAKINGS WE HAVE GIVEN, UP TO $ 13 MILLION
WILL BE PROVIDED FOR WORKS NECESSARY TO RESTORE
THE BRIDGE ITSELF, AND TENDERS WILL SHORTLY
BE CALLED TO PROVIDE FOR THE CLEARING OF THE
WRECKAGE FROM THE VICINITY OF THE BRIDGE THUS
ALLOWING FURTHER EXAMINATION AND PLANNING FOR
RECONSTRUCTION TO BE CARRIED OUT, MR BARNARD
HAS APPROVED THE PROVISION, THROUGH THE ARMY,
OF SUFFICIENT BAILEY BRIDGE MATERIAL TO ALLOW
CONSTRUCTION OF A TEMPORARY BRIDGE UPSTREAM
TO CARRY ESSENTIAL COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, AND
CONSIDERATION IS BEING GIVEN TO THE PROVISION OF
A PERMANENT SECOND BRIDGE, 



i, AU ir ALIA
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 453# 4
16 February, 1975
TASMAN BRIDGE ADVISOR APPOINTED
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced in
Holart today that Sir Roland Wilson had accepted his
invitation to be his personal advisor on the T; sman
Bridge reconstruction. Sir Roland will advise the Prime
Minister on all matters aff&amp; cting the Hobart Metropolitan
area in which Federal Departments are involved. The move
has the support of the Tasmanian Premier, Mr. Keece, and
Australian Government Ministers with responsib:; lities in
the area. Sir Roland Wilson is a former Secretary of the
Treasury, Chairman of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation,
and Chairman of Qantas.
Mr. Whitlam said:" Sir Roland is a Tasmanian who
became one of Australia's most experienced and esteemed
administrators."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



AUS IHKA~
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 453
16 February, 1975
TASMAN BRIDGE ADVISOR APPOINTED
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced in
HoLart today that Sir Roland Wilson had accepted his
invitation to be his personal advisor on the Ti sman
Bridge reconstruction. Sir Roland will advise the Prime
Mirnister on all matters affecting the Hobart Metropolitan
area in which Federai Departments are involved. The move
has the support of the Tasmanian Premier, Mr. Reece, and
Australian Government Ministers with responsib: ilities in
the area. Sir Roland Wilson is a former Secretary of the
Treasury, Chairman of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation,
and Chairman of Qantas.
Mr. Whitlam said:" Sir Roland is a Tasmanian who
became one of Australia's most experienced and esteemed
administrators."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



ADDRESS 10 THE NATIOIN.
BY THE PRIME 1 INISTER,
MR, EG. W11r -LAM, m. P.,
SUNDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 1975
I want to speak tonight about some distrubing
developments in Australia's parliamentary system which
I am bound to say post as werious a threat to its
strenght and stability as we have ever encouintered in
our history. It's time to stop the rot. And that can really
be done only by the Australian people
Let me begin by stating a very general principle
about the working of our democracy. Our syster, depends very
heavily on custom, tradition, the unwritten rul~ es of the*
game. True, we have a written Constitution bul: the
Constitution itself is silent on many of the most important
and fundamental aspects of the working of our democracy.
The Constitution says nothing about rule by popular majority.
It says nothing about political parties. It says nothing about
freec'om of speech. Yet these are basic to how we govern
ourselves. The basis of our system the rule of law is
commion consent and comimonsense. In the ultimate, these are
the only guarantees against the fule of force.
When violence is done to an improtant convention,
a well-established custom, then violence is done to
demtocracy itself.
Last April, we had the unprecedented attempt by the
Opposition in the Senate to refuse Supply to the elected
Government that is, to deny the Government the money
it needs to carry out its duties. At the election which
followed, you were able to pass judgement on this -action.
You re-elected my Government for a further 3 years and
repudiated the action of the Opposition in the Senate.
That should have been the end of the matter. Yet almost
from the time the numbers we-: t up, the opposition has made no
secret of its intention to repeat the exercise if it can,
whenever it can. It confronts Australia with the prospect of
6-monthly national elections an impossible basis for
sound effective government.
This is a generalised threat to set aside the verdict
you recorded only last May. Now, only last week, we have a
clear specific threat to set aside a clear specific decision
made by the people of New South Wales.
In May. the people of the largest State voted in favour
of the Government team of the Senate candidates by a majority
of 50% as against 41.7% of the votes for the Opposition
candidates. / 2 
-2-
The Senator who headed the successful Senate team, Senator
L. K. Murphy I--as now been a-Fpoln., ted a Justice of the
High Court, the sixth Australi. an Attorney-General to be made
a judge by the Australian Government.-Mr. Justice
Hliggins, Mr. Justice Isaacs, Chief Justice Latham, Chief Judge
SpicE-r-and Chief Justice Barwick. incidentally, so far
this century 12 English Attorney-General have been appointed
Lords Chancellor, Lords Chief Justice or a Lord Justice of
Appeal.$ This is the 26th casual bacancy in the Senate
since proportional representation was introduced in 1949.
hitherto the States have filled every vacancy with a.
Senator who belongs to the smae political party as his
predecessor. In 10 of the 25 cases the new Senator for the
State was a political opponent of the government of the State.
The first casual vac * ancy was caused by the death of a
Labor senator for Western Australia in 1951. Th,. Liberal
Premi er of Western Australia, after consulting the Liberal
Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies and the other Premiers, sponsored a
Labor man to replace him. This practice has sence been scrupulously
followed in every State by every Premier, Liberal, Labor and
Country Party. In 1959 the Constitutional Review Committee, composed of
8 M. H. R. s and 4 Senators, 6 of them Labor, 4 Liberal and
2 Country Party, recorded that they were all strongly of the
view that, if the Senator for a State whose place has become vacant
was a member of a political party, the Parliament of the
State or the Governor of the State should be rqquired, in
filling the vacancy, to choose a person who was a member of
the same political party as the vacating senator.
Last rThursday the Senate unanimously carried this
resol ution: The Senate cornmends to the Parliaments of all
the States the practice which has prevailed since 1949 whereby
the States, when casual vacancies have occured, have
chosen a Senator front the same political party as the
senator who died or resigned.
This a good and very proper ruJle good in principle
and soun~ d in practice. Yet now the Premier of Ne wSouth
Wales proposed to scrap it. But it's not just a
convention, a custom he's throwing on the scrap-heap; it's the
wishes of the people of New South Wales, recorded only 9
months ago. The New South Wales proposal would make the senate
as a whole even less representative of the opinion of the
electors recorded in May. Instead of a Senate elected with
Twenty-nine Labor senators, twenty-nine Liberal and
Country Party senators and two Independent senatcrs there would
be only twenty-eight Labor senators. / 3 
I believe AutwIralians of all political persuasions
should be deeply concerned about these events and should
express their concern. Certainly the voters of New South
Wales who are about to be defrauded of their proper representation
have very right to be aggrieved. But it's not
only the majority who voted Labor who should feel
incensed. I've always believed Liberal supporters have a
deep commitmcnt to the prOper workings oE the Parliamentary
system. Certainly any other commitment should be
unthinkable for the party founded and led by Sir Robert
Menzies. It is to all those thus committed that I make my appeal
to express in whatever way you can to your mem srs of
Parliament to ensure that our parliamentary system shall be
given a chance to work.
I've mentioned to you many times over the past
year the unprecedented stresses that democracies and
parliaments everywhere are now experiencing. The real
difficulties are great enough without deliberate sabotage.
I leave you with this very earnest question: If men in
positions of power feel free to break the rules with
impunity, how long will those who feel disadvantaged or
deprived or denied of power play. to the rules? 



47cr
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 454
17 February 1975
Mr Anthony and Constitutional Conventions
Mr Anthony's latest outburst suggests that his memory as well as
his principles are on the down-turn.
It is only a little more than a year since Mr Anthony was an ardent
defender of the principle of Senate vacancies being filled by members of the
same party as Senators who had died or resigned.
So concerned was he about this principle that in 1973, before the
retirement of Senator Prowse, he telephoned the Premier of Western
Australia to see whether the principle would be followed. He was assured by
the Labor Premier, Mr Tonkin, that a Country Party replacement would be
appointed to replace a Country Party Senator who wished to retire.
Mr Anthony's rejection now of this very proper Constitutional
convention must be related to his desire to break yet another.
It is quite apparent from the rushby thoe Countr 3iLrty to embrace
Mr Lewis' in( efenSible stand on the issue of finding a replacement for
a KSW L~ tbor Senator, that they are not at all sure of their numberp i" the
Senate. Even without putting a Liberal or Country Party Senator in Mr Justice
Murphy's place, the Opposition has the power to reject any Senate motion,
including the provision of funds for the Government to continue in office.
It is clear that the Opposition is not at all certain that it can
control its own nuinbersa It fears that there may be one Senator within its
own ranks who has a real respect for the Constitution and its Conventions,
and who would stop short of voting outright for a rejection of Supply.
In April last year some of the Liberal Senators were able to tell
themselves that they had not actually voted against Supply. This time Mr
Anthony is making sure that he will have the numbers to go the whole way,
so that he can strike a determined blow at one of the most fundamental
Constitutional Conventions: that the Senate does not determine who should
be in Government, or when elections should be held. 



JJ AUST ALIA L Press Statement No. 455
18 February 1975
APPOiNTMENT TO THE COAL INDUSTRY TRIBUNAL
The Prime Minister and the Premier of
New South Wales today announced the appointment of
Mr David Anthony Duncan as Coal Industry Tribunal.
The appointment was made under the joint
arrangements provided for by the Australian and
New South Wales Coal Industry Acts.
Mr Duncan, formerly legal officer for
the joint Coal Board, is to take up his appointment
immediately. He succeeds Mr Justice Gallagher, C. M. G.
who retired on 9 February following almost 28 years of
service as Coal Industry Tribunal.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



fl
' 21)
PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CQNFP. ENCE AT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA ON
18TH FEBRUARY 1975.
QUESTION WHITLAM QUESTION The N. S. W. Premier, Mr Tom Lewis, has announced that
he intends to fill the Senate vacancy with a non-
Labor Senator. Sir, what's your reaction to this,
and secondly, is there any action that your Government
can take to ensure that the convention is observed?
My attitude to the matter has been made quite plain,
of course, for very many years. I was a member of
the Constitution Review. Committee in the late 1950s
which unanimously said that, where there was a casual
vacancy then, and the former Senator belonged to a
political party, then the new Senator appointed by
the State Government or the State Parliament should
belong to the same Party as the vacating Senator.
I've always held that view. And it is also, I
gather, the view of every Senator at the moment,
and it used to be, hitherto, always has been the view
of everybody who has been Premier. So there's no
need to ask what my view is. I gather the Liberals
in this Parliament in the House of Representatives
also believe that Mr Justice Murphy should be
succeeded by a Labor Senator. Perhaps I might
quote what Mr Snedden, the Leader of the Liberal
Party in this Parliament, said, I gather, at Randwick
on Sunday: Billie Mackie Snedden, have no power
to determine who that successor will be. -I have no
power under the Liberal Party Constitution. 1 have
no power under the Australian Constitution". Anc
then he says something about that you press people
find it hard to understand this. Then he says,
" I have stated my view clearly, frankly, without fear,
and without seeking favour. That is my view, and I
maintain it, and if some of the commentators had the
merest teeny-weeniest understanding of the Australian
Constitution, and of the Liberal Party Constitution
they would understand where the decision lies". T
don't know where that leaves Billie Mackie Snedden.
He would make a great Prime Minister. That is, the
Liaader of what would be the majority numbers in the
Federal Parliament would have no authority whatever
in a case such as a casual-vacancy in the Senate.
And but it does seem to ' accord with general respect
in which he is held by Mr Lewis, by Mr Bjelke-Petersen
and by Mr Anthony. Because all of them have disagreed
with him on matters of oil prices, and beef or coal
exports, or Senate replacements within the last week.
And he lets them go their own merry way.
Does any Premier have any power to conduct international
trade agreements, or to conduct international
trade agreements on behalf of his State with another
country? 
WHITLAM QUEST ION
WHITLAM QUEST ION Well no other country has ever thought so, and
until the last week, I don't believe any Premier
had that illusion either. The Federal Parliament
is the one that has the authority over trade and
commerce with other countries and among the States.
That has always been the case. And here again,
Mr Snedden himself has said it, but of course,
apparently he has no power of persuasion over
these errant Premiers. But of course, it's not
just a question of what Queenslanders may think
of their Premier. I notice that Mr Bjelke-Petersen,
on I think it was, he wants to sell
Queensland beef. He doesn't want the Japanese who
want Queensland coal getting their beef from New
Zealand or Tasmania. He was down in Tasmania just
over a week ago, trying to rescusitate the Country
Party, or National Party, in Tasmania.
But the fact that he makes this reference shows the
absurdity of it. Other countries-buy Australian
beef. They want that beef to be of acceptable
standard and the national Government has to ensure
those standards. Now you just can't take our
commodities, whether they're mineral or pastoral
or agricultural commodities, and classify them
according to State compartments. We sink or swim
as a nation. And Premiers have no international
standing at all. None of them ever have. They
certainl~ y have functions, and important functions
within Australia. But internationally, no Premier
* has any standing whatever. Premiers, for'instance,
have no standing with the British Government,
except as heads of government of British coloni6O.
Do you have any plans, or are there any plans, to
appoint other Senators to august positions, such as
ambassadors or to the High Court?
No. Incidentally, there have been other appointments
of this character by our predecessors. You remember
Senator Spicer was appointed as a judge. Senator
Annabel Rankin was appointed as an ambassador.
Senator Prowse chose to retire before the end of his
term, aiid he was replaced by another Country Party
Senator. This was only early last year, about 12
months ago. Now Mr Anthony, the Leader of the Country
Party telephoned Mr Tonkin, the Premier of Western
Australia, to make sure that if Senator Prowse, a
Country Party Senator, retired before the end of his
term, would Mr Tonkin replace him with a Country Party
Senator. And Mr Tonkin said, of course he would. He
would heed the convention.
not only appointments of this nature for appointments
of this nature as well as for the convention of
replacing with a Senator of the same Party? / 3 
-3-
WHITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM QUESTION
WHITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM I don't believe that, since proportional representation
was introduced for the Australian Senate, that there has
ever been a Senator who has not been replaced by a
Senator of his own Party. There has never been such
a case. Senator Murphy's resignation produced the 26th
casual vacancy. The previous 25, that is, since
proportional representation was introduced in 1949,
had all been succeeded by persons belonging to their
own Party. 10 of them were appointed by a State where
they were political opponents of the Government of the
State.
Prime Minister, are you considering moving to have a
referendum to take the power of the States to appoint
Senators in a casual vacancy, away from them? And
secondly, are you considering a referendum removing
the power of the Senate to block Supply?
No. I suppose your question derives from an article*
in one of the newspapers which said that a couple of
university lecturers had written to me on this subject.
So, insofar as the matter's come in correspondence, I
can be said to be considering it. But a copy of their
letter was also given to the press, so that's the
origin of that story.
Mr LEWIS has indicated that his appointment may be
what may be called non-political. Is such a thing
possible? It would be extraordinarily difficult, I imagine, for
a politician to find a non-political appointee. I
think Mr Lewis went further I think he said heA-iould
appoint a political neuter. I'd assume that we would
not only have a Senator Withers, but a Senator Wethers.
The Sydney Morning Herald in a leader this morning
suggested that perhaps Mr Lewis might delay appointing
a Senator at all until the next elections, which
they seem to think might be an acceptable solution.
Do you think that would be an acceptable solution?
Well I naturally regard any suggestion by the editorial
wr-iters of the Sydney Morning Herald with the greatest
respect and reverence. I notice on this matter, the
Sydney Morning Herald is the only newspaper in the
whole of Australia which has given any editorial
support to Mr Lewis. Every other metropolitan newspaper
has editorially condemned him.
Sir, how much longer are you going to tolerate
Mr Stonehouse using Australia as a sanctuary?
I don't like commenting on individuals on an occasion
like this. If a question like this was asked in the
Parliament, I would require it to be put on notice.
Now a question was asked of the Minister for Labor and
Immigration about this, at question time today.
6 
-4-
( coqnt.
QUESTION
WH ITLAM
QUEST ION
* WHITLAM
QUESTION WH ITLAM
QUESTION You have his answer to it. I don't know all the
details of these matters. As I understand it,
Mr Stonehouse, has committed no breach of
Australian laws. As I understand it, until I
don't know what's happened this afternoon no
country has sought to extradite him. There are
procedures for extradition if he's broken any
laws of any other country. As I understand it,
he has not broken any laws of our country. I know
it's a very easy thing on which to comment. Anything
I said on this subject would get very great
coverage. You don't mind if I don't rise to that
lure.
Do you see any merit in those two referenda?
I ha~ ien't considered them. I have one referendum
proposal before the Parliament which I think is a
very urgent and necessary one. Namely, that whenever
there is an election for the House of
Representatives, there should also be an election
for that half of the Senate which is first due to
face the people. We must bring to an end this
absurd situation where we have an election a
national election every year and a half at the
most. Mr Prime Minister, Do you have under consideration
any plans to delay the Supply bill or in any other
Way circumvent the Senate's rather easy way of
sending the Government to the people?
My whole procedure is to act according to the
ordinary practices and proprieties in these matters.
Supply will be sought in the ordinary way. If the
Senate chooses to reject Supply, that will be another
breach of Constitutional conventions. I think we
ought to realise that the constant suggestion that
the Senate may reject Supply, as it threatened to do
in April last year, is no justification for refusing
Supply. We should never accept that this is a
proper or a normal or a principled thing to do. It
has not, it had never happened in Australia before.
The fact that it has happened once does not make it
proper to do it or to threaten it again.
Does that mean, Prime Minister, that the Opposition
if you had any say in it, the Labor Party in Opposition
would not reject Supply in the Senate if it had the
numbers? When we were in opposition, and this proposal to
reject Supply was put, I successfully opposed it.
I was talking, Sir, in the future tense. 
( I F
QUESTION WHITLAM T. nl' ontenip Late I am not goin* to hypothesise
on that nmitter. You know what I have done. In 1967
t3' ere was this suggestion. You remember it it was
in the context of post and telegraph charges, and
there was the suggestion in the Australian Labor
Party in the Caucus, then in Opposition that we
should vote against the money Bill. And I successfully
led the opposition against that move.
You have spoken very strongly today, Prime Minister,
against two State Premiers on the stands that they've
taken on two issues that we've spoken about here
today. And you have obviously taken great delight
in their disagreement with Mr Snedden. But do you
think in any way that Mr Lewis and Mr Bjelke-Pctersen
do, in fact, represent the views of the people of
their States their stands on the beef and coal and
on the Senate vacancy.
No, I don't think they do. But what does appal me
let's assume that Mr Bjelke-Petersen does represent
the views of Queenslanders on this matter. I do
believe that Australians in general should understand
the implications of what he is putting. It is not,
I believe, acceptable to Australians to say that, if
our biggest customer, Japan doesn't buy beef from
Queensland, then Queensland will not sell coal to
Japan. After all, coal comes from other States,
beef comes from other States. But surely, in
international trade, we act as one nation.. But it's
really an idle speculation, because Mr Bjelke-Petersen
has been condemned on all hands by this or should I
say Mr Snedden and Mir Peacock have begged to difrer
from Mr Bjelke-Petersen. They don't agree with him.
The fact is that any Australian Government could
prevent this course of action by any State Premier.
The any Prime Minister, any Australian Government,
the Australian Parliament have authorith over the
trade and commerce with other countries and among
the States. And if they choose to act or legislate
then any State action or legislation would be
nullified. It would be void to the extent of any
inconsistency. So Mr Bjelke-Petersen should know
that he couldn't do it. The difficulty is that, in
order to attract some support, presumably in his own
State, he is creating unnecessary tensions between
Queensland and the other States and he's also casting
a cloud over the our relations with other countries.
I think, however, Japan knows quite clearly with what
Government in Australia it has to have all its
relations. / 6 
QUESTION WHITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM QUEST ION
WHITLAM QUESTION WH ITLAM When will you expect this Session's Supply Bills to
be introduced into Parliament?
At the ordinary time.
Mr Whitlam, you mentioned before that when Senator
Prowse retired from the Senate, that Mr Anthony
contacted Mr Tonkin to make sure that the normal
convention would be followed. Did you contact Mr
Lewis to take the same precautions?
No. The only conversation I have had with Mr Lewis
on this matter was by telephone on Sunday week. I
told him that a letter was being delivered as the
Constitution requires, by the President of the
Senate, to the Governor of New South Wales. And
I said I thought he would like to know, because he
would have to advise the Governor as to his response.
And that's the only conversation I have had with
Mr Lewis on this matter. I gather, from the newspapers
that he then rang the Premier of Victoria,
Mr Hamer, who gave him certain advice, which Mr
Lewis chose to ignore.
Mr Prime Minister, do you approve of guns being taken
to the Cabinet Room? Were you aware last Friday that
Mr Bjelke-Petersen took an armed bodyguard into
the Cabinet Room? Do you know if the Queensland
Premier obtained permission from the presiding officers
of the Parliament to bring an armed man into the
precincts of Parliament House? And do yop1 intend to
have members of the Queensland Party frisked at the
next conference?
I believe nobody was in Parliament House. The
presiding officers or the Treasurer and I who
respectively presided over the Loans Council and
the Premiers' Conference were informed that Mr
Bjelke-Petersen had an armed body guard with him.
I don't propose to take any action about this
matter. I should imagine Mr Bjelke-Petersen would
have got the message here that no posses are required;
Prime minister, there have been suggestions from a
number of quarters that the Government should take a
much tougher stand this year. If the Opposition does
try to block Supply, that it should resist that, and
that it should try to stay in office. If Supply is
rejected, do you think this is possible? And is this
being considered by the Government?
I have seen such speculations. I'm not going to
respond to them. / 7 
-7-
QUESTION WHITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM QUESTION WH ITLAM
QUESTION WH ITLAM
QUESTION Prime Minister, following the Federal Conference
decision at Terrigal on the Provisional Revolutionary
Government of South Vietnam, have you had an
application from them for the establishment of any
sort of an office here?
No. Does the initiative, in fact, rest with them?
Yes.
What is the progress, if any, on the take over of
the State Railway system? Have you come to any
financial arrangement with South Australia? And
if not, when is such arrangement likely to come
about? There were some pretty thorough discussions on this
matter at Terrigal between Mr Dunstan and Mr Vergo
the &amp;. LMister for Transport and also
between Mr Nielson, the Tasmanian Deputy Premier
and Mr Batt, the former Tasmanian Minister for
Transport, with Dr. Cairns and Mr Jones, my minister
for Transport and me. And I would be pretty
confident that the discussions which have gone on
for over two years now will soon be successfully
concluded. Sir, following your rejection for the second time
of a visa for Mr Wallace to come' here, do you
think it likely that the Australian tour of Southp
Africa will proceed?
I think it will probably not proceed. After all,
the Australian Cricket Board of Control would be
influenced very much by the decision of the
International Cricket Association in July. last
year, that there should be no tours of South Africa
until cricket there was multi-racial. Furthermore,
if Australia were to send an XI to South Africa,
it is quite likely that no Australian XI would be
received in the Carribean countries j Indiarr
Pakistan or that any teams from those countries
would visit Australia. There's a very great deal
at stake in this matter as far as cricket is concerned,
quite apart from the general question of what the
nation's attitude should be and the extent to which
the Government should safeguard the nation's
interests and reputation.
Prime Minister, did Cabinet accept~ a proposal yesterday
from Mr Johnson, for additional expenditure on welfare
housing? If so, for how much? And secondly was
the proposal vetted by the Expenditure Review
Committee? / 8 
-8-
WHITLAM QUEST ION
WHITLAM QUESTION
WHIT LAM
QUEST ION
WHIT LAM
QUESTION There will be, quite soon, a Bill for additional
housing grants to the States under the Housing
Agreement, partly for Housing Commission or Trust
houses and partly for Home Builders' account loans.
And half of the amount to be appropriated was
announced last November. I mightn't have the
particular States precisely in mind, but I think
in November, the additional amounts were announced
for Qld., S. A. and in respect to housing commission
houses, N. S. W. There will now be home savings
home builders' accounts grants for announced for
each of those States, and both categories for
Victoria. But this is under an arrangement which
was made last June. You will remember at the
Premiers' Conference last June when preliminary
grants were announced by my Government under the
housing agreement with the States. We stated
that if additional amounts could be spent in
erecting houses we would consult with the States
again. And when the States made such proposals,
we did consult with them. That was the arrangement
concerning housing agreement finance. You remember
that in 1973, we allocated record amounts of money
for housing agreement purposes, but the States in
fact, built fewer houses than they built for those
purposes for about 10 years. So in June last, we
said we didn't mind, in effect, how much money was
provided, as long as it could be spent in housing.
Not just put in Trust Accounts.
To take up the point on the Expenditure Committee,
I think this the first question I think you've ever
addressed me. For months.
Two weeks, I think sir. To take up the Expenditure
Committee, it met, I understand, on Thursday last
week, and then you told the Premiers on Friday
that any " ons", as they say, would have to be matched
by " offs". When might we expect to hear what the
" offs" are?
I don't think you will hear them. They occupied
quite a deal of the Cabinet's attention yesterday.
Could you give us some idea of the amount of money
involved.
No. Mr Whitlam, in the light of the decision yesterday
on the Capital Gains Tax, or land tax, could you
comment on a proposal put forward by Mr Cameron
I think about 18 months ago, that the Cabinet
considered a Holding Tax on land and a flat rate
holding tax on unoccupied land? / 9 
-9-
WHIT LAM
QUESTION WHIT LAM
QUEST ION
WHITLAM QUESTION
WHITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM QUEST ION I don't remember the proposal.
Could you amplify that point about how we won't find
out about the " offs"?
No, I am not going to announce what proposals were
in Minister's submissions which have now been
deferred or modified. After consideration and
report by the Expenditure Review Committee. That's
what I have said.
I thought decisions had been made.
No. I should I thought it was clear to you what
was involved in the Expenditure Review Committee's
operations. It is to look at proposals between
Budgets. The Budget is the Budget discussions
are the~ appropriate time to fix priorities between
competing claims. And this Committee will particularly
scrutinise submissions by ministers for the
Cabinet which would involve additional expenditure
this financial year that is, before the next
Budget discussions are held.
Did Cabinet yesterday, decide to cut back on
existing programs?
It scrutinised the prospects of expending the full
amount allocated for some programs.
Are you of the opinion that statements being made
by'Messrs. Anthony, Lewis and Bjelke-Petersen since
Mr Justice Murphy was sworn in to the High Court
were in contempt of Court? And if so, will you
refer them to the Attorney-General?
Yes No. I believe the dignity of the High Court
would be better served by ignoring the comments
which the gentlemen that you name have made.
On the expenditure question, Sir, isn't one of
the aims of your announcement about the Committee
of Ministers to curtail expenditure? That it
would be providing something of the sort of
leadership-which is required for the States to
curtail their own expenditure? To let the private
sector know that you have an answer to the
cr4. ticism that Government expected to have
expenditure was going unchecked? Sir, why can't
we find out, in aggregate terms, the amount of
money that this mysterious committee administers is
saving? 
QUESTION W7HITLAM QUESTION WHITLAM Now, I am not going to respond to your kind invitation.
The fact is, that if I was naming any of these items,
I'd immediately be swamped with pleas to contirmr
particular item which is being c1eferred. You know
that perfectly well, so I am no't going to..
Sir, does that mean
No, you have had your question.
Well, to follow up, does that mean, sir, that you are
no longer on the election hustings in asking Mr
Snedden to stipulate on what he would cut back on
expenditure?
Well, I notice that he is proposing to cut back
expenditure on tertiary education, to introduce
fees and to cut education allowances. I' you
can s&amp; e think you asked him a few questions on
this what was it, Monday wasn't it? And he came
out with that bright idea. I can assure you that
we will not be bringing back tertiary fees,
technical fees. We will not be retrenching
educational allowances for those that can survive
the means test which is there in operation. 



PRIME MRAINISTE 19 February 1975
FAIRFIELD RED GRANTS
The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa,
Mr Gough Whitlam, said today that Fairfield Council should
feel particularly satisfied at their latest grants under
the R. E. D. Scheme. The Council received at total of
120, 256. Mr Whitlam. said that the Australian Ministerial
Committee on Regional Employment Development Schemes had
met a week ago to consider grant applications.
The largest single project grant was $ 279,828
which would cover 26 weeks employment for 56 people
involved in clearing areas of Fairfield Park.
Another grant of $ 197,919 would enable 33
people to work for 26 weeks on the construction of dog
show rings, fences and physical fitness track in the
Fairfield area.
Mr Whitlam said the Austiralian Government would
provide $ 142,758 of the $ 156,504 needed to employ 27
people for 26 weeks in clearing fire hazards, and planting
and maintaining trees in playgrounds and reserves throughout
the municipality. Work on the removal of debris in Carrawood Park
and Lansdowne Bridge Reserve will include the building
of car parks and picnic areas at Prospect Creek. This
project will employ 21 people for 26 weeks and has attracted
a grant of $ 124,052.
Other grants will include $ 130,000 to employ 23
people for 8-26 weeks on work on the Prout Parks at Mount
Pritchard; $ 136,072 providing ' employment for 23 people for
26 weeks at the Fairfield Golf Course and Rosley Park and
$ 109,627 to employ 18 people for 26 weeks on projects along
the Fairfield Railway line.
Mr Whitlam said a total of 201 people would gain
jobs under the grants, and they would be selected from
those registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service
at Fairfield.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 456
February, 1975
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR GRANTS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
grants and assistance totalling $ 305,300.00 for special
activities during, International Women's Year. This is the
second of a series of grants and represents a total commitment
so far of-over a half a million dollars ($ 538,800.00).
He stated that he had approved the grants on the
advice of the Australian National Advisory Committee for
International Women's Year. This Committee which was established
in September 1974, has the general responsibility for
developing themes and programmes for the Year which will be
of benefit to all women in Australia.
Mr Whitlam said that the grants were part of an
overall program for International Women's Year and reflect the
Government's determination to make the Year one of substantial
progress for women in Australia. The Prime Minister said that
he had been pleased with the response to the Year of both the
Premiers of South Australia and Victoria and also of many 11
local government organisations.
As well as involving the community and individuals
in activities for the Year the Government had embarked on an
extensive program throughout all. Australian Government Departments
which aimed at reassessing their existing activities in
light of the aims of-the Year.
As part of this program the Australian Post Office
would be issuing a stamp to mark International Women's Day on
March 8, a National Conference on Women and Health would be
held in Brisbane in August, a special edition of Education News
with special emphasis on women would be prepared, and an
International Seminar on Women as Victims in Crime will be
held in Canberra in April. Australia w-7ould also host a United
Nations Inter-regional Seminar on Women, the Arts and the Media
the communication of attitudes. e *. 2
11,1,( L A 1( W( 
The Prime Minister said that many other
submissions were presently under consideration by the
National Advisory Committee and by various Government
Departments. He expected to be able to announce further q~
grants-shortly.
NOTE FOR PRESS
A detailed description of projects available from the
Prime Minister's Press Office. Contact officers for
further information: Shirley Castley 49 6489, John
Gavin 47 0839. 
Attachment to 456
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
PROJECTS FUNDED
Submissions EDUCATION SSt. Michael's Collegiate School ( Tas.)
SNSW Teachers' Federation
Carole Ferrier, University of Queensland
SSpecial edition of " Education News"
SUniversity of Adelaide, Department of
Adult Education 874
12,000 1,682
up to 6,160
3,250
CREATIVITY Adele Cohen Readings ( W 4,775
The Women's Film Festival 75 ( N. S. W.) guarantee35,000
Royal South Australian Society of Arts Inc. 3,850
Albury Symphony Orchestra ( Vic.) 300
Ewing Gallery.( Vic.) 6,000
SAdelaide Festival Centre Trust 1,000
North Shore Symphony Orchestra 500
HEALTH AND WELFARE
Conference on women's health ( Qld) 22,500
The Wayside Chapel, Kings Cross 3,000
SN. S. W. Council for the Ageing 5,500
t I . IA 
Viole. nce
* The WcLmoC-n ' cIs cc,* saV i ct0 ri r
Cout-Wn1.22L Is assCzc'. aln, r~
tano-e n jg_:. C Gro ( t7c
* pannln t7-ithoumlt Partners ( Asst )
WORT, Cotrefo'r tlrban Pcscrnrch and Action ( Vic.) C
Women Lawyor: s Association
tational Council. Of Wromen, Towsvil ( 03Ac)
* As-ral. ian Lonn). t'evin I
W* OAclian roPoso', r~ a: r
P-nPh, v-n Co1llege of Advancec1 Edca-lcotin ( Vic)
n'C-na Woalomn's Day oite
uOnonan Asoco'ation' of tUniversi. ty t-c-meri
C x? r inq~ n. AgnJnT st lIO al Pp 0( r sc etnYt1 .) I
* The Cotntxv Wom." enls Association Vi~ co'Ia:'' I-
* Seventecent'h M'ational Confa,-ro2nce%
* The National. Council of IWomen o. i~ oi
joyce St-evens
* National Council -of Wammen of Lanncoton ( Tas)
ancl 1I! . Itc'n ( VICO~
* The Co~ T': cz-. cn s Assnciat!. on 0* f N' 09~ t1.
77-7.. 7. tS .0,2160 ' 4,000 000
6,000 C000 



AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 457
22 February 1975
SENATE VACANCY
Mr Lewis will be flouting the unanimous wishes of
the Senate, the Parliamentary Liberal Party in Canberra and
now the Liberal Party Federal Executive if he goes ahead with
his defiance of convention in filling the Senate vacancy.
It is apparent to everyone except Mr Lewis and
the more backward elements of the Country Party that
conventions of this kind must be preserved if our democratic
parliamentary system is to survive.
The fact that the Liberal Party Federal Executive
has had to hedge its support for the convention is clearly
the result of the difficulties in which Mr Snedden has
placed it by his inability to do anything but lead his party
from behind. The appointment of a Senator by a State is not
an " internal affair" of the State. It is something which,
unless carried out in accordance with Australia-wide custom,
can disrupt the whole Parliamentary, system.
Events of the last week have demonstrated just how
ineffective the Liberals would be if they were in government
in Canberra. On two major issues affecting the Australian
constitution, they have been unable to get the co-operation
of the Country Party and the two Liberal-Country Party Premiers.
Mr Lewis has disregarded Mr Snedden over the Senate
replacement; Mr Bjelke-Petersen has disregarded Mr Snedden
over the way in wHich Australia's overseas trade should be
conducted. It is clear that the Liberal and Country Party are
at odds with the Australian Parliament and the Leader of the
Liberal Party is unable to secure co-operation of the Premiers
of New South Wales and Queensland.
If Mr Snedden can't get-the Premiers to agree with
him on matters involving the propriety of appointments to the Australian
Parliament and the conduct of foreign trade, how hopeless
would he be facing the more difficult tasks of government.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON, E. G, WHITLAM, 0, C. M. P.
TO THE TASMANIAN STATE A, L. P CONFERENCE
I_ AUNCESTON, 23 FE3,. PUARY L975
JUST OVER TWO WEEKS AGO WE ENDED A SUCCESSFUL
NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE PARTY IN TERRIGAL. THAT
CONFERENCE REKINDLED OUR SPIRITS AND STRENGTHENED OUR
DETERMINATION TO CARRY ON WITH LABOR'S PROGRAM AND PUT
US BACK ON THE ROAD TO VICTORY. YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT
OUR OPPONENTS PREDICTED ALL SORTS OF DISUNITY AND
DISSENSION IN TERRIGAL. IT WAS TO BE A CONFERENCE
STEEPED IN GLOOM AND WRACKED BY CRISIS. AND OF COURSE
IT WAS NOTHING OF THE SORT, AT TERRIGAL WE RALLIED
OUR STRENGTH AND GATHERED OUR RESOURCES TO MEET WHATEVER
CHALLENGES, WHATEVER THREATS, WHATEVER OBSTACLES MAY
FACE US . IN THE MONTHS AND YEARS AHEAD. FOR WE CAN NO
LONGER HAVE ANY ILLUSIONS ABOUT OUR OPPONENTS. THE
EVENTS IN THE TWO SHORT WEEKS SINCE TERRIGAL HAVE SHOWN
ONCE AGAIN HOW DESPERATE AND UNSCRUPULOUS THEY ARE. THEY
WILL NOT ACCEPT THE UMPIRE'S VERDICT AND THEY WILL NOT
ABIDE BY THE RULES OF THE GAME. ./ 2 
-2-
I TOLD THE DELEGATES AT TERRIGAL:
" WE NOW KNOW THAT OUR OPPONENTS WILL TEAR UIP THE
RULE BOOK AND WRITE NEW RULES WHENEVER THEY THINK IT
SUITS THEM." I HOW TRUE THOSE WORDS WERE SHOWN TO BE,
WITHIN DAYS THE LIBERAL PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HAD TORN ANOTHER PAGE FROM THE RULE BOOK. WE SAW THE
LENGTHS TO WHICH THE LIBERALS WOOLD GO TO OVERTHROW AN.
ELECTED GOVERNMENT, TO FRUSTRATE ITS PROGRAM, TO OBSTRUCT
THE PEOPLE IS WILL. WE KNOW THIS, AND IN EVERYTHING WE
DO, IN EVERYTHING WE SAY, WE MUST KEEP THIS. FACT , IN MIND.
OUR OPPONENTS ARE OUT TO DESTROY US BY ANY MEANS THEY
CAN. THE COMING YEAR WILL PUT ENORMOUS STRAINS ON OUR
RESOURCES, OUR ORGANISATION, OUR LOYALTY AND OUR VIGILANCE.
THIS TASMANIAN CONFERENCE IS THE FIRST STATE
CONFERENCE SINCE WE GATHERED OUR FORCES AND REDEDICATED
OUR EFFORTS'IN TERRIGAL. IT WILL CARRY FORWARD THE
MOMENTUM AND THE GREAT SPIRIT OF RESOLVE WHICH TERRIGAL
SET IN TRAIN.-OUR PARTY HAS A I) NIlAcqtRFITh IN
TASMANIA AND A REMARKABLE HOLD ON THE CO) NFIDENCE OF
TASMANIAN VOTERS. WIE HOLD ALL FIVE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVE
SEATS IN THI. S STATE. WE HAVE FIVE LABOR SENATORS. WE HAVE
A VIGOROUS STATE LABOR GOVERNMENT. ALL THESE ARE'TREMENDOUS
ASSETS AND A GREAT SOURCE OF STRENGTH AND CONFIDENCE FOR
THE PARTY AT THE STATE AND NATIONAL LEVELS. WE MUST'
DEFEND IT RESOLUTELY. I WANT THIS CONFERENCE FOR THE GOOD
OF THE WHOLE LABOR MOVEMENT -TO'CONSOLIDATE OUR UNITY AND
SAFEGUARD AND STRENGTHEN OUR DOMINANCE IN THIS STATE. ia/ 3 
-3-
LET'S BE QUITE CLEAR WHAT OUR OPPONENTS
ARE TRYING TO DO. THEY WANT TO DRAG THIS COUNTRY BACK
BACK TO THE STAGNATION AND COMPLACENCY THAT WE BROUGHT
TO AN-END AFTER 23 YEARS OF CONSERVATIVE RULE. THEY WANT
TO MAKE AUSTRALIA SAFE FOR THE FANATICS, THE STATES
RIGHTERS, THE REACTIONARIES, THE VESTED INTERESTS, THE
OVERSEAS COMPANIES WHO HAD IT SO GOOD FOR SO LONG.
THEY WANT TO TEAR DOWN OUR PLANS FOR BETTER SCHOOLS, OUR
PLANS FOR CHILDREN, MIGRANTS, WIDOWS, MOTHERS, ABORIGINES
OUR PLANS FOR UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE, FOR NATIONAL
COMPENSATION, FOR DECENT CITIES WITH DECENT TRANSPORT,
THE CLOSER THESE GOALS COME TO FRUITION THE. MORE DESPERATE
THEY ARE TO DESTROy THEM, THE NEARER WE GET TO MEDIBANK
OR A PROPER LEGAL AID SERVICE, OR AN EFFECTIVE' PETROLEUM
AND MINERALS AUTHORITY, THE MORE FRANTIC AND RUTHLESS ARE
THEIR METHODS. ANY TACTICS WILL DO FROM OBSTRUCTION
IN THE SENATE TO Oi1STRUCTION I,'' THE COJRT3
OF COURSE THEY ARE COY ABOUT WHAT THEY
WOULD DO THEMSELVES. ONLY LAST WEEK, IN AN UNGUARDED
MOMENTMR. SNEDDEN LET SLIP ONE OF THE LIBERALS.' LESS
ATTRACTIVE PROMISES THE RESTORATION OF FEES FOR
TERTIARY EDUCATION AND A CUTBACK IN STUDENT ALLOWANCES.
THAT'S THE SORT OF LIBERAL ECONOMY MEASURE THE YOUTH OF
AUSTRALIA COULD EXPECT. BUT THE LIBERAL AXE WOULD FALL
MUCH WIDER THAN THAT. IT WOULD CHOP RUTHLESSLY INTO THE
CONSUMPTION AND LIVING STANDARDS OF THE POOR AND
UNORGANISED. WE KNOW WHO WOULD PAY THE PRICE FOR THE
RESTORATION OF SO-CALLED LIBERAL ' PROSPERITY' EVERY WAGE
EARNER, EVERY EMPLOYEE, EVERY PENSIONER, EVERY WORKING MAN
AND HIS FAMILY. 
-4-
HERE IN TASMANIA YOU HAVE HAD VIVID EVIDENCE IN
RECENT WEEKS OF THE CONTEMPT WITH WHICH OUR OPPONENTS
TREAT THIS STATE, TASMANIA HAS BECOME THE LATEST
COCKPIT FOR COALITION SQUABBLES AND PERSONAL FEUDS, THE
HAI-RED AND BITTERNESS AMONG THE FORCES OF THE RIGHT IS
NEVER SO EVIDENT AS WHEN THEY FIGHT AMONG THEMSELVES.
FIRST WE HAD .' ENATOR TOWNLEY SHEDDING HIS THREADBARE
MAiNTLE OF INDEPENDENCE AND EMERGING IN HIS OLD LIBERAL
COLOURS. FOR THIS. IT SEEMS, HE WILL BE REWARDED WITH
FIRST PLACE ON THE NEXT LIBERAL SENATE TICKET, I CAN
ONLY SAY THAT HE HAS MANAGED 1O CONCEAL HIS INDEPENDENCE
VERY WELL IN RECENF MONTHS.
THEN WE HAD THE CELEBRATED VISIT BY BJELKE-PETERSEN
TO TASMANIA IN AN ATTEMPT TO RESUSCITATE THE NATIONAL
PARTY. HE AND , R A'ITHONY MADE IT A TWO-NAN CRUSADE.
THEY HAD A DUSTY RECEPTION FROM THE LIBERAL LEADER IN THIS
STATE, WHO ACCUSED THE COUNTRY PARTY OF " EMPIRE-BUILDING" lei
AND WENT ON AT LENGTH ABOUT ITS " UNSAVOURY PAST".
BJELKE-PETERSEN SPENT SEVERAL DAYS IN TASMANIA PROCLAIMING
THE BENEFITS HIS PARTY WOULD BRING. TifEI HE RETURNED TO
QUEENSLAND AND THREATENED THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT WITH
REPRISALS UNLESS THEY STOPPED. BUYING BEEF FROM TASMANIA,
YOU WILL REMEMBER HIS WORDS ON AN INTERVIEW ON THE ABC
LAST MONDAY: " JAPAN SHOULD THINK IN TERMS OF THEIR GOOD
FRIENDS AND GOOD CUSTOMERS IN THIS AREA WHERE THEY BUY
THESE VAST QUANTITIES OF COAL THAT IS SO VITAL TO THEM
THEY SHOULD THINK OF US TO BUY THEIR MEAT, NOT NEW
ZEALAND AND NOT TASMANIA. THAT IS THE MESSAGE I'M
TRYING TO GET OVER TO THEM.", 
AND THAT'S THE BJELKE-PETERSEN MESSAGE TO
TASMANIA: JAPAN SHOULDN'T BUY BEEF FROM FOREIGN
COUNTRIES LIKE TASMANIA AND NEW ZEALAND: I MUST SAY
I WAS RELIEVED WHEN IR SNEDDEN CONDEMNED THE 9UEENSLAND
PREMIER IN THE SAME, BRAVE FORTHRIGHT AND PRINCIPLED FASHION
THAT HE CONDEMNED THE LEWIS TACTICS IN NEW SOUTH ' JALES.
SO THESE ARE THE MEN WHO OPPOSE US. WE ARE
DEALING WITH MEN WHO WILL SCRAP THE RULES WHEN IT
SUITS THEM, MEN WHO WILL CHEERFULLY THREATEN THE WHOLE BASIS
OF OUR DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM, MEN WHO CARE NOTHING FOR THE
SENSITIVE CONVENTIONS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE., MEN WHO WILL
JEOPARDISE AUSTRALIA'S STANDING ABROAD FOR
A QUICK POLITICAL ADVANTAGE, MEN TOO WEAK TO BRING THEIR
FOLLOWERS INTO LINE OR DEFEND A COURSE OF ACTION WHICH
THEY KNOW IS RIGHT.
WIE HAVE HAD ANOTHER GOOD EXAMPLE OF THEIR DESPERATION1
IN RECENT WEEKS. THE LIBERAL GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA,
CASTING OFF THE TRENDY IMAGE WHICH ONCE SERVED ITS
PURPOSES, HAS MOUNTED A HIGH COURT CHALLENGE TO TWO OF
OUR CURREHI PROGRAMS THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DFVELOPMENT
SCHEME AND THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN. l OF COURSE
THESE PROGRAMS ARE OF GREAT IMPORTANCE IN THEMSELVES,
AS PIONEER ATTEMPTS TO INVOLVE LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN
EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THEIR WELFARE. BUT THE VICTORIAN
CHALLENGE, SUPPORTED BY OTHER LIBERAL STATES, DOESN'T JUST
JEOPARDISE LABOR'S PROGRAMS: IT THREATENS LEGISLATION ON
A RANGE OF MATTERS WHICH HAS STOOD FOR 22 YEARS OR MORE. 
IT WILL JEOPARDISE SCHEMES WHICH WERE ORIGINALLY
AUTHORISED BY THE PREVIOUS LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENTSGRANTS
TO THE BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE, PROJECTS IN THE
FIELD OF MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CHILD CARE, PAYMENTS UNDER
THE NATIONAL APPRENTICESHIP SCHEME, GRANTS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SOCIAL SERVICE.
IT'S WOR-DiLISTING THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INITIATIVES WHOSE EXISTENCE OF LEGAL STANDING ARE
THREATENED BY THIS CHALLENGE. THEY INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:
ASSISTANCE FOR ISOLATED CHILDREN, PRE-SCHOOL TEACHER
EDUCATION ALLOWANCE 1 COMMONWEALTH TECHNICAL SCHOLARSHIPS,'
GRANTS UNDER THE NEW PROGRAM FOR CHILD CARE AND PRE-SCHOOL
EDUCATION, NATIONAL APPRENTICESHIP SCHEMES, GRANTS TO
COMMUNITY-AGENCIES INVOLVED IN MIGRAN'T WELFARE, LOCAL AID
FOR ABORIGINALCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, PROTECTION OF
ABORIGINAL SACRED SITES, ABORIGINAL COMMUNITY ENTERPR-ISES1
AGED PERSONS' HOMES AND HOSTELS, SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT
ASSISTANCE, HANDICAPPED CHILDREN'I S ASSISTANCE, HOMELESS
PERSONS' ASSISTANCE, MEALS ON WHEELS, HOME NURSING
SUBSIDIES, NURSING HOMES IASSISTANCE AND MANY MORE.
IN ALL, SOME 56 SEPARATE PROGRAMS OF ASSISTANCE FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT COULD BE AFFECTED IF THE CHALLENGE
SUCCEEDS. IN THE'LONG HISTORY OF LIBERAL OBSTRUCTION,
THERE COULD BE NO BETTER EXAMPLE OF FANATICISM AND
BLOODYMINDEDNESS THAN A LEGAL CHALLENGE WHICH THREATENS,
NOT ONLY LABOR PROGRAMS, BUT MANY OF THE THINGS THE LIBERALS
STARTED THEMSELVES. 
WHEN WE LOOK BACK ON THE MANY REFORMS AND
ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT, THERE IS ONE
THING WE CAN LOOK TO WITH THE GREATEST PRIDE. WE HAVE
BROUGHT ABOUT A MARKED SHIFT IN THE WEALTH OF THIS
COUNTRY. REAL LIVING STANDARDS FOR THE WAGE-EARNERESPECIALLY
THOSE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SCALE -HAVE BEEN
RAISED AS NEVER BEFORE. THIS FACT MORE THAN ANYTHING
ELSE THIS RAPID INCREASE IN THE SHARE OF GNP GOING
TO WAGES AND SALARIES 15 INTOLERABLE TO OUR OPPONENTS.
IN OUR FIRST TWO YEARS IN OFFICE AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS
INCREASED By 40% 7 AGAINST AN INCREASE IN THE CONSUMER PRICE
INDEX OF 30%. MINIMUM AWARD RATES FOR MEN-INCREASED BY
47% AND FOR WOMEN BY NO LESS THAN 70%. REAL AVERAGE
WEEKLY EARNINGS AFTER TAX HAVE GONE UP
ISHALL HAVE MORE TO SAY ABOUT THE LONG-TERM
IMPLICATION8 Of THIS TREND, BUT THE FACT REMAINS THAT* THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS LOOKED AFTER THE OPLE W'HO NEED Us.
AND THERE IS ANOTHER THING; WE HAVE LOOKED AFTER THOSE WHO
CAN'T SPEAK UP FOR THEMSELVES. KNOW THE MIDDLE CLASS
AND THE LABOUR UNIONS CAN PROTECT. THEIR INTERESTS BECAUSE,
IN THE LAST RESORT, THEY CAN ORGANISEi THEIR STRENGTHS AND
ARTICULATE THEIR DEMANDS. THE ABORIGINES, THE MIGRANTS"
THE WIDOWS, THE DESERTED CHILDREN, THE PENSIONERS, ARE
NOT SO FORTUNATE. THEY ARE NOT SO VOCAL. THEY ARE NOT
SO ORGANISED. THEY NEED A GOVERNMENT THAT WILL HEED
THEIR PROBLEMS AND SAFEGUARD THEIR NEEDS. AND IT IS BECAUSE
WE HAVE DONE SO THAT VAST NUMBERS OF FORGOTTEN'PEOPLE,
NEGLECTED AND UNDERPRIVILEGED PEOPLE, HAVE HAD A BETTER DEAL. 
-8-
THE LIBERALS KNOW THIS. AND THEY KNOW WHEN
PEOPLE FEEL THE BENEFITS OF OUR PROGRAMS, THE REA\ L GAINS
IN THEIR LIVING STANDARDS, ALL THE LIBERAL TALK ABOUT
CENTRALISM, STATE RIGHTS AND THE CONSTITUTION WILL BE
REVEALED FOR THE CLAPTRAP IT IS. YOU HEAR A LOT ABOUT
LABOR ATTACKS ON THE FEDERAL SYSTEM.* HERE IN TASMANIA
THE SMALLEST STATE, YOU HAVE A SPECIAL PLACE IN THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM, A SPECIAL CONCERN TO ENSURE THAT THE
SYSTEM OPERATES TO YOUR ADVANTAGE. IASK: WHO IS
MORE CONCERNED TO MAKE THE SYSTEM WORK THOSE.: WHO WANT
TO PRESERVE ITS MANIFEST INADEQUACIES OR THOSE WHO WORK TO
IMPROVE IT? IHAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
CAN WORK BUT IKNOW IT WILL WORK BEST WHEN WE ESTABLISH
THE RIGHT BALANCE BETWEEN THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENTLOCAL1
STATE AND NATIONAL. THAT IS WHAT WE ARE DOING.
THE LESSON OF THE PAST DECADE THE LESSON TO BE DRAWN
FROM OUR OWN'ELECTORAL SUCCESSES -, IS THAT MANY OF OUR'
PRESSING PROBLEMS DEPEND ON A GREATER INVOLVEMENT BY THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.-I HAVE POINTED OUR THAT IN THE TWO
AUSTRALIAN STATES WITH THE LARGEST POPULATIONS, IT WAS
OBVIOUS THAT ONLY THROUGH THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT COULD THE PEOPLE BE PROVIDED WITH ESSENTIAL PUBLIC
SERVICES LIKE. HEALTH, TRANSPORT AND EDUCATION. INIHE
STATES WITH THE LARGEST AREAS ONLY THE. NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
COULD SAFEGUARD AUSTRALIAN CONTROL. OF. THE VAST NEW NATURAL
RESOURCES DISCOVERED IN THE LAST 10 YEARS. 841/ 9 
-9-
IN TASMANIA, WHO BUT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENJT COULD DO
ANYTHING ABOUT YOUR SHIPPING AND RAILWAYS? ONLY AN
A\ USTR~ ALIAN LABoi? GOVLRiimiFNT HAS THE WILL, THlE RESOURCES,
f 1-IE AUTH~ OiRITY TO-DEVELOP THF: A. N. L. ArmIF THE_ NATIONAL
RAILWAYS. ONLY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CA N RELIEVE YOUR
STATE GOVERNMENT OF THE CRIPPLING COSTS-OF ITS RAILWAY
SERVICES. AND WE HAVE MADE GREAT PROGRESS TOWARDS THAT
GOAL-IN THE PAST FEW DAYS.
LABOR HAS-A GOOD RECORD IN TASMANIA -A RECORD OF
POSITIVE ACHIEVEMENT AND WE SHOULD MAKE-SURE THE PEOPLE
ARE AWARE OF IT. CERTAINLY WE HAVE A S PECIAL PROBLEM
WITH UNEMPLOYMENT WHICH IS HIGHER THAN THE NATIONAL
-AVERAGE. BUT OUR MEASURES HAVE BEEN DESIGNED TO TACKLE
UNEMPLOYMENT NATr 0ONALLY AS WELL AS REGIONALLY. THE
GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR TASMANIA THAN ANY GOVERNMENT
BEFORE US. WE HAVE BEEN UNSTINTINGLY GENEROUS IN OUR
FINANCIAL PAYMENTS. OUR GENERAL PURPOSE REVENUE4
ASSISTANCE To TASMANIA-AMOUNTED TO $ 131 MILLION IN OUR
LAST BUDGET 31.6% MORE THAN 1973-74, SPECIAL PURPOSE
PAYMENTS FOR UNIVERSITIES, HOSPITALS AND THE LIKE HAVE
SHOW4N AN EVEN MORE SPECTACULAR RISE. THEY AMOUNTED TO
$ 109 MILLION IN OUR LAST BUDGET 80% MORE THAN THE YEAR
BEFORE. AND BEAR IN MIND THAT OUR PAYMENTS IN rHE
PREVIOLUS BUDGET WERE THEMSELVES FAR IN. EXCESS OF ANYTHING
PROVIDED BY OUR PREDECESSORS. SO WE HAVE NOTHING TO
APOLOGISE FOR IN OUR FINANCIAL TREATMENT OF TASMANIA.
EVERY MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD IN THIS STATE RECEIVES AN
ESTIMATED $ 790 PER HEAD FROM THiE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
COMPARED WITH $ q66 PER HEAD FOP. THE SIX STATES COMBINED. 
Ah) THESE FIGURES TAKE NO ACCOUNT OF THFI ADDITIONAL
FUNDS GRANTED TO [ ASMANIA AT THE PREMIER'S CONFERENCE
LAST FRIDAY WEEK,
THE MESSAGE WE MUST KEEP IN MIND IS -THIS: WE MUST
NEVER ALLOW THE THUGS AND WRECKERS IN THE OPPOSITION TO
RATTLE US OR SHAKE OUR NERVE, THERE IS A CONSTANT ATTEMPT
TO DO SO IN THE MEDIA, FROM THE MORE STRIDENT VESTED
INTERESTS, FROM THEIR SUPPORTERS IN PARLIAMENT, I KNOW WITH
OUR PROBLEMS OFINFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT, AND WITH
THESE CONSTANT THREATS OF AN ELECTION, WE CAN EASILY LOSE
HEART. BUT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE KNOW THAT WE ARE NOT
ALONE WITH INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT THEY KNOW THAT ALL
THE WORLD'S MIXED ECONOMIES, ALL THE WORLD'S INDUSTRIALISED
COUNTRIES, ALL OUR TRADING PARTNERS ARE SHARING THE SAME
EXPERIENCE. MANY OF THEM ARE MUCH WORSE OFF THAN WE ARE.
INDEED, ON MY RECENT VISIT TO EUROPE I CONCLUDED THATAUSTRALIA'S
ECONOMY IS BASICALLY MUCH SOUNDER THAN THOSE
OF MOST OF THE COUNTRIES I VISITED, 1lO SENSIBLE PERSON,
IN AUSTRALIA OR ABROAD, IMAGINES FOR A MOMENT THAT
UNFMPLOYMENT OR INFLATIO14 WOULD 12E ANY iETTIER IN AUSTRAL! A
TODAM UNDER A SNEDDEN-/\ N[ HONY GOVERNMENT. THEY WOULD
ALMOST CERTAINLY BE WORSE, MR ANTHONY WOULD SEE THAT PETROL
PRICES WERE A GOOD DEAL HIGHER FOR A START. MANY OF OUR
MEASURES TO RELIEVE UNEMPLOYMENT AND RESTRAIN PRICES
THE THE R. ED. S. SCHEME, WAGE IJDEXATION WOULD
BE SCRAPPED OUT OF HAND, .,/ ii1 
Il-
THELRE I S GOOD R FASOH TO H OPE TIHAT OUR ECONOMI C
CONDITIONS WILL SOON BEGIN TO IMPROVE. lIN SAYING THIS
I DONAl WANT TO RAISE UNDUE HOPES OR GENER~ ATE COMPLACENCY.
WIE LIVE IN. TIMES OF RAPID AND SOMETIMES UNPREDICTABLE
CHANGCE, BUT I AM CONFID: ENT THAT OUR RECENT CCONOMIC
MEASURES WILL SHORTLY SHOW THEIR EFFECTS. LATER THIS
YEAR WE CAN EXPECT SOME MARKED IMPROVEMENT IN THE
LACOUJR MARKET. THE IMPORTANT THING FOR US AND OUR PARTY
SUPPORTERS TO BEAR IN MMII) ISA HAT THIS IMPROVEMENT CAN
ONLY BE SUSTAINED IF WAGE-EARNERS EXERCISE RESPONSIBILITY
INJ THEIR PAY CLAIMS. IKNOW THERE ARE SECTIONS OF THE
LABOR MOVEMENT WHO ARE RELUCTANT TO FACE THIS FACT.
THEY ARE QUITE OBSTINATE IN IGNORING IT. I SHALL NJOT
MINCE WORDS. THE TRUTH IS THAT WE CANNOT AFFORD WAGE
GAINS IN THE YEAR AHEAD LIK( E THOSE IN THE YEAR JUST PAST.
IDON'T TAKE ANY PLEASURE IN POINTING THIS OUT, ISTATE
IT AS A FACT. WAGE EARNERS HAVE MADE UNPRECENDENTED GAINS
IN THE PAST YEAR. IF WE WANT TO PRESERVE THE REAL
VAL. UE OF THOSE GAINS, IF WE WANT TO BUIlD ON THE
ACHIEVEMENTS WE HAVE MADE TOGETHER, IF WE WANT TO PREPARE
THE GOUND FOR FURTIIER GAINS IN FUTURE YEARS, WE CANNOT
PUSH THlE SYSTEM TOO FAR TOO FAST. IF &amp; I OVERLOAD
OUR DEMANDS AT PRESENT WE RUN THE RISK OF CANCELLING
OUT OUR GAINS. WE WILL CERTAINLY POSE A THREAT TO
THE GOhVERNMENT'S SURVIVAL WHENEVER THE IJEXT ELECTION
COMES. 
-12-
DON'T FORGET THAT OUR TAX CUTS ARE MAKING IT
MUCH EASIER FOR THE WORKING MAN AND GIVING THE GREATEST
BENEFIT TO WAGE EARNERS WHO NEED IT MOST. OUR OPPONENTS HAVE
BEEN IN A LATHER OF INDIGNATION ABOUT SOME OF THE LURKS
AND CONCESSIONS WE HAVE CUT. TAKE OUR REDUCTION IN EDUCATION
EXPENSES, A DEDUCTION OF $ 400 BENEFITS A MINORITY OF PEOPLE
WHO LEAST NEED HELP. ALWAYS WITH SUCH CONCESSIONS THE
MAN ON THE HIGHEST INCOME RECEIVES THE GREATEST BENEFIT.
I SUPPOSE THAT OF ALL THE PEOPLE IN THIS ROOM I WOULD HAVE
THE HIGHEST SALARY. I COULD -AFFORD TO SPEND MORE ON MY
CHILDREN'S EDUCATION THAN ANYONE ELSE. WOULD ANYONE
CONSIDER IT JUST AND PROPER ON THAT ACCOUNT THAT I SHOULD
ALSO GET THE GREATEST BENEFIT IN TAX CONCESSIONS FROM
MY EDUCATION EXPENSES?
TASMANIA HAS HAD AMPLE PROOF OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
CONCERN FOR ITS PEOPLE. WE HAVE GIVE! J SPECIA. L IFLP TO
IASIANIA'S AGRICU! LTURAL INDUSTRIES AND MADE SPECIAL EFFORTS
TO IMPROVE TRANSPORT LINKS WITH THE MAINLAND. OUR RESPONSE
TO THE TASMAN BRIDGE DISASTER WAS PROMPT, EFFICIENT AND
GENEROUS. THE OBJECT OF ALL OUR REFOPMS, ALL OUR
PROGRAMS, . IS TO ENSURE THAT THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIANS
TO LEAD RICH AND FULFILLING LIVES ARE MADE MORE ABUNDANT
AhD MORE EQUAL. IN TASMANIA YOU FACE SPECIAL PROBLEMS
BECAUSE OF YOUR STATE'S SIZE AND ISOLATION. NO ONE IN
TASMANIA Si OUIlD SUFFER ON THAT ACCOUNF. I BE IFVE ', OUR
CONFEREI. CE W; L, BRING ; S CLOSER in THE ACHIEVEMENT OF OUR
GOALS, AND ENA. BLE OUR TWO LABOR ' iOVEPr'MEN i S IN HOBART AND
CANDERRA TO CO-OPERATE IN FURTHER EFFORTS FOR THE oENEFIT
OF TiE PEOi'L. E OF TASMANIA AND OUR NATION.
* t . I'c 



26 February 1975
VISIT OF SOVIET TEXTILE TECHNOLOGY
DELEGATION
The Prime Minister and Acting Foreign Minister,
Mr E. G. Whitlam, and the Minister for Science, Mr Bill
Moriison, announced today that a party of five Soviet
textile technologists vill arrive in Melbourne tomorrow.
The group is visiting Australia for twc weeks under the
auspices of the Australian/ Soviet Science Agreement, but
will also undertake somz activities arranged by the
International Wool SecretPariat.
Whilst in Australia the Soviet textile technologists
will have discussions with Australian scientists on possible
areas in textile technology where Australian/ Soviet
collaboration can be developed. Textile technology is one
of the five fields beina given particular emphasis for cooperation
under the Australian/ Soviet Science Agreement.
The Soviet textile technologists will visit the
CSIRO Division of Textile Industry and the Gordon Institute'
of Technology in Geelong, and the CSIRO Division of Protein
Che. istry and the Australian Wool Corporation in Melbourne.
They will inspect textile mills at Albury, Orange, Lithgow
and Melbourne. In Sydney tours to be undertaken by the
Soviet delegation will include visits to the University
of New South Wales, the CSIRO Division of Textile Physics,
and the Australian Wool Testing Authority.
Mr Whitlam and Mr Morrison said that it was likely
that a group of Australian textile technologists, led by
Dr M. Lipson, Chi-ef of the CSIRO Division of Textile Industry,
would pay a return visit to the Soviet Union in April to
finalise the program of co-operaticn in textile technology
tha would be recommended to the Australian and Soviet
Governments. The members of the visiting Soviet textile
technology group are: / 2 
-2-7 t
Mr R. A. Tshaianov;
Head of the Department of Light Industries
Mr B. E. Golovastikov;
Director of the Central Research Institute
of the Soviet Wool Textile Industry
Mr B. G. Eliseev;
Deputy to the Technical Director of the Soviet
Wool Textile Industry in the Ministry of Light
Industries
Mrs R. S. Kusminskaia;
Foreign Department of the State Committee for
Science and Technology
Mr A. I. Kniazev;
Chief of Laboratory of the Central Wool Textile
A_ Research Institute
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



lOpfl
THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE SYDNEY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, WENTWORTH HOTEL, SYDNEY,
FRIDAY, 28 FEBRUARY, 1975. 4
IT IS MORE THAN SEVEN YEARS AGO SINCE I FIRST
ADDRESSED, AS LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, A
MAJOR CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, NOT SYDNEY BUT MELBOURNE, IN
OCTOBER 1968y .1 HAD THE REPORTS OF MY SPEECH LOOKED UPx
SI FOUND THAT MY THEME ON THAT OCCASION WAS THE SAME AS I
HAD PLANNED TO TAKE WITH YOU TODAY, I SAID THEN SEVEN
YEARS AGO " THE PROGRAM OF REFORM AND DEVELOPMENT OF
ANY FUTURE LABOR GOVERNMENT CANNOT BE FULFILLED WITHOUT
PROSPERITY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR."' AND I[ SAID
S '; PRIVATE ENTERPRISE IN AUSTRALIA CANNOT PROSPER WITHOUT
GOVERNMENT -INITIATIVES PARTICULARLY AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL, " x
I MADE THOSE STATEMENTS SEVEN YEARS AGO AND I REPEAT THEM
O TODAYX, I DON'T RECALL THESE STATEMENTS JUST TO PROVE A
CONSISTENCY, I RECALL THEM BECAUSE IT'S TOO OFTEN IGNORED
THAT THIS APPROACH, THIS RECOGNITION OF THE INTERDEPENDENCE
OF OUR PROGRAM AND PRIVATE PROSPERITY, ISA FUNDAMENTAL
PART OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN OR
OUT OF OFFICEk SEVERAL MINISTERS IN MY GOVERNMENT, IN
PARTICULAR THE TREASURER AND I, HAVE IN RECENT WEEKS BEEN
EMPHASISING THE NEED TO RAISE PROFITABILITY. IN THE PRIVATE
SECTORx 1 
-2-
IN SOME QUARTERS THIS HAS BEEN DEPICTED AS A REVERSE,
IN OTHER QUARTERS AS A CONVERSION SOME MIGHT HOPE A
DEATH-BED REPENTANCE, IT IS NOTHING OF THE SORT. IT
EXPRESSES A VIEW I HAVE BEEN PUTTING, AS I HAVE JUST
EVER SINCE I BECAME LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTYx OUR CURRENT EMPHASIS ON PROFITABILITY REFLECTS
A RESPONSE WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF A CONSISTENT PHILOSOPHY
TO THE PARTICULAR NEED OF THE PARTICULAR TIME. WE HAVE
NEVER LOST SIGHT OF THAT INTERDEPENDENCE, OF WHICH I
HAVE JUST SPOKEN, JUST AS WE HAVE NEVER LOST SIGHT OF OUR
GOALS FOR AUSTFALIAx As I* AM RECALLING PAST SPEECHES I
CAN DONO BETTER THAN REFER TO THE FIRST MAJOR SPEECH I
MADE AS PRIME MINISTER TO A REPRESENTATIVE CROSS SECTION
OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS AT A METAL TRADES INDUSTRIES
ASSOCIATION SEMINAR IN JUNE 1973x I SAID, ". THE ASSURANCE
I GIVE YOU IS THAT WE FULLY RECOGNISE THE INTERDEPENDENCE
OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE BUSINESS. I ACKNOWLEDGED
IN MY POLI. CY SPEECH THAT WE COULD NOT EXPECT THAT OU. R
SOCIAL PROGRAM COULD BE FINANCED WITHOUT A SIGNIFICANTLY A
INCREASED GROWTH RATEx AUSTRALIA HAD BEEN STUMBLING
ALONG WITH A PALTRY GROWTH RATE OF 3 PER CENT OR SO. I
SAID THEN THAT WE WOULD NEED TO ACHIEVE A GROWTH RATE OF
6 TO 7 P'ER CENT IF OUR PROGRAM WA8. TO BE IMPLEMENTED
WITHOUT VASTLY INCREASED TAXATION.* WE SHALL PROBABLY
ACHIEVE A RATE HIGHER THAN 7 PER CENT THIS YEAR,, WE CAN
ONLY ACHIEVE SUCH A RATE IF ALL SECTORS OF THE COMMUNITY,
NOT LEAST THE PRIVATE SECTOR, IS PROSPEROUS, EFFICIENT
AND FULLY EMPLOYEDx -I 4 
-3-
" You NEED A PROSPEROUS ECONOMYw So DO Ix. I KNOW VERY
WELL I CANNOT ACHIEVE A MOIETY OF WHAT I WANT TO ACHIEVE
FOR THE PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY DECENT SCHOOLS, DECENT
HOSPITALS, DECENT CITIES, DECENT PROVISION FOR THE SICK*
THE AGED AND THE HANDICAPPED WITHOUT YOUR PROSPERITY"
YOU MIGHT SAY THAT OUR PRESENT EMPHASIS ON THE
PRIVATE SECTOR AND OUR PRESENT PREOCCUPATION WITH THE
PROBLEMS OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR REPRESENT A PROFOUND CHANGE
OF PHILOSOPHYx I THINK I. AM ENTITLED TO SAY THAT IT
DOES NOT, BUT THAT IT DOES REPRESENT AN INTELLIQENT CHANGE
OF EMPHASIS IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING SITUATIONI IT WOULD BE
INTOLERABLE IF IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES PREVAILING THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD TODAY, GOVERNMENTS WERE TO BE ACCUSED OF
ERRATIC CONDUCT, OF RECKLESS CHOP-AND-CHANGE BECAUSE THEY
TAKE NEW INITIATIVES OR ABANDON POLICIES APPROPRIATE TO
OTHER CONDITIONS. IT WOULD BE INTOLERABLE IF GOVERNMENTS
WERE TO BE'SCARED OFF FROM MAKING CHANGES BY SUCH
ACCUSATIONSx THE FACT IS THAT CHANGE IS OCCURRING WITH
A GREATER SPEED THAN EVER BEFORE, AND ALL GOVERNMENTS
HAVE TO MAKE CHANGES WITH GREATER SPEED AND FREQUENCY THAN
EVER BEFOREx IT APPEARS THAT THERE HAS BEEN A PROFOUND
ALTERATION IN THE NATURE OF THE BUSINESS CYCLE, NOT ONLY
IN AUSTRALIA. BUT THROUGHOUT THE WORLDx NOT SO LONG AGO
IT TOOK THE BUSINESS CYCLE ABOUT FIVE OR SEVEN YEARS TO
OCCUR IN ALL COMPARABLE COUNTRIES, -NOW THE FULL CYCLE
TAKES A COUPLE OF YEARSx 4* 
ACCORDINGLY, THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS FOR GOVERNMENTS
AND FOR BUSINESS ALIKE IS SUBJECT TO QUITE EXTRAORDINARY
AND UNPRECEDENTED STRAINS) NONE OF US IN OUR LIFE-TIMES
HAVE-EVER BEFORE FACED THIS CONTINUING NEED FOR
RE-ADJUSTMENT OF POLICIES AND PLANS FOR WHICH THE NEW
PHENOMENON OF A TWO YEAR BUSINESS CYCLE IMPOSES ON ALL OF
US, WE'VE ALL BEEN CALLED UPON TO* CHANGE THE DIRECTION OF
POLICIES AND PLANS MORE FULLY AND FREQUENTLY THAN EVER
BEFOREx IT IS EASY ENOUGH TO BLAME GOVERNMENTS FOR* THIS
CHANGE AND IT IS EASY ENOUGH, I SUPPOSE, FOR PEOPLE IN
GOVERNMENT TO BLAME THE PRIVATE SECTORx I THINK, HOWEVER,
IT IS TIME. WE ALL ROSE ABOVE A DEBATE WHICH MERELY SEEKS
TO ALLOCATE BLAMEx THERE IS VERY OFTEN A'NEED' ON BOTH
SIDES FOR PLAIN SPEAKING IT IS OFTEN NECESSARY TO STATE
UNPALATABLE FACTSx FOR EXAMPLE, IT GIVES ME NO
PARTICULAR PLEASURE TO GO TO A LABOR PARTY CONFERENCE AND
POINT OUT THE PRESENT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WAGE INCREASES
AND INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENTx BUT A STATEMENT OF PLAIN
FACT SHOULD NOT BE DESCRIBED AS UNION BASHING JUST AS WHEN
I STATE FACTSWHICH MAY BE UNPALATABLE TO YOU, I DON'T
EXPECT TO BE ACCUSED OF BUSINESS BASHINGA IN RECENT
MONTHS WE HAVE LAID THE FOUNDATIONS, AS A GOVERNMENT, FOR
A NEW DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS.
WE WANT TO BUILD ONTHESE FOUNDATIONS TO ESTABLISH HEALTHY
COMMUNICATION TO USE THE DIPLOMATIC CLICHE FULL AND
FRANK EXCHANGE" x 8 
IT IS POSSIBLY TRUE THAT IN THE PAST THE GOVERNMENT
HAS OVER-ESTIMATED THE FLEXIBILITY OF INDUSTRY TO
-ADJUST TO CHANGEA IT IS PROBABLY EQUALLY TRUE THAT
THE PJRIVATE SECTOR HAS UNDER-ESTIMATED THE GOVERNMENT'S
OWN FLEXIBILITY. WE SHOULD ALL TRY TO UNDERSTAND TE FORCES
WHICH MAKE FOR UNCERTAINTY IN THIS NEW ERA OF CHANGE IN
WHICH WE LIVE, THE FIRST FACTOR IS THE EXTRAORDINARY
INFLATIONARY FORCES PREVAILING THROUGHOUT THE WESTERN
WORLD IN RECENT YEARS FORCES WELL UNDER WAY BEFORE.
THE OIL CRISISA THERE HAVE BEEN QUITE FUNDAMENTAL
CHANGES IN SOCIAL ATTITUDES., CHANGES IN PEOPLE'S
EXPECTATIONS, CHANGES IN PEOPLE S PATIENCE IN ACHIEVING
THEIR EXPECTATIONSx THERE HAVE ALSO BEEN CHANGES IN
BASIC INDUSTRIAL ATTITUDES, THINGS LIKE THE GROWTH OF
SHOP-FLOOR MILITANCY AND A tHALLENGE TO TRADITIONAL
CONCEPTS OF UNION LEADERSHIP. WHEN BUSINESS DEPLORES
THE UNCERTAINTY OF THE TIMES IT SHOULD-ALSO REFLECT
THAT GOVERNMENT DECISION-MAKING IS SUBJECT TO THE SAME
PRESSURES, THE SAME UNCERTAINTIESx IT'S POINTLESS TO
BLAME GOVERNMENTS FOR THOSE UNCERTAINTIES WITH WHICH
GOVERNMENTS THEMSELVES HAVE TO GRAPPLE JUST AS'MUCH AS
BUSINESS)( 
-6-
I HAVE BEEN AT SOME PAINS TO TRY TO UNDERSTAND
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH MAY HAVE GIVEN RISE TO SOME
MISUNDERSTANDING BETWEEN BUSINESS AND GOVERNMENT IN THE
PAST'FEW YEARSK PERHAPS THE FIRST FACTOR WAS THE MERE
FACT THAT WE HAD BEEN OUT FOR 23 YEARSK THERE WERE FEW
BUSINESSMEN WHO HAD ANY EXPERIENCE OF LABOR I'N GOVERNMENT
AND THERE WERE NOT MANY WELL ESTABLISHED LINES OF
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN BUSINESS AND THE LABOR PARTYX
UNDOUBTEDLY THERE WERE UNFOUNDED PRECONCEPTIONS AND
PREJUDICES ON BOTH SIDESK
WITH THIS BACKGROUND IT IS PERHAPS NOT SURPRISING
THAT COMMUNICATION WAS OFTEN INEFFECTIVEA ANOTHER FACTOR
WAS THE ENTHUSIASM AND THE SENSE OF MISSION OF THE NEW
GOVERNMENTX IT MAY BE THAT BUSINESS WAS SURPRISED THAT
WE MEANT WHAT WE HAD SAID4 THE BROAD RANGE OF POLICY
INITIATIVES . AND CHANGES WHICH WE INITIATED AT FIRST
EXHILARATED MOST PEOPLE, IF ONLY BY INVIDIOUS COMPARISON 4
WITH THE STAGNATION OF PREVIOUS YEARS CONTINUATION OF
THESE INITIATIVES AND CHANGES BECAME DIFFICULT TO ABSORBA
I CONCEDE THAT IT BECAME DIFFICULT TO KEEP UP WITH THE\.
SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF OUR POLICIES.' S, ,7/ S 
-7-
THE SCOPE AND SPEED OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
DECISIONS HAVE MADE IT DIFFICULT FOR PEOPLE TO ACQUIRE
A DEFINITE PERSPECTIVE OF THEGOVERNMENT'S OVERALL
PROGRAM AND INTENTIONSx IN THIS CONTEXT IT WAS EASY FOR
PEOPLE TO GENERALISE A VERY SPECIFIC GRIEVANCE OR REACT
ON THE BASIS OF TRADITIONAL PREJUDICES ABOUT THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTYx I HAVE OFTEN DETECTED A VIEW
AMONGST THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY THAT LABOR PARTY POLICY
HAD CONSPIRATORIAL OVERTONESK SOME HAVE BELIEVED THAT
WHILST PUBLIC STATEMENTS OF LABOR SPOKESMEN HAVE BEEN
EMINENTLY RESPONSIBLE, SOMEHOW LURKING IN THE MINDS OF
MEMBERS OF THE PARTY WAS A SECRET DESIRE TO CONTROL
EVERYTHING BY OUTRIGHT NATIONALISATION OR BY STEALTHx IT
IS PERTINENT TO NOTE THAT DURING THE PERIOD OF THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT THERE HAS BEEN NO INITIATIVE TO NATIONALISE
ANY INDUSTRYx THERE WILL NOT BE. WE HAVE TAKEN STEPS
TO PROVIDE PUBLIC SECTOR COMPETITION IN AREAS HITHERTO
EXCLUSIVELY PROVIDED FROM THE PRIVATE SECTORx ' 4.
FOR AS LONG AS I HAVE BEEN A MEMBER OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, IT HAS BEEN COMMITTED TO THE
CONTINUATION OF A MIXED ECONOMYx CLEARLY WE WANT
GREATER PUBLIC INITIATIVES THAN OUR OPPONENTSx BUT THE
CONTINUANCE OF THE'MIXED ECONOMY HAS NOT BEEN SERIOUSLY
QUESTIONED FOR MANY YEARSx IT IS TRUE THAT THE ROLE OF
PROFITS HAS NOT BEEN PART OF OUR. RHETORIC BUT WE HAVE
ALWAYS ACCEPTED, AS WE MUST, THE ROLE OF THE PROFIT
MOTIVE IN A MIXED ECONOMYx 8/. 
-8-
AT THE RECENT TERRIGAL CONFERENCE, THIS WAS EXPLICITLY
ACKNOWLEDGED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN THE LABOR PARTY
PLATFORM HOWEVER, THE VERY REAL COMMITMENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY TO A MIXED ECONOMY IS OF MUCH
LONGER STANDING THAN THATv
MOST OF OUR MAJOR DECISIONS FALL WITHIN THE CONTEXT
-OF TWO BROAD POLICY OBJECTIVES OBJECTIVES WHICH HAVE
CHARACTERISED THE LABOR PARTY SINCE IT WAS ESTABLISHED AND
WHICH DISTINGUISH THE LABOR PARTY FROM ITS OPPONENTSX
THESE OBJECTIVES ARE: THE EXTENSION OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
AND THE RE-DISTRIBUTION OF INCOMES TO PROMOTE PUBLIC
QUALITY AND PRIVATE EQUALIiY$ OF COURSE SUCH OBJECTIVES
ARE SUBJECT TO THE CONSTRAINTS OF THE GROWTH OF THE ECONOMY
AND THEY CAN ONLY BE ACHIEVED GRADUALLY IN A MIXED ECONOMYK
WE HAVE NO INTENTION TO ACHIEVE EITHER OF THESE AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR WHICH PROVIDES SO IMPORTANT A
DYNAMIC IN OUR ECONOMYx
I FOUND WITH SOME SURPRISE, THAT ONE COMMENT IN
THE TREASURER'S 1974 BUDGET SPEECH WAS SO WIDELY MISINTERPRETED)
HE SAID THEN " THE RELATIVELY SUBDUED CONDITIONS UNDER
PROSPECT IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR PROVIDE THE FIRST REAL
OPPORTUNITY WE HAVEHAD TO TRANSFER RESOURCES TO THE PUBLIC
SECTOR." 1. 19/,. 
-9-
THIS WAS INTERPRETED BY SOME AS A THREAT TO
THE PRIVATE SECTORx IT WAS NOT INTERPRETED IN THE
LIGHT OF A CLEAR OBJECTIVE, WHICH I HAVE MENTIONED ABOVE,
TO EXPAND THE PUBLIC SECTORv
THE GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENTS IN SUCH AREAS AS
EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND WELFARE CLEARLY IMPLIED THIS
AND SHOULD HAVE COME AS A SURPRISE TO NO-ONEA YET IN.
THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1973/ 74, THE PROPORTION OF GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT EXPENDED IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR
ACTUALLY FELL FROM 32.3 PER CENT TO 31.6 PER CENT,, THIS
OCCURRED DESPITE THE EFFORTS OF THE GOVERNMENT TO LAUNCH
ITS NEW PROGRAMSx WE WERE FRUSTRATED BY-THE QUITE
EXTRAORDINARY SHORTAGES PREVALENT IN THE ECONOMY DURING
THAT PERIQDx To QUOTE ONLY ONE EXAMPLE -OUR OBJECTIVE
TO PROVIDE BETTER HOUSING FOR LESS WELL OFF SECTIONS OF
THE COMMUNITY WAS FRUSTRATED BY SHORTAGES OF MATERIAL AND
LABOUR IN THE HOUSING SECTORX' THE " SUBDUEDCONDITIbN"
TO WHICH THE THEN TREASURER MADE REFERENCE WAS NOT A
THREAT TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR SO MUCH AS A RECOGNITION
THAT THE EXCESS DEMAND WHICH HAD EXISTED UNTIL THEN WOULD
DISAPPEAR 
WE DID NOT PREDICT AT THAT TIME THE QUITE
EXCESSIVE AND RAPID DOWNTURN IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR THAT
HAS OCCURRED THE BUDGET WAS CRITICISED AT THE TIME
AS BEING TOO EXPANSIONARYw IN RETROSPECT WE CAN SEE
THAT IT WAS NOT EXPANSIONARY ENOUGHX THIS DEFECT WAS
CORRECTED BY THE MEASURES ANNOUNCED ON 12 NOVEMBER
WE RECOGNISE THAT THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS THE PRINCIPAL
AVENUE OF EMPLOYMENT IN THIS COUNTRY AND OUR DECISIONS
SINCE THE PRESENT POSITION EMERGED., HAVE CLEARLY INDICATED
THAT THE REVIVAL OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS ESSENTIAL FOR
O THE RESTORATION OF FULL EMPLOYMENT,
STo THIS END, WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMBER OF MEASURES
WHICH HAVE FOUR BROAD OBJECTIVESx FIRST, WE HAVE
SUBSTANTIALLY EXPANDED THE AVAILABILITY OF MONEY FOR THE
PRIVATE SECTOR. SECONDLY, WE ARE LIFTING CONSUMER DEMAND
THROUGH A SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN PERSONAL INCOME TAX,
THIRDLY, WE ARE SEEKING TO ATTACK INFLATION BY REDUCING
S THE PRESSURE FOR WAGE INCREASES THROUGH A SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT IN AFTER-TAX TAKE-HOME PAYx FINALLY, WE HAVI
SOUGHT TO ENHANCE PROFITABILITY BY A REDUCTION IN COMPANY
TAX, BY REQUESTING THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL TO GIVE
PARTICULAR CONSIDERATION TO THE ADEQUACY OF RETURNNON CAPITAL
AND BY URGENTLY INVESTIGATING THE IMPLICATIONS OF RAPID
INFLATION. FOR THE TAXATION OF COMPANIES/ THE REPORT OF THE
MATHEWS COMMITTEE IS EXPECTED SOON AND ACTION ON ITS
RECOMMENDATIONS WILL BE PROMPT/ . WE RECOGNISE THE EXTRAORDINARY
IMPACT OF RAPID INFLATION ON CORPORATE TAX RULES, PARTICULARLY
WITH RESPECT TO STOCK VALUATION AND DEPRECIATIONX 1I II I I " I 1l 
-11-
I REFERRED TO THE CONDITIONS OF UNCERTAINTY
WITHIN WHICH BOTH GOVERNMENTS AND BUSINESS HERE AND
SAROUND THE WORLD ARE CURRENTLY FORCED TO OPERATEx
IN AUSTRALIA IT MUST BE SAID THAT THERE IS A SPECIAL
FACTOR OF UNCERTAINTYe THAT IS THE POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY
CREATED BY THE CONTINUING THREAT OF A NEW ELECTIONS WE
ARE CONFRONTED WITH A SITUATION BY-WHICH AUSTRALIA COULD
HAVE NATIONAL ELECTIONS EVERY SIX MONTHSy THIS IS BAD
FOR GOVERNMENT AND IT IS BAD FOR BUSINESSw WHAT
BUSINESSMAN AMONG YOU COULD PLAN ON THE BASIS OF THE NEXT
9 .4
SIX MONTHS ONLY? WHAT BUSINESS COULD OPERATE UNDER THE
THREAT OF-A TOTAL CHANGE IN MANAGEMENT EVERY-SIX MONTHS?
IT IS NOT ONLY THAT THIS THREAT, THIS HARRASSMENT, THIS
WAR OF NERVES, MAKES THE BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT DOUBLY
DIFFICULT; IT IS NOT JUST THE DIFFICULTY THE THREAT ADDS
TO EFFECTIVE PLANNINGx THE ELECTION PROCESS ITSELF
REQUIRES A SUSPENSION OF THE NORMAL BUSINESS, OF THE
NORMAL ADMINSITRATION OF GOVERNMENTw DECISIONS WHICH " 4
SHOULD BE TAKEN ARE NOT TAKEN WORK THAT SHOULD BE DONE
IS NOT DONEx. THEWHOLE MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT AT BOTH.
THE POLITICAL AND THE OFFICIAL LEVEL HALTS IN KEY AREAS
AND SLOWS DOWN; IN ALL AREASx
THIS INTERRUPTION CAN BE THE MORE DAMAGING WHEN
AN ELECTION COMES OUT OF THE NORMAL TIME AND IT IS DOUBLY
DAMAGING IN THESE TIMES OF VERY RAPID CHANGE WHEN
GOVERNMENTS MUST ADAPT AND REACT TO THAT CHANGE WITH SPEED
AND VIGOURx 
-12-
THE FACT IS THAT THE MAY ELECTIONS MEANT A VIRTUAL SUSPENSION
OF NORMAL GOVERNMENT FOR NEARLY THREE MONTHS; AND THOSE
MONTHS OF APRiL-MAY-JUNE WERE OBVIOUSLY CRITICAL IN TERMS OF
ECONOMIC POLICY-MAKINGx AS A MATTER OF PROPRIETY I
INSTRUCTED MY MINISTERS TO MAKE NO MAJOR DECISION UNTIL THE
PEOPLE HAD MADE THEIR DECISION, AND MADE IT CLEAR THAT OUR
DECISIONS WOULD NOT COMPROMISE OR I'NHIBIT AN* INCOMING
" GOVERNMENTx o..
EVEN WHEN THE ELECTION RESULTS WERE CLEAR AND
ee
BELIEVE THAT THE TEN DAYS OF UNCERTAINTY WHICH FOLLOWED
POLLING DAY, NOT BECAUSE OF ANY REAL DOUBT ABOUT THE
MEANING OF THE PEOPLE S DECISION, BUT BECAUSE OF THE VAGARIES
AND COMPLEXITIES OF OUR ELECTORAL SYSTEM, WERE THOROUGHLY
DAMAGING TO AUSTRALIA AT HOME AND ABROAD THERE WAS THE
FURTHER INTERRUPTION OF THE JOINT SITTING, IT WAS A
TOTALLY UNNECESSARY INTERRUPTION IN THAT THE OUTCOME OF THE
JOINT SITTING WAS A FOREGONE CONCLUSIONx I DO HOPE THAT
THE DAMAGE DONE, THE UNCERTAINTY CREATED BY THIS THREATENED
DISRUPTION OF OUR NORMAL AND ACCEPTED AND TESTED
CONSTITUTIONAL PROCESSES AND CONVENTIONS IS THOROUGHLY
UNDERSTOOD BY ALL AUSTRALIANSX THE DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM IS
EVERYWHERE UNDER CHALLENGE AND GREAT STRESSA IT'S NO
COINCIDENCE THAT THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM IS EQUALLY AND
EVERYWHERE UNDER CHALLENGE AND GREAT STRESS), ,13/, 
.: t SYou MIGHT PONDER HOW LONG OUR DEMOCRACY CAN PREVAIL
UNDER THESE REPEATED ASSAULTS, ASSAULTS WHICH, AS
SIR. ROBERT MENZIES HAS SAID, " WILL MAKE POPULAR,
DEMOCRACY UNWORKABLE" x AND YOU MIGHT PONDER HOW LONG
CAPITALISM CAN SURVIVE IF POPULAR DEMOCRACY DOES NOT I
SURVIVEx I VENTURE TO SUGGEST THAT THE VACUES YOU
UPHOLD WILL NOT GO UNCHALLENGED IF THOSE WHO SEEK CHANGE
THROUGH THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM LOSE FAITH IN THE
CAPACITY OF THAT SYSTEM TO PROVIDE PEACEFUL CHANGE
~ 1 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE FEDERAL CONFERENCE OF THE HEALTH AND
RESEARCH EMPLOYEES' ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY, MONDAY 3 MARCH 1975
It is seven years since I had the pleasure
of opening an annual conference of your association.
It was a memorable conference and a memorable year for
my party. It was in 1968 that Labor formulated its
health scheme. In my speech on that occasion I took
one of the first opportunities available to me to
explain publicly the fundamentals of our health program
and the philosophy behind it.
Since then I have often had cause to be
grateful to your association for the support you have
given us support through two elections, continuing
support for one of the fundamentals of Labor's program.
Experience has taught me to be grateful for the fact
that medical care is not solely in the hands of the
medical profession. Health is too serious a matter
to be left to doctors! Your association is one of the
oldest and largest trade unions in Australia. Your
members include a wide range of workers in public, and
private hospitals, in psychiatric hospitals, child
welfare institutions, ambulance services, universities
and laboratories. No one is better qualified by dayto-
day experience to understand Australia's health
problems, why they exist and how they may be resolved.
You know at first hand the shortcomings and inadequacies
of our hospitals, the lack of equipment and facilities,
the problems of staffing and morale. You have seen the
failings of the antiquated and inefficient private
health insurence scheme. At the same time you have
been in the vanguard of many important industrial
reforms. That is why I value so highly the support
you have given the Government support expressed in
successive conference resolutions. ./ 2 
-2
Anyone who heard my speech to you seven years
ago will be forgiven for thinking that the more things
change, the more things ~ remain the same. For the truly
remarkable thing, the sobering thing, is that so much
of what I said to you in 1968 the facts, the figures,
the arguments of 1968 are still part of the current
debate about health care in this country. The Labor
health scheme, the scheme developed and nurtured in
those days, has of course been modified over the years,
but its essential purpose remains the same. We are
determined to bring universal health insurance to every
Australian. We are determined to ensure that every
citizen, regardless of means, enjoys the best medical
and hospital care that an affluent and advanced society
can provide. It is one thing, of course, to grant universal
health insurance coverage. It is another to see that
those benefits give real security against the cost of
hospital and medical care and that the price of this
guarantee can be met by the community. Labor's scheme
means that for the first time the whole community will
be undertaking responsibility for the community's healthjust
as the community is responsible for the education
of chiLldren. It is a sad and astonishing fact that
Australians can still be brought to court, and even put
in gaol, because of an * inability to pay medical and
hospital bills. It is a sad and astonishing fact that
more than a million Australians have no protection
against medical or hospital expenses. And the people
who remain outside the present system are precisely
those most in need of health insurance coverage.
It is certainly not for want of trying that
seven years after it was first proposed, Labor's health
scheme has still to be implemented. Never in the history
of our country has a major social reform faced such
sustained and unscrupulous opposition. our proposals
have been debated interminably. No policy has been more
thoroughly expounded or widely canvassed. Our health
program was adopted at the ALP Federal Conference in
1969. It was first put to the people at the 1969 general
election and was in fact the central issue in that
campaign. It received a clear mandate from the people
in the 1972 elections and again in the 1974 elections.
So the people have three times voted for it, twice
approved it, twice empowered us to put it into action.
The basic legislation has been passed three times by
the House of Representatives. It was one of the bills
that formed the basis of the double dissolution. It
was passed a fourth time at the joint sitting of both
Houses last August. It has had repeated electoral and
legislative endorsement. If ever a party had a mandate
for its legislation, the Labor Party has a mandate for
its health scheme. / 3 
w
-3
There is something about universal health
schemes that arouses a special fury in the hearts of
conservatives. In every western country social democratic
parties have had bitter and protracted struggles to
implement similar proposals. The British national
health service a scheme very different from ours, a
scheme, nevertheless, much maligned and much misunderstood
has been so widely accepted that no Conservative
Government has dared to undo it. You will remember
the efforts of doctors and conservative politicians
in the United States to sabotage the Medicare scheme.
Similar battles have been fought in Canada and New
Zealand. All these schemes have differed in points of
detail, sometimes quite radically, but all of them have
had one basic purpose to make medical treatment
available to all who need it, to ensure that medical
care is not just another marketable commodity but a
right of every citizen.
Of course it is not just doctors who oppose
the health scheme. If we only had the doctors to contend
with our scheme would have been working long ago. In
fact there are thousands of responsible and fair-minded
doctors who support us. The truth is that our health
scheme arouses the deepest conservative instincts in
our political opponents our opponents in the Parliament
and our opponents in the community. The issues involved
are quite fundamental to the basic political struggle.
That struggle is between those who want greater equality
and those who want to preserve the power and privilege
of a minority. It is perfectly obvious that doctors will not
be a whit worse off under the Labor scheme than they
are at present. I am sure the doctors know this in
their hearts. Their incomes will not suffer; indeed
they will rise. Their practices, their day-to-day routines,
will not change. All that will change from the doctors'
point of view is the method of settling accounts. For
many doctors this process will be more prompt, more
simple and more reliable. I regret to say that doctors
have been the victims of their own scare tactics and
irrational prejudice. After next July, when Medibank
is in operation, they will come to see that their fears
were groundless. They will see that they were hoodwinked
by a minority of extremists and propagandists in the
profession and in the Parliament. I am dismayed at the
lengths to which this great profession has gone to
frustrate the wishes of the Australian people. There
has never been a time when doctors were more at odds
with popular opinion, more insensitive to the community's
needs, or more indifferent to self-inflicted wounds on
their professional reputation. 
-4
Misguided as their opposition has been, the
obstruction of the opposition has been even more disgraceful,
their obstinacy on this matter, their utter
contempt for the expressed wishes of the people, have
been staggering. Even when the health bills were passed
at the joint sitting, they proceeded to block our ancillary
legislation to give effect to the Government's measures.
This obliged us to make substantial changes in the method
of financing the scheme.
Even now, with plans for Medibank well advanced,
the Opposition is still threatening and undermining
and misrepresenting our proposals. Mr Snedden last
week told a public meeting in Melbourne that the Liberals
would dismantle Medibank and pull down Labor's plans
for national superannuation and a national compensation
and rehabilitation scheme. These are all programs to
which your association has pledged support. They are
all programs for which the Government has a mandate
from the Australian people. We cannot ignore these
threats. Australians have already seen how a right-wing
Federal Government can destroy a free hospital system.
You will remember that every Australian had free standard
ward hospital treatment for five years in the late
and early ' 50s under an agreement between the States
and the postwar Federal Labor Government. The Menzies
Government broke off that agreement. By June 1953 most
State Governments had re-introduced charges for public
ward patients. Australia's first free hospital scheme
was dismantled. So don't think it cannot happen with
Medibank. It has happened once, and the Liberals would
do it again. Our opponents were never able to decide what
their attitude to the old health scheme should be. They
argued in one breath that no change was needed and in
the next breath that the present scheme can be easily
repaired. When I last spoke to you I drew attention to
some of the central weaknesses of the voluntary scheme.
The Liberals had years to correct the shortcomings of
the private insurance system. They did nothing. Nearly
all the criticisms I made in 1968 can still be made of
the private insurance scheme. It is costly. It is
riddled with duplication and wasteful competition. It
ignores the needs of a million or more Australians who
have no medical or hospital cover. Contributors are
obliged to pay a substantial proportion of the cost of
the health services they receive. The scheme is illequipped
to take account of increases in fee scales.
It imposes unnecessary hardship on pensioners. 
Many of these weaknesses were exposed in
the report of the Nimmo Committee in 1969. Nimmo
proposed many reforms to the old scheme. For example,
they suggested voluntary deductions by employers to
achieve a wider voluntary cover. They proposed a
national Health Insurance Commission and standard ward
hospital care without a means test. The Liberals did
none of these things, but all of them have been incorporated,
in various forms, into the Government's present
proposals. And here we find a particularly striking
example of Opposition obstruction and hypocrisy. Early
in 1968 the Senate set up a committee to look into
hospital and medical charges. Mr Justice Nirrmo' s
committee, to which I have referred, was established
by the Liberal Government partly as a counter to the
Senate committee. I do not disparage either of these
inquiries; they did valuable work. But it was clear
that the previous Government was prepared to ignore
both committees when their findings didn't suit them.
Last December the Senate removed important provisions
from our health legislation relating to the supervision
of health insurance organisations. These provisions
were essential to protect the rights of contributors.
We accepted the Senate's amendments last year
because, had we not done so, other important provisions
of the legislation would have been held up. Last week,
however, the Minister for Social Security, Bill Hayden,
brought in new legislation to cover the provisions
deleted by the Senate. The point is that the Senate's
action last December was directly counter to the
recommendations of both the Nimmo and the Senate's own
committee established in 1968. It was counter to an
undertaking given by Dr Forbes when he was Liberal
Minister for Health. Dr Forbes promised on 4 March 1970
that he would implement the Nimmo recommendations
relating to health fund reserves and the establishment
of a special stabilisation account. In other words
the Senate was ignoring the recommendations of its
own committee and the promises of a Liberal Minister
in obstructing our legislation.
The development of social welfare policy
invariably calls for compromise and flexibility. It
has never been our approach to strike dogmatic attitudes
or to ignore criticism. I believe Bill Hayden's
handling of the Medibank negotiations was a model of
firmness and fair play. To listen to our opponents
you would think we had forced through every detail of
our original scheme and done nothing to accommodate
reasonable suggestions from doctors or interested groups.
/ 6 
6
It is worth looking at some of the modifications
we have made in evolving the final shape of the
Medibank scheme. I don't regard these concessions as
any sort of weakness or backtracting since none of them
undermines the essential structure of our plan. Indeed
I acknowledge that many of the suggestions we have
incorporated will do much to widen and strengthen the
scheme. For example, we have decided to allow people
who want additional private health insurance to insure
with private funds; we have agreed to provide full
benefits for medical services in private hospitals; we
have agreed to increase by 30 per cent to $ 16 a day
the bed subsidy payable to patients in private hospitals;
we have agreed to defer our measures to ensure that
doctors adhere to schedule fees and drop premium
payments designed to encourage doctors to bill the
Health Insurance Commission directly. All this was
done in a process of open public debate, in a spirit
of, co-operation and frankness. Yet the AMA and the
Opposition ignore these reforms and modifications. They
mouth slogans about " freedom of choice" and " nationalised
medicine". For those who still give credence to these
rantings I repeat categorically: We cannot nationalise
medicine and we have not attempted to do so. And every
Australian under Labor's scheme will have complete
freedom to go to any doctor he chooses.
There is one class of patient who will gain
particular benefit from the Medibank scheme. I refer
to pensioners. Currently Pensioner Medical Service
patients are entitled to free treatment only for GP
consultations. In future, pensioner patients will have
access to all medical practitioner treatment specialist
as well as general practitioner, procedural and diagnostic
as well as consultations. Under Medibank, all treatment
will be free to pensioner patients whose doctors agree
to bill Medibank directly that is, if their doctors
accept the medical benefits payable for a particular
service and do not charge pensioners an amount on top
of the benefits. For the rest of the community, as you
know, treatment will also be free if doctors bill Medibank
direct. They will not be bound to do so, and will be
free, if they wish, to bill patients in the traditional
way. In this case the patient will have to meet only
per cent of the schedule fee up a maximum amount
of We are offering the States a much better deal
for hospitals than they have now. We are ready to enter
into agreements with the State Governments to share
equally the net costs of operating State public hospital
systems. This will mean, as it did in the late
and early ' 50s, public ward treatment free of means test
and free of charge. For those choosing private treatment
either in a public or private hospital, there will be an
$ 18 a day subsidy towards hospital bed charges. It is
frankly difficult to imagine why any State Government
would refuse such a generous cost-sharing arrangement
and penalise its citizens so severely. It is obvious / 7 
7
that hospital charges, which have already risen steeply,
will go higher if the present financing system continues.
We are building on existing and well-accepted
public hospital arrangements. The only innovation is
that honorary medical services ( those in public wards
for which no payment is made to the doctor) will be
eliminated. Doctors will be paid on a sessional or
other contract basis. After all doctors in Queensland
are already paid on this basis, and it is accepted by
the AMA in that State. It is moreover, an increasingly
common practice for many visiting specialists at public
hospitals in all States. So far only Tasmania and
Queensland have agreed to co-operate in our scheme. I
hope the other States will come to accept it for the
sake of their people. We owe it to ourselves and our
families to see that every State Government participates
in the new arrangements.
Medibank will mean substantial savings for
every Australian contributing to a health insurance
fund. I give examples of what contributors will save
in New South Wales. For medical insurance alone, $ 96.72
a year; for medical and public ward hospital insurance
$ 157.04 a year; for medical and intermediate ward
insurance $ 132.72; for medical and private ward insurance
$ 123.76. For all that, it would be a mistake to think
of Medibank merely in terms of money savings of extra
cash in the pocket. It represents a great commitment to
community well-being, a great experiment in social
responsibility, a milestone in the history of progressive
Labor legislation. When Medibank is in operation, when
people come to see and feel the practical benefits of
the scheme and the increased sense of social security
it fosters, there will no longer be any talk of pulling
it down. It will stand, like all great reformist measures,
as a permanent landmark in our legislative history. Its
success will owe much to the steadfast support it has
received inside and outside the Labor Party from social
welfare workers, from hospital workers, from enlightened
members of the medical profession, and not least from
the members of your association, whose annual conference
I now have pleasure in opening. 



ALS IV i 1wI
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 459
4 March 1975
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY INTERIM COUNCIL
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whit lam, announced today
that Mr. Fred Williams, of Melbourne, had accepted an
invitation to become a member of the Interim Council of
the Australian National Gallery.
Mr. Williams is well-known as an Australian
painter and graphic artist, and was a member of the former
Australian National Gallery acquisitions committee.
The Interim Council is responsible for all Gallery
affairs until the Gallery is established as a statutory
authority. It is expected that legislation to establish
the Gallery as a statutory authority will be introduced
during the current session of Parliament.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M, P.,
TO A DINNER GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY OF AUTHORS,
SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE, 4 MARCH 1975
I AM HONOURED THAT YOUR COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT
HAS ARRANGED THIS EVENING FOR ME. THE LAST TIME I SPOKE
AT THE OPERA HOUSE WAS IN THE ELECTION LAST MAY. I WAS
IN THE COMPANY OF PATRICK WHITE, So YOU WILL SEE THAT I
HAVE ALWAYS HAD SOME SUCCESS IN GETTING WRITERS ON SIDES
NOW THAT AUTHO'RS ARE RECEIVING PUBLIC FUNDS, NOW YOU ARE
ALL ON THE GOVERNMENT PAYROLL, I EXPECT AN EVEN BIGGER
TURNOUT AT OUR NEXT OPERA. HOUSE MEETING, WHENEVER THAT
MAY BE. IN THE MEANTIME IT IS A PLEASURE TO MEET SO MANY
OF YOU PERSONALLY, NAMES FAMILIAR FROM INNUMERABLE DUSTJACKETS
AND. TITLE PAGES, FROM COUNTLESS AIRPORT BOOKSTALLS AND
LIBRARY SHELVES, ARE NOW FLESHED OUT IN LIVING FORM.
IT IS GOOD TO BE AMONG YOU.
MY WIFE OF COURSE HAS A MUCH GREATER REPUTATION
AS A WRITER THAN I DO, NEVERTHELESS, I TAKE GREAT PRIDE
IN THE FACT THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN ABLE TO ESTABLISH
THE PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT IN FULFILMENT OF ITS UNDERTAKINGS
IN 1972, AUSTRALIA AND. NEW ZEALAND ARE THE ONLY TWO
ENGLISH-SPEAKING COUNTRIES WITH THE PLR. DENMARK, SWEDEN
AND NORWAY ARE THE ONLY OTHER NATIONS TO INTRODUCE IT.
WE DON'T NORMALLY TAKE OUR LITERARY AND ARTISTIC STANDARDS
FROM SCANDINAVIA EXPECT PERHAPS IN FILM MAKING BUT ON
THIS OCCASION WE ARE IN THE VANGUARD OF A VERY IMPORTANT
REFORM, 
-2-
FOR YEARS WE HEARD IT SAID THAT THE PLR WOULD BE
. TOO DIFFICULT TO ADMINISTER, THAT THE LEGAL AND TECHNICAL
PROBLEMS WOULD BE TOO GREA', IT WAS EVEN SUGGESTED THAT
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD NOT GIVE ASSISTANCE TO WRITERS FOR FEAR
OF COMPROMISING THEIR INDEPENDENCE. I THINK WE HAVE
SHOWN THAT THE ADMINISTRATIVE DIFFICULTIES OF PLR WERE NOT
INSUPERABLE AFTER ALL, AND I DOUBT IF ANY OF YOU WILL BE
EASILY SEDUCED BY THE SCALE OF PAYMENTS INVOLVED. WE
DON'T SEE THE PLR AS A PRIVILEGE OR A BENEFIT FOR AUTHORS.
WE SEE IT AS A R'IGHT. WE SEE'IT AS AN OVERDUE RECOGNITION
OF SERVICES YOU HAVE GIVEN THE COMMUNITY; A PAYMENT FOR
YOU WORK, MOST OF YOU WILL. ALREADY HAVE RECEIVED SOME
AMOUNTS UNDER THE SCHEME, LAST WEDNESDAY I AUTHORISED THE
FIRST PAYMENTS RECOMMENDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS
FUND FOR THE 1974-75 FINANCIAL YEAR, AMOUNTING TO $ 440,000
FOR AUTHORS AND PUBLISHERS,
OF COURSE THIS IS NOT A LARGE SUM AS GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURES GO, BUT IT STANDS FOR SOMETHINU IMPORTANT,
IT MEANS THAT AUSTRALIA AS A NATION RECOGNISES THE VALUE OF
CREATIVE WRITING, THE PLACE OF LITERATURE AND THE ARTS' IN
A ROBUST AND CIVILIZED SOCIETY. GOVERNMENTS CANNOT CREATE
GOOD WRITING OR GREAT ART BUT THEY CAN CREATE THE CONDITIONS
IN WHICH ART AND LITERATURE ARE MOST LIKELY TO FLOURISH.
THEY CAN REMOVE UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP,-THE FINANCIAL ANXIETIES
THAT INHIBIT MANY ARTISTS ANI) WRTT[ R EVEN WELL-ESTABLISHED
AND SUCCESSFUL ONES. 
-3-
WRITING IS NOT THE tlt-Pt LUC1tATIVE PROFESSION, AND THE PLR
WILL HARDLY MAKE IT SO; BUT AUTHORS NOW HAVE AN ADDITIONAL
AND A6SURED SOURCE OF INCOME FROM THEIR WORK, AND THAT INCOME
WILL FLOW TO THEIR DA8ENDANTS. I TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO INFORM YOU THAT. THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOW AGREED THAT PLR
PAYMENTS AFTER AN AUTHOR'S DEATH WILL. BE MADE TO THE HUSBAND
OR WIFE OF THE AUTHOR AND TO ALL THE'AUTHOR'S CHILDREN
NOT JUST DEPENDANTS, OUR OBLIGATION TO WRITERS DOES NOT END:-WITH THE
PLR. IT IS JUST OVER TWO YEARS SINCE I ANNOUNCED THE
FOUNDING MEMBERSHIP OF THELITERATURE BOAPD, SINCE THEN WE
HAVE DISBURSED ALMOST $ 2 MILLION FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF
AUSTRALIAN'WRITING AND PUBLISHING. OUR TOTAL BUDGET FOR
THE ARTS THIS FINANCIAL YEAR IS $ 20 MILLION. THIS AGAIN
IS A COMPARATIVELY MODEST SUM IN OVERALL GOVERNMENT
SPENDING, BUT THERE WILL ALWAYS BE CRITICS WHO SEE IT ' 4.
AS WASTEFUL, SOME PEOPLE REGARD ANY SPENDING ON THE.
ARTS AS WASTEFUL. I DON'T, I BELIEVE THE ARTS ARE A
PROPER, INDEED A PRIMARY, AREA OF GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
IT IS NOT SO MUCH THAT PRESENT EXPENDITURES ARE EXTRAVAGANT.
BUT THAT PREVIOUS EXPENDITURES WERE INADEQUATE AND UNPLANNED.
THE ARTS ARE A FIELD IN WHICH QUITE MODEST INVESTMENTS CAN
BRING HIGH RETURNS. IT COSTS THE COMMUNITY VERY LITTLE TO GIVE
A PROMISING AUTHOR AN INCOME FOR SIX MONTHS OR A YEAR,
THE BENEFITS FROM SUCH EXPENDITURE THE RETURNS TO SOCIETY,
AND ONE HOPES TO POSTERITY MAY WELL BE INESTIMABLE, 
THE EMPHASIS IN OUR SUPPORT FOR THE ARTS HAS BEEN
ON ENCOURAGING WORTHWHILE PROJECTS, ON DEVELOPING TALENTS,
ON M~ VING HELP WHERE HELP IS NEEDED OILING THE MACHINE.
TAKE PUBLISHING. IT IS PROBABLY TRUE THAT MOST BOOKS WORTH
PUBLISHING WILL BE PUBLISHED ANYWAY, BlUT WHAT THE LITERATURE
BOARD CAN DO IS MAKE PUBLICATION A LITTLE MORC PROMPT
AND EASY. A SUBSIDY CAN BRING DOWN THE PRICE OF A BOOK AND
MAKE IT AVAILABLE TO A WIDER AUDIENCE. OUR PRESENT
SUBSIDY SCHEME. GOES FURTHER . THAN THE PRACTICE OF THE OLD
COMMONWEALTH LITERARY FUND OF GUARANTEEING'A PUBLISHER
AGAINST LOSS. I THINK THE LITERATURE BOARD-HAS HAD SOME.
NOTABLE SUCCESSES IN HELPI NG THE PUBLICATION OF MORE AUSTRALIAN
WRITING. IN 1972-73 NO MORE THAN 18 NOVELS WERE PUBLISHED
BY THE LOCAL INDUSTRY. SUBSIDIES TO DATE HAVE HELPED THE
PUBL ICATION OF 21 NOVELS AND 23 VOLUMES OF POETRY AND
OTHERS, OF COURSE, HAVE BEEN PUBLISHED WITHOUT SUBSIDIES#
SO THERE HAS BEEN SOME PORGRESS'HERE. QUANTITY DOES NOT
ALWAYS MEAN QUALITY; BUT THERE ARE DEGREES OF QUALITY, AND
WORK OF THE-HIGHEST MERIT MAY SOMETIMES RESULT FROM
ENCOURAGEMENT GIVEN TO EFFORT OF A LESSER OR MOST MODEST KIND.'
11 a, 
WHAT WE ARE TRYING TO DO IS ENCOURAGE A WHOLE NEW
CLIMATE IN THE ARTS, A NEW PERCEPTION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF
THE ARTS IN THE LIVES OF AUSTRALIANS, AS WELL AS GREATER
ACTIVITY AND GREATER VITALITY. WE WANT THE ARTS TO
PERMEATE SOCIETY AT ALL LEVELS, TO BE AVAILABLE TO EVERYONE
WHO WANTS THEM AND) DARE ONE SAY IT TO SOME . PEOPLE WHO
DON IT: FUNDAMENTALLY, OUR ASSISTANC'E TO THE ARTS IS NOT
INTENDED TO BENEFIT ARTISTS THEMSELVES, THOUGH INEVITABLY
IT DOES, AND ONE WOULD NOT WISH IT OTHERWISE: IT IS
INTENDED AS A SOCIAL MEASURE, PART OF A COMMITMENT TO THE
QUALITY OF. PEOPLE IS LIVES. NOT THE LEAST OF-THE SOCIAL
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEPRIVATIONS AT THE HEART OF OUR
CONTEMPORARY URBAN MALAISE IS THE INADEQUACY OF ARTISTIC AND
CULTURAL STIMULATION; A LACK OF ACCESS TO THE ENRICHMENTAND
STIMULATION THAT THE ARTS ALONE CAN BRING. W~ E DON'T WANT
TO BE POMPOUS OR PATRONISING ABOUT SUCH THINGS. IT IS NOT
FOR GOVERNMENTS TO TELL PEOPLE WHAT THEY SHOULD LIKE. IT
IS, HOWEVER, A RESPONSIBILITY OF GOVERNMENTS TO MAKE THE
BENEFITS AND REWARD S OF OUR CIVILIZATION AND INDEED OTHER
CIVILIZATIONS AS WIDELY AVAILABLE AS POSSIBLE. CERTAINLY
IREGARD THAT AS A DUTY OF SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS
SUCH AS MINE.-OPPORTUNITIES FOR CULTURAL AND ARTISTIC
ENJOYMENT SHOULD BE-PROVIDED , READILY, AND AS EQUALLY, AS
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION OR HEALTH. IT MAY EVEN BE
ARGUED THAT THE ENJOYMENT OF THE ARTS IS AN ESSENTIAL PART
OF EDUCATION AND HEALTH. 9 e/ 6 
-6-
I HOPE THE ASSISTANCE WE ARE GIVING TO AUTHORS
WILL ENCOURAGE A STRONGER INDIGENOUS LITERARY COMMUNITY.
IN-PARTICULAR, I HOPE IT WIL. L ENCOURAGE AUSTRALIAN
WRITERS ABROAD TO RETURN TO AUSTRALIA. I DON'T BLAME
AUTHORS FOR WANTING TO WORK ABROAD; FAR BE IT FROM ME
TO DISPARAGE THE IMPORTANCE OF OVERSEAS TRAVEL. FOR THOSE
LIKE COLIN SIMPSON, WHO WRITE TRAVEL BOOKS, I SUPPOSE
SME TRAVEL. IS ESSENTIAL. NOW THAT WE HAVE THE PLR I MAY
BE ENCOURAGED. TO KEEP A DIARY OF MY OWN, As OSCAR WILDE
SAID I LIKE SOMETHING SENSATIONAL TO READ ON THE TRAIN.
OUR MISFORTUNE WAS THAT TOO MANY WRITERS WHO TRAVELLED
ABROAD PREFERRED NOT TO LIVE IN AUSTRALIA. THERE WAS A
CLASS OF EXPATRIATE AUSTRALIAN WHOSE CRITICAL FACULTIES,
WHOSE POWERS OF SOCIAL OBSERVATION, WERE SORELY NEEDED AT
HOME. WE WERE THE POORER FOR LOSING THEM. I KNOW THAT IN
MANY WAYS AUSTRLAIA CANNOT PROVIDE ALL THE STIMULATION A
WRITER NEEDS; ALL THE EXPERIENCE OR ALL THE PECUNIARY
REWARDS. NEVERTHELESS, I SEE OUR ASSISTANCE TO WRITERS,
IN PARTICULAR THE PLR, AS SYMBOLS OF A DEVELOPING
CULTURAL MATURITY. I HOPE THEY WILL BE A: PRACTICALN CINCENTIVE
To AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS TO LIVE AND WORK-IN THEIR OWN COUNTRY. 17 
-7-
WE HAVE IN AUSTRALIA A RICH AND REMARKABLY DIVERSE
' LITERARY HERITAGE. THE LABOR PARTY OWES MUCH TO IT.
CONSIDERING OUR COMPARATIVELY SMALL POPULATION, OUR
CONTRIBUTION TO WESTERN LITERATURE HAS BEEN EXTRAORDINARY.
THE STIMULUS WE ARE GIVING TO THE OTHER ARTS, TO THE THEATRE.-
AND TO THE FILM AND TELEVISION INDUSTRIES, WILLCREATE
WIDER OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIAN WRITERS. THESE
OPPORTUNITIES MUST NOT BE ALLOWED TO COMPROMISE ARTISTIC
STANDARDS. SADLYo OUR REPUTATION ABROAD IS NOT ONE OF
HIGH CULTURAL ATTAINMENT11. IDEPLORE THE INFLUENCES IN THE
MEDIA, IN ENTERTAINMENT THAT PERPETUATE A DEBASED AND
DISTORTED VIEW OF OUR SOCIETY. ONE OF THE OBJECTIVES OF THE
COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS UNDER THIS GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN THE
PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE IN ALL FIELDS OF ART; IT IS FOR
WRITER S AND PUBLISHERS TO PRESERVE THESE STANDARDS IN OUR
WRITING. BE WARY OF THE PRETENTIOUS; DON'IT BE SATISFIED
WITH THE SLIPSHOD OR THE SECOND-RATE, WITH SECOND-HAND OR
DERIVATIVE IDEAS. IF AUSTRALIAN WRI'TING IS TO HAVE ADISTINCTIVE
PLACE IN WORLD LITERATURE IT WILL'BE BASED
ON AN AUTHENTIC AND ORIGINAL STYLE. OUR BEST WRITING HAS
ALWAYS REFLECTED OR EMBODIED SOME PECULIAR. TRUTH ABOUT
OURSELVES, WHETHER EXPOSING SOCIAL INJUSTICE OR REVEALING
QUALITIES IN THE AUSTRALIAN CHARACTER. THIS HAS NOTHING
TO DO WITH CRUDE NATIONALISM. GREAT-WRITING IN EVERY SOCIETY,
ESPECIALLY GREAT FICTION, WHILE DEALING IN UNIVERSAL HUMAN
VALUESo HAS CHOSEN DISTINCTIVE NATIONAL AND REGIONAL
IDIOMS. IT IS THROUGH SUCH NATIONAL IDIOMS THAT THE BEST
WRITING HAS ACHIEVED ITS TIMELESS QUALITY AND BROUGHT US
CLOSER TO A DEEPER KNOWLEDGE OF OURSELVES AND OF HUMANITY. 
I HOPE I WILL BE FORGIVEN THIS SOMEWHAT PORTENTOUS
NOTE. THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE ARTS IS BY NO MEANS THE
LEAST TROUBLESOME OF MY RESPONSIBILITIES; IT IS, HOWEVER,
AMONG THE MOST SATISFYING. I LIKE TO THINK THAT WE ARE
CREATING PRECEDENTS AND ESTABLISHING ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURES AND INSTITUTIONS THAT WILL-PERMANENTLY ENHANCE
THE QUALITY OF ARTISTIC LIFE IN THIS COUNTRY. DO NOT
IMAGINE THAT THE THINGS WE ARE DOING OUR BOARDS AND
COUNCILS, OUR SPECIAL GRANTS AND SUBSIDIES ARE INVULNERABLE
TO ATTACK. THEY ARE NOT. THEY MUST BE GUARDED'AND PRESERVED,
THE CURRENT LEGAL CHALLENGE BY CERTAIN STATES TO THE
VALIDITY OF THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME AND
THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN HAS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
FUTURE OF MANY KINDS OF ESTABLISHED GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS
INVOLVING COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO INDIVIDUALS AND GROUPS.
IF THIS CHALLENGE SUCCEEDS THE PLR WOULD BE AT RISK, YOUR
SOCIETY, I NOTICE, IN AN EDITORIAL IN " THE AUSTRALIAN .4
AUTHOR", HAS EXPRESSED CONCERN ABOUT THE SECURITY OF THE
PLR AND URGED THAT IT SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED BY AN ACT OF
PARLIAMENT. ACTS OF PARLIAMENT, OF COURSE, CAN ALWAYS BE
REPEALED; THOUGH I ACKNOWLEDGE THE FORCE OF YOUR ARGUMENT.
I ASSURE YOU IT WILL HAVE THE GOVERNMENT'S FULL CONSIDERATION. S 
-9-
Two YEARS AGO, WHEN I ANNOUNCED OUR INTENTION TO
ESTABLISH THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS AS AN
INDEPENDENT AGENCY, I SAID THIS ABOUT OUR GENERAL POLICY
FOR THE ARTS: " THE POLICIES WHICH my GovERNMENT'WILL PURSUE
WILL HAVE A TWO-FOLD OBJECTIVE THE PURSUIT OF
EXCELLENCE AND THE SPREAD OF INTEREST AND
PARTICIPATION, WE WILL SUPPORT THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS AND PROGRAMS WHICH PRODUCE, SUSTAIN
AND DISPLAY THE TOP LEVEL OF PROFESSIONAL
ACHIEVEMEN4T IN THE'ARTS THE . MAJOR THEATRE
COMPANIES AND ORCHESTRAS, THE NATIONAL GALLERY
AND COLLECTION, AND SMALLER GROUPS AND PARTICULAR
PROJECTS OF HIGH QUALITY. BUT OUR SUPPORT FOR
ESTABLISHED ORGANISATIONS AND ART FORMS WILL
BE BALANCED BY A STRONG PROGRAM OF ENCOURAGEME4T
FOR EXPERIMENT AND DEVELOPMENT, AND FOR NUMEROUS
SMALLER GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS, WHOSE ACTIVITIES
BRING ENJOYMENT TO MANY PEOPLE...
"' VITALITY IN THE ARTS IS FREQUENTLY ACCOMPANIED
BT INNOVATION, BY CONTROVERSY AND BY CHALLENGE
TO ESTABLISHED CONVENTIONS OF TASTE, BELIEFS AND
BEHAVIOUR. ARTISTS NEED PROTECTION FROM
UNNECESSARY RESTRAINTS, AND GOVERNMENTS
BE ABLF TO RESIST PRESSURE FROM THOSE WHO ARE
DISTURBED BY CONTROVERSY AND CHALLENGE." .1/ 10 
THESE REMAIN OUR OBJECTIVES, THE PLR AND OUR OTHER
PROGRAMS FOR AUTHORS ARE CONSISTENT WITH THESE AIMS. I
COMMEND THE WORK OF YOUR SOCIETY IN HELPING US DEVELOP AND
IMPLEMENT OUR PROGRAMS, WE DON'T LOOK TO WRITERS JUST
FOR ENTERTAINMENT OR ESCAPE, THOUGH GOOD ENTERTAINMENT IS
A HIGH AND NECESSARY CRAFT. WE LOOK-TO YOU ALSO FOR
THAT SPIRIT OF INNOVATION, CONTROVERSY, OF CHALLENGE,
THAT IS THE BASIS OF ALL CHANGE AND ALL TRUE PROGRESS.
AUSTRALIA WILL ALWAYS NEED MORE WRITERS. WE WILL ALWAYS
NEED BCTTER WRITERS, AND BETTER WRITERS WHO ARE BETTER OFF.
I KNOW THE GOVERNMENT CAN COUNT ON YOUR SUPPORT, JUST AS
YOU THE WRITERS AND AUTHORS OF AUSTRALIA CAN COUNT
ON OURS, 



. AUSIKALIA~
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 460
March 1975
PASSPORTS
Administration of the Passports Act is to become the
responsibility of the Minister for Foreign Affairs. This
follows a decision in October 1974 that the issue of
travel documents to Australian citizens was appropriately a function
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who exercises
responsibility for Consular matters relating to Australian
citizens overseas. The reorganisation follows from a
continuing review of the functions of the former
Department of Immigration.
Staff previously engaged in issuing passports in the
Department of Labor and Immigration will be transferred
to the Department of Foreign Affairs.
As from 6 March applications for Australian passports
should be made to the office of the Department of Foreign
Affairs in the State in which the applicant lives. For
the convenience of the public, the Department of Labor
and Immigration offices in Darwin, Townsville# Newcastle
and Wollongong will continue to issue passports to local
applicants.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 461
7 MARCH 1975
JOINT STATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER AND TASMANIAN PREMIER
( Following their meeting in Canberra on Thursday night
6 March 1975)
The following joint statement was made by
the Australian Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
and the Premier of Tasmania, the Hon.
E. E. Reece, following a meeting in Parliament
House last night to discuss matters arising out of the
collapse of the Tasman Bridge in Hobart..
" The immediate problem arisir~ g from the
collapse of the Tasman Bridge is to restore as quickly
as possible means of communication between the
Eastern Shore and the main part of the city on the west
of the Derwent River, leaving questions of liability and
financial responsibility to be sorted out later.
This problem can be seen in two parts.
The first is to make temporary and shorterterm
arrangements to keep passenger and vehicular traffic
flowing between the two parts of the city. This task has
been tackled energetically by the State and Australian
Government agencies concerned. Further efforts in this
direction are receiving top priority and are being
intensified. The second and necessarily longer-term part of
the problem is to restore the original Bridge to a
satisfactory trafficable condition. This is a very big
task from an engineering point of view. It is, nevertheless,
the best way of restoring the position in the medium term.
The building of a second bridge of a permanent type at another
location will, in due course, make its contribution to
the increase of traffic between the two sides of the Derwent.
It must be appreciated, however, that the design and
building-of a second crossing will inevitably take longer
than will the repair of the existing Bridge. till, F 
We have, therefore, concentrated our
immediate attention at this meeting on how to organise
the clearing of the river-bed in the near vicinity of
the Bridge, with the object of enabling the engineers to
decide finally how best to repair the existing structure
and support the new spans to bridge the present gap and
then to get the reconstruction job going.
To overcome the problems of divided control
and divided responsibility we have agreed to support
the establishment of a Special Joint Commission to
superintend and direct the combined salvage and rebuilding
operation. This will be done through an inter-governmental
Agreement, the mnain points of which we have already
accepted, and this Agreement will, in due course, be
submitted to the Australian and State Parliaments
for their approval. In the meantime we will proceed at once with
the nomination of the Commissioners, and will ask them
to act as an Interim Commission pending the creation
of the substantive body. They will commence their work
immediately upon appointment and will be given wide
powers of decision. The Chief Commissioner will be jointly appointed
by and be responsible to the Prime Minister and Premier.
One Associate Commissioner will be appointed by the
Australian Prime Minister and another by the Premier of
Tasmania. Each of the Commissioners will be highly
qualified in engineering and experienced in large-scale
construction projects. The Commission will have as its
Chief Executive Officer the Tasmanian Director of Public
Works and the Commission will be able to borrow or
recruit appropriate skilled staff as required.
We are happy to be able to announce that Sir
Allan Walton Knight, the Present Chairman of the
Tasmanian Hydro-Electric Commission, has accepted our
invitation to act as Chief Commissioner. Sir Allan is
Widely known throughout Tasmania, and indeed in engineering
circles throughout the world, as a great engineer and
administrator. The names of the two Assistant Commissioners
will shortly be announced, as will the details of the
proposed Agreement between the Australian and Tasmanian
Governments 
We express our great admiration for the
work already done in trying to cope with this very difficult
situation by the numerous Commonwealth and State departments
and agencies concerned. Naturally a lot of this work is not
fully seen nor readily appreciated by those adversely
affected by the accident. Nevertheless, the efforts made
have been quite outstanding. Great credit is due to
all who have helped in the initial reaction to the disaster.
We emphasise that the salvage and engineering
problems involved in restoring the Bridge are most
severe. The sulken ship lies in very deep water, and the
river-bed is overlain by a thick layer of mud which no
diver can penetrate. Visability is extremely limited and
strong currents make the work difficult and hazardous.
Much of the visible debris and parts of the ship have to
be removed, and the area probed to locate any invisible
obstructions to new supporting structures, before the
final reconstruction plan can be determined and new supports
built. In the meantime, and with all possible speed,
preparatory work will go on while the underwater site
is being cleared." The Prime Minister and the Premier expressed
their appreciation of the efforts of Sir Roland Wilson,
who had assessed the situation on behalf of the
Prime Minister, conceived the notion of a Bridge Commission
and prepared the comprehensive agreement which was
signed today. Sir Roland, they said, would continue to
act as special adviser to the Prime Minister in respect
of the Tasman Bridge and would consider and advise on
all of the consequences of the bridge disaster. 



i, M 10 7 M. rch 1975
AUSTRALIAN GIFT TO TESCO FMtID
The Prime Minister and Acting inister of Foreign Affairs,
Mr E. G. Whitlam, today announced that Australia would contribute
$ A50,000 to the UNESCO Trust Fund for the Restoration and Preservation
of Moenjodaro. The remains of the city of Moenjodaro, dating back scme
5000 years, form one of the most important archaeological sites of
Pakistan and in the world.
The site is now threatened with destruction by
in the nearby Indus River and by atmospheric wethoring.
of its importance, Pakistan and UNESCO are collaborating
preservation and restoration of the remains. movements In view
in the
An international appeal has been launched and the Australian
Government will contribute $ 50,000 to the fund.
The contribution is evidence of Australia's desire to take
part in efforts to conserve and protect the world's cultural heritage. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 462
7 March 1975
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
The Prime Minister will give the opening address at
an International Women's Day reception to be held in Melbourne
tomorrow night.
The function will begin at 7.30 p. m. in the Melbourne
Custom House Ballrocm.
It is in honour of Victorian women pioneers in many
fields of endeavour formerly the province of men.
They include Dr J. Daws, first woman President-elect
of the Ms N. Preston, first woman bus conductor;
Rev. C. Ling,. first woman ordained in Methodist Church and Rev.
M. Thalheiver, first woman ordained in Presbyterian Church;
Ms A. Polis, first woman editor of a suburban newspaper;
Ms K. Polgrase, first woman apprentice motor-mechanic and Ms
K. Perrin, first woman Governor of Fairlea Women's Prison.
A full list of notable Victorian women " firsts" is
available from the P. M.' s Press Office.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. J)&gt; AU ST L A.&amp; 
NAES OF FIRSTS
DAY CELEBRATION TO
I
DR. LORNA SISLEY:
( 24-6860)
Dr. J. Dgws
Miss M. Maxwell
Ms. A. Polis
( 419-3037)
Ms. N. Findley
( 58-4659) ( h) MEDI CAL
1st woman to be admitted as a Fello7of the Rojal Australasion
College of Surgeons as a general Surgeon in Victoria.
1st. and only wvoman to be awarded Craig Travelling Scholarship
of Royal Australian College of Surgeons. Only woman member
of Urological Society of Australasia. Now Senior Surgeon of
Queen Victoria Hospital.
1st. woman President-elect Aust. Medical Association
PRESbS ( cannot attend-sending message
1st ' Women's Section Editor Melbourne Herald ( 98 years old -crippled)
Ist. Women Editor Suburban Newspaper ( Melbourne Times)
EDUCATION
1st woman Fullbright Scholarship award in Victoria most likely
Australia, Now Principal Emily McPherson School of Domestic
Economy.
Dr. E. MESSER First Ph. d. Now employed Dept of Labour Librarian.
( 63-0361) 96-5624 ( h)
Ms. K. Grant-Stevenson lsot~. Pincipal Co-od :; condcry School (-o-ing~ rteed High School.)
( 328-1796)
Ms. T. Prior
Ms. Y. Smith
Ms. D. Sonenberg
-r ( 38-5056) ( h)
Ms. M. Tipping
( 24.7133) ( h)
Ms. A. New/ ton
Ms. N. Preston
( 29-6485)
Ms. A. Morton
Ms. N. Ouens
Ms. M. Henderson
Ms. M. Pegan
( 42-4368) ( h) INDUSTRIAL
Shop Steward I. C. I. for 26 years.
1st Claims Officer Butchers Union only one known in Vio.
1st woman Secretary Insurance Staff Association, only one knomw
Vic.
Isyfersonell Officer Cyclone Factory 1950' s
Ist./ v0ce-nPres, then Pres. Royal Historical Society ( Vio.)
1st. Woman Conductor Trams ( prefer no interviews)
1st. \ oman Conductor ( Buses)
1st, woman bus cleaner Fitzroy Depot
Ist, woman timber worker still employed Bruthen Vi.,
1st woman Concrete Technologist
1st woman Overhead Electrical Crane Driver
Ms. G. ', 1fitelaw
( 57-4472)
Ms. K. Polgrase APP R E N T I C ES
1st woman apprentice-gardener Melb. City Council
1st woman apprentice motor mechanic John Oulc' Motors
1st woman apprentice State Electricity Commission ( Morwell)
C HU R C H
CHURCH
SRev. C. Ling st woman to be ordained in Methodist Church ( Buckley Sto Methodist Ch.
Rev. M. Thalheirer 1st woman to be ordained in Presbyterian Church ( The Manse Romsey)
Ms. Ms. G. Brobner
Ms. ( 874-5584) GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT ( Police)
1st woman to be appointed to C. I. B.
errin ist. omar. Governor ' Fairlea Women's Prison. Foni.; rly Matron
V~ inff^^-
in numerous fields for PRESS RELEASE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S
BE HELD CUSTOM HOUSE BALLROOM-MARCH 8th, at 7.30 pn.
F
Us. K. P 
-2-
NAMES OF 1OMEN FLRSTS PRESS RELEASE TTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY CELEBRATION
CUSTOM HOUSE BALLROOM MARCH 8th 7.30 pm,
Mu. F.,-Eduwards
Ms. C. Ball
( 836-6578)
Ms. I. Lics
Ms. P. Perry
( 36-1565)
Ms. I. Plo\ man
Ms. D. M. Brady
( 93-1631)
Ms. E. M. Tracy
( 29-4926)
Sister Burcholl
( 878-8746)
Ms. Z. D'aprano
( 387-2318)
Ms. M. Doring
( 86-5462)
Cr. N. Barbour
( 90-2000)
Ms. J. Bates
( 81-4612) MI SC ELLANE US
Groat Granduughtor of Miru. E. Davis the first Registrar of Births,
Marriages Deaths in Melbourne offico was in kew. Mrs. Davis
was also in Royal Socioty of St. Georgo.
lot woman to be granted a liquor licence for a grocery business
( although married)
1st wom, n to open a Gent's Hairdressing salon Melb. ( 18 yrs, ago)
1st woman to open a Theatrical Agency still in business,
Woman Cyclist rode Sydney to Melbourne 1938 beat the then
best male cyclist Hubert Opperman on the Razor Back stretch.
1st woman Commercial Traveller employod by large firm.
1st woman in Melbourne to be employed selling radio sets
1932. 1st woman Australian Inland Mission wrote book ' Imamincka' is
now in its 5th edition and translated into Braille-all proceeds
from book goes to ' Homes for the Aged Darwin'.
1st woman in Melbourne to chain hebself tothe ralings at the
Arbitration in protost re their Judgement in equal pay case
Later chained herself to Commonwealth Building in same cause.
1st women Building Student R. M. I. T. Working at present on a
Building site full time necessary to work 2 years on site to
receive Diploma.
24 years as a Councillor
1st woman ' Hansard Writer for Victorian Parliament still
employed. Organisations to be represented
Women's Christian Temperance Union
Housewives Association
League of Women Voters
Girl Guides Association
Women's International League for Peace
Women's Health Collective
Abortion Contraceptive Advisory Centre
Council for Aboriginal Rights
Victorian Council for Aboriginal Island
Victorian Aboriginal Advancement League
Women's Electoral Lobby
National Council of Women
South Melbourne Community Chest
Rape Crisis Centre
Half-way House for Women
Union of Australian Women
Country Women's Association
Women's Centre ( Melbourne)
Unitarian Church C'ttee.
Colinail for Single Mother Child ( as guests)
Unions
Tramway's Union, Butcher's Union
Aust. Metal Workers Union
Postal Workers Union
Freedom Furnishing Trades Union
Liquor Trades Union
Plumber's Union
I Women Clothing Trades Union
Gippsland Trades Labour Council
Australian Railways Union
Miscellaneous Workers Union 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, 2
THE HON, E. C. WHITLA1l, 0l. C,, M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF AUSTRALIA
FESTI\' AL OF CREATIVE ARTS AND SCIENCES,
LAKESIDE INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, CANBERRA,
7 MARCH 1975 4
OCCASIONS SUCH AS THIS ARE AMONG THE REWARDS, IF NOT THE
LUXURIES, OF POLITICAL LIFE, WHERE ELSE BUT IN POLITICS
W'OULD ONE FIND MORE CONGENIAL SURROUNDINGS, MORE REFINED
COMPANY, A GATHERING OF SUCH DIVERSE TALENTS AND RARE
MI1NDS, AN ATMOSPHERE OF SUCH LIVELY DEDICATION TO ALL THAT
IS BEST AND MOST CULTIVATED IN OUR SOCIETY? THIS IS A
UNIQUE FESTIVAL BRINGING TOGETHER THE ARTS AND THE
SCIENCES AND BRINGING THEM BOTH TO A WIDE AUDIENCE. '~ E
HAVE HAD ARTS FESTIVALS BEFORE, WE HAV/ E HAD SCIENTIFIC
EXHIBITIONS BEFORE; BUT I CANNOT REMEMBJER AN OCCASION
WHEN THE TWO WERE COMBINED SO SUCCESSFULLY, SO LOGICALLY
AS THEY HAVE BEEN IN THE PLANNING FOR AUSTRALIA 75. IT
IS A TRIBUTE TO THE ORGANISERS; AN HISTORIC EVENT IN TH~ E
DEVELOPMENT OF OUR NATIONAL CAPITAL; A DEMONSTPATION OF
THE HIGHEST ATTAINMENTS OF A NATION'IS CULTURE AND THE
HIGHEST VALUES OF OUR CIVILIZATION, i @/ 2 
-2-
NOT LONG AGO A FRIEND SENT flE A COPY OF THE LATE
DR. JOHN BRONOWSKI ' S BOOK THE ASCENT OF MIAN. SOME OF
YOU WILL REMEMBER THE RECENT TELEVISION SERIES EASED UPON
IT; I'M NOT SURE IF THE BOOK WAS BASED ON THE FILM OR THE
FILM ON THE BOOK FILMS AND BOOKS ARE PLEASURES ALL TO
RARE FOR ME. NEVERTHELESS, I CAME ACROSS THJS
STATEMENT: " MAN IS UNIQUE, NOT IECAUSE HE DOES SCIENCE,
AND HE IS UNIQUE NOT BECAUSE HE DOES ART, BUT BECAUSE
SCIENCE AND ART ARE EQUALLY THE EXPRESSIONS OF HIS
MARVELLOUS PLASTICITY OF MIND." i THAT SEEMED A FITTING
TEXT FOR THIS FESTIVAL. PERHAPS I MIGHT EXTEND IT BY
SAYING THAT MAN IS UNIQUE IN PERCEIVING THE CONNECTION
BETWEEN ART AND SCIENCE, IN RECOGNISING THEIR INDEPENDENCE,
THEIR EQUAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE GOOD LIFE.
THAT IS WHAT YOUR FESTIVAL IS HELPING~ TO DO.
THE BEST ART AND THE PURIEST SCIENCE REFLECT THE SAME
ATTITUDES OF MIND CREATIVITY, IMAGINATION, A DISINTERESTEDLOVE
OF BEAUTY AND TRUTH, BERTRAND PUSSELL OBSERVED
THAT PURE MATHEMATICS, PROPERLY VIEWED, POSSESSED THE
SAME AUSTERE BEAUTY OF THE BEST MUSIC, WITHOUT ITS
GORGEOUS TRAPPINGS. UNDOUBTEDLY THERE HAVE BEEN RARE
INDIVIDUALS V! ITH BOTH SCIENTIFIC AND ARTISTIC GIFTS.
ONE THINKS OF LEONARDO, OF DARWIN, OF EINSTEIN AND AGAIN
OF RUSSELL. C. P. SNOW WAS THE FIRST POPULAR WRITER IN OUR
OWN" GENERATION TO SEEK A BRIDGE BETWEEN THE HUMANE AND
SCIENTIFIC DISCIPLINES. 
CERTAINLY IT IS TIME WE ABANDONED THE IDEA THAT SCIENCE
AND THE ARTS ARE HOSTILE,. OR EVEN NECESSARILY DISTINCT, A
GREAT DEAL OF MODERN ART HAS A TECHNOLOGICAL EASE. THE
CINEMA IS A PRODUCT OF CHEMISTRY AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING;
TELEVISION SPRINGS FROM ADVANCED ELECTRONICS; THE THEATRICAL
ARTS DEPEND MIORE AND MORE ON THEIR SOPHISTICATED TECHNOLOGY
OF STAGECRAFT AND PRODUCTION; LITERATURE RELIES ON MO11DERN
TECHNIQUES OF PRINTING.
W-HAT I HOPE THIS FESTIVAL WILL DO IS CONVINCE US THA
A SOCIETY WITHOUT A RESPECT FOR ART IS AS BARREN AND
DANGEROUS AS A SOCIETY WITHOUT A RESPECT FOR SCIENCE. THE
PRE-SCIENTIFIC AGE IN EUROPE WAS NO LESS BARBAROUS FOR ITS
ARTISTIC GLORIES. a NTO UNTIL THE DAWNING OF THE AFE OF SCIENCE,
WITH THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND SCIENTIFIC
DISCIPLINE, WAS MAN READY TO TEMPER HIS DESTRUCTIVE URGES,
HIS MEDIEVAL FANATICISM, WITH REASON AND TOLERANCE. AND
THE CONVERSE IS EQUALLY TRUE, HAV'E SEEN EXAMPLES
OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETIES ',! ITH CRIPPLIW3RESTRAINTS
ON THE ARTIST IS FREEDOM. I HAVE BEEN CRITICISED IN' RECENT
MONTHS FOR MY FONDNESS FOR ANCIENT G-REECE, THE Uf-. IQUE GLORY
OF GREEK CIVILIZATION W. AS ITS EQUP! L RESPECT FOR SCIENCE AND
THE ARTS; THE TWO WERE HELD IN A PERPETUAL BALANCE, THE GREEK
CONTRIBUTION TO PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS WAS AS ENDURING AS
TIS CONTRIBUTION TO POETRY AND DRAMA, AND THAT WAS 140 MERE
CO-INCIDENCE: THERE WAS UNDOUBTEDLY A QUALITY IN THE
INTELLECTUAL SPIRIT AND TEMPER OF ' THENS THAT INSPIRED BOTH ART
AND SCIENCE WITH A COMMON PURPOSE,
04JE OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF OUR TIME IS THE
DEPENDENCE OF ART AND SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOUR ON GOVERNMENT
SUPPORT ON PUBLIC FUNDS. 
-LI~
I SEE NOTHING WRONG WITH THAT; IT IS PROBABLY INEVITABLE, EVEN
DESIRABLE, PROVIDED ARTISTS AND SCIENTISTS MAINTAIN THEIR
INDEPENDENCE OF GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY, OUR CURRENT BUDGET
FOR THE ARTS is $ 20 MILLION A YEAR, OUR OUTLAYS FOR SCIENCE
COVER AN ENORMOUS RANGE OF DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.
EXPENDITURE ON THE C. S. I. R. OI AND THE ATOMIC ENERGY
COMMISSION ALONE AMOUNTS TO SOME $ 110 MILLION IN A FULL YEAR.
IN ADDITION, MUCH OF OUR EXPENDITURE-ON TERTIARY EDUCATION IS
DIRECTED TO ISCIENTIFIC AND ARTISTIC OR CULTURAL PROJECTS.
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN GOVERNMENTS WERE MORE
INVOLVED IN SCIENCE AND THE ARTS. ( THE GREEKS, INCIDENTALLY,
WERE EXPERTS IN ALL THREE.) THERE HAc, NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN
SCIENCE AND THE ARTS ACTIVITIES SO PERVASIVE, SO POPULAR, SO
FUNDAMENTAL TO OUR WAY OF LIFE WERE LESS ABLE TO SUPPORT
THEMSELVES. THE FACT IS THAT IN THEIR PUREST FORM THEY HAVE NOTHING
TO DO WITH PROFIT-MAKING, THOUGH BOTH CAN BE APPLIED FOR
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES. AND I MUSTSAY I PREFER THAT OUJR
INVESTMENT IN THESE FIELDS SHOULD BE A COMMUNITY INVESTMENT,
THAT THESE BASIC AREAS OF RESEARCH AND CREATIVITY SHOULD BE
PROTECTED FROM ANY SUSPICION OF PRIVATE GAIN OR OFFICIAL
PATRONAGE. ONLY GOVERNMENTS CAN PROVIDE THE FUNDS FOR AN OPERA
HOUSE: ONLY GOVERNMENTS CAN PROVIDE THE FUNDS FOR A NUCLEAR
REACTOR, A THEATRE, A TELESCOPE OR AN ORCHESTRA. MODERN
ENLIGHTENED GOVERNMENTS ACCEPT THESE THINGS AS BEING JUST AS
MUCH PART OF THEIR RESPONSIBILITY AS EDUCATION OR HEALTH. m 
IN OUR POLICIES FOR THE ARTS IN PARTICULAR
WE HAVE SOUGHT TO ENSURE THAT PUBLIC FUNDS ARE DISBURSED
THROUGH INDEPENDENT AGENCIES. WE HAVE LEGISLATION
CURRENTLY BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT TO ESTABLISH THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS AS AN INDEPENDENT
STATUTORY AUTHORITY. IT IS ALREADY ADMINISTERING ITS
POLICIES THROUGH AUTONOMOUS BOARDS WITH COMPLETE
INDEPENDENCE OF* GOVERNMENT OR MINISTERIAL INFLUENCE.
ONLY TWO NIGHTS AGO I INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO
ESTABLISH IN CANBERRA THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY.
IT WILL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A NATIONAL COLLECTION OF
WORKS OF ART AND PROVIDE AN ART FOCUS FOR THE WHOLE
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY. THE GALLERY WILL BE A STATUTORY
AUTHORITY. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY AND THE. A. B. C. OPERATE
WITH SIMILAR INDEPENDENCE. THESE ARE SOUND PRINCIPLES
AND No GOVERNMENT WOULD WANT TO CHANGE THEM.
THE ARTS BY THEIR NATURE ARE A PUBLIC t ACTIVITY,.
THEY ARE MEANT TO BE SEEN AND HEARD. SCIENCE IS
MORE RETIRING, MORE CLOISTERED MORE ESOTERIC. ONE.
OF THE GREAT THINGS ABOUT YOUR FESTIVAL IS THAT
THOUSANDS OF AUSTRALIANS WILL COME TO '-EE MORE OF
AUSTRALIA'S CONTRIBUTION TO SCIENTIFIC ACHIEVEMENT AND
INQUIRY. WE HAVE A GREAT RECORD, BUT FAR TOO LITTLE
IS KNOWN. CAN RECALL THREE OCCASIONS AS PRIME MINISTER
WHEN I HAVE HAD THE HONOUR OF OPENING, OR BEING PRESENT
AT THE OPENING, OF NEW SCIENTIFIC FACILITIES AND ALL
OF THEM'WERE SYMBOLIC OF AUSTRALIA'S RENOWNED AND
IMPORTANT WORK IN THEIR FIELDS. 
-6-
THERE WAS A NUCLEAR FACILITY AT THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL
UNIVERSITY; OUR WORK IN HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS IS OF GREAT
IMPORTANCE. THERE WAS THE NEW OPTICAL TELESCOPE AT
SIDING SPRINGS, AND THE DEEP SPACE TRACKING STATION AT
TIDBINBILLA. WE ARE AMONG THE LEADING NATIONS IN ASTRONOMY,
PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELD OF RADIO ASTRONOMY, AND WE ARE AN
IMPORTANT LINK IN WORLD-WIDE SPACE TRACKING NETWORKS$
THESE, PERHAPS, ARE THE MORE SPECTACULAR AND POPULAR ASPECTS
OF SCIENCE' I DO NOT FORGET THE QUIET, DEDICATED, VALUABLECONTRIBUTIONS
OF AUSTRALIAN SCIENTISTS To ANTARCTIC RESEARCH,
TO GEOLOGY, TO BIOLOGY, TO MEDICINE, TO PHYSICS. THIS
FESTIVAL WILL BRING MANY ASPECTS OF OUR SCIENTIFIC EFFORT TO
A WIDE AND INTERESTED AUDIENCE.
IT WOULD BE A PITY IS I MADE THIS OCCASION SEEM TOO0
ACADEMIC OR SOLEMN. IT IS, AFTER ALL, A EESI. ALESSENTIALLY
A TIME FOR ENJOYMENT, THERE ARE MANY
OPPORTUNITIES FOR SHEER FUN AND RECREATION, I AM GLAD IT IS
TO BE A BIENNIAL EVENT, AND I AM PARTICULARLY GLAD THAT THE
FIRST IS BEING HELD IN THE NATIONAL CAPITAL, SYMBOLISING THE
CREATIVITY AND ACHIEVEMENT OF THE WHOLE NATION. I AM NOT AN
ARTIST OR A SCIENTIST, BUT AT LEAST I CAN ENJOY AUSTRALIA
AS A CENTRALIST. I CONGRATULATE THE FESTIVAL BOARD FOR THEIR
DEDICATED PLANNING AND PREPARATION,-AUSTRALIA 75 WILL
ENHANCE OUR KNOWLEDGE OF SCIENCE AND OUR ENJOYMENT OF THE ARTS$
JUST AS IMPORTANT, IT WILL BRING THESE ETERMAL DISCIPLINES
TOGETHER, REVEALING THEIR COMMON PURPOSE IN THE GREAT WEB OF
BEAUTY, KNOWLEDGE AND CONTEMPLATION,
IHAVE THE GREATEST PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN AUSTRALIA
THE FESTIVAL OF CREATIVE ARTS AND SCIENCES, IN CANBERRA. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. r4HITLAM, M. P.
COMMITTEE FOR. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIA
MENZIES HOTEL, SYDNEY
FRIDAY, 7 MARCH, 1975
This is the second successive Friday Luncheon
I've spoken to representatives of the Sydney business
community. If there are any here who were also at the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce Luncheon I hope they will bear
with any repetitiousness on my pa . rt because I do think
that my theme itself bears some repetition.
I emphasised there my Government's long-term
commitment to the prosperity of tJ-le private sector.
I was at some pains to refute the-assertion that there is
anything phoney about this commitment that it represents
some sort of panic response to present difficulties. I
concede that there have been failures of communication in
the past and I concede that some prejudices and
pre-conceptions on both sides have raised needless
difficulties. I do detect, however, in the business
community generally a new willingness to co-operate, born
of a mutual recognition that we share so many of the
difficulties for so many of the same reasons. I think
on both sides there is a willingness to end futile
recriminations which of course, is not to say that we
should not have plenty of constructive criticism. If
I am right in this assessment that there is a healthier
spirit emerging then I assure business that the Government
is ready to go more than half way to foster it.
Last Friday I drew attention to the way in which
economic circumstances here and throughout the world
were now subject to rapid change never experienced in
our life-times. The business cycle which used to take
five to seven years for its completion now appears to
take about two years. This imposes unprecedented
pressures on both Government and business and requires
very great flexibility in policy planning for business
and Government alike. In this situation one has to be
extremely careful in making predictions based on the
latest set of economic indicators. We have seen too
many false dawns. Nonetheless, there are grounds for
some cautious optimism. When I announced the new
economic measures of 12 November 1974 and in subsequent
statements to the nation, I emphasised the figures,
particularly on unemployment and inflation, would not
be good for many months to come. This remains true. 
-2-
The situation at present, however, is that some of the
more serious aspects of decline in activity are now
behind us. Liquidity is freely available and the
demand for funds, particularly for housing, is high.
Imports are declining and the balance of payments
situation particularly on current account is
strengthening. We are seeking the first real signs that
unemployment and inflation may have peaked. With the
large personal tax cuts, including the housing interest
deductability scheme now being reflected in pay packets,
disposable incomes are rising strongly. By past
standards the Government has given a massive expansionary
boost to the economy in the measures taken since the
budget. These are, of course, not normal times and we
cannot be absolutely assured of normal reactions. The
response of the private sector is the key ingredient in
economic revival in 1975. You can be assured that the
Government will do all in its power. to stimulate that
revival, consistent with our overall goals of social
advance and economic management.
At the recent conference of the Australian Labor
Party we inserted in the platform a specific recognition
of the role of the private sector and a specific
commitment to the development of a healthy mixed economy.
I think it should be recognised, however, that the present
Australian Government itself has from its inception
tried to establish machinery and set in train measures
to give practical expression to the formal commitment
now contained in the Party's platform. In December 1972
we established the Department of Manufacturing Industry.
The first Minister was the present Treasurer and he set
about establishing a network of industrial panels to
provide channels for closer co-operation and consultation.
Against much opposition we have sought to develop the
role of the Australian Industry Development Corporation.
In our first budget we provided funds to establish the
National Management School within the University of New
South Wales. We have set up the Small Business Bureau
to provide advice and assistance for this very important
but long neglected sector. We have sought to enhance
profitability by reduction in company tax, by requesting
the Prices Justification Tribunal to give particular
consideration to the adequacy of return on capital and by
urgently investigating the implications of rapid inflation
for the taxation paid by companies. The report of the
Mathews Committee is expected soon and actions on its
recommendations will be prompt. We recognise the
extraordinary impact of rapid inflation on corporate tax
rules, particularly with respect to stock valuation and
appreciation. / 3. 
-3-
Perhaps most important of all in its long term
implications will be the report of the Committee of
Inquiry under the Chairmanship of Mr Gordon Jackson,
General Manager of C. S. R. The Jackson Committee's
terms of reference are to advise on the future role of
manufacturing industry, the role of foreign companies
in the Australian economy, the long term balance between
exports and imports, better communication between
Government, industry, the States and employees'
organisations. I am quite determined that the report
of the Jackson Committee will not suffer the fate of
the Vernon Committee. We will not stall it or pigeon-hole
it and we will not set out deliberately to rubbish it or
bucket it. One of the sorriest aspects of the Vernon Report
was that the treatment meted out to it acted as a
discouragement to highly qualified, busy and public spirited
persons in serving the nation in similar roles. One of
the most gratifying experiences I have had as Prime Minister
has been the readiness of distinguished Australians, in
business, the professions and the Universities to serve on
the many commissions and committees of inquiry which we
have established. I believe that a big factor contributing
to this readiness to serve has been the positive acceptance
by the Government of their work. Men and women called upon
to serve Australia in this way know that they are not
wasting their time.
our major piece of current legislation concerning
the private sector is, of course, the Corporations and
Securities Industry Bill. I am sure that members of
C. E. D. A. are too sophisticated to give the Pavlovian
response we ' ye had from some quarters that this is an
attack on freedom of private enterprise. The fact is
that without the establishment of the Corporations and
Exchange Commission as the National Regulatory Authority
to supervise the securities industry in Australia, the
future prosperity of Australia cannot be assured because
the economic development of any nation is directly
determined by its efficiency in raising new capital.
During the mining boom, vast sums of money were raised
which was wasted and never found its way into mining.
The efficient mobilization and allocation of
capital through the medium of the stock exchanges can only be
optimised if the exchanges provide and, just as significantly
are seen to provide, a fair and orderly market. The market
must be one in which both the financially sophisticated
investor and also the unsophisticated investor with the
aid of his investment adviser can invest his capital.
However large or small an amount it may be, with the
knowledge that the risk he assumes can be evaluated on
accurate information disclosed to him and that his risk will
be subject only to the usual commercial hazards. 
-4-
The self-regulating activities of the Stock
exchanges during the mining boom period were abysmally
lax. Even formal rules, which were and are still
minimal, were as the RAE Report recounts seldom
enforced and were viewed with contempt by some members
who continued with their practices in blatant disregard
of the stock exchange regulations and of their fiduciary
duties, on the assumption that their abuses would go
undetected or unpunished; an assumption by no means
unreasonable in the absence of adequate surveillance
by some independent authority.
The genuine difficulties which have been
encountered by self-regulatory bodies and the State
authorities in dealing with the securities industry have
been partly due to the failure of some of the States to
recognise the national character of the securities markets
and of the securities industry. If one recognises that
each stock echange functions only as part of an Australia-wide
network and that to a very large degree, listed public
companies carry on their businesses on an Australia-wide
or national basis, then it should be obvious that the
problem of attaining effective, coherent and efficient
securities regulation can be solved only if there is one
nationally uniform body 6f law and a national authority
which will eliminate the variation of administrative
practice and interpretation and which will standardise
the quality of administrative action and investigation.
I mentioned the Terrigal Conference's statement
on the mixed economy. Equally important for business
is the decision to express a firmer commitment to economic
planning. Planning is really about institutionalising
foresight. It is a process which tempers expertise
with judgment. We believe that the Australian Government
should contain a department with the prime responsibility
for planning the long term future of the economy. It
should be staffed with experts, but advised by
representatives of various community groups especially
workers, employers and consumers. We considered, but
rejected, the notion of a National Economic Council because
although we believe that the views of community groups
are an essential part of the planning process, we believe
that ultimate power of decision must rest with the
Parliament. The planning machinery we are creating is
therefore advisory.
Market forces, alone, are not good enough as
indicators of the direction in which resources should flow.
The market mechanism is there to be used, but it must not
become the only influence determining how and where we
allocate our resources. 
We envisage a broadly based planning mechanism
at its centre, the planning department with its advisory
machinery; around it the other departments, but
especially the industry departments, each with its own
network of advisory bodies and panels. From this
mixture of expertise, judgment, subjective opinion,
and self-interest will come, I believe, the sort of
advise which, when combined with the more objective data
from the planning department, will enable the Government
to appraise its long term goals with more certainty, more
humanity and more efficiency than is possible at present.
Our commitment to planning is not simply based on
ideology not simply due to any mistrust of market forces.
It stems from the interdependent nature of a good deal of
economic decision-making. Much public investment has
long lead time and it is difficult to undertake major
development projects unless there is some certainty about
the continued supply of funds and avoidance of ' stop-go'
economic policies. The private sector, too, needs some clear view of
the Government's long term operations with confidence.
I envisage a fruitful, interactive planning environment
with both public and private sectors playing their part.
When we spekk of Australia's " mixed economy"
let's be clear what we mean. Public and private
sectors are mainly complementary, not competitive with
each other. The aim of the major initiatives my
Government has taken has been to build better structures,
more modern structures upon which the whole community
can propper. The private sector has a definite interest in
the development of public infrastructure and ' the
rational public regulation of private activity.
Important initiatives in public investment will prove
of great advantage to the private sector. I refer to
our assumption of responsibility for national highways
which are of such great importance in facilitating the
movement of goods among our major markets. Another
area of great long term interest for the private sector,
is the improvement of the quality of our education system
as a whole and particular major initiatives in areas of
direct concern to private industry, such as the
development of technical education. The private sector
will also see advantages from the re-organisation of
some major areas of public investment. I refer
particularly to the establishment of two Commissions to
conduct postal and telecommunication services. 
-6-
The Government has taken-new initiatives to
facilitate trade relations with other countries. A
large number of new trade agreements lave been sined.
We have extended the charter of the Old Bxport Payments
Insurance Corporation to create the Export Finance
Insurance Corporation and we shall proceed to establish
an Overseas Trade Corporation, to promote trade with
centrally planned economies in particular. We have
established new institutions to assist firms to adjust
to the continuing pressures of change. Our Structural
Adjustment Assistance Scheme is the first systematic
effort to help industry adjust to changes of economic
policy. The NEAT scheme is the first step in our
continuing development of longer-run manpower policy.
In a more specific area of housing, we have established a
Housing Standards Advisory Council to eliminate the
extraordinary cost disabilities of the multiplicity of
housing codes. In all these ways I believe that public
initiative is la)? ing the foundations for the future
balanced development for the private sector.
Far from these programs being antagonistic to
the success of private endeavour or incompatible with
private prosperity they are essential to it. A skilled,
healthy, efficient community that is both our national
goal and an economic necessity. In a speech last
December Mr Gordon Jackson had this to say:
" We should perhaps speculate that in a turbulent
and uncertain world, a principal role of government
should be to articulate a set of values that will find
acceptance in the community. Acceptance will help to
constrain the parts from antisocial and maladaptive
behaviour and will encourage progress towards common
ideals. The role of government also should be to
simplify the business environment enough for people to
understand the situation and the prospects, so they can
plan with confidence." I
I endorse thoserentarks.
Effective planning needs new structures and new
machinery, . We are building them. To articulate a
set of values which will find acceptance in the community
requires consultation. We are eager to have it.
In the present situation of rapid change and uncertainty
it is urgent that we should be able to apply ourselved
all of us, government and business alike to these tasks.
I won't labour the point I'll just leave you with this
thought: In this critical time it would be tragic for Australia
if over the next six months, our national preoccupations
were to be purely political, if the national debate
were to be conducted, not in terms of our greater goals
and long term needs, but were to be forced into the
narrow fcus of yet another election. 



( ADDRESS TO BE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER) 4
NOTES FOR LABOR DAY DINNER SPEECH' 9
VICTORIAN I1RADLS HALL COUNCIL
LOWER MLLBUURNJE TOWN HALL
SATURDAY 8 MA~ RCH, 1975
EIGHT YEARS AGO THIS WEEKEND I FIRST RESPONDED
TO THIS TOAST As LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY.
WE AT A CRITICAL STAGE IN THE HISTORY OF
THE MOVEMENT AN. D THE PARTY.
I SAID THEN: " POLITICAL OPPOSITI'ON IS NO
SUBSTITUTE FOR POLITICAL POWER. THE REAL
TEST OF WHAT WE CALL OUR PRINCIPLES IS NOT
THEIR PRESUMED PURITY BUT THEIR PRACTICAL
APPLICATION." EIGHT YEARS LATER THE CONTEXT IS VERY DIFFERENT..*
BUT THE RELEVANCE OF THOSE REMARKS REMAINS.
EIGHT YEARS AGO AFTER THE DEBACLE OF 1966 THERE WAS
A VERY REAL QUESTION OF WHETHER THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY WOULD EVER FORM A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
AGAINt THERE WERE POWERFUL FORCES AT WORK FOR THE
DISINTEGRATION OF THE PARTY. THEY WERE
STRONGEST IN THIS STATE 4!. 
-2-
Now WE HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN TWO NATIONAL
ELECTIONS WITHI[ J 1.8 MONTHS OF EACH OTHER.
THE TWO-YEARS-AND-THREE-MONTHS WE HAVE
HAD IN OFFICE HARDLY CONSTITUTE THE DEFINITIVE
TEST OF OUR ABILITY TO CARRY OUT OUR PROGRAM,
TWICE PRESENTED TO THE . PEOPLE ON THE BASIS OF
A THREE-YEAR PROGRAM$
OUR DIFFICULTIES HAVE BEEN COMPOUNDED BY THE
UNREMITTING OBSTRUCTION IN THE SENATE AND THE
UNRELENTING HOSTILITY OF AN OPPOSITION WHICH
JUST WON'T ACCEPT THE PEOPLE'S VERDICT,
AND FURTHER NOT FOR THE FIRST TIME AN
AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT FINDS ITSELF IN
POWER AT A TIME OF PROFOUND INTERNATIONAL
DIFFICULTY$ DESPITE THESE FACTORS* DESPITE THESE PRESSURES
FROM HOME AND ABROAD I BELIEVE WE HAVE
DEMONSTRATED THE TRUTH OF WHAT I SAID EIGHT
YEARS AGO THE OVERRIDING IMPORTANCE OF OUR
ABILITY THROUGH PARLIAMENT TO PUT OUR
PROGRAM INTO PRACTICE$ 3/, 
-3-
WE CAN LOOK AT IT TWO WAYS,
THERE IS THE NEGATIVE WAY TO THINK OF THE
APPALLING ALTERNATIVE,
THERE IS THE POSITIVE WAY WHAT OUR PROGRAM
AND OUR POLICIES MEAN FOR THE VAST MAJORITY
OF OUR SUPPORTERS AND FELLOW CITIZENS OF
AUSTRALIA,,"
ONE MUST GIVE SOME SORT OF CREDIT WHERE CREDIT
IS DUE; AND THIS MUCH AT LEAST MUST BE SAID
FOR OUR OPPONENTS$ WE'VE HAD THE SIDE-EFFECT
OF MAKING THEM COME CLEAN ABOUT THEIR INTENTIONS.
To PROVE HIS TOUGHNESS, TO PROVE HIS ORTHODOXY,
MR SNEDDEN HAS DECLARED THAT HE WOULD UNDO MOST
OF WHAT LABOR HAS DONE.
To PROVE HIS OWN PARTICULAR BRAND OF TOUGHNESSi
MR MALCOLM FRASER, MR SNEDDEN'S RIVAL, HAS
REVEALED HIS INDUSTRIAL PLANS A RETURN TO THE
PENAL'CLAUSES, JAIL SENTENCES FOR MEMBERS AS
WELL AS OFFICIALS, A COMPLETE WAGE FREEZE$
A NETWORK OF INFORMERS AND INTIMIDATION WITHIN
THE UNIONS.
You CAN'T SAY WE HAVEN'T BEEN WARNED, 11, q/ 
IT IS TRUE T1lAT LIBERAL POLICIES CHANGE
WITH THE OPINION POLLS$
AFTER THEIR D7F7AT IN 1972 TIITY MADE SOME
TOKEN ATTEMPT TO RECOVER THE M4IDDLE-GROUND.
THE TRENDIES HAD THEIR LITTLE DAY.
HAMER WAS GOING TO MAKE THINGS HAPPEN BUT
WHEN IN THE FACE OF OUR ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES
THE POLLS BEGAN TO CHANGE, IT WAS A DIFFERENT
STORY,
OUR OPPONENTS BEGAN TO THINK THAT THEY COULD
GET AWAY WITH ANYTHING,
THEY STOPPED WORRYING ABOUT THE PUBLIC AND
BEGAN DEVOTING THEIR ENERGIES TO THE BATTLE FOR
THE LEADERSHIP.
THIS BATTLE IS NOW REACHING DECISION POINT.
THIS WEEK IN CANBERRA THE DOGS WERE WERE WOOF
WOOFING IT SNEDDEN MUST GO.
BUT HOWEVER IT TURNS OUT WE NOW KNOW FROM THEIR
OWN DECLARATIONS THAT THE LIBERAL ALTERNATIVE
IS BENT UPON DISMANTLING AND DESTRUCTION
BENT UPON A COURSE OF SOCIAL REACTION AND ECONOMIC
AND INDUSTRIAL REPRESSION.
So THAT IS THE NEGATIVE SIDE OF WHY IT IS SO
CRUCIAL$ 6 O o5/ 1 a 
THE DAMAGE THREATENED BY OUR OPPONENTS' RETURN
GOES BEYOND THE THREAT OF OBSTRUCTION OF OUR
MOST IMPORTANT PROGRAMS EDUCATION, CITIES,
WELFARE, HEALTH. THEY WOULD THREATEN THE
LIVING STANDARDS OF THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY
OF EMPLOYEES, THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIAN MEN AND WOMEN WHO ARE IN EMPLOYMENT$
A REPORT BY THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
PUBLISHED LAST WEEK SINGLES OUT AUSTRALIAN
WOMEN WORKERS AS THE RECIPIENTS OF THE BIGEST
INCREASE IN REAL WAGES IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
IN THE WORLD IN 1974.
AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF ONLY SIX COUNTRIES WHERE THE
BUYING POWER OF THE PAY PACKET IMPROVED SIGNIFICANTLY
LAST YEAR. THE OTHERS ARE BELGIUMI KOREA, NORWAY, a
POLAND AND YUGOSLAVIA$
FROM THE DECEMBER QUARTER 1972 TO THE SEPTEMBER
QUARTER LAST YEAR PRICES ROSE 27-PER CENT BUT
AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS ROSE 40 PER CENT. IN THAT
PERIOD MINIMUM WEEKLY WAGES FOR MEN ROSE BY
47 PER CENT AND FOR WOMEN 68 PER CENTO REAL
WEEKLY EARNINGS BEFORE TAX ROSE BY 10.4 PER CENT
AND AFTER TAX By 7.5 PER CENTS v o s6/ a 
-6-
EVERY COMPARABLE COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS
SUFFERED RISING UNEMPLOYMENT AND RISING PRICES,
CERTAINLY THE PRESENT UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS
TOTALLY UNACCEPTABLE AND WE ARE FIGHTING IT ON
ALL FRONTS, BUT AUSTRALIA AMONG THE COUNTRIES
SUFFERING THE SAME PROBLEMS HAS BEEN OUTSTANDINGLY
SUCCESSFUL IN MAINTAINING AND INCREASING THE
REAL VALUE OF WAGES FOR THOSE IN EMPLOYMENT.
THAT IS WHAT IS BEHIND THE CONCERN EXPRESSED BY
JIM CAIRNS AND ME-ABOUT THE CONSEQUENCES OF
EXCESSIVE WAGE CLAIMS THIS YEAR. IT'S NOT A
MATTER OF BLAMING UNIONS OR UNION OFFICIALS$
WE DO WANT, HOWEVER, TO SEE THAT THE VALUE OF WAGE
INCREASES IS A REAL ONE NOT JUST A PAPER INCREASE.
AND WE DO WANT TO SEE THAT WORKERS DO NOT PRICE
THEMSELVES OR THEIR FELLOW-WORKERS OUT OF JOBS.*
DON'T LET' S HAVE ANY OF THIS NONSE NSE THAT
EITHER THE AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL SYSTEM OR THE
ECONOMIC SYSTEM MAKES IT IMPOSSIBLE* FOR A LABOR
GdVERNMENT TO APPLY LABOR PRINCIPLES.
I KNOW HOW FRUSTRATING THE SYSTEM CAN BE.
IT IS DOUBLY SO WHEN WE HAVE AN OPPOSITION-SUCH
AS THE PRESENT ONE, DETERMINED TO OBSTRUCT AND
DESTORY BY WHATEVER MEANS AT ITS DISPOSAL.
o* 971@ 
-7-
YET DESPITE ALL THE DIFFICULTIES THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IS WORKING.
WE HAVE USED THE SYSTEM TO SECURE THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
RE-DISTRIBUTION OFWEALTHEVER TO HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.
WE HAVE USED IT TO SECURE THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
INCREASE IN REAL INCOMES FOR THE OVERWHELMING
MAJORITY ACHIEVED SINCE THE WAR -THIS DESPITE THE
WORLD-WIDE INFLATION, DESPITE THE WORLD-WIDE UPWARD
TREND IN UNEMPLOYMENT.
ABOVE ALL, WE HAVE USED IT TO IMPLEMENT OUR PROGRAM*
WE HAVE IMPLEMENTED AN EXTRAORDI1NARY PROPORTION OF
THE PROGRAM ON WHICH WE WERE TWICE ELECTED -AND
THIS DESPITE THE UNPARALLELLED OBSTRUCTION IN THE
SENATE AND THE LACK OF CO-OPERATION FROM THE STATES.
TRUE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM CREATES EXTRAORDINARY
DIFFICULTIES FOR A SOCIAL DEMOCRAT GOVERNMENT.
YET-WE ARE MAKING REMARKABLE HEADWAY. THERE IS
CERTAINLY-NO CAUSE FUR LOS ING FAITH IN OUR CAPACITY
TO ACHIEVE OUR OBJECTIVES, TO IMPLEMENT OUR
PROGRAM, TO APPLY OUR PRINCIPLES, ANY MORE THAN
THERE IS CAUSE TO LOSE FAITH IN OURSELVES AS A
PARTY, AS THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO HAVE BEEN ENTRUSTED
BY THE PEOPLE WITH THE LEADERSHIP OF THIS NATION. 


This day, 8 March, 1975, and this gathering tonight have an historical significance far beyond the occasion. Today, International Women's Day, has been celebrated for well over sixty years as the day on which women, particularly working women, come together to make their voices heard and their problems known.
&nbsp;This year, International Women's Year, is a year which has come into being because women like yourselves individual women, fighting *~ omen, women with determination and spirit have not easily taken no for an answer, have not believed those who told them " It is not women's work", or " It can not be done by women."
&nbsp;International Women's Year, as all of you who fought and won and lost and came back to fight again will know, is not going to solve the problems of the world, the problems of women and through them of men and of children. It is however, our responsibility, the responsibility of you the women of Australia and of us your Government, to try to ensure that this year the world will be given a shove in the right direction a shove without which changes for the good of women, of all women, not just a few might never occur.
The history of International Women's Day is often traced back to 1909 when women garment workers poured out of every garment factory in New York, Brooklyn, Philadelphia and Chicago protesting against the sweatshop conditions under which they had to work. It was like a mighty army rising in the night and demanding to be heard. The response was violence, assault and arrest. Half the women were under the age of twenty. Their demands were for the organization of all workers into trade unions, for equal pay for equal work, and eight hour day, a living wage and full citizenship for women.
During the next eight years women workers all over the world rose and protested about their working conditions. Their demands were the same, and a further demand was added as the First World War approached the demand for peace, a protest against the ease with which the world was headed towards war. In 1910, it was proposed that March 8 should be set aside as a special day for women, a day to remind the world of women's demands for justice in the work force, for a place in society, for peace rather than violence and conflict.
Here in Australia we have the same splendid tradition a past of which we can be justly proud. Our women formed their own trade unions and rose up from their workbenches. The great seamstresses' strike of 1882, here in Melbourne, led not only to an improvement in the working conditions of their own industry but to a general investigation of the conditions under which both women and men were labouring. The findings of this inquiry were so appalling that they led to the formulation of the factory acts and other legislation aimed at protecting workers.
As the First World War approached our women were increasingly concerned by an easy acceptance of the inevitability of war. Many anti-war and anti-conscription women's groups were started, including the Women's Peace Army. Their fight for peace was untiring and uncompromising. When the Depression camne the women were not content to sit idle. Nor were they content viith the handing out of charity. Women's Employment Bureaux run by women and for women sprang up all over the country. Here in Victoria, clothing factories, jam factories and rural industries, to name but a few, were established to provide employment for unemployed and poverty-stricken women. The same happened throughout the rest of Australia.
In more recent times we have seen the wives of the Wollongong miners refuse to allow scab labour to work their husbands' mines. We have seen the women in a small factory in Whyalla refuse to be retrenched and set themselves up as a co-operative under their own management. Creating their own employment opportunities. And only weeks ago here in Melbourne there was the dramatic stand of a small group of women in the metal trades. Many women in Australia have stood up and fought for decent working conditions for women, for a living wage and for equal pay for work of equal value. Many women in Australia have marched through the streets on 8 March reminding us Australians of these demands and of the demand for peace.
This day in Australia is part of a tradition of which we can be truly proud. And it has not only been the women of Australia who have fought for justice for women in the workplace and for peace in the world. Men, too, have fought for these demands. Many men, too, have marched our streets demanding a rate for the job, peace and protection against unjst., laws.
The Federal Parliamentary Labor Party as early as 1901 accepted unanimously a motion that women should get not equal pay for equal work, but, much more significantly, equal. pay for work of equal value. The Labor Governments of Australia can be proud of our historical record in this area, a record not just of rhetoric but of action.
Immediately this Government came to power in December 1972 we abolished conscription and re-opened the National Wage Case arguing cogently and successfully for acceptance of the principle of equal pay for work of equal value. In May 1974 we again went to the Arbitration Commission arguing that, in all justice, women as well as men should be given a: minimum wage below which no human being should be asked to work. Both these judgements have been contentious: Just principles are rarely implemented without problems, but we are proud that we have not compromised our principles and by June of this year both these judgements will be fully implemented. This makes 8 March 1975 even more significant. I might mention here that an ILO Study has shown that in the year ending June 1974 the world's biggest increase in real wages for women in manufacturing industry went to Australian women. Then real wages went up by 16%. From December 1972 to the December quarter 1974 average minimum weekly award rates for women increased by 73%.
Equal pay alone will not bring about justice in the work force. We are aware of this and have shown this awareness in our actions. When this Government came to power in December 1972 its program for women was two-fold: First to correct the past injustices from which they had suffered and, secondly to lessen distress and suffering, to respond sensitively to social problems affecting women and children.
These latter problems, problems which have continually arisen within Australian Society, include the need for shelters, health centres, contraceptive advice, rape crisis centres, marital counselling, problems facing women with young children, their recreation and leisure needs, their need for company and ease of movement and programs relating to the welfare of women.
Shelters and refuges for women can be traced back beyond the work of Caroline Chisolm. An understanding of the pressing need for health services relating directly to the health problems of women gave birth in 1899 to the Queen Victoria Hospital here in Melbourne, staffed by and run for women. The welfare problems of women have been recoqnised and worked for by all the great women in the past. Catherine Spence, Vida Goldstein, Muriel Heagney, Rose Scott, Jessie Street, Edith Cowan are among the better known of these many, many women.
To this day the majority of poor people in Australia are women, including mothers many of them single or deserted mothers. The need to create a more humane world for these women is an overwhelming concern of this Government: We introduced the Supporting Mother's Benefit, we removed the sales tax on the pill, we are funding women'srefuges, women's health centres and family planning centres.
Perhaps the most exciting development has been the acceptance of the need for multi-purpose centres, centres concerned with all the needs of women in the area. The Hunter Region Working Women's Centre in Newcastle is one such centre. It will cater for women's health, welfare, educational, workforce and legal problems as well as providing recreation and child care facilities.
&nbsp;To ensure that no area of need will be overlooked that no social problem relating to women, whether they be married or not, with or without children, aboriginal or newcomer, English speaking or not, young or old, rural or urban, will be hidden away, forgotten or neglected we have established a Royal Commission into Human Relationships. It is the First Royal Commission in history to investigate such social problems.
&nbsp;Of the first kind of demand, the demand for fairness and for justice, we have again shown a sensitivity to the existence of these problems and a determination to understand and overcome them.
&nbsp;Our concern has been for women at home as well as at work, for women in the unpaid as well as in the paid workforce. We have introduced anti-discrimination committees throughout Australia, new training and retraining opportunities. We have made every effort to ensure that * unemployed or retrenched women are not overlooked. We have also, in exempting the matrimonial home from the dutiable value of the family's estate, publicly recognised for the first time in the history of Australia that the person who looks after the home and family contributes as much to the economic value of that family's home as the person who goes to work.
&nbsp;Further, mothers, indeed parents, whether they remain at home or are in the paid workforce, need help and support in the care of their children.
&nbsp;In the last year Australia has introduced a program of childhood services the first of its kind in the world. It is not designed to impose an arbitrary blueprint on the children of Australia and their parents. Rather it is to be flexible enough and integrated enough to respond at the neighbourhood level to all their needs.
&nbsp;This program has begun to be implemented and million has been set aside for this financial year alone. Many of the projects being funded under this scheme are innovative and 6xciting, and the implementation of this program is going ahead as fast as is humatly possible. It will be some years however, before its effects become widely visible, before the present overwhelming needs will be satisfied.
No matter how genuine our attempts to ensure that women at work and at home are justly cared for, it is the range of possibilities, expectations and limitations which are instilled in girls in school which limit the scope of their later aspirations and determine the patterns of their future life. The importance of education as the major determinant of a child's future and the role that education has to play in motivating women to take up the challenge of new roles and of new life patterns is now being recognised.
These changes which we have undertaken, changes essential to emotional and financial independence and to the ability of women to choose freely the future which best suits her, are based on principles of equity and fairness, on our desire to correct injustices. We take great pride in these advances and achievements. It is nevertheless clear that many problems remain.
Too few women have been involved in making decisions at all levels of Government, in the Public Service, in the political parties and in the trade unions. Decisions which affect their lives both as women and as citizens. This must concern not only my Government but the whole Australian Parliament, the State Parliaments, local government authorities and all other bodies whose day-to-day decisions on matters of policy and practice affect the lives of all people, not just men.
&nbsp;Because of this concern the Australian Government has decided that as part of Australia's activities for International Women's Year a conference should be held in Canberra later this year on the theme of women and politics. It is hoped that this conference will be open to all women and women's groups and that all political parties and other relevant organizations will play a part. The intention is not only to discuss past and present participation by women in political activities but also to bring about a greater understanding of the means by which women can participate in the making of political decisions and the difficulties that confront them in. so doing. Women from other countries who, through their elected or appointed positions have contributed to political change or women who have brought about significant social or political achievements from outside government, will also be invited to participate.
&nbsp;The major problem, however, in the course of this year is to ensure that our efforts are more than a fleeting, token gesture to lull women into a false belief that their problems are at last being taken seriously and understood in all their complexity. My Government has not committed itself and will not commit itself to any program which it does not genuinely believe is both desired by the women of Australia &nbsp;&nbsp;and which will be of lasting benefit to them. During International Women's Year we are advancing and extending programs which we had already undertaken in response to the needs of women. But our overriding task and challenge for this year is to strike out at the attitudes which cause these difficulties and give rise to these problems.
We must challenge notions such as that of the breadwinner and the homemaker; values such as those of ambition, prestige, status and incessant promotion; dichotomies such as that between work and home; the hidden and usually unarticulated assumptions about women's abilities, capacities, life patte-rns, needs, skills and desires. These affect women not only in their employment but in the whole range of their opportunities in life. Both men and women must be made aware of our habitual patterns of prejudice which we often do not see as such but whose existence manifests itself in our language and our behaviour.
&nbsp;During this year, International Women's Year, we must question, discuss and reassess the attitudes, assumptions, beliefs and prejudices that society holds about women. We must create a society in which a woman's place is where she freely chooses to be, from which neither cultural prejudices, lack. of education or lack of self-confidence will keep her.
Today, International Women's Day, is a start towards this. This year, International Women's Year, we must work towards a society which eases the stresses placed upon men in the workforce, which recognises that home is a place for men as wdl as women, but which insists that women have a place with men in the total Australian society.
My Government has always been committed to the theme of enlarging and equalising opportunities for all Australians, the theme of creating a more humane, a more compassionate society for Australians, the need to instil in women self-confidence and a sense of independence, the need to see more clearly each other's abilities and potential. We shall never be content with a society which buys its prosperity, its well-being at the expense of some other part of that society. We, all of us, men and women, would be diminished by such a society.
I have no doubt that you, the women of Australia, have carefully watched the changes that have come about in the last two years. For these are the changes which you yourselves have fought for so bravely. This Government may not always have done them in the way that you thought best, but we have done them sincerely and to the best of our ability. More significantly, our successes rest upon and are due to your determination, your experiences, your defeats and your successes.



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C., M. P. o
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY ZONE 1 CONFERENCE
LANE COVE TOWN HALL, SUNDAY 9 MARCH 1975
THE POLITICS OF MEDIBANK
THE OPPOSITION'S THREAT TO MEDIBANK SYMBOLIZES AND
ENCAPSULES THEIR WHOLE DESTRUCTIVE AND NEGATIVE APPROACH TO
NATIONAL ISSUES TODAY.
1; IT PERFECTLY ILLUSTRATES THEIR CONTEMPT OF THE WILL
OF THE PEOPLE AND THEIR REFUSAL TO ACCEPT THE PEOPLE S
VERDICT. LABOR'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROPOSALS WERE
FIRST PUT BEFORE THE ELECTORATE IN DETAIL AT THE
ELECTIONS OF 1969 ELECTIONS IN WHICH THE LABOR PARTY
GAINED 17 SEATS. THEY WERE AGAIN CENTRAL TO OUR
POLICIES ON WHICH WE WON THE 1972 ELECTIONS. THEY
WERE SPELT OUT AGAIN IN 1974. INDEED, THE HEALTH
INSURANCE COMMISSION ACT WAS ONE OF THE. SIX BILLS
REJECTED TN THE SENATE ON WHICH THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
WAS GRANTED A DOUBLE DISSOLUTION AFTER THE SENATE'S
REFUSAL OF SUPPLY. As THE MELBOURNEAGE SAID YESTERDAY:
" THE BROAD HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMME IS ALREADY LAW,
IT HAS BEEN APPROVED BY PARLIAMENT. IT HAS TWICE
BEEN THE ? RINC! PAL PLANK IN A WINNING ELECTION POLICY,
IF EVER THE WHITLAM GOVERNMENT HAD THE RIGHT TO CLAIM
A MANDATE FOR ANYTHING IT IS FOR THE HEALTH SCHEME," 
-2-
2. THE OPPOSITION'S ATTITUDE IS A CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF THE
USE OF THE SENATE TO FRUSTRATE NOT JUST THE ELECTED GOVERNMENT
BUT THE CLEAR DECISION OF THE PEOPLE. THE HEALTH INSURANCE
COMMISSION IS NOW ESTABLISHED BY THE LAW OF THE LAND AS ARESULT
OF THE JOINT SITTING LAST AUGUST. WHEN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AND THE SENATE TOGETHER PASSED THE BILL INTO LAW THE OPPOSITION
THEN USED ITS NUMBERS IN THE SENATE TO PREVENT PASSAGE OF THE
HEALTH INSURANCE LEVYASSESSMENT BILLS TO FUND MEDIBANKS
IS
3. I/ AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE WAY IN WHICH THE OPPOSITION NOW-.
OPPOSES MEASURES WHICH THEY THEMSELVES PROPOSED OR INITIATED IN
GOVERNMENT. SINCE THE JOINT SITTING THE OPPOSITION IN THE
SENATE HAS TWICE EXCLUDED FROM A NATIONAL HEALTH BILL PROVISIONS
WHICH WERE-RECOMMENDED SIX YEARS AGO BY THE NIMMO COMMITTEE AND
WHICH FIVE YEARS AGO LAST WEEK DR FORBES WHEN MINISTER FOR
HEALTH SAID THAT THE GORTON GOVERNMENT WOULD ADOPT.
4I, MR. SNEDDEN'S WRITHINGS AND WRIGGLINGS IN HIS EFFORTS fO
RECONCILE HIS STATEMENTS WITH MR ANTHONY'S IS A CARICATURE OF
LEADERSHIP. THE COUNTRY PARTY TAIL IS WAGGING THE LIBERAL.
WOOF WOOF. MR ANTHONY OPPOSES MEDIBANK ONLY BECAUSE HE IS
DESPERATE THAT AN ELECTION BE HELD BEFORE THE NEXT RE-DISTRIBUTION
CAN GUARANTEE AUSTRALIANS EQUAL ELECTORATES AS PROVIDED BY THE LAW
OF THE LAND ANOTHER PROPOSITION ENDORSED BY THE PEOPLE LAST MAY
AND APPROVED AT THE JOINT SITTING IN AUGUST. IT IS QUITE
IMMATERIAL TO HIM THAT HIS LIBERAL ALLIES SUFFER AS MUCH FROM
THE PRESENT APPORTIONMENT AS THE-LABOR PARTY.
( MITCHELL, LIB, 29.98 ABOVE THE QUOTA; ROBERTSON, LAB, 25.29
ABOVE THE QUOTA; CALARE, 16,82 BELOW THE QUOTA;
HUME, 20.73 BELOW THE QUOTA; GWYDIR, 16.96 BELOW
THE QUOTA.) I 3/ I 
AND IT IS SYMPTOMATIC OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
THAT IT WILL MEEKLY ACCEPT THIS DICTATION AND THIS INJUSTICE,
THE ATTITUDE OF THE NON-LABOR STATES ILLUSTRATES THE
PHONINESS OF THEIR " STATES' RIGHTS" SLOGANEERING WHEN IT COMES
TO A MATTER OF THE PEOPLEIS RIGHTS. IN N. SW, DAILY CHARGES FOR
PUBLIC WARD BEDS WERE LIFTED TO $ 30, EXACTLY DOUBLE THE CHARGE
IN JULY 1972, NSW, STANDS TO LOSE $ 30 MILLION IN 1975/ 76 IF
IT REFUSES TO OPERATE MEDIBANK,
6. THE WHOLE BUSINESS IS DESIGNED TO DRAG OUT THE DEBATE, TO
OBSCURE THE BASIC ISSUE SO THAT PEOPLE WILLEBECOME THOROUGHLY
CONFUSED AND THOROUGHLY DISILLUSIONED. THE FACT IS THAT HOWEVER
HEALTH INSURANCE IS FINANCED, HOWEVER MEDIBANK' IS FUNDED,
MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENT WILL NOT COST A CENT MORE. WE
HAVE TO FACE THE FACT THAT AN INCREASING PERCENTAGE OF THE
i ATIONAL INCOME WILL'BE APPLIED TO HEALTH. IT IS IRRELEVANT
WHETHER THIS IS CHANNELLED THROUGH THE PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS OR
THROUGH MEDIBANK HOWEVER FUNDED. THE ONLY SIGNIFICANT RESULT
IN OVERALL COST IS THAT MEDIBANK WILL BE LESS EXPENSIVE TO
ADMINISTER THAN HEALTH INSURANCE ADMINISTERED BY MORE THAN 100
PRIVATE BUREAUCRACIES PRESENTLY OPERATING IN AUSTRALIA.
7. AS FAR AS THE GOVERNMENT IS CONCERNED MEDIBANK IS THE LAW
OF THE LAND. WE WILL APPLY THAT LAW AND WE'WILL COMPLY WITH IT,
, m D 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 462
1~ March 1975
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES
The Prime Minister today announced the establishment
of a wide-ranging Committee of Inquiry. into public librrries
in Australia. The Committee will comprise:-
I'r A. 0orton, Librarian, University of r1ew South 7' ales
Chairman
Hr V. L. Brrown, State Librarian, Tasmania
professor D. NcL. Lamberton, Professor of Economics,
University of Queensland
ilr Pickering, Senior Special Education Officer,
Departm: ent of Education, Victoria
Professor P. Tannock, Dean, Faculty of Education,
University of T'estern Australia
i. rs Trask, Principal Lecturer in Librarianship,
Kurinsai College of Advanced Education.
The terms of reference of the Committee are:
To inquire into and report upon the current role and
effectiveness of State, regional and municipal libraries
in serving the information and recreation needs of the
community including the limitations imposed by existing
methods and levels of financing and staffing.
To report upon the desirable future roles for, and
development of, State, regional and municipal library
services, including priorities of need for these
libraries; interaction with, or dependence on, developments
in related fields; likely costs; manpower and training
requireents; requirements for specialised. library
services; the need, and possible mechanisms, for the
jrovision of Australian Government assistance.
To recommend measures necessary to give cffect to those
developmnents and neans whereby these measures might be
implemented. In its report the Committee of Inquiry should pay
particular attention to:,
the development of methods for evaluating the
effectiveness of public libraries and library systems; 
2
the relationship between proposed public library
policies and the Australian Library Based Infor; mation
Syster feasibility studies, the Australian Assistance
Plan . nd the policies planned or implemented by the
Departments of Urban and Regional Development and
Tourism and Recreation;
S the relationship between public libraries and
libraries in education centres.
The Committee should consult widely and openly with
the Australian, tate and local governments, the cb* munity and
professional groups AACOBS, LAA, State Librarians Council).
It should be able to commission specific studies.
The Committee will be expected to present its report
by 1 December. 1975 to the Special ' iiister of Ctate who will
have the carriage of the Inquiry. for the Australian ' overni ent. -t* 



I. JAUSAL IA0
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 461
March 1975
OFFICIAL VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, M. P.,
announced today that the Prime Minister of New Zealand, the
Rt. Hon. W. E. Rowling will make an official visit
to Australia from Sunday 23 March to Tuesday 25 March 1975.
He will be accompanied by Mrs Rowling.
It will be the first visit to Australia by Mr.
Rowling since assuming office as-Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs and will present a welcome opportunity to
have wide ranging discussions on matters of mutual interest
to Australia and New Zealand.
The Prime Minister will arrive at Sydney on Sunrday
afternoon where he will give a short press conference before
flying to Canberra by RAAF Aircraft. In the evening Mr. and
Mrs. Rowling will be guests of honour at dinner given by
the Governor-General at Government House.
On Monday 24 March the Prime Minister will lay a wreath
at the Australian War Memorial before having official talks
at Prime Minister level and with Cabinet Ministers at
Parliament House. It is expected that the discussions will
continue in the afternoon.
Mr. Rowling has accepted an invitation to address the
National Press Club at lunch on Monday. That evening Mr. and
Mrs. Rowling will have dinner at The Lodge.
The Prime Minister and Mrs. Rowling will leave
for Sydney on Monday evening and 8tay at Kirribilli House
overnight. They will leave for New Zealand early the following
morning. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MRAINISTE Press Statement No. 463
March 1975
Appointments to Special Joint Commission on Tasman Bridge
In the joint statement issued by the Australian
Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, and
the Premier of Tasmania, the Hon. E. E. Reece, M. H. A. regarding
their Agreement to set up a Special Joint Commiission to
superintend and direct the salvage and re-building operations
following on the collapse of portion of the Tasman Bridge
over the Derwent River, it was stated that the names of the
two Associate Commissioners to act with Sir Allan Knight
would shortly be announced.
The Prime Minister and the Premier said today that
they were happy to be able to announce the acceptance by
Mr Eric George Warrell, of the Prime Minister's
invitation to act as Australian Government representative, and
by Mr Bernard J. Donnelly, B. Eng., to act as the
Tasmanian Government representative, on the Joint Commission.
They will take up their duties immediately as members of the
Interim Commission pending completion of the final
arrangements. Mr Warrell, who is Chairman of the Cities Commission
under the Minister fcr Urban and Regional Development, commenced
his engineering career as Assistant Engineer with the State
Rivers and Waters Supply Commission of Victoria, where he
served from 1947 to 1951. For the next 18 years he was
associated with the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority,
where he rose to the position of Associate Commissioner in 1965.
In 1969 he became Vice-President of the Sydney Water Sewerage
and Drainage Board. In June 1973 he moved to the Chairmanship
of the Cities Commission.
Mr Donnelly retired last year from the position of
Director of Public Works in Tasmania after a distinguished
41 year career in the Department, in which he served as Deputy
Director for 13 years. Previously, he had been the Bridge
Engineer before occupying the post of Deputy Chief Engineer
for 8 years. He served for 5 years in the Army.
The Prime Minister and the Premier expressed their
great appreciation to the Chief Commissioner, Sir Allan Knight
and to the two Associate Commissioners, Mr Warrell and
Mr Donnelly, for having agreed to make their services
available at such short notice.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



i6
I _ I Press Sta'ement No. 464
1.1 March 1975
VISIT OF SOVIET PLANT INDUSTRY DELEGATTON
The Prime Minister and Acting Foreign Minister,
Mr E. G. Whi{-iam, and the Minister for Science, Mr Bill
Morrison, announced today that a party of five Soviet
plaiit scientists will arrive in Porth on Thursday morning,
13 March. The group is visiting Ausurali. a for two weeks
under the auspices of the Australian/ Soviet Science
Agreemert. During its Australian visit the Soviet plant
scientists will have discussions witn Australi. n scientists
to map out possibe areas where subsequenL Austraian/
Soviet collaboration in the plant sciences can be develoned.
The Soviet plant scientists will visit the
Western Australia Department of Acricu. lture and the
C. S. I. R. O. Division of Land Resources Management in Perth,
and the W7aite Institute and the C. S. I. r. O. Divisions of
Soils and of Horticultural Research in Adelaide. At
Griffith the Soviet group will inspect work at the C. S. I. R. O.
Division of Irrigation Research. In Canberra visits will
be paid to the C. S. I. R. O. Divisions of Plant Industry and
of Land Use Research and the Australian National University.
The Soviet group will then go to Sydney, and have discussions
at the University of Sydney, Macquarie University, and the
N. S. W. Department of 2griculture. During visits to Tamworth
and Armidale the Soviet plant scientiscs will call at the
National Wheat Collection and the University of New England.
Their rrogram concludes with a visit to the C. S. T. R. O.
Division of Tropical Agronomy in Brisbane.
Mr Whitlam and Mr Morrison said that a group of
Australian plant scientists, led by Dr L. T. Pvans, planned
to pay a return visit to the Soviet Union in mid-year to
Finalise the program of co-operation in plant sciences
-chat would be recommended to the Australian and Soviet
Governments. The members of the visiting Soviet plant industry
group are: Academician A. V. Pukhalsky,
All-Union Academy of Agricultaral Sciences;
Dr M. N. Rodin, USSR Ministry oF Agricliture;
Academician 1. Z. Boodin, All-Uanion Institute of
Plant Industry; / 2 



PRIME MINISTERPres StaNeo m4e6t
Press Statement No. 466
11 March 1975
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE SHIPS
The Government has authorised the preparation and
introduction df legislation authorising Australian
Government borrowing overseas on behalf of the Australian
National Line. The loan is to assist the ANL to buy two bulk
ore carriers from the Gotaverken shipyards in Sweden.
The amount involved is $ US68 million.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 29? 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 465
11 March 1975
PENS IONS
Cabinet agreed today to a further step in the
abolition of the means test for age pensions, and on
an increase in all pension rates.
As promised in the September 1974 Budget,
the means test will be abolished for people aged 70 to 74.
There will be a three months period of grace in which
claims may be lodged without loss of arrears. People
and over were granted exemption from a means test
by my Government in 1973.
In accordance with its policy of increasing
pensions twice a year, the Government proposes an increase
of $ 5 a week in the standard rate of pension, with
proportionate adjustments for other social security.
and repatriation payments.
Both measures will come into effect, if accepted
by the Parliament, on the first pension day in May.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



L: rhrI 197r
R. E. D. (; RANTS TVEf-RiOOT,
The Prime fli-D; ister a'i cmbiro cr-ivwa
MrC-c-. h : dti lam to'iay arno 4-ncnc:-' morr w~' r oc
T:-: ce First i nvolve c~ . l j, F Qflc,,
around Amafia Dark ( cstabli shc'' I i 3 -J 71 t,
o s t c 1 7, i1 Austra ii~ a af-s\' rfh'rC~ flr
Vvi8 r1 I '' rnploy 6 people :. or .: 0c n ou r
' he other Projeoct i s II comrn; Lr l,' e / hCI
pa t 1-W,) y 1 son -dt . t a t o0 2 f
c f wh J:-C h-Aus cr alI ~ an r. 1ov r-, T fli~ l n w i y
' hsw) 1nabl c no3 4 rcv ~ anwr o
four wecl: FS.
" Ir 4!-d. Icam. 32a ih i r(~ I~ t ait
Cotunci1 . i .: 4ne with r 1. . ieene
ontr' oO) F rO nqmc cyrv-i. uina'! rc~-ki jnq37
dos igjnc-i'ir.-c ce12e 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 467
11 March 1975
ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR FRUIT JUICE
PROCESSORS
The Government has decided to pay structural
adjustment assistance to fruit juice processors
affected by the removal of the exemption'from sales tax
of aerated waters containing less than 5 per cent
Australian fruit juice.
The exemption had encouraged soft drink
producers to include 5 per cent of fruit juice in
their products to escape sales tax.
The compensation will cover plant made redundant,
and stocks, and is expected to amount to about $ 1.5 million.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



A HAL jA,
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 469
12 March 1975
APPOINTMENT OF MR POWELL TO POSITION OF CHAIRMAN
OF DARWIN RECONSTRUCTION COMMISSION
The Prime Minister announced today that
Mr A. J. W. Powell, aged 41, the Commissioner of the National
Capital Development Commission, has also been chosen by
the Government as Chairman of the Darwin Reconstruction
Commission following the resignation of Sir Leslie Thiess.
In announcing the appointment, which will take
effect as from 13 March 1975, the Prime Minister said he
would like to express his own and the Government's
appreciation of Sir Leslie Thiess' public spirit in launching
and leading the Darwin Interim Reconstruction Commission.
The Prime Minister said that Mr Powell has been
Commissioner of the NCDC since February 1974 and brings
to this task a wide professional background in a private
enterprise field and in both State and Federal authorities.
The Prime Minister added that Mr Powell had not
only expressed, but through his actions as Commissioner of
the NCDC, had demonstrated his concern for the need for
meaningful communication with the community and associated
government departments and authorities.
The Australian Government believed that his forceful
attitude coupled with his professional expertise would ensure
that the massive job waiting to be done in Darwin would
proceed without undue delay.
The Prime Minister outlined the following details
of Mr Powell's qualifications and experience:
His professional qualifications are: BE; DipTCP ( Syd);
MRAPI. His professional experience comprises five
years between 1958-1963 as an investigation and
research engineer, first with the Snowy mountains
Hydro-Electric Authority in Australia and later
with a private enterprise firm in Britain. This was
followed by a year with the Cumberland County
Council and then between 1964-1970 with the N. S. W.
State Planning Authority. From 1970-1973 Mr Powell
was in private practice as a consultant town plann~ er
gh~ d p-ihioipl ink his o0ii firm; BefdrL-his Apobintnent 
-2-
as Commissioner of the NCDC, he spent a year
on contract with the Department of Urban and Regional
Development assisting in the initial setting
up of the Department. Mr Powell has been an
external lecturer in town planning at the
University of Sydney as well as occupying
posts on various government committees concerned
with planning and transportation. He was
Vice-President ( 1972) of the NSW Division,
Royal Australian Planning Institute and in the
period 1970-1974, he was a member of the
Council of the N. R. M. A.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 468
12 March 1975
OIL AND URANIUM EXPLORATION
GOVERNMENT GUIDELINES
The Government reaffirms that it seeks Australian
participation in oil exploration, but has decided that
foreign companies undertaking oil exploration in
Australia need not necessarily seek Australian participation
at the initial or ' grass roots' level of their exploration
activities i. e. up to the detailed proving stage, but that
in exploitation and development beyond these stages, the
Australian Government expects such companies to offer
Australian interests, private and public, every reasonable
opportunity as is practicable for participation in these
projects. The Government reaffirms that the development
of any oil * discoveries, as for minerals generally, will
be subject to approval by the Government in accordance
with the guidelines published by the Prime Minister
on 3 November 1974.
The Government makes clear too, that search
f or uranium in the Northern Territory will be done only
by the Atomic Energy Commission. Export licences will
not be issued where there is exploration with foreign
participation arranged after 31 October 1974. The
Australian Atomic Energy Commission will be the only
exporter of uranium wherever found.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 
GUIDELINES FORl r'Ow* H N WILITTrY PARTWI'TPATrON IN
AND) ( ONTI1efl ( W ; II: ti irqirN [ FNiI WoI ZY
i n s ; i i I i -in I t oret' i
' ihli Governmiient' s baicC i i s PtCo cnsuiie Lli Awn: t rali i'
minera rii'I osourcu arou doleIopil inI suich a w. Iy as to 1br i i loii IiiIII
WwwuiLtsL to the AustralIianu pcVo. if t his. obu~ ict-i I . in to Ao
I ' Ji! vt: d, ultimate( nfiluE ini ia t y~ lo t LiiAIIlora ioni, dvl c t t
ona~ ia, whlet her Austraia n or Foriqn-owodd, eng( aged~ it)
unpIorLi dtl) tr. lV v ' opmontF or pri n) i() i. in, muustCLCofio rui wi th the
nalt inal interes't. The Covoiuuioii will. use all of itPs pnorh,
InirInq i ts export and e: xcIh nq contrvol J) 0wnr s, to achie ve
Y[ ho G; overnmienit des ires;, as; ai ma jor oh]( c t. iye tQ promo Ie
Australianli eq. uit y An and contriol of itCs resource~ s and iridust ries,
aniii iiid) iilUL Australian ownershI i p compa-tibal o xii t Atralia' 5 longjtermi
cap it al requirements adi Ms neeicds for access t-o markets,
ManVdfced technology anid kflo\ I-iow The Coveruuwunt recoqn uses,
hou'vor that many of the i iuort2 in P exis tinhj unterpr isuengri~ dod
in t he dev'elopmentC of Aus t ral i~ esourrc es are under fore ign
eofui L ~' ontrol. For this reason, the promotion of Aus tralIian
oqu. ity in and contlt. of our cohnurces and industries must be:
v icoal~ an a longer-term Objent i
( iii) Rloles for the Public anud Pri vat-e Sectors.
The Government . recoqnisos that private participation in
explorat i. on and development " Q1i cont inue to On essential. A
MMiU liuivma l of activity will he achijeved onl y if there i. q
AIpMa, r tioiiipda tpi orniv abtoet h ebnyt erppurbilsiecs . b o ITLhise Gsouvcehr nmaenn tt hbere cPoMgAn aizrde s tahlseo' T~ aa
part1i cipatLion by conupan Les w il b. e dopoenit, on the prlopect of it
PC? tiu iiOi capit al hip loyed ui ilis1. comnhl( urate with the h igh
rinsnos iCt. 1iiCs involved.
Q v) xr lora t ion
The Government seeks Australian participation in mineral
expl1oration. it bolieves lho wever t hat becauge of the r isk!;
inVivd and Australia ' s Ilii itad capital resourices it in mo11c e
a op. vt ant to secure a htiq1h doqvcoo oh~ Auatraioc n equity part ici pation
ant: h n production sta96. The ' level opnient of aay mineral discoveries;
1willo, f course, he subject t o npprov" l by the Government in
aWCcd rdancL w. ith these quidel i. ns
Prorossinq
The Government's objectivo is the maximui level of mineral.
proce:. snc cons is tent withi thle rati onal use Wt Australia's re:. Ourcos. 
' i'Iit t int*( lni*( I al I ma jo) r inerai
-ol ai ly 4ikiV-' TI1t ! po i. of C() it. dC L uil I be
" oIL Hii t o' Vo fo rkril n( l: I~ a I qy ' ah) o I1Wt t~ i~ I rI It t) er( I f~* r'h
L I i I ( 0oVt Jim( I ~ i I IH i i i i iiit I t o1i n imi w i Ihi in 1 h " i
I; renponsili i Li V ho 1T reauiL onl Vo ret'tj q owtiors i i1)
,1i on riallcilij ( t.,) poc t It 1L, i i i a; L er V it l) u Env! rotliont and
k. k uitti, v, tLL i onf onl en1v] i oliie a1 I: s1, andt 1 I iv Al i n Is Lt! r f or U rl iii
i I Oihil Deveoment-ioi. bant and reqf Vaal asp; ect s. Thki WIi I1
-wi h. Governmentt in oitnut ing that ntaxit oum benelfi L acc~ rue
io Ulto0~ it 0 ]. lOat tr VeCof). I an at: w hio le. 



; PA
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 470
17 March' 1975
AUSTRALIAN BEEF EXPORTS WITH JAPAN
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlam, announced today
that the Japanese Government had allocated an im~ port
quota of 2,400 tonnes of beef for the Okinawa market.
Mr. Whitlam said the-Japanese Government had
made a simultaneous announcement of its decision in Tokyo
this afternoon. Commenting on the reopen-ing of the Japanese beef
market Mr. Whitlam, said:" The amount is not significant
compared with our peak exports tc Japan of 115,000 tonnes
in 1974. " What is welcome is the reaffirmation I have
received from the Japanese Goverrmen-t that they will
be approaching the question of further meat imports in a
forward looking constructive matter."
Mr. Whitlam said the Australian Government
expected that Australia would get at least its traditional
share of the new beef quota.
The Prime Minister said that the Australian
Government would continue to make strenuous efforts to
persuade the Japanese Government to purchase more Australian
meat. He recalled-that during the visit to Australia of
the then Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Tanaka, in November,
he took every opportunity both public-ly and in private,
to emphasise the plight of the Australian beef producers..
His colleague, the Minister for Agriculture, made similar
strong representations to senior Japanese ministers when he
was in Tokyo in October last year.
" jWe will continue to maintain our efforts and we
now have greater reason to hope for more substantial
development as the Japanese situation further improves,"
the Prime-Minister concluded.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE j
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBErRRA
TUIE-TrhAY, 18 ? V PCI 1975
PRIME MINISTER: Ladies and gentlemen, I understand that Mr
Bjelke-Petersen the Premier of Queensland, has claimed credit
for the sales of beef to Japan which I announced yesterday.
I should e'xplain that I instructed the Secretary of the Department
of Foreign Affairs, Mr Renouf, to raise this matter with
the Japanese Ambassador in Canberra on Saturday.
Over the last twelve months the Australian Government
has mounted a major effort to have the Japanese re-open their
beef market. Soon after imports were cut-in February last
year representations to Japanese officials and consultations
with them began. A formal Aide-Memoire protesting at the
action taken was lodged on 14 June after the ban was formally
imposed. in July a high level delegation led by Dr Harris,
then Deputy Secretary of the Department of Overseas Trade,
with senior industry representatives including the Chairman
of the Meat Board, Niisited Tokyo. Follow-up discussions with
Japanese officials took place in Canberra at the time of the
joint Agriculture talks in August last year with the Secretary
of the Department of Overseas Trade leading for the Australian side.
The Minister for Agriculture, Senator Wriedt, pressed
the matter with senior Japanese ministers during a visit to
Tokyo to discuss the supply of Australian primary products to
Japan, that was on the 10 of October last year. In the same
month, at the special meeting convened in Washington on
Australian initiative to discuss the world beef crisis and to
launch its proposal for an International Meat Consultative Group
( since successfully established in the GATT), the Japanese
were again pressed to re-open the market, that was on the 18th
of October. The matter arose in discussions between Prime Minister4
Tanaka and me on 1st of November. The Japanese were yet again
strongly urged to re-open the market.
As you know, the Queensland Premier has tried to
indulge in his own form of resources black-mail on this issue
threatening not to permit coal deposits in his State being exported
to Japan. He, of course, has no power in thi * s issue which the
Australian Constitution specifically provides is within the
power of the Australian Government and the Australian Parliament.
The Qucenslafid Minister for Agriculture was in.
Japan recently and has been negotiating with the Japanese
on some issues concerning the Queensland Government. However,
the Minister, Mr Sullivan assured the Australian Embassy that
he had no intention of seeking to negotiate on the beef issue.
It is nonsense for Mr Bjelke-Petersen to suggest
that his black-mail rather than our serious and consistent
negotiations have caused a change in the Japanese attitude on
this issue. Unlike Mr Bjelke-Petersen we are interested in
results rather than in grand-standing. 
-2-
QUESTION: The Country Party leader, Mr Anthony today called on
the Government to protest to thco North Vietnamese about the death
of Mr Graham Lewis. Have you done so, and do you intend to?
P19IME MINISTER: I haven't.
QUESTION: Has there been any progress or contact with the PRG
on the question of setting up an Information office in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: There was an approach through the North Vietnamese
and we said that any office in Australia would be along the lines
of those established in Scandinavia.
C-FSTION: Since late December there has not been a single petroleum
explcyration well drilled on land in Australia. This level of
zero being the worst for more than twenty years. How do you
reconcile this with Australias pressing future needs for oil
supplies? PRIME MINISTER: The people who have been exploring in* Australia
for oil, of course explore in many parts of the world. They have
thought that the prospect of finding oil on land where greater
in other parts of the world.
QUESTION: I understand that Mr Renouf also talked about the Nara
Treaty with the Japanese Ambassador at the weekend. Could you
say or could you outline the state of negotiations on that treaty
and would you say that it is, in jeopardy at the moment because
of the stalemate?
PRIME MINISTER: The negotiations have been temporarily suspended
while we wait for further clarification of the Japanese position
on a technical and legal point. When we receive this clarification
and if it meets our position, we expect the talks will 1? e
resumed and quickly concluded.
QUESTION: Can you tell us why you have not protested against
to the Vietnam Government over the death of Mr Lewis?
PRIME MINISTER: It's not clear who destroyed the plane. I am not
going to assume and I don't suppose anybody is in a position
to assume that it was the North Vietnamese the Viet Cong or the.
South Vietnamese. There is no information on it.
QUESTION: Are inquiries being made?
PRIME MINISTER! I think inquiries are being made, yes.
QUESTION: On the Nara Treaty again could you say what exactly
the hold up is, the particular clauses which are in dispute between
the Australian Government and the Japanese Government?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no I won't go into details on this. It is a
technical, narrow matter.
QUESTION: They don't concern Japanese ownership * of minerals and
resources in Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: No, that's not the precise issue. I 
QUESTION: Mr Stirn a French Government Minister said yesterday
that if it was possible there would be further atmospheric
nuclear tests in the Pacific. Would you comment on that?
PR. IME MINISTER: I saw a report to that effect. I had an hour
with him this afternoon he said nothing of the sort.
QUESTION': Senator Wheeldon announced that he had written to the
Federal Executive of the ALP asking them to take action against
Mr Bill Hartley over the PLO. Do you intend to support
Senator Wheeldon in that action?
PRIME MINISTER: This is a matter which w ' ill come Pefore the
Federal Executive, so I suppose I ) would have to express a view
in that body when I hear the facts. You wouldn't expect me
to pr !-judge the matter.
QUESTION: What priority do you place on re-establishing the
Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh? I just wondering, not'when,
but in what circumstances would it be re-established?
PRIME MINISTER: When Phnom Penh is safe.
QUESTION: fugardless of what government?
, PRIME MINISTER: Of course. We have made our attitude clear all
along, for over two years. That we will have diplomatic relations
with whatever government is installed in the Capital of Cambodia.
We have relations with the Lon Nol Government. Our diplomats
have been withdrawn because there was no sufficient Australian
interest to justify their being in jeopardy in Phnom Penh at
this time. And that attitude has been adopted by most other
countries which had diplomats still in Phnom Penh. We don't
believe that Australian lives should be jeopardised in the
circumstances there at this time.
QUESTION: Are you concerned that a possible change of Opposit~ in
leadership might open threats of an early election?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what the attitude of any of the
suggested contenders is on this matter. I find it difficult
to keep track of the attitude that Mr Snedden has expressed
from time to time on it. Indeed from week to week or day to day.
I got, the very distinct message, three or four weeks ago, that
he was challenging me, he was going to put me to the jump on
thi4s question of having a refusal of Supply and an election.
As I understand. he's changed his mind and guaranteed that there
will not be a refusal of Supply in the middle of this year.
I don't know what his guarantees are worth in this respect. I don't
remember any of the other contenders, any of the people who go
to these social gatherings on Sunday night, have said about this
matter. But of course the whole question is that it is the
Country Party which) in season and out of season, has said that
there should be a refusal of Supply. It first said that you
might remember in September 1973.1 And then six or seven months
later Mir Snedden agreed. Despite the fact that we won the election
and the coalition lost the election last May, thelte have again
been these threats. They were being bandied abroad in October
last year, they were being bandied about in February 
-4-
and March this year. Perhaps its well to recall that at the
election during the campaign last May neither side said
that if it failed to get a majority in the House of Representatives
it would use an evenly divided Senate to refuse Supply to the
s ide which got a majority in the House of Representatives.
I never said that if we only broke even in the Senate but didn't
have a majority still in the House of Representatives that we
would be using the evenly divided Senate to reject money bills.
Nor in fact did Mr Snedden. Nor in fact did Mr Anthony at that
time. But we all know what Mr Anthony's game is. He's bullying
Mr Snedden, who has shown on many occasions in Government and
in opposition that he will bow to Country Party pressure.
I'm told that Mr Fraser would do it more. discreetly. Hle would
i the arrangement with Mr Anthony in advance, that is they
would confer on a joint attitude, the Country Party attitude
would prevail but it would be done more decently, between
gentlemen rather than delivering an ultimatum publicly to
Mr Snedden who then after some hesitation would fall into line.
QUESTION: If there was a change in Opposition leadership who
would you see as a greater threat to you in the Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to come in on that. I'm quite
satisfied with the present leadership of the Opposition. I think
I express the view of my party in that respect.
QUESTION: How do you react Sir to statements by Mr Nixon of the
Country Party, that you are shielding Professor-Downing of the
ABC, for what he calls'inadequacies'i and from his statement
that thereare too many " pinkies" and even out and out socialists
in key positions in the ABC?
PRIME MINISTER: You come from one branch of the ABC? I don't
won't to do anything to jeopardise your position. What. has
Mr Nixon made another statement on this? Well quite frankly
I've got bigger fish to fry or to toast at this-moment than
Mr Nixon. I gather that Mr Nixon's original complaint was that
some ABC newscasts had referred to forces opposing the government
in South Vietnam or Cambodia. And Mr Nixon said that the ABC
should have said they were communists. I would have thought that
even Mr Nixon would know that its not only communists who are up
in arms against the government in Saigon and in Phnom Penh. These
simplifications do nobody any good at all. We suffered from that
sort of simplication too long. Sure its a better headline, single
word always is and particularly if it can Le abbreviated. But
there are very many elements including communists who are opposed
to the present regimes in Phnom Penh and in Saigon. I saw nothing
inaccurate in what the ABC said,, nothing objectionable and in most
countries nowadays this wouldn't have been regarded as inaccurate
or objectionable.
QOESTION: Mr Whitlam, Alan Thornhill, Sydney Morning Herald,
Mr Bjelke-Petersen suggests that you have his phone tapped,
whether jokingly or not, do you?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I can give you an unqualified assurance.
I've never heard of the suggestion before.
Incidentally, i've just been passed a note.
Our Embassy in Tokyo has been in contact with the Japanese 
department concerned, which cannot recall a telephone call from
Queensland oi,, 1ecf.
Perhaps I might mention, for the benefit of the record.
It would be well known to all you Ladies and Gentlemen, what
is the niain spring of the Country Party's stirring on this
question of an election. For entirely selfish and internal
reasons one can expect that the Opposition, whoever the leader
of it may be, would continue to agitate for an early election.
We were elected for three years, they sought to be election
for three years, we succeeded, they failed. Now, , there can be
no question that the public expects us to get on with the job,
unimpeded, uninterrupted, for that three years. But the
Country Party is constantly agitating on this question, and
bullying Mr Snedden and any other Liberal leaders or aspirants
who will yield to their bullying because they want another
election on the present boundaries.
Particularly, in the three largest States the
boundaries-are quite unacceptable. In New South Wales, in
Victoria, in Queensland, in each case there are some electorates
which now have more than 80,000 people on the roles, and there
are others which have fewer than 50,000 people on the roles.
In New South Wales, Mitchell has an enrolment, at the end of
last December of 82,700, Robertson of 81,000; on the other
hand, Hume has an enrolment of 49,800, and Darling an
enrolment of 46,600. In Victoria, Diamond Valley at the end
of December, had an enrolment of 86,000, Bourke 83,200; on
the other hand Malley had an enrolment of 49,600, Wimmera of
49,100. In Queensland, Macpherson had an enrolment of
93,100, another seat Maranoa had fewer than half that number,
46,300. There was another seat in Queensland with an enrolment
of 80,400, Bowman, and other one with an enrolment of 51,000,
Kennedy. Now I don't think that Australian democracy should
have to suffer such great disparity of numbers.. The Country
Party believe that those niumbers suit them; but I don't believe
that the Labor Party, or any self-respecting Liberals should
accept such a distortion of the democratic process in Australia.
The new distributions which have been put to the Parliament
provide that instead of there being a disparity of over 30,000
or even 40,000 between electorates in the three largest States,
in no case will tbere be a disparity of more than 5 or 6,000.
The electorates which are under the quota, are the growing ones;
the ones that are over the quota. on the new distribution proposals
are the ones which are static in population. That's the-. whole
objective of the Country Party, the present system suits them,
but it doesn't suit the other parties in the Parliament, nor
of course, should it suit electors in general. 



QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 1
MEDIBANK
BRAODCAST BY THE PRIE MINISTER FOR QUEEISIAND RADIO STATIONS, 23 MFIARCH 1975
THE MANAGEMENT OF THIS STATION HAS BEEN GOOD
ENOUGH TO INVITE ME TO TALK REGULARLY TO THE PEOPLE OF
QUEENSLAND ABOUT MATTERS OF CURRENT INTEREST, I AM
GRATEFUL FOR THIS OPPORTUNITY., IN THE WEEKS TO COME
I WANT TO TELL YOU SOMETHING OF WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN
S GOVERNMENT IS DOING, NOT ONLY FOR YOUR OWN GREAT
STATE, BUT FOR ALL THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE.
I. THOUGHT I WOULD BEGIN WITH A SUBJECT VERY
MUCH IN THE PUBLIC MIND, AND. IN THE HEADLINES, AT THE
MOMENT MEDIBANK. THIS IS THE NEW UNIVERSAL HEALTH
INSURANCE SCHEME TO BE INTRODUCED THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA
ON THE FIRST OF JULY. I SHALL TELL YOU SOMETHING OF
S WHAT IT MEANS IN A MOMENT, BUT FIRST LET ME EMPHASISE
THIS: MEDIBANK HAS BEEN THE POLICY OF THE LABOR PARTY
SINCE 1968. IT HAS BEEN ENDORSED BY THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE IN THE TWO FEDERAL ELECTIONS IN 1972 AND 1974.
WE HAVE SPENT YEARS DEVELOPING THE SCHEME AND MANY,
MANY MONTHS IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH INTERESTED GROUPS
DOCTORS, HEALTH FUNDS, THE STATES WORKING OUT'THE
DETAILS, I BELIEVE THAT BILL HAYDEN, THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, AND A QUEENSLANDER, HAS PERFECTED
ONE OF THE BEST HEALTH SCHEMES IN THE WORLD.. / 2 
-2-
THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE HAS TRIED HARD
TO BLOCK OUR PROPOSALS BUT IT HAS NOT SUCCEEDED.
-THE LEGISLATION HAD TO BE PASSED AT THE JOINT SITTING
OF THE PARLIAMENT LAST AUGUST. SO SIMPLY: MEDIBANK
IS THE LAW OF THE LANDO THE PEOPLE WANT IT. IT IS
GOING AHEAD ON SCHEDULE. AND IT IS GOING AHEAD AS
. PLANNED. MEDIBANK WILL MEAN THAT AFTER 1 JULY NO ONE
WILL HAVE TO PAY ANY CONTRIBUTIONS FOR MEDICAL INSURANCE
TO COVER DOCTORS' BILLS. THIS INSURANCE WILL B
FREE, DOCTORS WILL BE ABLE TO TREAT ANY PATIENT, AND
PATIENTS WILL BE FREE TO CONSULT ANY DOCTOR*. IF THE
DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL TO MEDIBANK, PATIENTS WILL PAY
NOTHING, IF THE DOCTOR PREFERS TO SEND HIS BILL TO THE
PATIENT IN THE OLD WAY, PATIENTS CAN CLAIM A REFUND FROM
MEDIBANK OF 85% OF THE BILL. THE PATIENT WILL PAY
THE REST, BUT NEVER MORE THAN $ 5 FOR ANY TREATMENT,-
NO MATTER HOW EXPENSIVE. You HEAR OUR OPRONENTS SAY THAT
MEDICAL .* INSURANCE WON'T REALLY BE FREE AT ALL THAT
IT'S GOING TO COST THE COUNTRY . SO MANY MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS. WELL OF COURSE, EVERYTHING COSTS MONEY, THE
DIFFERENCE IS THAT THE FUNDS FOR MEDIBANK WILL COME
FROM. OUR TAXES, JUST. AS FUNDS FOR OTHER GOVERNMENT
SERVICES LIKE EDUCATION, PENSIONS, THE DEFENCE
FORCES COME FROM OURTAXES, PEOPLE* WILL PAY NOTHING
THEMSELVES. HEALTH WILL BE A RESPONSIBILITY'OF
THE WHOLE COMMUNITY. 
-3-
WE THINK THIS IS A MUCH BETTER SYSTEM FOR A
NUMBER OF REASONS, IN THE FIRST PLACE IT IS SIMPLER
AND FAIRER, IT WILL DO AWAY WITH A HUNDRED OR MORE
SEPARATE, COMPETING, OVERLAPPING HEALTH FUNDS WHOSE
ACTIVITIES HAVE OFTEN LED TO WASTE AND INEFFICIENCY
IT WILL MEAN THAT EVERYONE IN THE COMMUNITY WILL BE
COVERED AUTOMATICALLY DON'T FORGET THERE ARE NOW OVER A
MILLION AUSTRALIANS WITH NO MEDICAL INSURANCE AT ALL,
IT'WILL MEAN BETTER TREATMENT FOR-PENSIONERS AND
THOSE MOST IN NEEDS AND FOR EVERYONE IT WILL MEAN
NO MORE WORRY OR FINANCIAL EMBARRASSMENT IN'MEEtING THE
COST OF CONTRIBUTIONS$ I HAVE MENTIONED THE MEDICAL SIDE OF OUR SCHEME.
THAT'S GOING AHEAD WHATEVER THE STATES MAY DO, THEHOSPITAL
SIDE IS MORE COMPLICATED, IT DEPENDS ON
WHETHER THE STATES AGREE TO CO-OPERATE WITH
MEDIBANK OR NOT, IF THEY DO, HOSPITAL CARE IN GENERAL
p WARDS WILL COST NOTHING THE AUSTRALIAN. GOVERNMENT AND
THE STATE GOVERNMENT WILL SHARE THE COST FOR EACH
PATIENT, WE HAVE OFFERED THE-STATES SUBSTANTIAL FUNDS FOR
THIS PURPOSE, NoW I KNOW THAT HERE IN QUEENSLAND YOU ALREADY
HAVE FREE HOSPITAL TREATMENT IT WAS A LABOR GOVERNMENT
IN THIS STATE THAT KEPT YOUR FREE HOSPITAL'SCHEME GOING
AFTER MR MENZIES IN THE 1950' WITH A COUNTRY PARTY
MINISTER OF HEALTH, BROKE OFF THE AGREEMENTS WHICH
THE CHIFLEY LABOR GOVERNMENT HAD MADE WITH EVERY STATE
FOR FREE HOSPITALS BACK IN 1947. 
-41-
So YOU MAY THINK IT DOESN'T MATTER MUCH TO QUEENSLANDERS
WHETHER YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT JOINS MEDIBANK OR NOT.
SWELL, IT DOES MATTER. IT'S TRUE THAT YOU WOULD CONTINUE
TO HAVE FREE PUBLIC WARD TREATMENT AS LONG AS
THE STATE PROVIDES IT BUT IF QUEENSLAND JOINS THE
MEDIBANK SCHEME YOU STATE WILL BE GETTING MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN EXTRA FUNDS ABOUT $ 50 MILLION A YEAR
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THESE FUNDS WOULD
GREATLY EASE THE BURDEN ON YOUR STATE FINANCES. THEY COULD
BE USED TO BUY MORE HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT OR EMPLOY MORE S
STAFF THINGS WHICH QUEENSLAND HOSPITALS SORELY NEED,
So BY JOINING MEDIBANK, QUEENSLAND WILL BE MUCH BETTER OFF
THAN IF SHE DOESN'T JOIN. WITH OR WITHOUT MEDIBANK, THE
FACT IS THAT HOSPITAL COSTS ARE GOING TO GO ON RISING,
BECAUSE HEALTH CARE EVERYWHERE IS BECOMING MORE
EXPENSIVE, MORE IN DEMAND. WITH MEDIBANK, YOUR STATE
GOVERNMENT WON'T HAVE TO BEAR SINGLE-HANDED THIS
INEVITABLE BURDEN OF RISING COSTS. THAT MEANS MORE MONEY
TO SPEND ON OTHER THINGS SCHOOLS, ROADS, RAILWAYS,
COMMUNITY FACILITIES FOR THE BENEFIT OF QUEENSLAND PEOPLE.
ALSO, UNDER MEDIBANK, PRIVATE HOSPITALS WILL BE GETTING
ANOTHER $ 16 A DAY FOR EVERY PATIENT. So IT'S NOT JUST
PUBLIC HOSPITALS, BUT PRIVATE HOSPITALS, THAT STAND TO
GAIN. 
I THE STATE GOVERNMENTS ARE NOW DECIDING THEIR
ATTITUDES TO THE MEDIBANK HOSPITAL PROPOSALS, Two
STATES TASMANIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAVE ALREADY
COME IN, I HOPE QUEENSLAND WILL JOIN THEM, I WOULDN'T
ENVY A STATE PREMIER WHO HAD TO EXPLAIN TO HIS FELLOWCITIZENS
WHY HE'S DECIDED TO DEPRIVE THEM OF
MILLION A YEAR. DON'T FORGET: MEDIBANK WILL BE
STARTING IN JULY WHETHER QUEENSLAND JOINS OR NOT.
WHATEVER HAPPENS, QUEENSLANDERS WILL BE GETTING THE
BENEFITS OF FREE MEDICAL INSURANCE, I WANT THEM TO
GET THE EXTRA BENEFITS OF THE HOSPITAL SCHEME AS WELL$
I WANT THEM TO BE FULL PARTNERS IN A SCHEME THAT MEANS
BETTER HEALTH AND GREATER HAPPINESS AND SECURITY FOR ALL.
AUSTRALIANS, 



jA 6STRA L 1
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 472
23 March 1975
P. R. S. REVIEW 0O' HOUSING POLICY
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, said
today that the Priorities Review Staff were undertaking,
at his request, a complete review of Australian
Government policies on housing. Mr Whitlam said he
expected the review would include an examination of the
efficiency with which various objectives were being met
and an exploration of the options available to the
Government. Departments of the Australian Government
were co-operating with the PRS. Mr Whitlam hoped
there would also be co-operation and assistance from
other individuals and institutions approached for
views or information.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 



VICTORIAN AL. P. CONFERENCE
NATIONAL SCIENCE CENTRE, PARKSVILLE,
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR WHITLAM,
SUNDAY, 23 MARCH, 1975.
THE CONTINUING LEADERSHIP CRISIS IN THE LIBERAL
PARTY IS NOW IN ITS NINTH YEAR/ THERE IS NO REASON TO
BELIEVE THAT. LAST FRIDAY'S DECISION HAS REALLY SETTLED
ANYTHINGx THE WAR OF THE LIBERAL SUCCESSION HAS BECOME
WAR BY ATTRITIONX THERE MAY BE, AFTER THE MELODRAMA OF
THE LAST FORTNIGHT, A PERIOD OF TEMPORARY TRUCE, BUT IT
WILL BE ONLY THE PEACE OF EXHAUSTIONX FOR THE FACT
REMAINS THAT IN ALL THOSE NINE YEARS OF STRUGGLE AND
BLOOD-LETTING, IN ALL THOSE SEVEN CONTESTS INVOLVING
CHALLENGES TO THE LEADERSHIP, THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A REAL
DEBATE ABOUT ISSUES, ABOUT THE DIRECTION THE LIBERAL
PARTY SHOULD TAKE OR ABOUT THE DIRECTION IT WANTS
AUSTRALIA TO TAKEX
THE MOST DEPRESSING ASPECT OF THE CRISIS IN THE
LIBERAL PARTY HAS BEEN, AND REMAINS, THE FUNDAMENTAL
TRIVIALITY OF THE TERMS IN WHICH THE DEBATE HAS BEEN
CONDUCTEDX NONE OF THE PROTAGONISTS S: EM TO BE AWARE
THAT A CHANGE IN PARTY LEADERSHIP HAS DEEP IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE DIRECTION THAT PARTY WILL TAKEX AND THIS IS HOW
IT HAS BEEN FOR NEARLY A DECADEX 
-2-
THE DESTRUCTION OF SO MANY LIBERAL LEADERS GOES
DEEPER THAN THE MERE CONFLICT OF PERSONALITIES AND
PERSONAL AMBITIONS, PRETTY SAVAGE AS THAT HAS BEEN; IT
HAS BEEN A DIRECT RESULT OF THE SHEER NEGATIVISM OF THE
LIBERAL PARTY&gt; THE
EXCRUCIATING BARRENESS OF THE LIBERAL APPROACH HAS BEEN
PAINFULLY EXPOSED IN THE PAST TWO YEARS)
WHEN THE APPARATUS OF GOVERNMENT WAS TAKEN AWAY AFTER
23 YEARS, THE LIBERALS HAD PRECIOUS LITTLE TO SAY OR TO
DO) YOU REMEMBER THAT WHEN THEY FORCED ON THE. MAY
ELECTIONS THEY TOOK A WEEK OFF TO DEVISE POLICIES FOR
THE ELECTION) WE'VE HEARD NOTHING OF THEM SINCEX ALL
WE HAD WAS A PRE-OCCUPATION WITH TACTICS ELECTORAL
TACTICS, PARLIAMENTARY TACTICS AND ABOVE ALL, ULTIMATELY
FATAL TO BILL SNEDDEN, PARTY TACTICSy AND IN THIS SENSE
BILL SNEDDEN HAS BEEN A VICTIM-OF LIBERAL PARTY NEGATIVENESSA
THE ABSORPTION WITH TACTICS, THE DELIBERATE DAMAGING
CREATION OF ELECTION HYSTERIA, INEVITABLY MEANT A PRE-OCCUPATION
WITH PERSONALITIES RATHER THAN POLICIES, PERSONAL
CONFRONTATION RATHER THAN DEVELOPMENT OF RELEVANT POLICIESx
YOU HEAR A GREAT DEAL OF TALK ABOUT PARLIAMENTARY
PERFORMANCESX OF COURSE, THAT IS AN IMPORTANT ASPECT OF
POLITICS IN A PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEMx IT IS A TEST, A VALID
TEST OF LEADERSHIP BUT IT IS ONLY ONE OF MANYX BUT IN
THEIR SELF-CREATED OBSESSION WITH ELECTIONS, THE LIBERALS
TOOK A SINGLE POOR PERFORMANCE IN PARLIAMENT AS A CATASTROPHE) 
-3-
BECAUSE THERE IS NO ESSENTIAL UNDERPINNING OF A
POLICY, OF A PHILOSOPHY, OF ANYTHING THAT COULD BE
DESCRIBED AS A WELL MOTIVATED, PURPOSEFUL PARTY,
PERSONALITIES HAVE BECOME EVERYTHING TO THE LIBERALSX
THE THREAT OF USING THE SENATE TO FORCE OUT THE
ELECTED GOVERNMENT TO FALSIFY DEMOCRACY ONCE AGAIN
WAS AN ATTEMPT TO MAKE US LOSE OUR NERVE; ALL THAT HAS
HAPPENED IS THAT THE LIBERALS HAVE LOST THEIR HEADx
I NOTE THAT MR FRASER HAS STATED THE CORRECT DEMOCRATIC
PRINCIPLE THAT A GOVERNMENT SUSTAINED BY A COMFORTABLE
AND ASSURED MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, THE
PEOPLE'S HOUSE, SHOULD RUN THE FULL TERM FOR WHICH IT
WAS ELECTEDX TRUE, HE QUALIFIES THIS SOMEWHAT BY CURIOUS
REFERENCES TO CATCHING ME WITH MY PANTS DOWNX I'M SURE I
DON'T KNOW WHAT HE MEANSX
THE PEOPLE ARE ENTITLED TO INSIST THAT MR FRASER
STICKS TO HIS ORIGINAL UNDERTAKING HIS FIRST PROMISE. AS
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION THAT THE DECISION THE PEOPLE
MADE LAST MAY WILL BE ADHERED TOx AFTER ALL, IT IS MY
PREROGATIVE AS PRIME MINISTER TO ADVISE THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL
WHEN, AND ON WHAT GROUNDS, AN ELECTION WILL BE CALLEDx
4 
IF I WERE ABSORBED IN THE BATTLE OF PARLIAMENTARY AND
ELECTORAL TACTICS I COULD CALL ONE NOW,( I HAVE EVERY
GROUNDJ FOR ITx I ALREADY HAVE THE GROUNDS FOR A DOUBLE
DISSOLUTION I COULD TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE. PRESENT
DISARRAY OF THE LIBERAL PARTY&amp; I COULD BE AS-FULLY
JUSTIFIED IN THAT COURSE AS SIR ROBERT MENZIES WAS IN 1955,
BARELY A YEAR AFTER THE 1954 ELECTIONSA I FORBEARA THE
SMASHING ADVANTAGE WE WOULD HAVE COULD NOT JUSTIFY THE
DAMAGE YET ANOTHER INTERRUPTION A SUSPENSIOR OF THE PROPER
BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT FOR THREE OR FOUR MONTHS WOULD DOA
WHAT REMAINS TO BE SEEN IS WHETHER MR FRASER WAS REALLY
STATING A PRINCIPLE OR AN EXPEDIENTA. FOR IN HIS SITUATION
IT IS CERTAINLY NO SACRIFICE ON HIS PART TO ABJURE AN EARLY
ELECTIONx, THE REAL TEST OF HIS CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES
IS YET TO COMEX
AND OF COURSE ALL HIS REAL TESTS ARE YET TO COME,
FOR A MAN WHO HAS BEEN IN PARLIAMENT 20 YEARS, MR FRASER
IS CURIOUSLY UNKNOWN. A THERE IS NOBODY SO PROMINENT IN
PUBLIC LIFE WHOSE STANCE ON THE WIDER RANGE OF ISSUES IS
SUCH AN ENIGMAL ONLY JOHN GORTON CLAIMS TO KNOW WHAT HE
REALLY STANDS FOR$ e 
BUT HIS CRUCIAL TESTS IN THI IMMEDIATE FUTURE ARE
THESE:-HIS ATTITUDE TO SENATE OBSTRUCTION
HIS RELATIONS WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY
( REDISTRIBUTION)
HIS ATTITUDE TO THE IRRESPONSIBILITY
AND SOCIAL SABOTAGE OF THE ANTI-LABOR
STATES. ( VIC, CHALLENGE MEDIBANK)
THESE THREE MATTERS ARE CLOSELY CONNECTEDK AFTER
ALL, ONE OF THE FUSES WHICH SET OFF LAST WEEK'S EXPLOSION
WAS MR ANTHONY'S THREAT TO BLOCK MEDIBANK IN THE SENATE
AND THE REFUSAL OF THE ANTI-LABOR STATES TO CO-OPERATE IN
MAKING MEDIBANK WORK RAISES A GREAT NATIONAL ISSUE WHICH,
HAD WE BEEN FORCED INTO IT, WE SHOULD HAVE BEEN PERFECTLY
PREPARED TO FIGHT ON FOR THE FOURTH TIMEX
MR FRASER HAS ACKNOWLEDGED THAT MEDIBANK IS THE LAW
OF THE LAND AND THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS THE RIGHT TO BE ABLE
TO APPLY THE LAW AND COMPLY WITH ITA BUT HIS GESTURE IS
MEANINGLESS UNLESS HE IS PREPARED TO USE HIS INFLUENCE ON
HIS COLLEAGUES IN THE NON-LABOR STATES TO GET THEM TO STOP
SHILLY-SHALLYING AND TO STOP PLAYING AR) UND WITH THE HEALTH
AND WELL-BEING OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLEX a 
THE VICTORIAN PREMIER AND THE VICTORIAN MINISTER
FOR HEALTH, MR SCANLAN, NOW PLEAD FOR MORE TIMES
WHAT ARE THE FACTS?
THERE WERE INITIAL MEETINGS BETWEEN BILL HAYDEN AND
THE VICTORIAN HEALTH MINISTER ON MEDIBANK IN OCTOBER AND
NOVEMBER 1973. y,
I WROTE TO MR HlAMER ON 15 AUGUST, 1974 SETTING OUT
OUR PROPOSALS)( SAID:
" NOW THAT THE HEALTH INSURANCE ACT HAS BEEN PASSED
BY THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT, I AM NOW IN A POSITION* TO
PUT TO YOUR GOVERNMENT A FIRM PROPOSAL FOR AN AGREEMENT
WITH my GOVERNMENT CONCERNING THE PROVISION OF HOSPITAL
SERVICES AND THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC HOSPITAL OPERATING COSTSA
THE OBJECTIVES OF THE AGREEMENTS WILL BE TO'
ENSURE THAT EVERY PERSON HAS ACCESS TO COMPREHENSIVE HOSPITAL
CARE, INCLUDING MEDICAL TREATMENT, PROVIDED FREE OF CHARGE
IN STANDARD BEDS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN A WAY THAT WILL NOT
PLACE ANY IMPEDIMENT IN THE WAY OF PERSONS BEING ABLE TO
SEEK PRIVATE TREATMENT-IN PUBLIC HOSPITALS, IF. THEY SO WISHX
_ F_ 
-7-
" to Tills END, TI1E TI:. a1; () 17 [ HiE AGREIMEIIf S WILL VISUALISE
TIlE REMOVAL, WHERE APPLICABLE, OF MEANS TESTS WHICH
DECIDE ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION TO STANDARD BED PUBLIC
HOSPITAL ACCOMMODATION AND TREATMENT; ABOLITION OF STANDARD
WARD FEES; THE PROVISION OF FREE MEDICAL SERVICES TO
HOSPITAL PATIENTS; THE METHOD OF PAYMENT OF DOCTORS
PROVIDING MEDICAL SERVICES TO HOSPITAL PATIENTS AND THE
SETTING OF SPECIFIED FEES TO BE CHARGED FOR CERTAIN CATEGORIES
OF INPATIENTSI " FOR ITS PART, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL UNDERTAKE
TO MAKE PAYMENTS TO BOTH INDIVIDUAL HOSPITALS AND STATE PUBLIC
HOSPITAL AUTHORITIES WHICH WOULD AMOUNT TO 50% OF THE NET
OPERATING COSTS OF THE PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN THE STATES"
I RECEIVED AN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT4 ON 5 SEPTEMBER BILL
HAYDEN WROTE TO MR SCANLAN SETTING OUT THE MATTERS TO BE
SORTED OUT AT THE OFFICIAL LEVELf,
ON 2 DECEMBER I WROTE AGAIN TO MR HAMER SEEKING AN
EARLY DECLARATION OF THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE,( 
-8-
ON 12 DECEMBER MY DEPARTMENT RECEIVED AN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
FROM THE SECRETARY OF THE PREMIER'S DEPARTMENT(
AND ON FRIDAY ( 21 MARCH 1975) I AT LAST RECEIVED A
REPLY FROM MR HAMER SAYING,'" MR SCANLAN IS SEEKING EARLY
DISCUSSIONS WITH MR HAYDEN TO CLARIFY THE OUTSTANDING ISSUES.",
THAT'S HOW HAMER MAKES THINGS HAPPEN&amp; 9/, 
-9-
WE ARE ALSO ENTITLED TO KNOW MR FRASER'S ATTITUDE
TO THE POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES OF THE VICTORIAN CHALLENGE IN
THE HIGH COURT TO THE VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLANX THERE ARE 57 PROGRAMS IMPERILED BY THIS CHALLENGE
SOME OF THEM INITIATED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF WHICH MR FRASER
WAS A MEMBERK THE POLITICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS CHALLENGE
IS THAT IT IS ONE OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE VERY RAPID
SHIFT TO THE RIGHT, THE SHIFT TOWARDS REACTION WHICH IS
TAKING PLACE IN THE LIBERAL PARTY, NOT LEAST HERE IN VICTORIAK
MR FRASER'S STANCE ON THIS MATTER NOT JUST THE CHALLENGE
BUT ON ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR WEAKENING THE NATION'S WELFARE
SYSTEM WILL BE A CRITICAL TEST ABOUT WHERE HE REALLY
WANTS TO TAKE HIS PARTYK 
JUST AS CRUCIAL FOR TIE FUTURE ( O THE LIBERAL PARTY
WILL BE MR FRASER'S ATTITUDE TO OUR FIGHT FOR EOUAL
ELECTORATES THAT TIIE VOTE OF EACH AUSTRALIAN WILL HAVE
EQUAL WORTH WHEREVER HE OR SHE LIVES.
ONE OF THE REAL SIGNIFICANT RESULTS OF LAST FRIDAY'S
DECISION WAS TO REDUCE TO ALMOST NOTHING THE REPRESENTATION
OF METROPOLITAN ELECTORATES AT THE LEADERSHIP LEVEL OF THE
COALITION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. OF THE FOUR
ONLY MR LYNCH NOW REPRESENTS SUCH AN AREA. So I DON'T SEE
MUCH REASON TO MODIFY THE STATEMENT THAT METROPOLITAN
REPRESENTATION THE EFFECTIVE VOICE OF AREAS TYPICAL OF
WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS LIVE HAS BEEN REDUCED TO ALMOST
NOTHING. 11/ 
-11.-
MR SNEDDEN LEIT OFFICE ON FRIDAY AND HE DID IT
WITH ADMIRABLE GRACE SAYING THAT THE LIBERAL PARTY " HAD
ENTERED A NEW ERA", t THERE IS CERTAINLY A FAIR AMOUNT OF
AMBIGUITY IN THAT MR GORTON OBVIOUSLY AGREES THAT IT IS
A NEW ERA FOR THE LIBERAL PARTY AND IT IS ONE'IN WHICH HE
DOES NOT WANT TO TAKE PART, WHATEVER IT MEANS FOR WHAT IS
LEFT OF THE LIBERAL PARTY, IT DOES MEAN FOR THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT AND THE LABOR PARTY AT ALL LEVELS, A GOOD
OPPORTUNITY TO GET ON WITH THE JOB FOR WHICH WE HAVE BEEN
TWICE ELECTED, TO GET ON WITH THE BUSINESS OF IMPLEMENTING
THE PROGRAM WHICH THE PEOPLE HAVE TWICE ENDORSED AND TO
CONTINUE THE JOB OF DEVELOPING FURTHER POLICIES TO ENSURE
YET ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR OUR CAUSE AT THE NEXT ELECTIONSV 



2
Press Statement No. 471
23 March 1975
VISIT OF PRESIDENT SUHARTO
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced
that President Suharto of Indonesia would pay an informal
visit to Australia from 3 to 5 April. The visit will take
place in North Queensland. The Prime Minister and
President Suharto will have informal discussions. The
program will include a visit by the President to a
cattle station. President Suharto will be accompanied by two
ministers, the Minister for Agriculture, Mr Thojib Hadiwidjaja,
the State Secretary and Minister of State Lieutenant General
Sudharmono and several senior officials.
The visit is a continuation of the informal round
of discussions initiated in Yogyakarta and Wonosobo in
September last year. It was decided then that President
Suharto would try to pay a return visit to Australia at
a mutually convenient time in the first six months of
1975.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



3cV;
PRIME MINISTER~ Press Statement No. 474
24 March 1975
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTERS OF
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed that the'economic
relationship between New Zealand and Australia was of
special significance to the two countries.
It was recognised that there was a need to
look beyond the precise balancing of advantages in
trade negotiations to ensure that the long term benefits
of wide economic co-operation were not obscured.
Accordingl. y it was agreed that the two
Governments would ur. dertakea comprehensive study of
ways to achieve more effectively the fundamental objective
of economic co-operation and of making the best possible
use of the resources of the two countries.
The Prime Ministers noted that considerable progress
had been made in reaching solutions to problems in the
sale of clothes driers and carpets to Australia.
following M4r Crean' s recent visit to New Zealand.
Although final details had yet to be worked out a position
had been arrived at which could enable free trade in
clothes' driers between Australia and New Zealand.
On carpets an approach was being evolved under
which New Zealand carpets could have access to Australia
at a volume which would maintain traditional trade levels.
Industries of the two countries were now being consulted,
and final decisions in these areas are expected to be
announced shortly by the appropriate Ministers.
The two Prime Ministers welcomed the increase
in Ministerial contacts that had taken place between
Australia and New Zealand in the past year.
They agreed that the volume of exchanges, particularly.
in the * conomia area* was now such that thexre would be merit
in establishing arrangements vhiai~ would enable relevant.
Ministers to take an overall view of the relationship OptWeen
the two countries. 
-2-
The Prime Ministers agreed that Ministers in
the economic area, particularly those Ministers concerned
with finance, overseas trade and manufacturing industry,
should meet collectively at intervals of from 12-18 months,
alternatively in Wellington and Canberra.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



S 4 Press Statement No. 473
24 March 1975
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr E. G. Whitlam
and the Premier of New South Wales, Mr T. L. Lewis
FINANCE FOR STATE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS'
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, and the Premierof
New South Wales, Mr T. L. Lewis, have signed six agreements
which will provide $ 73,927 million to New South Wales for
urban and regional development programs in 1974/ 75.
The agreements between the Australian Government and
the N. S. W. Government have been made under the Urban and
Regional Development ( Financial Assistance) Act, 1974.
This allows the Australian Government to agree with a
State Government on financial assistance to provide for
spending by a State or an approved body in a State on urban
and regional development programs.
The six agreements and the financial assistance to
be given under each are:
The National Sewerage Program
Urban Land Council
Sydney South-4est Sector
( Campbelltown/ Holsworthy)
Area Improvement Programs
Bathurst/ Orange
National Estate Program $ 42,000, OCO
$ 10,400,006
$ 10,000,000 5,500,000 5,000,000 1,027,000
Mr Whitlam and Mr Lewis said that the agreements
were an example of effective co-operation between the two
Governments in programs for urban and regional development.
They gave these broad details of the programs.
National Sewerage Program
Some details of the program had been announcedrecently
by the Minister for Urban and Regional Development,
Mr Tom Uren and the N. S. W. Minister for Public Works and
Ports, Mr-Leon Punch. / 2 S
4 VI
.) jA3SjT ALI( A, 
-2-
The aims of the program were to remove existing
backlogs of unsewered homes, to improve sewage treatment,
and to ensure that by 1982 all new homes could be connected
to a proper sewerage system. The program would also
contribute to the treatment of industrial wastes and the
protection of receiving waters. In addition the program
would support research and forward planning connected with
sewerage schemes. In 1974/ 75 the program had been extendea to cover
smaller cities and centres. In N. S. W. these areas would
benefit from the program: Gosford, Wyong, Tweed Heads,
Armidale, Dubbo, Goulburn, Queanbeyanr Tamworth, Wagga Wagga,
Broken Hill, Bathurst and Orange.
Funds were to be made available on the basis of
as a non-repayable grant and the remaining 7M% to be
provided by way of an advance repayable over 40 years with
interest at the long term bond rate currently 9h% p. a.
Urban Land Council
This would allow the N. S. W. Government, with.
financial assistance from the Australian Government, to
expand the provision of home sites at reasonable prices. The
program was designed to have a significant impact on
stabilising the land market.
An Urban Land Council would be set up as. an
advisory body linked to the New South Wales Planning and
Environment Commission. It would be staffed and chaired
by the Commission with a part-time membership from State
agencies and the Australian Government.
The amount to be provided to the State would be
repayable only from the revenues of the program, to the
Commonwealth over 30 years with interest at the long term
bond rate.
Sydney South-West Sector ( Campbelltown/ Holsworthy)
A total of $ 10 million would be made available
in 1974/ 75 to the Interim Development Authority for the
Sydney South-West Sector.
million would be for land acquisition
million for acquiring land for urban use, and the remainder
for acquiring open space land in the Camden Park Estate.
The remaining $ 2.5 millionwould go'to development
works, including roads, bridges, sewerage and flood
mitigation in Minto, Ingleburn and Campbellt9wn.
The amount to be made available for the acquisitioqn
of the Camden Park Estate would be by way of a non-repayable
grant and would represent two-thirds of the total cost of
acquisition. The balance of the amount to be advanced to the
state would be repayable only from the revenues of the program
over a period of 30 years with interest at the long te ijq~ nd rate. 
-3-
Area Improvement Programs
These programs aim to link Australian, State and
Local Government with community groups in a co-operative
effort to improve the standard of service and facilities in
areas where deficiencies exist.
So far, Area Improvement programs have been
established in five regions in N. S. W. South Sydney,
Western Sydney, Hunter, Illawarra, and South-East N. S. W.
Mr Uren and the N. S. W. Deputy Premier and Minister
for Local Government and Tourism,-Sir Charles Cutler, had
announced most of the programs to be ' funded in 1974/ 75.
The amounts to be made available to N. S. W. under
this agreement would be provided as a non-repayable grant.
Bathurst/ Orange A total of $ 5 million would be made available for
Bathurst/ Orange Growth Centre development $ 4 million for
land acquisition by the Development Corporation and $ 1 million
for municipal backlog works by local government.
The amount to be provided for land acquisition
would be repayable over a period cf 30 years with interest
at the long term bond rate. Funds for municipal backlog
works would be provided on the basis of 1/ 3rd grant and
2/ 3rds advance repayable only from the revenues of theprogram
over 30 years with interest at the long term bond
rate. National Estate Program
In 1974/ 75 the Australian Government would assist
46 programs in N. S. W. to help preserve the National Estate.
These included the resto'ration of historic buildingq
and other items of historic value, the acquisition of land
for public conservation purposes and the preparation of
conservation studies and education programs.
Details of the programs would be announced as soon
as possible by Mr tken and the New South Wales Minister
for Planning and Environment, Sir John Fuller.
Funds for the programs would be made available to
New South Wales-as a nyon-repayable grant.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



AU1 8ALIA 0
IPRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 475
26 March 1975
MESSAGE OF CONDOLENCE ON THE DEATH OF KING FAISAL
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, has sent the
following message of condolence to King Khalid the new ruler of
Saudi Arabia upon the death of King Faisal:
" On behalf of the Australian Government, may
I convey to you my deep regret and sincere condolences at the
tragic death of the late King Faisal, whose wise and constructive
leadership in Saudi Arabia and in the whole Middle East region
we have greatly admired. This event has been received with
sorrow in Australia." E. G. Whitlam, Prime Minister of Australia.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 


PRESS STATEMENT NO. 47627 March 1975AUSTRALIA POLICEThe Prime Minister announced today the first steps in the formation of a service to be known as the Australia Police. 
He notified the appointment of Mr Kep Enderby, as Minister of a new Department of Police and Customs. The new Department would be formed out of the Department of Customs and Excise, the Commonwealth Police and the Police Forces of the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory. The Permanent Head of the new Department is Mr A. T. Carmody formerly head of the Department of Customs and Excise.&nbsp;
Mr Enderby will also retain his portfolio of Attorney-General.&nbsp;&nbsp;
The amalgamation of federal law enforcement agencies is one of the objectives of the Government which Mr Whitlam announced in his policy speech in November 1972.&nbsp;
This action has been taken after wide ranging discussions with those concerned. It represents a major step in integration of the law enforcement agencies; it will achieve more efficient operations generally and in particular it will enable a concerted effort to be made against white collar or corporate crime. At the same time the creation of the integrated Police service will provide the Australian Government with the opportunity to build into the new system proper and better safeguards for the rights of the individual.&nbsp;
In its operations the Australia Police will have regard for the Government's policy to place emphasis on the prevention of crime and the protection of the rights of citizens.&nbsp;
The Australia Police will operate initially under existing legislation but the drafting of an Australia Police Bill will begin immediately. This will provide for a common framework for the operation of ' all the components of the Australia Police, for specialised training and for the appointment of an independent tribunal to investigate complaints against the police.&nbsp;&nbsp;
The Bill will also lay down guidelines to members of the service to preserve and reinforce civil rights and liberties. It will provide that there will be no discrimination against any sector of the community and will facilitate public scrutiny of police operations. The Bill will reflect the Government's policy to develop a well trained and educated police service equal to any national police force in the world.&nbsp;&nbsp;
The new Police Service will have increased capacity to deal with areas of federal law under new legislation being developed by the Government. It will involve an increase in responsibility for Commissioners of Police in the A. C. T. and Northern Territory. More effective liaison arrangements will also be developed between the Department of Police and Customs and the law enforcement sections of other Departments.&nbsp;&nbsp;
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
&nbsp;



Acting MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
FOR PRESS AUSTRALIA AID TO REFUGEES IN INDO-CHINA
The Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that a contribution of $ 200,000 was being given as an initial
response to an urgent appeal from the International Committee of
the Red Cross for funds to assist its Indo-China Operational Group
in making purchases for refugees in Cambodia and Vietnam. A
Wcheque for this amount was given to the President of ICRC by the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, in Geneva yesterday.
The Australian Government is giving money to the ICRC and
similar organisations because they are uniquely qualified to assist
refugees on both sides of the existing lines of military control.
Clear information about the requirements of the vast numbers
of displaced persons in Cambodia and Vietnam is difficult to obtain
under present circumstances but the immediate cash grant will allow
purchases of food, tents and medical supplies. As the situation
develops, Australia will look sympathetically at the possibility of
giving further aid through the Red Cross and similar organisations.
Mr Whitlam commended the extremely valuable work being carried
out by the Red Cross and by other mult'Cilateral organisations in
the very difficult conditions in Indo-China. Earlier contributions
to the Red Cross for Indo-China relief made by Australia were
$ 277,000 in 1973/ 74 and $ 100,000 in November 1974. Contributions
were also made in November last to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees ($ 500,000) and to UNICEF ($ 400,000).
Mr Whitlam said that the Australian Government was in close
contact with all the international humanitarian organisations caring
for refugees in Vietnam and Cambodia and he anticipated that
substantial further contributions would be made by Australia if the
situation so required.
CanberraCanbMearrrcah2 81 975 



SPEECH BY THE PRJN'E MINISTER, E. G. WHIT1LJ1, M.
TO THE APEX CONVENT1iOWI ALURY
FRIDAY, 1VLARCH 2 1975
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION A NEW PARTNERSHIP
THE BASIC CONTRACT BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WAS SPELT OUT IN THE POLICY
SPEECH WHICH I DELIVERED ON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTY FOR THE ELECTIONS OF i972. IN THAT SPEECH I SAID:-
" OUR PROGRAM HAS THREE GREAT AIMS. THEY ARE:
To PROMOTE EQUALITY;
To INVOLVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN
THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF OUR' LAND;
AND TO LIBERATE THE TALENTS AND UPLIFT THE
HORIZONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE".
THE INTERVENING TWO YEARS'AND FOUR MONTHS HAS
BEEN A PERIOD OF VERY GREAT TURBULENCE AND TURMOIL AT HOME
AND AROUND THE WORLD. GOVERNMENTS EVERYWHERE HAVE HAD TO
DEAL WITH PROBLEMS OF RAPID CHANGE NOT EXPERIENCED IN THE
LIFETIME OF THE OLDEST OF US HERE, IN ALL THE MIXED ECOr" OMIES1
THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM IS UNDERGOING UNEXAMPLED STRESS. IN ALL
THE DEMOCRACIES, THE POLITICAL SYSTEMS ARE UNDER PROFOUND
CHALLENGE. GOVERNMENTS, BUSINESSe ORGANISATIONS, GROUPS,
FAMILIES, INDIVIDUALS ARE BEING CALLED UPON TO ADJUST AND
ADAPT TO CHANGE AT A PACE AND TO A DEGREE SELDOM, IF EVER,
ENCOUNTERED IN H-ISTORY. s12 
IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES IT MIGHT APPEAR THAT PRINCIPLES
PROCLAIMED FOR THE PURPOSES OF AN ELECTION MORE THAN
TWO YEARS AGO WOULD HAVE LITTLE RELEVANCE TODAY. THERE MAY
BE THOSE WHO BELIEVE THAT THE SHEER NUM", BER OF DECISIONS WHICH
HAVE HAD TO BE MADE, THE SPEED WITH WHICH THEY HAVE HAD TO
BE MADE HAVE OBSCURED OR EVEN OVER-RIDDEN BASIC PRINCIPLES,
IDO BELIEVE, HOWEVER. THAT IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE YEARSO
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE SEEN TO HAVE PROMOTED THE
THREE BASIC PRINCIPLES I PUT FORWARD IN 1972,. THE PRINCIPLES
WHICH ARE THE BASIS OF OUR CONTRACT WITH THE PEOPLE, WITH
FIDELITY AND CONSISTENCY.
AT THIS APEX CONVENTION, IT IS THOROUGHLY
APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD TRY TO PUT THE POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE PERSPECTIVE'OF
THE SECOND AIM WHICH I ASSERTED IN 1972 TO INVOLVE THE
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF
OUR NATION. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD DO SO BEFORE AN
AUDIENCE OF APEXIANS, MEMBERS OF THE MOST CONCERNED, THE
MOST INVOLVED OF ALL OUR COMMUNITY SERVICE ORGANISATIONS.
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD DO SO IN THIS CITY, WHERE
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN ONE OF THE HIGHEST TASKS THAT
CIVILISED MAN-CAN UNDERTAKE THE CREATION OF A GREAT CITYWILL
BE CRUCIAL IN DETERMINING THE SUCCESS OR FAILURE OF A
NOBLE EXPERIMENT. me J3 
3
THE PROGRAI-UNDERTAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS MEANT A GREATER DEGREE OF INVOLVEMENT BY THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT IN MATTERS LIKE SCHOOLS. HOSPITALS, iWELFARE AND
CITIES THAN HAD HITHERTO BEEN ACCEPTED IN AUSTRALIA, THE
UN4DERLYING PHILOSOPHY IS THIS: IN MODERN COMMUNITIES, EVEN
THE WEALTHIEST FAMILY CANNO0T PROVIDE ITS MEMBERS WITH THE
BEST EDUCATION, WITH THE BEST MEDICAL TREATMENT, THE BEST
ENVIRONMENT, UNAIDED BY THE COMMUNITY. INCREASINGLY, THE
BASIC SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES WHICH DETERMINE THE REAL
STANDARD OF LIFE OF A FAMILY OR AN INDIVIDUAL CAN ONLY BE
PROVIDED BY THE COMMUNITY AND ONLY TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH
THE COMMUNITY IS WILLINIG TO PROVIDE THEM. EITHER THE COMMUNITY
PROVIDES THEM OR THEY WILL NOT BE* PROVIDED AT ALL. IN THE
AUSTRALIAN CONT EXT, THIS MEANS THAT THE COMMUNITY, THROUGH
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, MUST FINANCE THEM OR THEY WILL NOT
BE FINANCED AT ALL. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED
THAT THESE SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES WILL BE PROVIDED AND
THAT THEY WILL BE FINANCED. AND A NATIONAL FINANCIAL
COMMITMENT MUST INEVITABLY MEAN A NATIONAL INVOLVEMENT.
BOTH BEFORE AND SINCE WE CAME TO OFFICE, THIS
APPROACH THIS NATIONAL INVOLVEMENT HAS BEEN CRITICISED
ON A NUMBER OF GROUNDS, I'D LIKE TO DEAL WITH TWO OF THE
CRITICISMS. ONE IS THE CHARGE OF CENTRALISM. THE OTHER IS
THE FEAR THAT A BLOATED BUREAUCRACY BUREAUCRACIES ARE OF
COURSE ALWAYS BLOATED -THE FEAR THAT UNFEELING PUBLIC
SERVANTS IN CANBERRA -AND PUBLIC SERVANTS IN CANBERRA ARE
ALWAYS UNFEELING WILL DESTROY COMMUNITY INITIATIVE, &amp; a 
COMMUNI-TY INVOLVEMENT, EITHER BY MAKING VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS
LIKE APEX REDUNDANT OR BY THROTTLiING THEM WITH RED
TAPE. IMAINTAIN, ON THE CONTRARY, THESE TWO PROPOSITIONS:-
FIRST, THAT OUR NATIONAL COMMUNITY PROGRAMS WILL
REPLACE THE EXISTING STATE CENTRALISM WITH GENUINE REGIONAL
INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION;
AND SECONDLY, THAT THE PROGRAMS PROVIDE FOR, OR
RATHER, POSITIVELY, REQUIRE A LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT AND
INITIATIVE BY GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE COMMUNITY WHICH
MAKES THE WORK OF VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS LIKE APEX MORE
RELEVANT, MORE REWARDING, MORE EFFECTIVE, MORE EXCITING,
THAN EVER BEFORE. LATER, I SHALL REFER TO SOME SPECIFIC PROGRAMS
IN WELFARE, HEALTH, EDUCATION AND AREA IMPROVEMENT WHERE
WE SEEK AND NEED PARTICIPATION BY AND COOPERATION WITH
COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS, PROGRAMS IN WHICH APEX IS ALREADY
INVOLVED. I SHOULD SAY, HOWEVER, THAT OUR WISH FOR COMMUNITY
INVOLVEMENT IS BEING PUT-INTO EFFECT OVER A VERY WIDE RANGE
OF POLICY MAKING AND DECISION TAKING. a 
THE NUMEROUS ROYAL COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES OF INQUIRY
AND TASK FORCES WE HAVE ESTABLISHED ARE NOT ONLY DESIGNED TO
PROVIDE THE BEST ADVICE FROM THE BEST QUALIFIED MEN AND WOMEN.
THEY HAVE ALSO DEIMONSTRATED OUR INTENTION TO HAVE IFULL PUBLIC
INQUIRY AND FREE PUBLIC DEBATE BEFORE FAR-REACHING DECISIONS
ARE TAKEN. THERE IS NO BETTER ILLUSTRATION THAN THE ROYAL
COMISSION ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION ITSELF.
HERE WE ARE TRYING TO GET TO THE VERY HEART OF THE MATTERTHE
FUNDAMENTAL RELATION4S BETWEEN THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND
THE GENERAL COMMUNITY.
SHORTL&gt; AFTER ITS ESTABLISHMENT, THE COMMISSION
INVITED INTERESTED ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS TO MAKE
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TO IT ON MATTERS RELATING TO THE TERMS
OF REFERENCE. THE COMMISSION'WROTE TO MORE THAN 150 GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES AND 500 ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA, BUSINESS GROUPS, CHURCHES, VOLUNTARY SERVICE
ORGANISATIONS, EMPLOYER AND EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROFESSIONAL
AND WELFARE BODIES, TO INFORM THEM OF THE TERMS OF
REFERENCE AND SEEKING THEIR COMMENTS.
W4ITH THE AID OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SOCIAL
SERVICE, H ELP AND ENCOURAGEMENT WAS GIVEN TO LESS ARTICULATE
AND LESS WELL-ORGANISED CITIZENS TO PREPARE SUBMISSIONS. THE
ROYAL COMMISSION's ADVISER ON COMMUNITY RELATIONS AND HIS
STAFF ASSISTED AND SOLICITED MANY SUCH SUBMISSIONS TO
GENERATE AS WIDE A HEARING OF PUBLIC VIEWS AS POSSIBLE. 111/ 6 
AT EACH PLACE WHERE A FORM-' AL HEARING WAS HELD, PUBLIC MEETINGS
WERE ARRANJGED FOR INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANISATIONS TO
PUT FORWARD EITHER ORAL OR WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS, SIX HUNDRED
PEOPLE TOOK PART IN THESE MEETINGS.
THIS HAS BEEN AN EXAMPLE-0F COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
IN A MATTER OF FUNDAMENTAL IMPORTANCE AT A LEVEL QUITE NEW
To AUSTRALIA. 14E HAVE ADOPTED THE SAME APPROACH WITH THE WORKING
GROUP ON RURAL POLICY WHICH PRODUCED THE GREEN PAPER ON
RURAL POLICY, WITH THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION, AND
WITH [ NVIRONMENTAL-IMPACT STATEMENTS, I! E HAVE TAKEN THE
VIEW THAT PUBLIC PARTICIPATION BY THE GOVERNED IS A FUNDAMENTAL
CHARACTERISTIC OF DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT, INITIALLY
AND INEVITABLY, PUBLIC PARTICIPATION WILL MEAN THAT THE
BEST ORGANISED AND THE MOST ARTICULATE. THE MOST ACTIVE WILL
TEND TO HAVE THE FIRST AND GREATEST SAY. WE DO WISH HOWEVER,
TO* PROVIDE THE MACHINERY A14D TO DEVELOP A LEVEL OF PUBLIC
AWARENESS WHICH WILL ENABLE THE WHOLE PUBLIC TO BE INVOLVED
AND INCLUDED IN A GENUINE, MEANINGFUL WAY.
THESE ARE EXAMPLES OF PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT iN DISCUSSING AND FORMING POLICY. W4E
WANT HOWEVER, PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
IN IMPLEMENTING POLICY. WHE WANT COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
THROUGH COMMUNITY ACTION, LET ME GIVE EXAMPLES OF HOW WE
ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE THIS IN THE FIELDS OF SOCIAL WELFARE,
CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION, HEALTH AND THE ENHANCEMENT OF THE
PLACES WE LIVE IN. 
THE AUSTRALIAN Ass ISTANCE PLAN
THE AUS T R tL I Ass ISTANCE PLAN IS A PIONEERING
EXPERI'" IENT IN COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE
IS TO SEEK OUT AND MEET AREAS OF SOCIAL N4EED HITHERTO EITHER
IGNORED OR UNIDENTIFIED BY . THE-EXISTING WELFARE AGENCIESNATIONAL,
STATE, LOCAL OR VOLUNTARY. ITS ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTIC
IS THAT ITS WORK IS BASED ON REGIONS, ON REGIONAL
COMMUNITIES AND THAT ITS WORK AND PLANNING IS TO BE DONE
BY GENUINELY INDEPENDENT, GENUINELY COMMUNITY BASED GROUPS
OF CONCERNED CITIZENS WHO KNOW THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY OF WHICH THEY ARE A PART.
THE 9ASIC PLANNING UNIT IS CALLED THE REGIONAL
COUNCIL FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPM~ ENT. SUCH COUNCILS HAVE ALREADY
BEEN SET UP IN THIRTY-SIX REGIONS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. THE
COUNCILS ACT AS A COMMUNITY FORUM FOR DISCUSSION AND A
COMMUNITY INSTRUMENT FOR ACTION IN IMPROVING EXISTING WELFARE
SERVICES AND PERHAPS MORE IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN, EXPERIMENTING
IN NEW FORMS OF WELFARE. As ITS CONTRIBUTION, THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT: . VM AKES SPECIFIC GRANTS TO TH E REGIONAL COUNCILS
TO COVER ADMINISTRATION;
aPROVIDES A ' CAPITATION GRANT'I OF $ 2 FOR EACH
PERSON4 IN THE REGION FOR SMALL SCALE, SHORTTERM
SOCIAL WELFARE PROJECTS;
aAND MAKES A ' COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT' GRANT TO
PAY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS TO STIMULATE
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. 
ANJINITIATING .1 GRANT IS AVAILABLE TO ASSIST THE FORMATION
OF A COU1NCIL WITH DIVERSE REPRESENTATION FROM COMMUNITY
ORGANISATION. THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSIONYOU WILl-BL AWARE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GoVER1NMENT
HAS DECIDED TO ESTABLISH A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION, IN THE
OPERATION OF THIS BODY, WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE PRINCIPLE
OF INVOLVING THE COMMUNITY AS CLOSELY AS POSSIBLE IN THE
PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT OF PROGRAMS SPONSORED BY THE
COMM ISS ION. a THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WILL PROVIDE HELP FOR
A WIDE RANGE OF IMAGINATIVE AND FLEXIBLE PROGRAMS DEVOTED
TO LOOKING AFTER CHILDREN BEFORE THEY REACH SCHOOL AGE AND
CARING FOR OLDER CHILDREN OUTSIDE SCHOOL HOURS,
THE DECISION TO SET UP A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION
WAS ITSELF A RESPONSE TO COMMUNITY REPRESENTATIONS FOR
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN PROVIDING CARE FOR CHILDREN. IT
RECOGNISES THAT THE CARE PROVIDED SHOULD NOT BE RIGID OR
HIGHLY INSTITUTIONALISED,~ BUT THAT CHOICES FOR PARENTS AND
THEIR CHILDREN SHOULD BE MAXIMISED: a a / 9 
THE POLICY OF THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WHEN IT
1 L LI.; ANND, U TIHF INTlR IMN COMMf. ITTI:! vWlH ICH IS NOW
CARRYING OUT ITS WORKK, I; ONE OF MAIllTAINING THE CLOSEST
POCSS lLE CONTACT WITH THll: COMMUNITY.
THE INTERIM COMMITTEE AND ITS VARIOUS STATE
COMMITTEES HAVE ALREADY RECEIVED A NUMBER OF REQUESTS FOR
ASSISTANCE FROM COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS AND WILL BE ENCOURAGING
MORE IN THE COMING FINANCIAL YEAR.
PART OF THE FINANCE TO BE ALLOCATED BY THE
CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WILL GO TO THE STATES FOR SPECIFIC
PURPOSE GRANTS, AND PART OF THE FINANCE WILL GO DIRECT TO
COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS. BUT THE COMMISSION WILL EXPECT
THAT PROGRAMS TO BE SUPPORTED WILL BE THOSE WHICH THE
COMMUNITY HAS SHOWN IT WANTS, NOT JUST THOSE WHICH IT HAS
BEEN TOLD IT WANTS, AND THAT ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE RUNNING
OF THE PROGRAMS WILL ALLOW FOR A GENUINE COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. 
SCHOOLS COMMIIISSIONJ THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERqNMENT HAS MADE AVAILABLE
7.2 MILLION DOLLARS FOR THE 1977-75 TRIENINIUiM TO SUPPORT
INNOVATORY PROJECTS A: iD FIELD-13ASED EXPERIMENTS ASSOCIATED
WITH PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION. THE INNOVATIONS
PROGRAM WAS ESTAB. ILS iHD TO ACCEPT PROPOSALS FROM SCHOOLS,
TEACHERS, PARETNS, OR COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS.
THE INNOVATIONS PROGRAM kRPRIESENTS A MAJOR
EFFORT TO BRING ABOUT IMPROVEMENTS IN OUR EDUCATIONAL
SYSTEM THROUGH THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY INITIATIVE
AND THE DEVOLUTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FROM THE CENTRE TO
THE REGION. THE GENERAL AIMS OF THE PROGRAM ARE:
To IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF SCHOOLING IN AUSTRALIA;
TO ENCOURAGE DIVERSITY;
TO STIMULATE INNOVATION IN SCHOOLS;
To ENHANCE THE CAPACITIES OF ALL THOSE
COMMITTED TO EDUCATION TO GENERATE
THEIR OWN IMPROVEMENTS IN SCHOOLS. ./ 11 
1.1.
COMMUNITY IHEALITH iOGiAii
THE COiMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM IS AIMED AT THE
PROVISION OF SERVICES IN THE COMMUNITY WHERE PEOPLE LIVE
OR WORK AS DISTINCT FROM THOSE AVAIL.. ABLE IN HOSPITALS AND
SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS. COMMUNIIT. IY I-IALTH SERVICES HELP
PiRSONS -TO MEEl TIiE I HEALTH AND WELFI. ARE NEEDS AT CONVENIENT
LOCATIONS AND 0O REiTURN H1 ME AFTER ATTENDANCES, THIS
LESSENS DEPENDENCE N0 INS IITUTI ONSI AND FREQUENTLY PRESENTS
AN ALTERNATIVE TO GOING INTO HOSPITAL.
PEOPLE INVOLVED IN DECISION-MAKING ON THEIR LOCAL
HEALTH SERVICE WILL BE GIVEN OPPORTUNITIES TO INFLUENCE THE
ACCEPTABILITY AND AVAILABILITY OF SERVICES. IT WILL ALSO
PROVIDE A MEANS OF EDUCATING THE COMMUNITY AND CHANGING
CONVENTIONAL EXPECTATIONS. PEOPLE PARTICIPATING IN THE
MANAGEMENT OF THEIR OWN HEALTH SERVICES WILL HAVE A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF THE LIMITATIONS OF MEDICINE, THE COSTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF PARTICULAR SERVICES, AND THE INDIVIDUAL'S
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONAL AND FAMILY HEALTH. ./ 12 
AREA IlMPROVEMENT PROGRAiIS
T-HE AREi. A Ii'ifVEkLMENT PjROGRAM IS INTENDED TO
SUBSTANTIALLY IMI'iOV i LEi EQ UALITY O1: LIFE IN NOMINATED
REGIONS THROUGH PROJLCTS DETERMINED BY THE PEOPLE OF
THE REGION. A FUNDAMEI'TAL CONCEPT IN THE AIP IS THE
ENCOURAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN MAKING
DECISIONS THAT AFFECT THEIR REGION . AND THEIR WAY OF
LIFE, THE AlP HAS BEEN AN EXERCISE IN CO-OPERATIVE
FEDERALISM WIYH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BEING
INVOLVED CLOSELY IN ALL ASPECTS OF THE PROGRAM, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS PROVIDING $ 14.1 MILLION IN
1974-75 FOR AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS, / 13 
13
iREGIONAL ELi'OYlM. T DViLOPiiT SCiEM-i
I GIVE A FIiNAL iXAIMPLE OF A COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
IN NATIONAL PROGRAMS ONE IN wiLIC APEX'HAS GIVEN
NOTAbLE COOPERATION. lUNDLlTilH E RGIONJAL EMPLOYMENT
DEVELOPMENT SCHL'EME, APEX CLUBS iTHROUGHiOUT AUSTRALIA HAVE
SS'PONSORIE) A NUMBER OF PIROJIECI WiHICH HAVE A DOUBL VALUE.
THEY PROVIDE SOCIALLY MEANI INGFUL WORK FOR THE IMMEDIAT
VICTIMS OF OUR PRESENT ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES AND THEY
LEAVE BEHIND SOMETHINIG OF ENDURING WORTH TO THE COMMUNITY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WELCOMES ANY APPLICATION FROM
APEX CLUBS FOR APPROVAL FOR PROJLCTS WHICH WOULD HAVE A
LASTING BENEFIT FOR THE COMMUNITY WHILE AT THE SAME TIME
GIVING MEN AND WOMEN PRESENTLY UNEMPLOYED SATISFYING,
WORTHWHILE WORK. THE WHOLE THRUST OF ALL THESE PROGRAMS
AND I COULD MENTION MANY MORE IS THAT A GREAT NUMBER OF
CONCERNED AUSTRALIAN MEN AND WOMEN ARE ALREADY INVOLVED
IN COMMUNITY DECISION-MAKING AND COMMUNITY ACTION IN
COOPERATION WITH GOVERNMENT, IN A WAY THAT WAS NEVER
THOUGHT POSSIBLE A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO. IT IS IMPORTANT
THAT WE AS A GOVERNMENT SHOULD PROVIDE MORE AND MORE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS, PARTICULARLY THE
DISADVANTAGED AND THE HANDICAPPED IN OUR MIDST. . ll^ 
BUT IT I " s EQUALLY I MPORTANT IN TERMS OF
THE STRENGTH AND VIGOUR OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY THAT
THOSE OF US WHO ARiL NOT UNDERIPRIVILEGED, NOT HANDICAPPED,
THOSE OF US WHO BY VIRTUE. OF WEALTH OR HEALTH OR GOOD
FORTUNE CAN SERVE, SHOULD HAVE ENHANCED OPPORTUNITIES
TO SERVE THE COMMUNITY, SO WE ARE TRYING IN TRUTH
BOTH TO ENHANCE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE DISA) VANTAGED AND
IN A JIFFERENT BUT RELATED SENSE THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
THE ADVANTAGED OPPORTUNITIES TO SERVE THE COMMUNITY,
I SHOULD HOWEVER, ADD A WARNING. ALL THESE
PROGRAMS I HAVE MENTIONED ARE NOVEL FOR AUSTRALIA AND
EXPERIMENTAL IN AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE THEY ARE NEW,
BECAUSE THEY ARE TENTATIVE, THEY LACK THE POLITICAL
CLOUT THAT COMES FROM YEARS AND YEARS OF EXPERIENCE AND
EXPERTISE BECAUSE THEY SEEK OUT NEW AND NEGLECTED
AREAS OF NEED, THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS POLITICALLY
PERIPHERAL. THEY HAVE NOT HAD THE TIME TO BECOME
SACRED COWS. BECAUSE THEY ARE DESIGNED TO SERVE THE
NEEDS OF THE WEAKEST, OF THE LEAST ARTICULATE MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITY, THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS POLITICALLY
DISPENSABLE. 
l O F Hi : G i I lI/ E I I Oi I D
T IL-rFFAI. Ai i AC; [) ILAN Ar) iWc OllNAL iPI. OYIMIHT
EVIJEOIP ; i-NT S CIIE-I'L A iR A IR ADY IIiE'R C IAI. dGE FROM
SUM E OF HiE o AAIl l UVI. G IML. I'JS IN I il-IGH COUI( T
NOT, OF CGURSEL ON ANY GRIOU. WDS OF TfI-IR SOCIAL VALUE
BUT ON lH E cCiOl-NSTITUTINAt. ARGUMi'lT THAT THEY SHOULD
BE PROVIDED, IF AT ALL, iY OR TI-IHOU THE STATE GOVERNMI
' TS. 1, . ANmD IF THAT CilALLENE SII:) ILD SUCCEIED, NO LESS THAN
7 NATIOHNAL WELFARF PROGRAMS, SiE FJ: THEM INITIATEDI) BY
THE PREVIOUS,. GOVCRNMENT, COULD BE I'iPERILLED. FOR
EXAMPLE, PROGRAMS FOR AGED AND HOMELESS AND HANDICAPPED
AND ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, ISOLATED CHILDREN, HEALTH CENTRES,
LEGAL AID OFFICES, NURSING HOMES AND HOME NURSING,
MEALS ON WHEELS, FLYING DOCTORS AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION.
THE COMMON DISTINGUISHING FACTOR IN ALL THESE PROGRAMS
IS THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED TO MEET SPECIAL NEEDS OF THE
WEAK AND INARTICULATE SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY THE
OLD THE SICK, MIGRANTS, ABORIGINES, THE VERY YOUNG. IF
THESE GROUPS WERE POLITICALLY POWERFUL, IF THEY COULD
MOUNT EFFECTIVE POLITICAL PRESSURE, THE GOVERNMENTS
WHICH DARED TO PLACE THESE PROGRAM IN JEOPARD'Y WOULD
BE DESTROYED. BUT AS IT IS, THE THING PASSES OFF WITH
SCARCE A MURMUR, 
AGAIN, BECiU 3E THESE PROGiRAMS THE ONES I
HAVE NiENTIONED TODAY AS ', W'ELL AS THE ONES THREATENED
BY THE HIGH COURr CHALLEINGE CAN HELP ONLY THE WEAK,
TiiL UNDLI P/ I VI LEGTL THItL INARTI CUL. ATC, THEY WOULD BE
THE FIRST TO GO, TiIl FIR. ST TO BE K'NOCKED OFF IN ANY
FULL SCALE ONSLAUGHT AGAINST PUBLIC SPENDING AND PUBLIC
INIIATIVE. lllE TRAGLDY IS THAT WHATEVER VALUE THESE
PROGRAMS MIGHT HAVE FOR THOUSANDS UPON THOUSANDS OF
OUR FELLOW CITIZENS, WHATEVER THE COST IN HUMAN HAPPINESS
AND HUMAN HOPE THEIR ABOLITION MIGHT MEAN, IT WOULD BE
QUITE FEASIBLE POLITICALLY TO DUMP THEM ALL AT ALMOST
NO POLITICAL COST.
THE ONLY PROTECTION IS THE CONSCIENCE AND
THE CONCERN OF THE INTERESTED AND ARTICULATE GROUPS IN
THE COMMUNITY, OF WHICH I FIRMLY BELIEVE APEX IS IN THE
FRONT RANK. IT IS BECAUSE APEX HAS BEEN INVOLVED AND
. WILL BE FURTHER INVOLVED IN THESE SORTS OF COMMUNITY
PROJECTS, IT IS BECAUSE APEXIANS KNOW THEIR VALUE, KNOW
WHAT THEY MEAN TO THOUSANDS OF OUR FELLOW-CITIZENS, THAT
I BELIEVE I CAN COUNT UPON APEX TO PROTECT THEM AS WELL
AS TO PROMOTE THEM. A VOICE MUST BE RAISED ON BEHALF
OF THE VOICELESS IN OUR COMMUNITY AND I LOOK TO APEX
TO GIVE IT. s / 17 
17
ISA[ D iEEF3R f HAT WE, LIi K-ALL CCOhIPARABLE
COMNfIIITI ES, ARE-GO IN'G TiIRO\ UGi-i A PELRIOGD OF EXTRAORD INARY
ECO'OU11 C DIFFICULTIC'lL&amp; i ' INIFICAJ11Tl-Y, AnPEX WAS FORMED
IN A TIM E OF EVEN GREATLR HARDSHIP ANDil DIFFICULTY. * IT
WAS A RESPONSE BY A iiAf'JDFUL OF CONCERNELD AUSTRALIANS AT
THE TIMiE OF THE DEFRESSImJ. iHOUGH -hMERE IS A SII1LARITY
IN THE UNIVERSAI.. IT\( OF FRESENT WORLD ECONOMIC PROBLEMS,
THERE IS' ONE VEfY GNEi5AT SAL. UTARY DIFFi: RENCE. THE GREAT
DIFFERENCE BETWEN THEN AND NOW IS iiE DEGREE OF SOCIAL
CONCERN, THE EXTENT TO WH:-IICH THOSE IIN TROUBL. E ARE
SUPPORTED BY THE CO1NU1iINTY, BY A CObICERNED COMMUNITY,
BY TilE CONSCIENCE OF Ti! E COMMUNITY. YET THAT CONCERN
AND THAT CONSCIENCE CAN ALL TOO EASILY GO TO SLEEP.
I LOOK NOT LEAST TO APEX TO KEEP THAT CONSCIENCE AWAKE,
TO KEEP THAT CONCERN ALIVE, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE 17TH NATIONAL CONFERENCE
OF THE FEDERAL COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
ABORIGINES TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS
CANBERRA, FRIDAY 28 MARCH, 1975
It is taking a long time to redress the long history
of injustice to our Aboriginal people. In no field of
Government are good intentions more easily subverted by
practical difficulties and human failings. My Government
has done a great deal for your people, but I am not going
to pretend that the plight of Aborigines has been removed
or even greatly alleviated. It has not. If increased
Government expenditures, the passage of enlightened legislation
and the creation of new agencies were all that were
needed, Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders would now
be enjoying much happier prospects for a full and better
life. The truth is that we.-are dealing with perverse and
intractable things like human nature, deeply ingrained
cultural and social habits, the legacy of decades of neglect
and generations of repression. In recent weeks in parts of
the Northern Territory we have seen a depressing and lamentable
resurgence of the worst strains of prejudice and racism.
Your struggle, our struggle, will be long and difficult. I
can only say this : throughout that struggle the Australian
Labor Government will be on your side.
And for all the difficulties we face the important
thing is not to lose faith in the power of Governments to
bring about change and improvement. True enough, the road
is hard and full of obstacles but when a national Government
is behind you there is hope, and there are real gains.
We should never forget the resounding victory Aboriginal
people secured in the referendum of 1967. That result gave
the Australian Government concurrent powers with the States,
and where necessary overriding powers, in respect of Aborigines
and Torres Strait Islanders. It was an unmistakable affirmation
of the people's will. And it was if you will forgive
the phrase -' very much a victory for centralism. We might
well ponder what the result of such a referendum would be
today. Would the Opposition senators and the States resist
such a referendum in their current obsession with State
rights? Would the referendum be carried so decisively?
The lesson to keep in mind is that reforms of this kindreforms
so crucial to your welfare and crucial to Australia's
reputation can easily be frustrated or set aside even when
the people approve them. 
Of course none of us can be content with the progress
of Aboriginal welfare since the referendum was carried. At
least one State is still resisting the clear instruction
given by that result, just as they resisted the efforts of
our predecessors to give effect to the people's verdict.
It is easily forgotten that Queenslanders themselves voted
over'ihelmingly for the referendum. Yet discriminatory laws
remain on the statute book in Queensland. Mr. Gorton did
his best to remove them. The State Government defied him.
And of course they have defied my own Government's attempts.
In November 1973 we first brought in a bill to outlaw all
forms of racial discrimination; it is still before the
Parliament. Our Human Rights Bill had a similar objective
and has met with similar obstruction. Last year we introduced
a further bill to override specific discriminatory
Queensland laws by legislation in the national Parliament.
I find it intolerable that Queensland's discriminatory laws
remain in force eight years after the referendum was passed,
in the face of the people's wishes, in the face of the
expressed policy of the two major political parties in
Australia. I would not want you. to think that we see Aboriginal
affairs as solely a national Government responsibility.
Your own council is organised on federal lines and our
approach requires a good measure of co-operation with the
States. Wh ere the States have constitutional authority in
such matters as health and education, we have sought the
co-operation of State Ministers and their departments.
So what we are doing is enabling Aboriginal communities
and groups to meet their own needs and look after
themselves. This year we are spending $ 13 million to fund
Aboriginal Housing Associations so they can build and buy
houses. We are funding Aboriginal medical services in New
South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia.
Aboriginal legal services have been established in all
States and the Northern Territory. We have set up the
Aboriginal Loans Commission to provide loans to Aboriginals
for business enterprises, and have prepared legislation to
make it easier for Aboriginal communities and groups to
incorporate for economic and social purposes.
One of the Government's major reforms was to set
up the National Aboriginal Consultative Committee, a
national body to which Aborigines may elect representatives
to advise the minister on policies and programs. We want
the committee to promote the autonomy and independence of
the Aboriginal people and help them maintain distinctive
cultures. 
For the same reason we established an Aboriginal Arts
Board within the Australia Council, and it is generously funded
to encourage traditional and developing Aboriginal arts. We
have introduced bilingual education courses in Northern Australia
so that Aboriginal children can be taught in their own dialects.
The Government has recognised from the start that land
rights are central to your aspirations, your dignity and your
place in a just social order. One of the Government's first
actions in December 1972 was to freeze mineral exploration
and land leasing in Northern Territory reserves and appoint
a Royal Commission to advise on ways in which Aboriginal land
rights might best be recognised. After Mr. Justice Woodward's
first report in July 1973, two regional Land Councils were set
up and, largely on the basis of submissions from these Councils,
a final report and recommendations were submitted in May 1974.
The recommendations were accepted in principle by Government.
Legislation is being drafted for introduction in the present
session after further consultations with the Land Councils.
The Aboriginal Land Fund Act was introduced and passed
later in 1974. It establishes a fund for the purchase by
Aboriginal communities of land for economic and social purposes
and for a Commission to administer the Fund. At least two of
the five members of the Commission will be Aboriginal. A
number of large properties have been bought by Aboriginal
communities since 1972 on the basis of funds provided by grant
by the Government.
Arrangements are being made for the surrender fhis year
of over 1,200 square miles from Wave Hill Station for theA
Gurindji community at Wattie Creek in terms of the group's
original request in 1967 so that the Gurindji can raise cattle
on their own land.
On top of that we have provided vastly greater sums
for Aboriginal housing, health, education and employment.
Here's a comparison to bear in mind. In 1971-72 the last
full year of Liberal-Country Party Government, Commonwealth
spending on Aboriginal affairs amounted to 32 million.
This financial year we are spending $ 164 million. But don't
imagine that because-of this we are ignorant of the problems
still facing you. The very generosity of our grants has
brought difficulties of fu nding and accounting for many of
your people. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs has
redeployed its staff to cope with the pressure of demand.
We know, too, that rural areas, where many Aborigines live,
have been hard hit by unemployment and there are special
problems of employment for Aborigines in more remote areas.
All this, regrettably, puts abnormal strains on relationships
with white communities. 
4.
I hope your own council will help remove these
sources of tension. Despite the establishment of other
Aboriginal bodies there will always be a need for your
organisation in promoting understanding of Aboriginal needs
and putting forward sound, practical and enlightened policies.
You have campaigned with us on many fundemantal
issues the 1967 referendum, the removal of discriminatory
legislation, land rights for your people. Those battles
are mainly won. You can be sure of our continued support
as we move towards the achievement of our other goals.
Don't be disappointed by inevitable setbacks and delays,
by administrative difficulties, by the problems posed by
your new responsibilities and your new sense of independence.
We are working steadily, patiently and surely towards a better
way of life for the Aboriginal people. In Jim Cavanagh we
have a minister with great common sense and great humanity.
He is tackling practical problems without losing sight of
ideals. There will always be groups with a vested interest
in obstruction and mischief. There will always be those,
in both the Aboriginal and white communities, with a vested
interest in tension, confrontation, even violence. It is
important to resist them, to get on with the job in our own
way, to keep clear and practical goals before us, to be on
guard against bombast and hysteria. I ask the Aboriginal
people to put their faith in a Government with their true
interests at heart, and ultimately to have faith in yourselves. 



DEPARMN OF
FORIG
AFFAIRS
EMAROEDM O N O S BFR 1D0AOE
28 MARCH 1975 28 March 1975
AUSTRALIA/ JAPAN MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE MEETING
4 The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced today that the Australian/ Japan
Ministerial Committee will meet in Canberra on 2 and 3 May 1975.
The meeting will be the third in a series of annual Ministerial
* consultations between Australia and Japan. The first was held
in Canberra in 1972, and the second took place in Tokyo in 1973.
The Australian delegation will be led by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, who will also chair the
meeting. Mr Whitlaxn said that as he would be absent at the
Meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Jamaica at the
time the Committee would be meeting, he had asked Dr Cairns, who
will be Acting Prime Minister at the time, to open the Committee
officially on his behalf. In addition to Dr Cairns and Senator
Willesee, other Australian Ministers taking part in the meeting
will include the Minister for Overseas Trade ( 14r Crean), the
minister for Minerals and Energy ( Mr Connor) and the Minister
for Agriculture ( Senator Wriedt).
The Japanese delegation will be led by the Foreign
Minister, Mr Kuchi Miyazawa, who will be making his first visit
to Australia since joining the Japanese Cabinet. Other Ministers
in the Japanese delegation will include the Minister for
International Trade and Industry ( Mr Toshio Komoto) and the
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry ( Mr Shintaro Abe). The
Japanese delegation is also expected to include two very senior
officials from the Finance Ministry and Economic Planning Agency.
The agenda will cover, following a keynote address by
Dr Cairns, discussion of a broad range of issues, including
international and national economic and financial matters, bilateral
and multilateral trade questions and related topics of mutual
interest. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 477
28 March 1975
ALBURY/ WODONGA FINANCIAL AGREEMENT
Joint statement by the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, the Premier
of New South Wales, Mr Lewis and the Premier of Victoria
Mr Hamer
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, the Premier of New
South Wales, Mr Lewis and the Premier of Victoria, Mr Hamer
announced today that they had signed an agreement providing
million from the Australian Government for the Albury!
-*/ odonga growth centre.
The funds will be allocated by the Australian Government
to the New South Wales and Victorian Governments to be used for
the further development of Albury/ Wodonga.
The Australian Government's contribution to the
development of the growth centre will be spent on land,
municipal services and building development.
Expenditure on municipal works will be one third
grant and two thirds loan. Funds provided to purchase land
for open space or recreation for the growth centre will be in
the form of a grant.
Generally other financial assistance will be provided
as a loan repayable over 30 years at the long term bond rate.
The first repayments of the loan moneys have been deferred
for ten years, except in the case of loans for muncipal works,
and special provision has been made to protect the States if
the growth centre generates insufficient revenue to meet loan
commitments. Mr Whitlam, Mr Lewis and Mr Hamer said the signing
of the Albury/ Wodonga financial agreement demonstrates the
continuim~ c interest of the three Governments in persuing
the co-operative arrangements for the development of the growth
centre.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.. 



QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 2
RESOURCES
RECORDED BY THE PRIME MINISTER FOR BROADCAST 30 MARCH 1975
ONE OF THE GREAT THINGS THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
HAS DONE FOR QUEENSLAND IS SECURE FAIR MARKET PRICES
VASTLY HIGHER PRICES FOR HER MINERAL EXPORTS. THIS
IS ESPECIALLY TRUE OF QUEENSLAND' S COAL. OUR POLICIES
HAVE BROUGHT A HUGE INCREASE IN WEALTH AND EXPORT
EARNINGS To AUSTRALIA AND TO THIS STATE IN PARTICULAR.
YOU'LL REMEMBER THAT WHEN LABOR WAS
ELECTED ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS WE DID WAS SET UP A
NEW DEPARTMENT OF MINERALS AND ENERGY. BECAUSE OF THE
IMPORTANCE OF AUSTRALIA'S MINERAL RESOURCES WE WANTED
A STRONG DEPARTMENT, WITH A STRONG MINISTER, TO LOOK
AFTER THE EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENTo PROCESSING AND SALE
OF OUR RESOURCES IN COOPERATION WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISES
WE WERE DETERMINED THAT OUR MINERALS WOULD BE DEVELOPED
IN A WAY THAT WOULD BRING MAXIMUM BENEFITS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, ,1/ 2 
-2-
THINGS WERE IN A PROPER MESS WHEN WE
CAME IN. THERE WAS NO NATIONAL POLICY FOR OUR MINERAL
AND ENERGY RESOURCES. MORE AND MORE OF THEM WERE
FALLING INTO OVERSEAS HANDS. AFTER YEARS OF LIBERAL
COUNTRY PARTY RULE, 62% OF OUR ENERGY RESOURCES
WERE CONTROLLED BY FOREIGN COMPANIES, THE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENT HAD ALLOWED THE MINING INDUSTRY TO WRITE
LONG-TERM CONTRACTS AND DETERMINE PRICES FOR OUR
EXPORTS WITHOUT REGARD FOR THE NATIONAL INTEREST,
THE RESULT WAS THAT EXPORTING COMPANIES WERE FIGHTING
EACH OTHER, CUTTING PRICES FOR THE SALE OF OUR MINERALS
AND REDUCING THE RETURNS TO AUSTRALIA, ONE OF THE
SILLIEST ASPECTS OF THE ' ANYTHING GOES' APPROACH
WAS COMPETITION BETWEEN THE STATES. QUEENSLAND WAS
ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL LOSERS IN THIS FREE-FOR-ALL.
OUR NEW DEPARTMENT, HEADED BY MY
COLLEAGUE, REX CONNOR, PUT AN END TO ALL THIS, WITHIN
WEEKS OF COMING TO OFFICE WE DECIDED THAT THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT SHOULD HAVE FULL AUTHORITY OVER THE EXPORT OF
OUR MINERAL RESOURCES. WE DECIDED IT WAS TIME TO
HALT THE DRIFT OF OUR INDUSTRIES INTO OVERSEAS HANDS. 
-3-
YOU HEAR A LOT OF CRITICISM OF REX
CONNOR AND HIS DEPARTMENT, BUT THE FACTS AND FIGURES
PROVE JUST HOW SUCCESSFUL OUR POLICIES HAVE BEEN.
THE FUTURE OF QUEENSLAND's COAL INDUSTRY HAS NEVER
LOOKED BRIGHTER, EXPORTS ARE AT A RECORD LEVEL, BOTH IN
VOLUME AND PRICES IN QUEENSLAND, WHERE THE COAL INDUSTRY
is 85% FOREIGN OWNED, INTERVENTION BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN NEGOTIATIONS HAS RESULTED IN SUBSTANTIAL
PRICE INCREASES, ThE TOTAL VALUE OF INCREASES NEGOTIATED
BETWEEN THE BEGINNING OF 1973 AND THE END OF SEPTEMBER
LAST YEAR WAS MORE THAN $ 1,364 MILLION OVER THE FULL
DELIVERY TERMS OF ALL QUEENSLAND COAL EXPORT CONTRACTS.
THE VALUE OF THE INCREASES ACTUALLY RECEIVED IN THE SAME
PERIOD WAS IN THE ORDER OF $ 67 MILLION. AUSTRALIAN
COAL EXPORTS TO ALL MARKETS ARE ESTIMATED TO BE ABOUT
$ 1100 MILLION FOR THIS-YEAR, 1975. THAT IS AN INCREASE
OF ABOUT $ 476 MILLION OVER LAST YEAR. IN THE CASE OF
IRON ORE, THE TOTAL VALUE OF AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS TO ALL
MARKETS THIS YEAR IS LIKELY TO EXCEED $ 800 MILLIONS
THAT'S MORE THAN DOUBLE THE EXPORT EARNINGS IN 1972,
THE LAST YEAR THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT WAS
IN OFFICE. o. a/ 4 
OF %-COUISE THAT' S NOT ALL WE'VE DONE IN THE
MINERALS AND ENERGY FIELD. WE HAD A GREAT BATTLE
IN PARLIAMENT TO GET OUR LEGISLATION THROUGH FOR A
PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY. LIKE THE MEDIBANK
BILLS, IT HAD TO BE PASSED AT THE JOINT SITTING
OF BOTH HOUSES LAST YEAR, AND LIKE MEDIBANKo PEOPLE
ARE NOW SEEING JUST HOW VALUABLE AND NECESSARY OUR
PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY IS. ITS AIM IS TO EXPLORE,
DEVELOP, PRODUCE, TRANSPORT, PROCESS AND SELL AUSTRALIAN
PETROLEUM AND MINERALS. AND IT WILL DO SO WHILE
RETAINING MAXIMUM AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP OF OUR RESOURCESTHAT'I
S WHAT IT'I S ALL ABOUT. A MAJOR PORTION OF THE
AUTHORITY'S EXPENDITURE OF $ 50 MILLION THIS FINANCIAL YEAR
IS AVAILABLE TO ASSIST AUSTRALIAN MINING VENTURES.
WHEN REX CONNOR WAS WITH ME IN QUEENSLAND LAST YEAR
HE ANNOUNCED THAT THE AUTHORITY HAD TAKEN UP ITS FIRST
EQUITY IN A QUEENSLAND VENTURE MAREEBA MINING. IT
NOW HAS EQUITIES IN' TWO OTHER COMPANIES AS WELL,
WE HAVE MADE A GREAT START IN OUR PLAN FOR
A NATIONAL PIPELINE SYSTEM TO CARRY NATURAL GAS
INTERSTATE. THE NATIONAL PIPELINE WILL MEAN TWO THINGSSTEADY
SUPPLIES OF GAS AND STABLE PRICES, OV/ ER 400
KILOMETRES OF THE PIPELINE HAVE ALREADY BEEN LAID.
WHEN IT'S COMPLETED IT-WILL BE THE BIGGEST ENGINEERING
ACHIEVEMENT IN AUSTRALIA'S HISTORY, AUSTRALIA AT
PRESENT MEETS ONLY 7% OF HER FUEL AND ENERGY NEEDS FROMNATURAL
GAS; COMPARABLE INDUSTRIALISED COUNTRIES USE
22% 1 I 
So WHEN OUR GAS RESOURCES ARE BEING FULLY USED
AUSTRALIA WILL BE MUCH LESS DEPENDENT ON IMPORTED
FUEL OIL, AND MILLIONS OF DOLLARS WILL BE CUT
FROM OUR IMPORT VILL,
SIMILARLY, TO DEVELOP AUSTRALIA'S VAST
URANIUM DEPOSITS IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY, WE HAVE
AUTHOR ISED THE ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION JO MINE AND SELL
OUR URANIUM RESERVES AT RANGER IN THE ALLIGATOR RIVER
DISTRICT. I FOUND TERMENDOUS INTEREST IN THE
PURCHASE OF AUSTRALIAN URANIUM DURING MY RECENT
VISIT TO EUROPE, AT THE SAME TIME WE HAVE REACHED
AGREEMENT WITH JAPAN ON A JOINT STUDY IN URANIUM
ENRICHMENT A PROCESS THAT WILL GREATLY INCREASE
THE VALUE OF OUR RESERVES.
THESE ARE ALL SOUND, PRACTICALPOSITIVE
ACHIEVEMENTS. THEY WILL NOT ONLY INCREASE OUR
NATIONAL WEALTH AND STANDARD OF LIVING BUT MAKE US MORE
SELF-SUFFICIENT THE WORLD ENERGY SHORTAGE HAS
BROUGHT PROBLEMS TO MANY OF OUR GREAT TRADING PARTNERS
WITH AUSTRALIA'S PRECIOUS RESOURCES KEPT AS FAR AS
POSSIBLE IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS, AND DEVELOPED IN AUSTRALIA'S
INTERESTS, WE ARE GOING TO BE IN A MUCH BETTER POSITION IN
THE YEARS AHEAD TO DEFEND OUR STANDARD OF LIVING AND
DEVELOP OUR COUNTRY IN AN ENERGY-HU4GRY WORLD,
SOME OF OUR POLICIES MAY NOT FIND FAVOUR WITH PARTICULAR
GROUPS OR INTERESTS AT THE MOMENT, BUT BELIEVE ME, THEY
ARE IN THE LONG-TERM INTERESTS OF OUR COUNTRY AND OF
ALL THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, 



FAUSTRALIAN DEVELOPMENT
ASSISTANCE 75 9
AGENCY MEDIA RELEASE
FOOD AID FOR B-. OT
The Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr ' Whitlam, announced today that the Australian Government
is giving an additional $ 400,. 9000 of food aid to Ethiopia.
Mr Whitlam said that this aid was being given
because of the continuing need of the Ethiopian-authorities
for international assistance in the procurement and
p distribution of food to rural areas. Ethiopia is also
developing food security buffer stocks in accordance with
an FAO national food security plan prepared in November
1974 at the request of the Government of Ethopia,
The Australian Ambassador to Ethiopia,
( Mr W. P. J. Handiner), resident in Nairobi, had recently
visited that country and had reported on food requirements
there. Details of the food aid to be financed by or
supplied from Australia are being discussed with Ethiopian
authorities. Mr Whitlam. recalled that Australia gave 4030 tonnes
of wheat to Ethiopia in 1974, and had airfreighted 12 tonnes
of protein-enriched milk biscuits previously, for a total
cost of $ 830,000. Mr Wbitlai added that the Ambassador had also
visited Somalia and consideration was being given to the
provision of food aid to that country, which has similarly
been seriously affected by drought.
Canberra
3 0 March 1975 



PROAT MIASTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 478
2 April 1975
AUSTRALIAN AID TO REFUGEES IN INDO-CHINA
The Prime Minister, and Actirkg Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr Whitlam, announced today a further contribution
of $ A 1 million for relief work among refugees in Indo-China.
He said that this sum had been offered to the United
Nations HighCojmissioner. for Refugees It was additional
to the $ 200,000 announced on 28 March for the Indo-China operational
group of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The grants would assist U. N. H. C. R. relief rand
rehabilitation projects for refugees in all parts of Indo-China.
U. N. H. C. R. was one of the international humanitarian
organisations qualified to assist refugees on both sides of
lines of military control in Indo-China. The funds could be
used by U. N. H. C. R. to purchase food, medical supplies and other
commodities if necessary from Australia.
Australian aid for the activities of these organisations
in Indo-China during the current financial year now totalled
$ 2.35 million. He had earlier decided to make available seven Hercules ctransport
aircraft together with other aircraft currently based at
Butterworth for use in an humanitarian role in Vietnam.
The task of the aircraft was to ferry supplies and
materials intended to meet immediate and critical human needs.
He had also given approval for the use of R. A. A. F.
aircraft for the transport from Vietnam of orphans for whom
adoption formalities had been completed in Vietnam and
Australia, and for whom prospective Australian parents were
waiting. He had asked for the co-operation of the State
Premiers in speeding up the processes for admission of these
children to Australia. ( See Attachment) / 2 
-2-
As he had indicated on 28 March, the Government was
keeping the situation under continuing review and he
believed that further generous Australian help could be
expected if such were necessary.
Over and beyond these immediate humanitarian
actions, the Australian Government reaffirmed its
commitment entered into within weeks of assuming office
over two years ago to contribute generously to the
reconstruction of post-war Indo-China.
ATTACHMENT Text of a message sent by the Prime Minister earlier
today to each State Premier:
" You will be aware of my Government's concern that
Australia should play its part in helping to alleviate
the hardship and suffering now being endured by the people
of South Vietnam.
The adoption by Australian parents of numbers of
Vietnamese children has been a note-worthy aspect of our
past contribution to the relief of this suffering in the
past and I should therefore be grateful if in the light
of the rapid escalation of the human problems in South
Vietnam in recent days you could now ask your regulatory
authorities to make special efforts to finalise as
expeditiously as possible decisions on applications by
residents of your State for permission to adopt
Vietnamese children.
The Australian Government for its part will endeavour
to facilitate the entry of such children for whom approved
parents are selected and who:, South Vietnamese authorities
have granted authority to leave.
E. G. WHITLAM"
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



* Jj,, AUSTHAL1A
PRM MOHNISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 481
3 April 1975
VIETNAMESE'CHILDREN
The Prime Minister, Mr ' Whitlam, said today that the
Government of the Republic of Vietnam had agreed to
facilitate arrangements for Vietnamese orphans to come
to Australia. In a special message to State Premiers, Mr Whitlam
repeated his appeal for the States to finalise as
expeditiously as possible decisions on applications for
permi ssion to adopt Vietnamese orphans. Children would
be flown from Saigon to Australia by the R. A. A. F. as
soon as the States gave certain guarantees about their
adoption and child welfare procedures in relation to the
orphans who would go to their States.
In his message to the Premiers, Mr Whitlam said:
" The Australian Government is in close touch with
the Government of the Republic of Vietnam through the
Australian Embassy. That Government has now advised my
Government that it is prepared to facilitate arrangements
for the exit of orphan children. There is, however, as yet no
precise figure on the number of children in Vietnam for
whom Australia is intended as destination. We also have
advice that in some cases children will not be accompanied
by documentation normally required for adoption. I am
however in the present critical circumstances prepared
to accept this situation. There remains one further
problem: that-we have no way of guaranteeing prior
to the orphans'departure that their physical and medical
condition will be such that they will necessarily be
accepted by adoptive families. In these circumstances,
therefore, I need your assurance that in the event that
children destined for your State are not chosen for
adoption by approved families your State will nevertheless
receive those children and guarantee their accommodation
and care..." " I should be grateful, therefore, for your agreement
that you will receive the number of children for whom
there are approved families whatever their condition and
that you concur in my Government's action in wajvivA
the normal medical requirements. 
4_ -2-
I w'julJ. also be grateful if your State authority responsible
tr adoption couIld mai. ntaiii clos; e liason with the
/' Lt ral ian p. tment o L,. ibor ind Immigration in your
tLe in the norm^." vryV for overseas adoption cases.
L or an. wil for its part, proceed as
qiuickly s r. idc keep in touch with the
situation in Vietnam Lhrough our Department of Foreign
Affairs." TOWNSVILLE CANBERRA FAMILIES APPROVED AND AWAITING CHILDREN
FROM SOUTH VIETNAM FOR ADOPTION
NEW SOUTH WALES
VICTORIA QUEENSLAND SOUTH AUSTRALIA
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
TASMANIA 100 2
D4 f
TOTAL
FIGURES FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND IMMIGRATION AS AT 0. 2/
APRIL 3, 1975. 



Jj,, AUSTRALIIA g-
PRIME MIMISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO 480
3 April 1975
RETURN OF VIETNAMESE AND CAMBODIAN STUDENTS
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr Whitlam. said today that students from Vietnam
and Cambodia studying in Australia would be allowed to
defer their return home.
Sponsored overseas students are normally required to
return to their homelands when they have completed their
studies in Australia, but they have in the past been
permitted to remain temporarily, for additional studi~ s
when circumstances in their own countries would make it
dangerous to return.
Mr Whitlam. added that he hoped that students from
Vietnam and Cambodia would be able to go back to their
homelands and make their contribution to the reconstruction
of their countries when peace is restored.
At the present time, there are 445 Vietnamese students
in Australia, including approximately 75 private students.
There are 75 students from Cambodia, including 18 private
students. They are in Australian schools, colleges and
universities or undertaking special courses of study or
training.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO0. 479
3 April 1975
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER TO LAUNCH THE
INDO-CHINA/ VIETNAM APPEAL
I know that I speak for all Australians in expressing
my deep concern at the current-plight of refugees in
Indo-China. Today, the Disaster Emergency Committee of the Australian
Council for Overseas Aid opens the national Indo-China
Vietnam Appeal so that Australians will have an opportunity
to contribute personally to the organisations which are
helping suffering people in these areas.
As a Government we have acted promptly to assist the
plight of these homeless refugees. Already this financial
year we have given $ 2.4 million to international agencies
which are working on both sides of present lines of military
control and we have reaffirmed our commitment to contribute
generously to the future reconstruction of post-war
Indo-China. We are conscious of the depth of feeling on this
humanitarian issue among the Australian people and their
desire to help personally. I therefore warmly commend this
national appeal to the Australian people and have pleasure
in launching it with a donation from the Government of
$ 50,000. I know that individual Australians will express
their personal concern by responding quickly and generously
to this-appeal.
The Australian Council for Overseas Aid coordinates the
work of the 32 voluntary aid agencies in Australia, including
such organisation as the Australian Red Cross, Australian
Council of Churches, Australian Catholic Relief, Freedom from
Hunger Campaign, Austcare, Community Aid Abroad, and other
major organisations in this area.
The Australian people have the assurance from past work
by the. Disaster Emergency Committee that the money given will
be sent quickly and spent wisely by reputable organisations.
TOWNSVILLE, QLD. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 485
4 April 1975
VIETNAM ORPHANS FURTHER REPLIES FROM PREMIERS' ( 2
The New South Wales Premier, Mr Lewis, sent
the following reply:
" my Government will accept children irrespective
of their current state of health or whether they can be
adopted immediately. As indicated over the last few days
this government will accept responsibility for two
thousand children and will give consideration should the
need arise to receive more than this number. Children will
receive medical and if necessary hospital accommodation and be
accommodated when they arrive."
The Tasmanian Premier, Mr Neilson sent the
following message: " I refer to your message this morning in connection
with the adoption of Vietnamese children. I note that the
Vietnamese government is prepared to facilitate arrangements
for the exit of orphan children. With regard to the lack
of documentation I am prepared to accept this, but it will
mean that some of the children will have to remain as
child migrants until adoption is possible. The
medical problem I accept in the emergency that this will be
true and on humanitarian grounds am prepared to agree with
the proposal that Tasmania should undertake to receive the
children and if not acceptable for adoption guarantee their
accommodation and care. Numbers of people already approved and
on the State's waiting list to adopt children have now
indicated willingness to accept Vietnamese children and
the number currently is 30 with more expected. My State
authority, the Department of Social Welfare, will continue
to keep day to day contact with the Australian Department
of Labor and Immigration and will at -the appropriate time
supply information about procedures for reception, placement
and ongoing care for the children. Tasmania is prepared to do
more than its share anj will cooperate in every way with the
Australian Government.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



J~ AUSTRI A A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO 482
4 April 1975
JOINT PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. WHITLAM
AND THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN PREMIER, MR DUNSTAN
The Australian and South Australian Governments
have agreed on the terms for the transfer to the Australian
Government of the non-metropolitan rail systems of South
Australia. They have also agreed that South Australia will
now cease to be claimant State before the Grants Commission.
The announcements were made jointly today by the
Prime. Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the South Australian
Premier, Mr Dunstan. The agreements were concluded at discussions in
Sydney on Wednesday between Mr Whitlam, Mr D~ unstan, the
Australian Treasurer, Dr. Cairns, and the Australian
Minister for Transport, Mr Jones.
The Prime Minister and Premier emphasised that
all employees of the S. A. Railways will be employed in
either the'State on' Australian Railways service and that
the terms and conditions of employment would be no less
favourable than those presently applied.
The Australian Government will assume
responsibility for the financial operation of the country
and inter-State systems.
It will also assume the burden of the appropriate
portion of the railways deficit as from 1 July 1974.
The metropolitan rail system will remain
the property of South Australia and will be operated by the
State Transport Authority.
There will be a cash adjustment involving a
substantial payment to the Soueh Australian Government
this financial year, and an appropriate adjustment to
the level of financial assistance grants in future years. / 2 
-2-
The agreement to transfer the South Australian
non-metropolitan railways resulted from the offer contained
in the Prime Minister's Policy Speech of November 1972
for the Australian Government to accept responsibility
for the railways of any State.
" This agreement is a most significant event
in the development of Australian railways and represents
the first major step towards the creation of a truly
national railway system," the Prime Minister and the Premier
said. " This agreement will benefit South-Australia and
Australian as a whole by enabling integration of Australian
National Railways and S. A. R. systems; encouraging greater
through-running of trains; fostering uniform purchasing and design
programs enabling the better utilisation of capital funds; and
removing unnecessary duplication between two of Australia's
major railways. The decision to transfer only the non-metropolitan
portion of the South Australian railways resulted from
the recognition of the need to coordinate all Adelaide's
urban transport modes under a single authority. However,
the major freight terminals, and key freight and country
lines inthe metropolitan area necessary for the efficient
operation of inter-State and country trains will be
transferred to the Australian Government. Where lines are
jointly used by urgan and non-urban trains these lines will
remain.. with the State but running rights will be granted
to non -urban trains.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



f D rf q rT f Press Statement ,441
4 April 1975
VIETNAM ORPHANS
The Qantas 747 carrying Vietnamese orphans
to Australia is now expected to reach Sydney shortly
after midday tomorrow. The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, told the
Premiers of details of the aircraft's movements in messages
tonight. He said the aircraft would fly from Bangkok
to Sydney. The children would be taken to the Quarantine
station at North Head. for reception and care pending their
allocation to individual States.
Mr Whitlam said officials of the Department
of Labor and Immigration were in touch with the adoption
authorities in the States on the details of these
arrangements, including details of where the assistance of
various State authorities might be required.
( For Background: The latestinformation from Foreign
Affairs is that the Qantas aircraft will be in Bangkok
only 90 minutes. The orphan6from Vietnam will be leaving
there up until about 9.00 pm Saigon time. Present expected
time of arrival in Sydney is 12.20 pm Saturday.
TOWNSVILLE. QLD. 



1, AU STHA LI/ A~
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 483
4 April 1975
VIETNAM ORPHANS
The Australian Government has chartered a
Qantas 747 jet to help in the evacuation of Vietnamese
children destined for adoption by Australian parents, the
Prime Minister announced in Townsville today.
Mr Whitlam said the aircraft would leave
Sydney at 4: 00 p. m. today for Bangkok carrying three doctors
and twenty nurses to look after the orphans on their flight
to Australia. It will also carry twenty-five tonnes of supplies
for emergency relief in Vietnam for humanitarian purposes
including rice, milk powder and corned beef.
Mr W. Morrison, the minister assisting the
Foreign Minister, will fly with the relief team to
supervise the evacuation and report directly to the Prime
Minister. The team will have as its medical director, Dr.
W Langsford, First Assistant Director-General of the
Public Health Division of the Australian Department of
Health. The aircraft will wait in Bangkok to receive
children being flown out of Saigon by RAAF Hercules
aircraft. It will also bring back to Australia dependents and
non-essential personnel being evacuated by the Australian
Embassy in Saigon. The children will leave Saigon as soon as
possible. So far three Premiers, Mr Dunstan, Mr Hamer and
Mr Bjelke-Petersen, have responded to the Prime Minister's
message to State Premiers last night seeking guarantees about
the care of the children brought i~ nto Australia and their
agreement to the waiving of usual formalities.
Some delays are being experienced in Saigon in
preparing the children for departure, but the Australian
Embassy is working to overcome these and hopes the airlift
of the children will be well underway tomorrow.
TOWNSVILLE AND CANBERRA 
-2-
/ ATTAkC.-LMENT: Premiers' Replies on Vietnam Orphans
Mr Dunstan's reply states:
" South Australia gives the underaking
and agreements sought in your message tonight and we will
make the arramgements you ask."
Mr Hamer' s reply reads as follows:
" I refer to your telegram of last night concerning
the adoption of Vietnamese orphans. You have my assurance
that we will receive orphans up to the number for whom
there are approved families and that we will provide
accommodation and care in the no ' rm-al way for those
children amongst these orphans who are not eventaully
chosen for adoption because of their medical or physical
condition. Our Department of Social Welfare will maintain
close and continuous liason with your Department of Labor
and Immigration as requested. We would appreciate advice
as early as possible of prospective numbers of children
arriving in the next few days so that appropriate
reception arrangements can be made. I have arranged for
the Department of Social Welfare to send separate advice
to your Department of Labor and Ihmigration about reception,
placement, and ongoing care for these children."'
Mr Bjelke-Petersen's reply reads as follows:
Reference your telex re adoption of
Vietnamese orphans by Queensland parents. Our Department
of Children's Services is presently processing well
over 2O0applications for such adoptions and is giving
very* urgent priority to them. While it is anticipated
further applications will be received I must emphasise
that not every such application is necessarily from
suitable adoptive parents and must be examined
accord~ ingly. As always, the future welfare of the
child concerned must remain the department's paramount
consideration. In accordance with your request I
confirm that my Government would be prepared to accept
without the normal medical check any number of such
children -up to the figure of 200 mentioned above.
You may also be assured that the Department of Children's
Services will maintain the closest liason with the
Department of Labor and Immigration here." 



GROWTH CENTRES IN QUEENSLAND
It is unfortunate f or the people of Queensland,
and particularly for those of Townsville who would be the
first to benefit, that the Queensland Premier is more
interested in making political points than in receiving
financial assistance from the Australian Government.
His ill-informed comments on growth centres contrast
starkly with the attitude of Liberal Premiers in New
South Wales and Victoria who have welcomed the Australian
Government's initiatives and cooperated with them.
The principles involved have been approved by the
Governments of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia
and are in the process of being implemented in Albury/ Wodonga,
Bathurst/ Orange, the South-West sector of Sydney and Monarto.
The basic principle agreed is that people should be
able to build their homes on their own land and hold this land
in freehold tenure for all time. The only condition that has
been placed on residential freehold is that land owners should
not be able to make private profit out of public decisions
such as a change in land use zoning.
At no time has the Australian Government considered
any proposal that all homes built in growth centres should be
for rental. In all growth centres supported by the Australian
Government people will have full opportunity to buy houses of
their own choice. The Australian Government and all State Governments with
whom agreements have been negotiated want to see viable growth
centres that do not have to rely for their establishment and
continued growth on subsidies. The objective of the Australian
Government has been to provide special financial support in the
early stages of growth and provide, where necessary, facilities
in advance of the normal time by which they would be needed. For
all revenue producing investment a basic principle of repayable.
loans has been established. For the growth centres agreed with
State Governments, long term loans are being provided at the
long term loan rate with initial grace periods. But agreements
have been reached with State Governments on the provision of nonrepayable
grants for certain purposes. For example, in the case
of sewerage backlog the assistance provided by the Australian
Government has been one-third grant and the remainder long-term
loans. Grants on a two for one matchihg basis are being made
available for the purchase of non-urban land. Assistance will
also be provided for projects to a standard higher than they
would have been provided for an equivalent population in other
areas in a State. The aim is to develop attractive well-planned
growth centres. / 2 
A detailed evaluation of proposals for international
airport facilities at Townsville is being undertaken currently
by the Bureau of Transport Economics. A report is expected
to be available at the end of next month. It is important,
of course, that any major proposals such as this for Townsville
be effectively integrated with other major projects and programs
to cater for future growth.
Accelerated growth in Townsville could be successfully
achieved if an agreement were reached between the Australian
Government and the State Government on the basic objectives of
a program and the basic principles to underly that program.
The Australian Government wants to see a more rational distribution
of population, improved access of people to the range of
specialised services which can only be made available in large
centres and the access of people to cheap developed land.
The Australian Government has promised to help promote
that growth. Its programs however need the cooperation of
the Queensland Government if they are to be fully realised.
Townsville, Qld.
April 5, 1975 



1z4-
EMBARGO: Sunday, S. 00 P. M.
QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 3
GROWTH CENTRES
6 APRIL 1975
During the Easter weekend, I visited Albury
where 2,000 delegates from all over Australia were attending
the Annual Apex Convention. As well as attending the Apex
Convention I was able to see the progress being made on one of
the most exciting experiments ever undertaken in Australia.
The governments of New South Wales and Victoria are
cooperating fully with the Australian Government in the
development of Albury-Wodonga as a-growth centre. There
on the banks of the Murray, the three governments and the
people of Albury-Wodonga are working together to create
what will be virttually a new inland city Australia's first
such since the founding of Canberra itself, more than
sixty years ago. Reflecting on what is happening in Albury,
one can't help drawing a contrast with what is happeningor
rather, what is not happening here in Queensland to
be precise, here in Townsville where I am recording this
broadcast. It's a very unfortunate story. For the fact is
that the development taking place in Albury, the finance
being made available, could be and should be paralleled in
Townsville. In the policy speech for the elections of
1972, I said this: " In our first term of office, a Federal
Labor Government will concentrate its own
initiatives and endeavours on two areas-
Albury-Wodonga and Townsville. At
Albury-Wodonga the Commonwealth has all the
ingredients for a successful effort to establish
another inland city the size of Canberra*.
The Commonwealth is already responsible for
decisions which have determined the growth and
the burdens of Townsville more than any other
-Austra-lian city, except Canberra itself."
That was what I said in 1972. The new government
moved very promptly to meet its undertakings. The
Albury-Wodonga project is going ahead. Townsville has
stalled. Why the difference?
I have to be quite blunt. The sole difference
lies in the attitude of the State Governments concerned.
From the beginning, we had good cooperation from
the Premiers of New South Wales and Victoria. Sure, there
were problems to be sorted out. The State Governments both
of them incidentally, non-Labor Governments sought and
obtained assurances about their own role and responsibilities.
That's fair enough. 
But the important thing was that the basic approach
by the three governments was a desire to cooperate, a
desire to see that the project succeeds. During my Easter
visit to Albury, I was able to make a joint statement with the
Premiers of New South Wales and Victoria, announcing that we
had signed an agreement providing $ 40 million from the
Australian Government for further development at Albury-Wodonga.
So the work is going ahead. My promise of 1972 is being
fulfilled. I am afraid I can't report the same progress with
Townsville. The fruitful cooperation we have had with the
non-Labor Government in New South Wales and Victoria just
has not been forthcoming from the Queensland Government.
In both the 1973 Budget and last year's Budget, we allocated"
very substantial sums to the States for land acquisition
and growth centre programs $ 30 million in 1973,
$ 125 million in 1974-75. Initially we offered the Queensland
Government over $ 4 million specifically for development in
Towns ville. That offer has never been taken up.
Our interest in Townsville is very close. The
growth of Townsville in recent years has owed very much to
initiatives by the Australian Government, to decisions made
indeed by the previous Australian Government. The James
Cook University, the Marine Research Institute and the choice
of Townsville as the headquarters of our northern defence
system h ave shaped the Townsville of today. The growth
that these institutions and installations have brought, has
also imposed very heavy burdens on Townsville's services
and amenities. It would be intolerable for any Australian
Government to ignore the consequences of its own initiatives
for the people of Townsville the taxpayers, the rat(% payers.
We can't expect the people of Townsville to foot the bill for
new community needs which have been created by decisions In
of the Australian Government, so we want to contribute. We
want to cooperate with the State Government and Townsville's
local authorities, to ensure that Townsville grows in a
well-ordered, well-planned way, that proper community services
are provided, that land prices are held down. But we
jus t are not receiving the necessary cooperation.
Why should this be so? What nonsense it is
to talk of this being an example of centralism, and what
nonsense it is to talk of this in terms of State rights.
what we offer is a splendid opportunity for genuine
decentralisation. This is what is being achieved at Albury-
Wodongai. Why' should it not be achieved in Queensland?
Why should the non-Labor Premier of Queensland refuse the kind
of cooperation we have had from the non-Labor Premiers of
New South Wales and Victoria. What is it that Mr Bjelke-
Petersen sees so sinister in an offer which is perfectly
acceptable to Mr Lewis and Mr Hamer? .3 
-3-
It is not too late although with every month
that passes the problems of Townsville's growth will
mount and the cost of solving them will go up.
But our offer the offer I made in 1972 still stands.
It requires only a word from Mr Bjelke-Petersen a word
that would indicated his willingness to cooperate in
the way that his southern colleagues are cooperating
This is something of concern to Townsville. It is in the
interest of Queensland as a whole that the Australian
Government should be involved in developing growth centres,
not only in Townsville but also in the Fitzroy and Moreton
regions. But if these projects are to go ahead, then we
must have cooperation from the State Government. Queenslanders
should insist that that cooperation is forthcoming. 



PRIME MINIS rl N
CANUL. ItOA
PRESS SIATI.: MI.: NT 6 April 1975
VIETNAMESE CIII , DREN IN SYDNEY
The Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam visited
both the Quarantine Station at North [ lead and the Royal
Alexandria Hospital for Children in Sydney this
afternoon. After Mr Whitlam's visit to North Head
it was announced that senior Australian Government and
State Government officials were working closely to
streamline arrangements for the Vietnamese children
to join adoptive parents.
More than half the children are receiving
hospital treatment in Sydney but none is said to be in
danger. At North Head, mere than 40 voluntary workers
are helping medical and nursing staff care for the
children. . Health checks are continuing on all children
and it will be some days before these are completed.
Officials stressed that these checks were
essential for the welfare of the children and it was
important that these be completed before the children
were moved.
Canberra A. C. T. 



JI4A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 487
7 April 1975
Second Orphan Flight
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today
announced details of a second Australian charter flight
to bring Vietnamese children to Australia.
He said that a Qantas Boeing 747 aircraft,
chartered by the Australian Government, would leave Sydney
at 2 pm today to fly to Bangkok.
On board will be a large team of medical
personnel, who will be flown from Bangkok to Saigon
by RAAF aircraft to accompany the children back to Bangkok
to join the Qantas flight. The Qantas flight is expected
to return to Melbourne on Wednesday.
The medical personnel will include 40 nurses,
three pediatricians, two general practitioners, officers
from the Department of Health and senior officials from
the Departments of Labor and Immigration and Social
Security,, The Qantas charter aircraft will be fully
loaded with about 27 tonnes of relief supplies for Vietnam.
This will include five tonnes of clothing, children's foods
and medicines which have been provided by Australian
voluntary agencies for the Rosmary Taylor Orphanage in Saigon.
There will also be $ 65,000 worth of drugs and other
medicines from the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, and
milk power. The Prime Minister said that it was not yet
certain how many children would return to Australia on
the Qantas charter. The final number would be advised
later, following advice from the Australian Embassy in
Saigon.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIP: MINISTER Press Statement No. 489
7 April 1975
INTER-STATE COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today
that legislation would be introduced in the Australian
Parliament soon to re-establish the Inter-State Commission.
Mr Whitlam said the re-establishment of the
Inter-State Commission would rectify " a major deficiency
in the. structure of our Constitutional institutions"
" It is one of the great anomalies of Australia's
post-Federation history that the concept of the Inter-State
Commission, for which the founders of our. Constitution
obviously envisaged a major role in Federal relationships,
has except for a brief period six decades ago been ignored
by Australian Governments.
" After more than two years of careful planning
we have now reached a stage where we can decide upon a
role and structure for the Commission which we believe
will enable it to function in a way consistent with its
original conception. " A clearly developed and defined role for the
Commission will evolve over time and in the light of
experience." Mr Whitlam. said the Australian Government
intended the Commission to play a major role in the transport
field in accordance with the intention of the Constitution.
Mr Whitlam. said the Inter-State Commission,
was first appointed in 1913 following an Act of Parliament
introduced by the Fisher Labor Government of 1912. One of
the first acts of the Menzies Government in 1950 was to
repeal the Act. The restored Inter-State Commission will consist
of a President and four other Members, all full-time. In
accordance with Section 103 ( ii) of the Constitution, they
will be appointed for terms of seven years.
" Although the Commission will not be a judicial
body it is considered appropriate that, in view of its
important role and its unique Constitutional status and
authority, the President should have the same rank, status
and precedence as a Justice of the High Court and that other
Members should have comparability with Judges of the Australian
Industrial Court. / 2 
-2-
" It will be apparent from this that we shall
be seeking men of the highest calibre to fill positions on
the Commission," Mr Whitlam said.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



iJJAUSTRLIA
PIUu' Z MPISTER Press Statement No. 490
7 April 1975
CANCELLATION OF SECOND ORPHAN-FLIGHT
A second charter flight by a Qantas aircraft
which was to have departed this afternoon to bring a second
group of Vietnamese orphans for adoption in Australia has
had to be cancelled. The Prime Minister, in announcing the cancellation
of the flight, said the Australian Embassy in Saigon had
been advised late this morning by the Deputy Prime Minister
of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam, Dr Dan, that
the quota of orphans for emergency evacuation from South
Vietnam had been filled, and that there was no present
intention to consent to additional blanket waivers for
bulk emergency evacuations. The Australian Ambassador
in Saigon has been given to understand that the Government
of the Republic of Vietnam wishes to review its practices
following the initial emergency evacuation and is reverting
to the normal adoption procedures. The Australian Ambassador
has reported that, following the first emergency evacuation,
there are very few Vietnamese children who have been
released to the adoption agencies.
Mr Whitlam said that the Australian Government
noted the Republic of Vietnam's position and the implication
that the most pressing problem which had faced it in relation
to the tragic problem of orphans, the innocent victims of
war, had been relieved by the emergency uplift in which
Australia had participated.
The Prime Minister said that urgent consideration
was now being given to the means by which the considerable
quantity of relief supplies which had been assembled by
the Government and private agencies in Australia for
humanitarian use in South Vietnam, and part of which was
to have been sent on the Qantas charter flight, could be
delivered to South Vietnam.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



1, A USTKALIAL
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 488
7 April 1975
PRIORITIES REVIEW STAFF REVIEW
The Prime Minister Mr Whitlam today announced
that he had asked for an urgent review of the Australian
Government's income maintenance and allied schemes,
including their relationship with the general social
security system, and its schemes for structural
adjustment assistance to employers. The review will
be carried out by the Priorities Review Staff.
Mr Whitlam said that the Government had
introduced various programs to aid structural adjustment
in both metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas.
Mr -Whitlam said that these programs had done a great
deal to mitigate financial and social hardships associated
with long-term adjustments but that problems and
anomalies have arisen as economic circumstances have
changed. Mr Whitlam said that there was now a need to
take stock of the various programs in operation. He
emphasised that the Government would filfil its obligations
to persons and firms eligible for benefits under
existing schemes.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



MINISTERIAL STATEMENT INDO-CHINA. THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
PRIME MINISTER. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
8 APRIL 1975
Thirty years ago France attempted to re-establish
her fallen empire in Indo-China. A war for independence
became a war of massive foreign intervention. It engulfed
a region. It challenged the might and will of the greatest
powor on earth. It made a wilderness of somte of'the fairest
portions of the globe. Thu most tranquil city in Asia
Phnomn Penh has been made, in the wo.-rds of the Member for
Kooyonq, a mire of human misery. CuntL-es of old civilisations
have been madu cities of death. The war unleashe. d on a
peasant people the heaviest bombing in history and the greatest
fire power used in history. Not less than two million have
been killed. Countless more have been maimed. Yet the war
continues. It is ten years this month since Sir Robert Menzies
announced the commitment of the First Australian Battalion
to Vietnam. Since then it has been the duty of successive
Prime Ministers to report to Parliament and people on
-Australian activities, on Australian actions, including
activity by the armed services, in Indo-China. I am now
the fifth Australian Prime Minister to have to fulfil that
duty but with this difference: for the first time an
Australian Prime Minister need report only on our humanitarian
involvement, including the use of the armed services, and
our endeavours to end the war rather than escalate the
war. After all these years, after all the blunders
and bloodshed of thirty years, what tolerable or feasible
objective can any foreign government set for itself except
the ending of the war, except the ending of the killing
as soon as possible. We outsiders never had the right to intervene.
But even if there were such a right or even if it was right
to intervene, would anyone now suggest that any foreign
government should resume that intervention? If we have learnt
nothing else in the last thirty years we have surely learnt
this much, at a heavy cost to ourselves but at a terrible one
to the people we claimed to be helping.
For a generation and more, Australia shared with
her Pacific partners a great delusion about our rights,
our interests, our obligations. Those who acted for Australia
as a government mistook entirely the nature of Australia's
interests and obligations and her rights. They shared, and
encouraged the Australian people to accept, a delusion about
the nature of the conflict in Indo-China. All of us are still
paying the price for those mistakes in economic cost, in
loss of confidence in Western civilisation itself. We can
repair the losses, other than the lives destroyed. But to
do so it is necessary not to repeat the mistakes of the past
not just the mistakes in action but the mistakes of attitude.
It was a mistaken attitude after the revolution in China that
led step by step to the mistaken view of Australian interests
and American interests and mistaken actions in Indo-China.
Surely we have learnt our lesson at last. 
-2-
Por twenty years there has been a kind of tragic
inevitability about the events now takingj place. The great
chance, the great opportunity for a political settlement,
L017uac thr-uujhouL Inido-China was Ov en . in 1954 by the
Geneva Agreements. The chance was lost, the opportunity was
thrown away. The Geneva Agreements provided the two basic
ingredients Eor a political settlement re-unification
after free elections. If such elections had been held, they
Would almost certainly have resulted in the power over a
un'i. ld Victnam under 11o Chi Minh. Rather th. in face this
prospect the regime in Saigon, urged on by thie then United
States Administration, refused to hold elections. The result
I been that an outcome whiich might have beutn achieved
by political means twenty years ago, an outcome certainly
foreseen by the parties to the Geneva Agreements, whether
they welcomed it or not, now seems likely to be achieved only
after these twenty more years of bloodshed.
The next great effort to achieve a political solution
resulted in the Paris Agreements of January, 1973. Once again
those Agreements envisaged a government of one Vietnam with
participation of all parties, not just the governments of
Saigon and Hanoi but the Provisional Revolutionary Government
the Vietcong so called. Neither the Geneva Agreements nor
the Paris Agreements ever allowed the idea that North and
South Vietnam were two separate countries. As Article
of the Paris Agreements states: " The military demarcation line
between the two zones at the seventeenth parallel is only
provisional and not a political or territorial boundary,
as provided for in Paragraph 6 of the final declaration of
the 1954 Geneva Conference." In other words, from 1954 to the
present day, from the fall of Dien Bien Phu 21 years ago to
the fall of Hue two weeks ago, the war in Vietnam has retained
its essential character. It is a civil war. The real
character of the war has never changed. What has changed
is the nature of the fighting and the level of violence.
That change, with all the additional suffering and killing it
has caused, is overwhelmingly due to one factor foreign
intervention. The real result of foreign intervention,
principally the United States on the side of Saigon and
Russia on the side of Hanoi, has been to raise the level of
violence, to raise the capacity for mutual destruction on
both sides. That is, if the two sides insisted on a solution
by military means, then foreign intervention made it certain
that the end whatever the outcome would be as bloody
as possible. What outsiders, including Australia, have done
is to create two of the world's largest armies. That is our
real legacy to Vietnam. That is almost the sole military
result of years of intervention. Let those who year after year
encouraged a military solution, those who decried as weakness
or even treason the calls for negotiations and the calls for
political settlement, now, and at last, recognise the real
consequences of their work. These strongmen, these realists,
the men on horse-back, insisted upon a military solution.
So a military solution it is now to be. / 3 
-3-
It should also be emphasised that both the Geneva
Aqre Iflcnts and~ the Paris Agjreements onvisa ' jed that all
conte. nding parties would share political responsibility in
a re-united Vietnam. The Geneva Agreements envisaged free
elections. The Paris Agreements provided for a National
Reconciliation Council, to arranye for general elections
in South Vietnam. Article 12 stated:
" Itmmediately after the cease-fire, the South Vietnamese
parties shall hold consultations in a spirit of national
reconciliation and concord, mutual respect, and mutual
non-elimination to set up a national council of national
reconciliation and concord of three equal segments.
After the National Council of National Reconciliation and
Concord has assumed its functions, the two South Vietnamese
parties will consult about the formation of councils at
lower levels. The two South Vietnamese parties shall sign
an Agreement on the internal matters of South Vietnam as soon
as possible and do their ' utmost to accomplish this within
ninety days after the cease-fire comes into effect."
This was the crucial political article of the Paris
Agreements. The Saigon Government has refused to act to implement
this central provision. It has not been prepared to join
with the Provisional Revolutionary Government. This breach is
the key to the justification for military retaliation claimed
by the opponents of the Saigon Government.
Because the political opportunities have been for
a second time lost, a military solution became inevitable
in the broader sense. This does not mean, however, that the
actual and specific events of the past three weeks were
themselves inevitable. The over-running of so much of
South Vietnam is by no means a classic example of a blitzkreig.
In very large measure the North Vietnamese forces have been
moving into a military vacuum. The United States' Defence
Secretary, Mr Schlesinger, said on 31 March that it was Saigon's
withdrawal rather than a communist general offensive which
was the primary cause of the Government of Vietnam's present
difficulties. President Ford said on 3 April: " A unilateral
decision to withdraw created the chaotic situation that exists
now. It was a unilateral decision by President Thieu."
To state these facts is not to condone breaches of the
Paris Agreements by North Vietnam. There have been gross
breaches repeatedly by both sides. It is just a plain
statement of fact that the immediate chaotic situation north
of Saigon is due to the unilateral decision by President Thieu.
In the words of the Australian Journalist Denis Warner
close as he is to military councils in Saigon " The shattering
loss of central Vietnam, which has swung the balance of forces
entirely in Hanoi's favour, was not caused by enemy action but
by hideous blunders in Saigon." The decision to withdraw and,
perhaps even more importantly, the way it was made, with no
explanation, no consultation, no communication, had two immediate
res ults. It destroyed the morale of the Army of the Republic
of Vietnam and it spread panic to the population. / 4 
-4-
It is in this situation of unparalleled chaoc and
unexpectud rapidity of events unexpected in lhanoi itself
tliat t AutLrian Government has tried Lo apply its
resources to save lives, to relieve sufferinig.
It must be emphasi. sed that the suddonness of the
collipse in South Vietnam ] imited the scuie ind effectiveness
ol tliy aid given by the Au.; t. ra] in GovenmL( J!. ur by any other
. government. Members of the Opposil. ion have clo:;( n to belittle
our efforts. For example, the Leader of the Opposition
particularised our participation in the attempted evacuation
01. Danang as a " futile and pathetic gesture too little,
too late." The truth is that the Australian Government met,
as soon as it was received through the American Embassy,
a reqLuest from the Government of South Vietricm flor assistance.
The decision wa* taken to make available seven lercules transport
aircraft together with other aircraft currently based at
B utterworth in Malaysia. On 2 April I received the following
message: " Please accept my warm appreciation and deep
admiration for your help to evacuate the
many desperate refugees from Danang. Australia
can take great pride in the rapid decision to
meet an absolutely essential humanitarian
requirement. Warmest respect. ( Signed)
Admiral Noel Gayler, United States Commander
in Chief Pacific."
The Australian Government last year contributed
$ 1.15million to international organisations to be spent in
Indo-China on both sides during the current financial
year. On 28 March the Australian Government announced a
further contribution of $ 200,000 to the Indo-China Operations
Group of the International Red Cross, which operates throughout
Indo-China. On 2 April I announced a further contribution
of $ 1 million to the U. N. -High Commissioner for Refugees'
relief work among refugees in all parts of Indo-China, on both
sides of the lines of military control. On 3 April I opened
a public appeal for a $ 5 million refugee aid fund, to be
co-ordinated by the Disaster Emergency Committee of the
Australian Council for Overseas Aid.
Yesterday the Minister for Foreign Affairs announced
a further grant of $ 1 million to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. This brings the total Australian
Government aid to international humanitarian organisations
operating in Indo-China to $ 3.4 million.
The action which has attracted most attention is of
course the bringing of children to Australia. In this matter,
the sole role of the Australian Government was to bring eligible
children to suitable adoptive families as promptly and as
safely as possible. Nobody has been helped by unfounded claims
that vast numbers of orphans were waiting for evacuation from
Saigon. 
At all times, the Australian Govenments has been
bound to require two conditions: that orphans would be approved
for exit from Saigon by the South VietnameseGovernment
for adoption in Australia, and that the States would guarantee
that normal adoption procedures would be observed.
As soon as the Australian Governunent received advice
that t hu uJrst JL: equi. umtinL 1,1d b . i melt, ad II i at on thu sec: old,
the States had approved 246 adopting families, arrangements
were made to bring the orphans by Hercules transport to Bangkok
and by chartered Qantas jet to Sydney. Austriilian Government
authorities found that many of the children evacuated from
Saigon were the subject of uncompleted off shore adoption
procedures in South Vietnam by Australian nationals. Faced
with this fact, my Government determined that it could do
nothing in the matter of allocating children to families as
this was clearly a State responsibility and therefore if
there was to be any disagreement between adoptive families
about the children then it was a matter for the States to
determine. The Government had arranged for an aircraft to
depart Sydney yesterday afternoon for Bangkok to evacuate
a second group of orphans. That aircraft did not take off,
following advice from our Ambassador in Saigon that the South
Vietnamese authorities decided not to release any more
chi ldren as they wished to reconsider their policy on adoption
by foreign nationals. Our Ambassador has been unable to
confirm reports that this decision has since been reversed.
I should point out, however, that the decision
i elf amply demonstrates that there is no large pool
of' orphans awaiting urgent evacuation and, further, that
the Saigon Government has properly insisted on the performance
of its own policies and procedures. / 6 
The actions of the Government in the immediate
emergency are part of the lonqstandinq program and policy
we have adopted since achieving office. our immediate
objective has been to do what we can to stop the fighting,
to bring the war to an end. our long-term objective has
been to help rebuild a devastated Vietnam and help
rehabilitate its peop: le. We hiave cons is itc~) ly pursued
both objectives since December 1972. The most important
step open to Australia to reduce the level of violence was
always to stop contributing militarily to that violence.
Within a week of taking office we ordered the end of
Australia's military involvement in Vietnam and Cambodia.
The second contribution open to Australia was to
use diplomatic influcnce to end the fighting. In particular
tho Australian Government has tried to promtote adherence
to the Paris Agreements. We have lost no opportunity to
encourage the. Vietnamese parties to implement the Agreements
to the full, and to deplore the breaches of the Agreements
by both sides. And, of course, we have been able to do
this only because we are diplomatically represented in
both Saigon and Hanoi.
These attitudes have consistently been expressed
over the past 15 months by me and by the Foreign Minister
at the highest level, and by personal contact between
Vietnamese ministers and officials and some of my colleagues,
including the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for
Defence. As recently as 13 March I wrote to both President
Thieu and the North Vietnamese Foreign Minister stressing
Australia's support for the implementation of the Agreements,
our concern at the continued lack of progress, the continued
fighting and the continuing breaches of the Agreements by
both sides. The fact is that the Australian Government has
been foremost among nations in seeking to end the war and
relieve the suffering it has caused. In this immediate
emergency, no government has been more active, more
concerned and, reflecting the wishes of the Australian
people, more generous. And it is worth noting the real
reason why the Australian people expect their Government
so to act. Why does Vietnam invoke a very special kind
of emotion and concern and compassion in Australia? It's
not just the scale and extent of the suffering, which is
not, unhappily, unique, not even unusual in this troubled
world. The refugee, the homeless, the starving, the
innocent victims of war number millions upon millions
across three continents. But Vietnam has a power over the
Australian conscience for one particular reason. The
Australian people have accepted the truth, the bitter
truth, that the intervention into which they were led was
disastrously wrong, that it only increased and lengthened
the agony of Vietnam. The Australian people have acknowledged
the truth in the same way that the American people and the
American Congress have acknowledged it. But is the truth
of the disaster acknowledged by its authors and their
abettors? 
Onie of the miost depressing aspects of this whole
tragic episode has been the lamentable performance of
the Opposition in the past two weeks. I've listened
with increasing dismay and contempt to the statements by
spokesmen for the Opposition. I pass over the humbug
mnd hypocrisy par for thc course 7 huit the truly depressing
thlinig ha s been the mounit ing ev i denice thim with the
Oppos it ion nothing has chanjed Ten yeatus of destruct ionl
have changed nothing. The present Leader of the Opposition
has even revived the doimino theory, smai-tly dismnissed by
the Pr ime Mini ster OF Singapore as " old hash". T1he onec
great constant in the attitudeI Of the Ipar1ties OJpoSite to
the war in Vietnam, throughout the period of Australia' s
involvement, was thei~ r determnination to squeeze every drop of
po1 itical advantage out ol it., Anid eveni iii the Final. thr-oes,
they're at it again. One could hear all the echoes from the
past, right from that unforgettable night ten years ago,
28 April 1965, when from this side of the House they bayed
and brayed with a delight they didn't bother to conceal as
Sir Robert Menzies announced the first instalment of Australia's
military cohimitmient. It was their finest hour. They laughed
as they lied their way into this war. But throughout the
subsequent years, in any debate which had to deal with any
American initiatives to disengage or dc-escalate * the war,
they were notable for their sullen silence. The only occasion
their spirits revived was when, five years ago
President Nixon unleashed the South Vietnamese Army upon
Cambodia, escalating the war to its most ferocious level and
transforming a haven of fragile peace into a war-ravaged
wilderness. In the orchestrated outpourings of the past week there
has been just one new note muted as yet, but clearly designed
to become a grand new theme, and that is that the United States
is an untrustworthy ally. The irony of it! We are witnessing
the beginning of a new effort to sow the seeds of fear and
suspicion and division in Australia. What else is the purpose
of this attemnpt to blame the United States Congress and the
American people for the debacle in which the Government of
South Vietnam now finds itself. There could be only one other
motive to shame the United States back into Indo-China.
Is this the wish of the Opposition? Is this their proposal
for either the United States or Australia to get back into
the war? to prolong it for yet another decade? If that
is not their proposal, then what criticisin of substance can
they have against my Government's attitudes or actions with
regard to Indo-China, now or at any time in the past two
years and four months?
In the heady days when Vietnam was a popular war,
when it was a political goldmine, before the people of
Australia came to see its implications and consequences
for Indo-China, for Australia, for the United States,
the constant challenge imade in this House, not least
from the present Leader of the Opposition, was, " stand
up and be counted". Indeed, the first time this challenge
was raised in this House was against me by the then
Minister for External Affairs, now Lord Casey 21 years
ago. It was in 1954 that in this House I first warned
against Australian or American military involvement in
Indo-China. Let the Members of the Opposition now stand
up and be counted and say that they believe it was wrong 
that we should have got completely out of the war or
believe that the United States or Australia should go
back inito the war.
As to the United States, she has fulfilled any
obligations she assumed to the Government of Saigon.
Neither-thle honour nior thc initerests of a great people
can bec confided to any particular foreigni regime. But
the United States' honour and interests do lie in helping
rebuild a unified Vietnam, the unification of which
misguided policies, mistaken policies of the past so long
delayed; the United States' honour and interest lie in
helping to rebuild an Indo-China to the devastation of
which those policies so greatly contributed. That is
the way for the United States to regain her real place
of leadership in our region. To helping in such a task,
the Australian Government is already committed, indeed,
already contributing. And in that task Australia, as
far as this Government is concerned, will be a good
partner with the United States.
We will have no truck with those who put out
the line that the United States should resume her
intervention in the war. We will have no truck with
any suggestion that America's honour or reputation
requires resumed intervention. We will have no truck
with those who seek to build a new philosophy of fear
upon the unwarranted assertion of American dishonour
in refusing to intervene with force on behalf of the
Saigon Government. While the security of Australia has never rested
solely upon the American alliance, that alliance remains
a key element in it. And whatever the outcome of the
events now unfolding in Vietnam, the basic elements
of Australia's security remain untouched. 
Who rules in Saigon is not, and never has been, an
inqredient in Australia's security. Our strength, our
cutr it. y reit on factoru aind crlationsh i p ultimately
unchlanqud by these events. The really important factors
. tnd rcolations are those, which have been davweloped by the
Australt. ian Covernment. . ince oocumber 19;! our relations
with our closest and largest neighbour Inidonesia, our
rel. ations with our greatest trading partner Japan, our
relations with China, our active support for development
of co-operation between ASEAN members, our efforts to ensure
that the Indian Ocean does not become the next area of
confrontation between the super-powers as Indo-China
became, in a sense, the first. Above all, Australia's
security, as with the peace ot the world, rents ultimately
upon mnaking the detete lhetwufln the Unite: d SI-ates and the
Soviet Union a success and with associatingc China in a
widor detente. ' Thlse re t he .) reat rolIn ion:; hips and the
ijireat fLictor which dut cinif. no Hli t' ec. u ity of Australia.
' Phis GovernmentI ha: s beun unr-umi ttinq i iLs efforts to
strenqthen those relationships. Those ettorts have been
rewarded with remarkable success.
It is not possible that the nightmare of Vietnam
will ever pass from the memory or the conscience of any
man or woman of our time. Nor should it. But the work
we are now doing to build good, constructive relations
with peoples and nations throughout the world will outlive
even that bitter memory, will outlast even the bad and
destructive things inflicted on the people of Vietnam
during the past thirty years. 



Press Statement No. 491
8 April 1975
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA BUILDING
Work will begin this month on the construction
of a building for the High Court of Australia. The building
is expected to be completed in three and a half years.
The project, the contract price of which is
$ 18.4 million, has been awarded to PDC Constructions ( ACT)
Pty Limited. This company is also building the Australian
National Gallery, which is being built nearby and is of
closely compatible architecture.
The design of the building is the result of a
major competition which began in mid-1972 and was won by
the late Chris Kringas of the company Edwards Madigan Torzillo
and Briggs, the architects who designed the Gallery.
The High Court building will be one of Canberra's
major national buildings located near the shores of Lake
Burley Griffin in the Parliamentary Triangle where its siting
will be related to Parliament House, the National Gallery
( now under construction) and the National Library.
The building will be 40 metres high and have a
gross floor area of 18,515 square metres consisting of:
* a large central public hall;
* 3 courtrooms including the ceremonial court;
* 8 storeys of administration, library and justices' chambers;
* 2 levels of basement car parking;
landscaping, ceremonial forecourt and site works.
The predominant building material will be selected
aggregate concrete using off-white cement. The exterior and
some interior surfaces will be Natural Concrete.
The public hall will be enclosed on the north
and south by large window walls. The building will be fully
air conditioned.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME INIISTER
FOR THE OPENING OF THE EXHIBITION.*
MODERN MASTERS: MANET TO MATISSE.
AT THE ART GALLERY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.-
SYDNEY,. 9 APRIL 1975
THIS IS PROBABLY THE MOST IMPORTANT ART EXHIBITION
EVER TO COME To AUSTRALIA. AUSTRALIANS FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO
TRAVEL HAVE PERHAPSSEEN SOME OF THE WORKS, OR THEIR LIKE,. IN THE
GREAT GALLERIES OF NORTH AMERICA AND EUROPE; OTHERS MAY HAVE
SEEN THEM REPRODUCED IN ART BOOKS; BUT THIS IS THE FIRST
OPPORTUNITY THAT THE LARGE PROPORTION OF AUSTRALIANS HAS HAD
TO ENJOY AND SAVOUR THE REAL THING,
CEZANNE. BONNARD,, BRAQUE,. DALI. DUBUFFET.
GAUGUIN,. VAN GOGH,. KLEE AND OTHERS VIE WITH EACH OTHER FOR
PRIDE OF PLACE; AND MANET. MATISSE,. MODIGLIANI. MUNCH,. PICASSO
AND MANY OTHERS VIRTUALLY STUMBLE OVER EACH OTHER TO CLAIM OUR
ATTENTIONt IT WOULD BE AN INVIDIOUS TASK TO TRY TO SINGLE OUT
INDIVIDUAL ARTISTS OR WORKS FOR SPECIAL COMMENT ALL HAVE THEIR
IMPORTANCE AND WE MUST BE THANKFUL TO THOSE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
EXHIBITION FOR BRINGING THIS VISUAL FEAST TO OUR COUNTRY. m e1 / 2 
-2-
THERE ARE, I BELIEVE, MORE THAN 100 WORKS IN THE
EXHIBITION REPRESENTING THE FINEST IN EUROPEAN ART OVER THE LAST
HALF OF THE 19TH CENTURY AND THE FIRST HALF OF THE 2OTH CENTURY.
THE ROLE OF THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, NEW YORK, IN PUTTING THE
EXHIBITION TOGETHER HAS BEEN CRUCIAL, AND I THINK IT IS IMPORTANT
TO REMEMBER THAT THIS IS NOT THE FIRST TIME THAT THE MUSEUM HAS
BEEN RESPONSIBLE FOR BRINGING SIGNIFICANT ART EXHIBITIONS TO
AUSTRALIA. OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS 3 EXHIBITIONS HAVE TOURED
AUSTRALIAN GALLERIES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE MUSEUM' S
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM.
TO THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART AND OTHER GALLERIES AND
THE PRIVATE COLLECTORS WHO LOANED WORKS FOR THIS EXHIBITIONI
EXTEND THE THANKS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, AND I TRUST THAT
THESE VALUABLE WORKS SO GENEROUSLY MADE AVAILABLE MAY NOT
SUFFER FOR BEING HUNG UPSIDE DOWN IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.
ART TODAY IS VERY MUCH AN INTERNATIONAL -OR SHOULD
ISAY A MULTINATIONAL VENTURE. GREAT EXHIBITIONS ARE OFTEN
SPONSORED BY PRIVATE COMPANIES AND CORPORATIONS. THE ALCOA
FOUNDATION HAS GENEROUSLY CONTRIBUTED $ 150,000 TO THIS
EXHIBITION, AND I SOMETIMES WONDER WHERE MODERN ART WOULD BE
WITHOUT BEER CANS AND TOBACCO. .1s.@ 3 
-3-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS, OF COURSE, PLAYING ITS
PART, AS IT QUITE RIGHTLY SHOULD. FIRST, IT HAS INDEMNIFIED THE
OWNERS OF THE WORKS COMPRISING TH4E EXHIBITION AGAINST LOSS OR
DAMAGE TO A TOTAL AMOUNT OF $ US 70 MILLION. WITHOUT THIS
SUPPORT THE EXHIBITION WOULD VERY LIKELY HAVE NOT BEEN POSSIBLE
BECAUSE OF THE PROHIBITIVE COSTS OF NORMAL INSURANCE COVER.
I SHOULD ADD THAT THE TREASURER WHO IS UNABLE TO BE WITH US
TONIGHT HAS ASKED ME TO STRESS HIS KEEN INTEREST IN THE SAFETY
OF THE EXHIBITION. SECONDLY, AN IMPORTANT AND CONTINUING ROLE IS
BEING PLAYED BY THE VISUAL ARTS BOARD OF THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL.
WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS IS MEETING THE TRANSPORT COSTS OF
THE EXHIBITION. THERE IS STILL A LINGERING PREJUDICE AGAINST MODERN
ART IN ALL SOCIETIES. EXHIBITIONS OF GREAT ART WORKS WILL HELP
TO DISPEL THIS; AND IT IS THROUGH REFERENCE TO THE WORKS OF
THE FOUNDING FATHERS OF MODERN PAINTING THAT WE SHALL COME TO
A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IS HAPPENING IN ART AROUND US TODAY.
WHEN THE AUSTRALIAN NlATIONAL GALLERY BOUGHT JACKSON
POLLOCK'S BLUJE POLES IN 1973 THERE WAS CONSIDERABLE CRITICISM FROM
PEOPLE WHO KNEW LITTLE ABOUT MODERN PAINTING AND WANTED TO KNOW
EVEN LESS. I REGRET THAT SECTIONS ' OF THE MEDIA DID THEIR
BEST TO PROVOKE PHILISTINE REACTIONS TO THE PURCHASE, THERE IS
A CERTAIN IRONY, THEREFORE, THAT IT WAS A NEWSPAPER, THE MELBOURNE
" HERALD", THAT IN 1939 SPONSORED AN EXHIBITION OF 215 WORKS BY
MANY OF THE ARTISTS REPRESENTED HERE THIS EVENING. iI . iA 
IT WAS ONE OF THE FIRST MAJOR EXHIBITIONS OF MODERN
ART IN THIS COUNTRY, AND THERE WERE FURIOUS REACTIONS WHEREVER
IT WAS SHOWN, SUCH ATTITUDES PERSIST, BUT I BELIEVE THAT WE NOW
HAVE A BETTER PERSPECTIVE AND UNDERSTANDING OF THE PLACE OF MODERN
ART IN THE HISTORY OF OUR CULTURE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS MAKING EARNEST EFFORTS TO
PROMOTE AN UNDERSTANDING AND LOVE OF THE ARTS TOWARDS IMPROVING THE
QUALITY OF LIFE OF OUR WHOLE COMMUNITY, OUR PRINCIPAL AGENCY IS
THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL, WHICH ' ASSISTS, THE INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE
OF ART AND IS CURRENTLY SPONSORING ( WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS) AN EXHIBITION IN EUROPE OF THE WORKS OF TEN AUSTRALIAN
PAINTERS AND SCULPTORS, THE VISUAL ARTS BOARD OF THE COUNCIL
HAS CONTRIBUTED SUBSTANTIALLY TO BRINGING THIS AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS
TO AUSTRALIA, IT MAKES GRANTS DIRECTLY TO ARTISTS; IT MAKES
SUBSIDIES TO BODIES FOR COMMISSIONING WORKS TO BE DISPLAYED IN
PUBLIC; IT MAKES SUBSIDIES TO PUBLIC GALLERIES FOR PURCHASING
AUSTRALIAN WORKS, AND GRANTS TO HELP ESTABLISH ARTISTS' WORKSHOPS
AND PUBLIC GALLERIES AND ASSIST ART SOCIETIES AND GROUPS, THE
BOARD'S BUDGET FOR 1974/ 75 EXCEEDS $ 1 MILLION, THIS IS PART
OF OUR OVERALL BUDGET FOR THE ARTS OF $ 20 MILLION THIS FINANCIAL
YEAR, 
IN CANBERRA WE ARE BUILDING A NATIONAL GALLERY
THE ROLE OF WHICH WILL BE TO COMPLEMENT THE WORK OF THE AUSTRALIA
COUNCIL AND OTHER ENTERPRISES, THROUGH PROVIDING FOR ALL TO
ENJOY EXAMPLES OF THE BEST WORKS OF ART AVAILABLE FROM DIFFERENT
PERIODS AND DIFFERENT CULTURES HERE AND ABROAD. THE EMPHASIS
ALWAYS IS ON QUALITY. AUSTRALIA IS BY NO MEANS WITHOUT DISTINCTION IN
INTERNATIONAL ART. IRECALL MY PLEASURE 18 MONTHS AGO WHENI
HEARDOF JOHN ARMSTRONG'S IMPORTANT PRIZE AT THE BIENNALE IN SAO
PAULO. SHORTLY AFTERWARDS, AT THE SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE, I OPENED
THE FIRST BIENNALE OF SYDNEY -AN EVENT WHICH I HOPE WILL COME
TO RANK AMONG THE BEST OF ITS KIND IN THE WORLD.
EXHIBITIONS SUCH AS THIS HELP OUR OWN ARTISTS AND
GIVE US THE OPPORTUNITY TO COMPARE THEIR WORK WITH THAT OF
THE GREAT ARTISTS FROM OTHER COUNTRIES AND OTHER PERIODS. THE
COMMUNITY OF SPIRIT, THE HUMANITY COMMON TO ALL ARTISTIC
CREATION, MAY BE FELT AND SHARED DIRECTLY. THE RESULT IS
AN ENRICHMENT OF OUR ARTISTIC EXPERIENCE AND HOPEFULLY A
STIMULATION OF THE ENERGIES AND PERCEPTIONS OF OUR ARTISTS.
IN THE LAST 2L1 HOURS I HAVE RECEIVED REPRESENTATIONS
FROM MANY DISTINGUISHED AUSTRALIAN ARTISTS, WRITERS AND OTHERS
SEEKING TO REMOVE GIFTS OF WORKS OF ART FROM THE PROVISIONS
OF THE INCOME TAX LAWS. I CAN WELL UNDERSTAND THAT MANY GREAT
PUBLIC ART COLLECTIONS HAVE DEPENDED ON PRIVATE BENEFACTORS.
I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT THIS QUESTION WILL RECEIVE THE EARNEST
CONSIDERATION OF THE GOVERNMENT, BUT IT IS NOT SOMETHING I CAN
PRONOUNCE UPON AT A MOMENT'IS NOTICE. I BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT
A GOVERNMENT WORKING TO BUILD UP THE FOUNDATIONS OF A GREAT 
-6
NATIONAL COLLECTION MUST LOOK AT WAYS OF ENCOURAGING GIFTS
FROM * PRIVATE OWNERS. I WISH THE EXHIBITION EVERY SUCCESS. IAM HONOURED
TO HAVE BEEN INVITED TO OPEN IT. IT WILL BE SHOWN IN SYDNEY
AND MIELBOURNE, AND SPECIAL GRANTS WILL BE MADE BY THE VISUAL
ARTS BOARD TO ENABLE STUDENTS FROM OTHER CITIES AND STATES TO
TRAVEL TO SYDNEY OR M'ELBOURNE TO SEE IT. I PAY TRIBUTE TO THE
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART; TO WILLIAM
LEIBERMAN, WHO SELECTED THE EXHIBITION AND IS LOOKING AFTER IT IN
AUSTRALIA; TO THE DIRECTOR OF THE MUSEUM OF fM'ODERN ART, MiR
OLDENBURG, AND HIS STAFF; TO THE GALLERIES AND INDIVIDUALS WHO
HAVE LENT THEIR WORKS; TO THE ALCOA FOUNDATION AND ALCOA OF
AUSTRALIA; TO THE ART GALLERY OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND THE
NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA; AND TO ALL WHO HAVEHELPED WITH
THE ASSEMBLING, TRANSPORT AND SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS.
FINALLY, I BELIEVE IT IS A MARK OF THE QUALITY
OF THE EXHIBITION WE HAVE HERE, THAT I UNDERSTAND IT IS TO BE
DISPLAYED AT THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART ON ITS RETURN TO NEW
YORK BEFORE THE WORKS ARE FINALLY DISPERSED ONCE AGAIN TO THEIR
OWNERS. 
ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR THE PRIME MIINISTER FOR A DINNER
GIVEN BY ALCOA OF AUSTRALIA AT THE BENNELONG POINT
RESTAURANT, SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE 9 APRIL 1975
1. ALL OF US CAN TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THE EXHIBITION
OPENED THIS EVENING. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT THIS
MORE SELECT CELEBRATION SHOULD TAKE PLACE IN THE OPERA
HOUSE, THE MOST BEAUTIFUL BUILDING IN THIS CITY, A
BUILDING THAT SYMBOLISES ALL THAT IS MOST MODERN AND
VIGOROUS IN OUR ARTISTIC AND CULTURAL LIFE.
2. I MUST SAY IT'S A PLEASURE TO ATTEND A DINNER
GIVEN By ALCOA AND NOT BE EXPECTED TO TALK ABOUT FOREIGN
INVESTMENT OR MINERALS AND ENERGY, AUSTRALIANS DON'T
NORMALLY ASSOCIATE ALCOA WITH THE ARTS, MODERN OR
OTHERWISE. LOOKING AROUND TH IS ROOM, I SEE QUITE
A FEW PEOPLE NOT NORMALLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE ARTS.
3. ALCOA IS A SPLENDID EXAMPLE OF THE PHILANTHROPIC
FOUNDATION WHICH IS SUCH A NOTABLE FEATURE OF AMERICAN
BUSINESS LIFE. ( IT IS ALWAYS IMPORTANT TO DISTINGUISH
BETWEEN THE FOUNDATION AND THE CORPORATION.) ONE THINKS
OF SIMILAR GREAT FOUNDATIONS FORD, CARNEGIE, ROCKEJXFELLER.
THESE BODIES HAVE GIVEN MANY MILLIONS, INDEED BILLIONS,
OF DOLLARS TO THE ARTS, SCIENCE, EDUCATION, MEDICAL
RESEARCH AND OTHER HUMANE CAUSES. THEY HAVE BROUGHT
INESTIMABLE BENEFITS To AMERICAN SOCIETY, AND ENHANCED
THE REPUTATION, NOT ONLY OF INDIVIDUAL CORPORATIQNS,
BUT OF THE UNITED STATES HERSELF,
ll 
-2-
4, IN THIS ROOM TONIGHT ARE SOME OF THE MOST DISTINGUISHED
REPRESENTATIVES OF AMERICAN ARTISTIC AND BUSINESS LIFE.
I CANNOT REMEMBER A TIME WHEN A MORE CULTIVATED AND
ESTIMABLE GROUP OF AMERICAN CITIZENS VISITED THIS CITY.
I WISH ALL OF. YOU A VERY HAPPY , STAY IN AUSTRALIA. WITHIN
THE NEXT FEW WEEKS I SHALL BE MAKING MY THIRD VISIT TO
THE UNITED STATES AS PRIME MINISTER. I SHALL BE MEETING
PRESIDENT FORD FOR THE SECOND TIME. No ONE IN THIS
COUNTRY DOUBTS THE ENDURING STRENGTH OR IMPORTANCE OF
AUSTRALIA'S LINKS WITH THE UNITED STATES. MY OWN
GOVERNMENT'S FOREIGN POLICIES, WHILE SEEKING WIDER CONTACTS
' WITH OTHER NATIONS AND MORE MATURE AND INDEPENDENT
RELATIONSHIPS WITH COUNTRIES IN OUR REGION, HAS NEVER
DOUBTED THE UNIQUE VALUE OF OUR TIES WITH THE UNITED STATES.
I BELIEVE THE FRIENDSHIP AND UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN OUR
COUNTRIES HAVE NEVER BEEN STRONGER, OR MORE SOUNDLY
BASED, THAN THEY ARE TODAY.
WHATEVER CRITICISMS I MAY HAVE MADE OF PARTICULAR
AMERICAN POLICIES OR DECISIONS, I HAVE BEEN A LIFE-LONG
ADMIRER OF THE TRULY GREAT QUALITIES OF AMERICAN SOCIETY
ITS OPTIMISM, ITS GENEROSITY, ITS ZEST FOR CHANGE, FOR
INNOVATION, FOR SHEER ACCOMPLISHMENT. I BELIEVE WE SEE
MANY OF THESE QUALITIES IN INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS THE MUSEUM
OF MODERN ART IN NEW YORK AND THE ALCOA FOUNDATION. THE
EXHIBITION OF MODERN MASTERS WILL REMIND US OF THE BEST AND
MOST VIGOROUS STRAINS IN AMERICAN SOCIETY. 



, A S TXALIA(
PRIME MCNISTER PRESS STATE'ENT NO. 492
9 APRIL 1975
INTER-STATE COMMISSION ( QUEENSLAND RELEASE ONLY)
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today dismissed suggestions
that the establishment of an Inter-State Commission might affect
transport costs in Queensland.
He rejected claims by the Queensland Premier that the
Inter-State Commission could result in increased rail
freights. He denied that industries in North Queensland would
be disadvantaged. " The Inter-State Commission is certainly not a plot to
take-over Queensland's railways," Mr Whitlam said.
" Mr Bjelke-Petersen knows full well that there can be no
take-over of State railways any State railways by the
Commonwealth acting alone.
" Section 51 of the Constitution provides for the consent
of the State, on terms which are satisfactory to both parties,"
he said. Mr Whitlan said the revival of the Inter-State Commission
had been supported by many non-Labor politicians, in particular,
Queensland's. Mr Killen.
As recently as March 11 this year, Mr Killen had supported
the idea in a speech to the Brisbane Press Club, the Prime
Minister said.
Mr Whitlam pointed out that the Inter-State Commission
had been written into the original Constitution in 1901.
" In terms of our federal system which the Queensland
Premier is usually so anxious to defend, there could be nothing
more legitimate that the revival of the Inter-State Commission,"
he said. 



352
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER$
\ THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM. M. P,,
FOR THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS RAILWAY,
SPORT AUGUSTA, SA,, 11 APRIL 1975
THERE COULD BE NO BETTER PLACE TO PROPOSE
A TOAST TO THE RAILWAYS OF AUSTRALIA THAN HERE IN PORT
AUGUSTA, THIS IS ONE OF THE GREAT RAIL TOWNS IN AUSTRALIA,
A GREAT RAIL JUNCTION, THE CENTRE OF A COMMUNITY WHOSE
HISTORY AND PROSPERITY ARE CLOSELY LINKED WITH THE PROGRESS
OF AUSTRALIA'S RAILWAYS, FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE POSTWAR
IMMIGRATION PROGRAM, WORKERS FROM MANY COUNTRIES HAVE
ENRICHED THIS DISTRICT AND MADE A MAJOR CONTRIBUTION NOT ONLY
TO THE RAILWAYS OF THIS COUNTRY, BUT TO THE STEEL INDUSTRY
WHICH HAS PROVIDED MUCH OF THE TRACK AND ROLLING STOCK ON
WHICH THE RAILWAYS DEPEND,
THE OPENING OF A NEW RAILWAY IS A RARE
EVENT IN AUSTRALIA. APART FROM THE STANDARD GAUGE LINK
BETWEEN ALBURY AND MELBOURNE,' OPENED IN 1962. THE TARCOOLA
TO ALICE SPRINGS RAILWAY WILL BE THE FIRST MAJOR RAIL LINK
TO BE ESTABLISHED ON THIS CONTINENT SINCE THE TRANSCONTINENTAL
RAILWAY IN 1917. ALMOST HALF A CENTURY HAS PASSED SINCE
WE LAST MADE A SIGNIFICANT EXTENSION TO THE RAILWAY SERVICES OF
THIS COUNTRY* FOR A NATION OF SUCH VAST SIZE, WITH SUCH
SCATTERED RESOURCES, WITH SUCH A WIDELY DISPERSED, THOUGH
BY NO MEANS DECENTRALISED, POPULATION, IT IS CURIOUS
THAT THE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN NEGLECTED FOR SO LONG, CURIOUS,
BUT NOT ALTOGETHER INEXPLICABLE. FEDERATION, FAR FROM
DRAWING TOGETHER THE DIFFERENT CITIES AND REGIONS OF THE
CONTINENT, TENDED TO ENFORCE THEIR SEPARATION. S,/ 2 
-2-
FOR GENERATIONS THE RAILWAYS HAVE LANGUISHED IN A
MIASMA OF INTERSTATE RIVALRY, CONSTITUTIONAL DIFFICULTIES,
IMPOVERISHED STATE BUDGETS AND SHEER INERTIA ON THE PART
OF STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS.
IN NO AREA OF GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY IS
THERE A GREATER NEED FOR MODERNISATION AND REFORM. IN
NO AREA ARE THERE GREATER CONSTITUTIONAL AND
S ADMINISTRATIVE bBSTACLES TO SUCH REFORM. IN NO AREA IS THE
COST TO THE PUBLIC OF OUR-PRESENT ADMINISTRATIVE CONFUSION
AND PHYSICAL DILAPIDATION GREATER AND MORE ENTRENCHED.
OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEMS ARE OUTDATED, INEFFICIENT AND
UNECONOMICAL. RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM IS FRAGMENTED
AND VAGUELY DEFINED. TRANSPORT IS THE CINDERELLA SERVICE
OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND THE RAILWAYS ARE THE
CINDERELLA OF OUR TRANSPORT SERVICES.
IN RECENT YEARS THE IMPORTANCE OF MODERN
RAILWAYS HAS BEEN INCREASINGLY RECOGNISED. THEY ARE
EASILY THE MOST EFFICIENT METHOD OF TRANSPORTING BULK
GOODS OVER LONG DISTANCES, BUT IT IS NOT SUFFICIENT TO
HAVE ADEQUATE STATE SERVICES. AN EFFICIENT RAILWAY
SYSTEM MUST BE AN EFFICIENT NATIONAL SYSTEM. IT MUST BE
ORGANISED TO MEET NATIONAL NEEDS AND PRIORITIES. THAT IS
THE APPROACH OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. THE PROBLEMS
OF INTERSTATE RAIL TRANSPORT ARE QUITE DIFFERENT FROM
THOSE OF URBAN TRANSPORT, 4 
URBAN TRANSPORT CAN PROPERLY BE LEFT TO THE STATES, THOUGH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ACTIVELY ASSISTING THEM IN
THIS-FIELD. INTERSTATE TRANSPORT, MUST BE TACKLED FROM
A NATIONAL VIEWPOINT. WE ALL KNOW . THE NOTORIOUS BORDEN THAT OUR
RAILWAYS HAVE INHERITED FROM A COLONIAL PAST. THE
NATION IS STILL PAYING A HEAVY PRICE FOR RAILWAY SYSTEMS
CENTRALISED ON STATE CAPITALS AND CONSTRUCTED ON
INCOMPATIBLE GAUGES. THE POWER OF THE AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT TO LEGISLATE ON TRANSPORT IS ILL-DEFINED.
APART FROM A GENERAL POWERs-TO LEGISLATE IN'RESPECT OF
THE TERRITORIES, THERE IS NO SPECIFIC PROVISION IN THE
CONSTITUTION GIVING THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT POWER IN
RELATION* TO ROADS OR ROAD TRANSPORT, FORTUNATELY THE
CONSTITUTION IS MORE SPECIFIC IN RELATION TO RAILWAYS,
THE PROSPECT OF A NATIONAL RAILWAY SYSTEM WAS-FIRMLY IN
MIND WHEN THE CONSTITUTION WAS DRAFTED. SECTION 51-ALLOWSe
THE PARLIAMENT TO MAKE LAWS, WITH THE CONSENT OF A STATE,
FOR THE ACQUISITION OF ANY STATE RAILWAYS ON TERMS ARRANGED N
BETWEEN THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE STATE. FOR MANY YEARS THE
STATE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN AN INSUPPORTABLE BURDEN ON STATE
GOVERNMENTS; DISTORTING THEIR BUDGETS AND DEPLETING THEIR
RESOURCES AT THE EXPENSE OF OTHER ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES. 
-4-
ALL FORMS OF TRANSPORT URBAN, RURAL AND INTERSTATE HAVE
, FALLEN DEEPER INTO DEBT AND OBSOLESCENCE. WHILE THE
STATES HAVE LACKED THE FUNDS TO PROVIDE MODERN TRANSPORT,
THE COMMONWEALTH IN GENERAL HAS LACKED THE POWERS, ON
TOP OF THAT WE HAVE A MULTIPLICITY OF TRANSPORT UNIONS,
ORGANISED ON A FRAGMENTED FEDERAL BAS. IS, TENDING TO
REINFORCE THE INEFFICIENCIES ENGENDERED BY INTERSTATE
RIVALRY. SOUTH AUSTRALIA IS LEADING THE WAY IN
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MORE ECONOMIC AND EFFICIENT RAILWAY
SERVICES. IN 1972 -IN ONE OF THE FIRST ACTS OF THE
NEW GOVERNMENT-I OFFERED TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE RAILWAYS OF ANY STATE PREPARED TO OFFER THEM.
VICTORIA AND QUEENSLAND REFUSED EVEN TO DISCUSS THE
OFFER, A WEEK AGO MR DUNSTAN AND I ANNOUNCED THE
AGREEMENT OF OUR GOVERNMENTS TO TRANSFER THE NON-METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. THIS MEANS THAT THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL BE RELIEVED OF THE BURDEN OF MUCH OF THE
RAILWAYS: DEFICIT. DISCUSSIONS WITH THE OTHER STATES'HAVE
BEEN GOING ON FOR SOME TIME. IN ADDITION TO THE NEW LINE
FROM TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS, AN AGREEMENT HASBEEN
SIGNED WITH SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO CONNECT ADELAIDE TO THE
EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE LINE AT CRYSTAL BROOK, THE
COMPLETION OF THIS PROJECT WILL MEAN THAT ALL MAINLAND
CAPITAL CITIES WILL BE CONNECTED TO STANDARD GUAGE, 
IN RECENT WEEKS WE HAVE TAKEN TWO OTHER
MAJOR INITIATIVES TO IMPROVE AUSTRALIA'S RAILWAYS,
ONE -F OUR GREAT INSTRUMENTS FOR THE REFORM AND
COORDINATION OF NATIONAL TRANSPORT WILL BE THE
INTER-STATE COMMISSION. LAST MONDAY I ANNOUNCED THE
GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION TO INTRODUCE -LEGISLATION TO
ESTABLISH THE COMMISSION. IN MY 1972 POLICY SPEECH
I SAID: " THE INTER-STATE COMMISSION WAS INTENDED TO
END THE CENTRALISM FOSTERED BY ALL THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS THROUGH THEIR RAILWAY SYSTEMS. IT
SHOULD NOW PROVIDE NOT ONLY FOR THE
COORDINATION OF OUR SIX MAINLAND RAILWAY SYSTEMS
AND OUR MAJOR PORTS IN THE PERIOD BEFORE THE
COMMONWEALTH, LIKE OTHER FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS,
INEVITABLY TAKES RESPONSIBILITY FOR RAILWAYS
AND PORTS; IT IS ALSO THE IDEAL INSTRUMENT FOR
CORODINATING OUR MAJOR ROADS AND SHIPPING A
LINES AND AIRLINES AND PIPELINES...
" A FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL PROMPTLY
RESTORE THE MACHINERY THE CONSTITUTION INTENDED
AND VEST IT WITH THE COMMONWEALTH'S FULL
MODERN MEANS OF COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE STATES."
7-
-6-
OUR OTHER IMPORTANT MEASURE HAS BEEN TO
INTRODUCE LEGISLATION TO CREATE THE AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION. THIS WILL ' PROVIDE FOR THE.'.
INCREASINGLY WIDER FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
PRESENT COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS. THE COMMISSION WILL HAVE
THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND OPERATIONAL'POWERS
NECESSARY TO CONSOLIDATE THE STATE AND AUSTRALIAN
RAILWAYS INTO THE SINGLE SYSTEM ENVISAGED UNDER THE
GOVERNMENT'S RAIL TRANSFER PROGRAM,
MY. COLLEAGUE THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT
GAVE A VIVID INDICATION OF THE SCALE OF THE TASK
BEFORE US WHEN HE INTRODUCED THE LEGISLATION FOR THE
COMMISSION ON 20 FEBRUARY. HE POINTED OUT THAT
AUSTRALIA'S RAILWAYS ON THE WHOLE ARE IN A PITIFUL
CONDITION. FOR YEARS THEY HAVE BEEN STARVED OF THE CAPITAL
FUNDS NECESSARY FOR THEM TO KEEP ABREAST OF ADVANCES
IN RAILWAY TECHNOLOGY AND MEET THE TRANSPORT DEMANDS PLACE2
UPON THEM BY A GROWING ECONOMY, FOR EXAMPLE, WE HAVE THE
RIDICULOUS SITUATION WHERE STATE RAILWAY DEFICITS ARE
INCREASLNG AT AN ALARMING RATE, YET THE RAILWAYS HAVE HAD
TO TURN AWAY BUSINESS. RAILWAYS AT PRESENT NEED OVER
3200 EXTRA'WAGONS-FOR INTER-SYSTEM TRAFFICALONE. IT HAS
BEEN ESTIMATED THAT THE VICTORIAN, SOUTH AUSTRALIAN,
NEW SOUTH WALES AND COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS LOST OVER
$ 66 MILLION IN POSSIBLE REVENUE IN 1972-73 BECAUSE THEY
WERE NOT ABLE TO MEET THE DEMANDS OF ! NTER-SYSTEM TRAFFIC, 717 
-7-
THIS GOVERNMENT WAS QUICK TO REACT TO THE PROBLEM AND
IN THE 1974 BUDGET ANNOUNCED A CONTINUING ROLLING STOCK
PURCHASING PROGRAM WHICH OVER THE NEXT 2 YEARS WILL
PROVIDE SOME 1300 MODERN BOGIE WAGONS FOR INTER-SYSTEM
USE. THESE WAGONS WILL BE AVAILABLE FOR LEASE TO THE
STATES. TOMORROW I SHALL HAVE GREAT PLEASURE
S IN INAUGURATING THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW LINE FROM
TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS. : I HOPE THE LINE WILL COME TO
SYMBOLISE OUR COMMITMENT TO BETTER RAILWAYS IN AUSTRALIA,
IT WILL BE THE L6NGEST RAILWAY BUILT IN AUSTRALIA SINCE
THE TRANSCONTINENTAL LINK BETWEEN THIS CITY AND
KALGOORLIE. IT WILL BE APPROXIMATELY 830 KILOMETRES
LONG. . IT WILL BE BUILT THROUGH SOME OF THE MOST
INHOSPITABLE DESERT COUNTRY IN AUSTRALIA. WHEN COMPLETED
IT WILL PROVIDE CENTRAL AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA . WITH A
RAILWAY OF WORLD CLASS AND FREE FROM THE RISK OF
FLOODING. IT WILL GIVE THE PEOPLE OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA
A FAST AND RELIABLE SERVICE, OF IMMEASURABLE BENEFIT
TO THE CATTLE AND MINING INDUSTRIES AND TO TOURISM. : 7l 
S w -8-
A NEW RAILWAY HAS ALWAYS CARRIED WITH IT
AN AURA OF ROMANCE# A SPIRIT OF PIONEERING. NOTHING
SUGGESTS MORE VIVIDLY THE DETERMINATION OF A VIGOROUS
SOCIETY TO DEVELOP ITS RESOURCES AND IMPROVE ITS
COMMUNICATIONS, SOMETHING WAS MISSING FROM OUR
NATIONAL LIFE DURING THE LONG YEARS WHEN THE RAILWAYS
WERE ALLOWED TO DECLINE. MEN AND FAMILIES WHO HAD
GIVEN A LIFETIME OF SERVICE TO THE RAILWAYS WERE
0 ENCOURAGED TO LOSE FAITH IN'THE IMPORTANCE AND FUTURE OF
A GREAT INDUSTRY. , I HOPE AND BELIEVE THAT WE ARE
0 SEEING TONIGHT, THE REBIRTH OF THE RAILWAYS IN THIS
COUNTRY, THE BEGINNING OF A NEW ERA OF GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT, YOU CAN BE SURE THAT MY GOVERNMENT WILL DO
ITS UTMOST TO SEE THE RAILWAYS PROSPER AND RESUME THEIR
RIGHTFUL, THEIR HISTORIC ROLE AS THE BASIS OF AN EFFICIENT,
MODERN AND ECONOMICAL TRANSPORT SYSTEM. PROSPEROUS AND
EFFICIENT RAILWAYS ARE AN ESSENTIAL CONDITION OF A
PROSPEROUS AND EFFICIENT NATION.
S. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P,,
AT THE OPENING OF THE FIRST SUBDIVISION
OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION,
HAPPY VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
11 APRIL 1975
I HOPE THIS WILL BE THE FIRST OF MANY SUCH OPENINGS
I SHALL ATTEND THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. IT IS APPROPRIATE
THAT THE FIRST SUBDIVISION OF LAND PURCHASED AND PREPARED
FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT BY A STATE LAND COMMISSION SHOULD
BE HERE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA. ADELAIDE WAS AUSTRALIA'S
FIRST PLANNED CITY. COLONEL LIGHT, THAT FAR-SIGHTED
SURVEYOR-GENERALWAS AUSTRALIA'S FIRST TOWN PLANNER
SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN ONE STATE WHERE COOPERATION BETWEEN
GOVERNMENTS IN THE INTERESTS OF OUR PEOPLE HAS ALWAYS -BEEN
PROMPT AND FRUITFUL. IT IS NOW ACCEPTED THAT GOVERNMENTS
EVERYWHERE SHOULD BE INVOLVED IN URBAN PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT NOT BECAUSE IT MAY BE SOMEONE'S PARTICULAR
HOBBY HORSE, NOT BECAUSE IT'S FASHIONABLE OR TRENDY, BUT
BECAUSE IT IS THE ONLY WAY TO IMPROVE OUR CITIES
AND MAKE THEM BETTER PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE.. IN...
h
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THIS SUBDIVISION HAS BEEN A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. PLANNERS, BUILDERS,
LOCAL RESIDENTS, LOCAL BODIES, HAVE HAD A PART TO PLAY.
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN CONSULTED; PEOPLE HAVE SAID WHAT THEY
WANT FOR THEIR NEW COMMUNITY. 
-2-
WE ARE GETTING AWAY FROM THE OLD IDEA OF CITIES BEING
BUILT AND PEOPLE BEING MOULDED TO FIT THEM ACCORDING
TO CONCEPTS IMPOSED FROM ABOVE OR FROM FAR AWAY, PEOPLE,
LOCAL PEOPLE, LOCAL NEEDS, ARE CENTRAL TO OUR THINKING,
I FIRST PROPOSED THE IDEA OF LAND COMMISSIONS
IN OUR ELECTION POLICY IN 1972, WE SEE THEM AS THE
ONLY PRACTICAL WAY TO BEAT THE SPIRALLING COST OF
BUILDING LAND. THE PRICE OF LAND IS THE SINGLE LARGEST
COMPONENT IN THE COST OF A HOME, THE LAND COMMISSION
PROGRAM OPERATES ON A VERY SIMPLE AND FUNDAMENTAL
PLANNING PRINCIPLE ADEQUATE LAND SUPPLY IS
NECESSARY TO PREVENT LAND PRICE INCREASES AT TIMES
OF HIGH DEMAND. THIS IS BECAUSE THE NATURE OF URBAN LAND
AS A COMMODITY MAKES IT PARTICULARLY LIABLE TO MARKET
MANIPULATION, PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTS IGNORED THIS
PROBLEM, SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS COOPERATED IN OUR SCHFME
FROM THE START, OTHER STATES WHERE LAND PRICES ARE
HIGHER THAN HERE ARE STILL DRAGGING THE CHAIN, YET
IN THIS SUBDIVISION WE CAN ALREADY SEE THE BENEFITS OF
OUR SCHEME, I BELIEVE THE BLOCKS OF LAND FOR SALE HERE
ARE ABOUT-$ 1,000 CHEAPER THAN COMPARABLE BLOCKS. 7IN
OTHER PARTS OF ADELAIDE,
PLANNED COMMUNITIES SUCH AS THIS WILL HAVE OTHER
PDVANTAGES APART FROM PRICE, . THERE WILL BE NO UNSIGHTLY
ELECTRICITY POLES, HERE, AS IN ALL OTHER LAND COMMISSION
SUBDIVISIONS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, THE VISUAL POLLUTION OF
UNSIGHTLY POLES WILL BE ELIMINATED AS THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
WILL BE UNDERGROUND, 
-3-
PROVISIONS WILL BE MADE FOR PARKS, RECREATION AREAS
AND PLAYGROUNDS SUCH AS THE ONE THIS PLAQUE WILL
COMMEMORATE. IDON'T THINK ANYONE WOULD ARGUE THAT RAPID
URBANISATION HAS BROUGHT MANY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
ILLS TO OUR CITIES. TRANSPORT, SEWERAGE, LOCAL
GOVERNMENT SERVICES HAVE BEEN MADE MORE COSTLY AND
DIFFICULT. 4I1fDUSTRIES HAVE MET WITH HIGHER COSTS,
THE ' ENVIRONMENT HAS SUFFERED. FOR ALL THESE REASONS
DON DUNSTAN' S GOVERNMENT AND my GOVERNMENT HAVE INITIATED
A SERIES OF POLICIES RELATING TO LAND USE AND LAND
PRICES. THE OBJECT IVE HAS BEEN TO REDUCE-THE
UNFORTUNATE CONSEQUENCES OF TOO RAPID URBANISATION.
THIS YEAR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
ALLOCATED APPROXIMATELY $ 26 MILLION TO THE SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION BETWEEN ITS ESTABLISHMENT
IN NOVEMBER 1973 AND JUNE 19714, IT HAS PURCHASED
1226 HECTARES OF LAND WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE
ADEALIDE METROPOLITAN AREA. THIS YEAR IT IS
IMPLEMENTING A FURTHER PROGRAM TO ACQUIRE OR
PURCHASE 21432 HECTARES FOR URBAN DEVELO'PMENT AND 11173
HECTARES FOR MAJOR METROPOLITAN OPEN SPACES, IN
ADDITION THE COMMISSION HAS ENGAGED THE. SERVICES OF
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS IN THE FIELDS OF PLANNING,
ENGINEERING, SURVEYING AND VALUING. IN THIS WAY IT HAS
HELPED SUSTAIN DEMAND FOR THESE SERVICES THROUGH THE RECENT
PERIOD OF DECLINE IN BUILDING ACTIVITY. 
-3ATHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS A FINANCIER TO
THE LAND COMMISSION BUT IT HAS A MUCH WIDER ROLE THAN
THAT, MANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES AND
PROGRAMS HAVE A DIRECT IMPACT ON THE PROVISION OF
CAPITAL WORKS IN URBAN DEVELOPMENT THE P. M. G.,
DEFENCE INSTALLATIONS, EMPLOYMENT, OFFICES, ROADS,
UNIVERSITIES, HOSPITALS, SEWERAGE PROGRAMS, PART
OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY IS THE
EFFICIENT COORDINATION OF ALL SERVICES PROVIDED BY
STATE AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS. THE LAND COMMISSION
IS A STATE ORGANISATION, STATE-RUN AND STATE-MANAGED:
BUT EXPERIENCE HAS SHOWN THAT THERE IS A PLACE FOR
JOINT EFFORT BY THE AUSTRALIAN AND SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS IN SHAPING THE BROAD STRATEGIC POLICIES
WITHIN WHICH THE COMMISSION FUNCTIONS,
THE LAND SUPPLY SHORTAGE IS LIKELY TO
BECOME CRITICAL, PARTICULARLY IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS THE WILL TO ACT BUT THE
STATES MUST ALSO PARTICIPATE. NEW SOUTH WALES HAS
SIGNED A FINANCIAL AGREEMENT, AND THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS LOOKING TO THAT STATE TO ACT-FIRMLY ON
A LARGE SCALE TO PREVENT FURTHER LAND PRICE INCREASES
IN SYDNEY. IN VICTORIA THE GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED TO
SET UP AN URBAN LAND COUNCIL'BY 30 JUNE THIS YEAR AND
ACTION ON THAT PROMISE IS URGENTLY NEEDED, ,/ 4 
DON'T IMAGIN4E THAT LAND COMMISSIONS ARE AL. L THAT
CONCERN US IN THIS FIELD. IN MAKING AUSTRALIA A BETTER
PLACE TO LIVE IN WE AIRE JUST AS CONCERNED WITH RURAL
AREAS AS WITH CITIES. OUR NEW DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT DEALS AS MUCH WITH THE WELFARE'OF
REfGlNS. AS IT DOES WITH CITIES, WE HAVE REACHED
AGREEMENT WITH THE STATES ON THE BOUNDARIES OF 76
REGIONS WHICH TH. E GOVERNMENT WILL USE AS THE BASIS
OF ITS PROGRAMS. LAST YEAR WIE APPROVED THE FIRST
DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE BY AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
LOCAL COUNCILS GRANTS TOTALLING $ 56 MILLION THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA, WE ARE PUSHING AHEAD WITH GROWTH CENTRES,
INCLUDING MONARTO IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA. WE HAVE
SAFEGUARDED THE NATIONAL ESTATE, THE UNIQUE AND
BEAUTIFUL THINGS, NATURAL AND MAN-MADE WORTH KEEPING
IN OUR COUNTRY. LAST FINANCIAL YEAR 101. NATIONAL ESTATE
PROJECTS WERE APPROVED AT A TOTAL COST OF $ 2.5 MILLION
WE ARE PROVIDING ASSISTANCE FOR.-ADELAIDE'S WATER
TREATMENT SCHEME. WE ARE CATCHING UP FURTHER WITH THE
SFWERAGE BACKL. OG IN THE MAJOR CITIES. IN THE LAST
FINANCIAL YEAR $ 38 MILLION WORTH OF APPROVED WORKS WERE
CARRIED OUT. A TOTAL OF $ 110 MILLION IS BE1ING MADE
AVAILABLE FOR WORKS STARTED THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. OUR
URBAN LOCAL ROADS PROGRAM IS DESIGNED TO IMPROVE THE
QUALITY OF RESIDENTIAL STREETS AND WILL INCLUDE A NUMBER
OF INNOVATIONS TO LIFT THE ENVIRONMENT STANDARDS OF ROADS
IN URBAN AND PROVINCIAL CENTRES. 
I CONGRATULATE THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION
AND THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ON COMPLETING THIS
FIRST SUBDIVISION, WITH GOVERNMENTS WORKING IN PARTNERSHIP
WE CAN ACHIEVE FAIRER LAND PRICES FOR THE HOMEBUILDER AND A
MORE CONGENIAL AND EFFICIENT ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT LAND COMMISSION CEREMONY,
HAPPY VALLEY, ADELAIDE
11. 4.
Mr. Chairman, the Deputy Premier, Ministers, Commissioners,
Representatives, our colleagues in the Australian, South
Australian Parliament and Local Council, Ladies and Gentlemen-
I don't mind how often I come to functions like this because
this function is the forerunner of many which will take place,
we hope, throughout Australia and which will have two very
great advantages. One is, that the old Australian dream of
having a house of your own, will be more within the reach of
people because the cost of the land, the biggest single
component of the cost of having a house, will be kept to the
minimum. And the second feature is that people who come to
sub-divisions, like this, developed by the Land Commissions,
can be sure that all the facilities that the Local Council,
the State Government, the Federal Government provide, will
be all co-ordinated and supplied at the same time. There will
be, that is, a good block of land at cost with all services
and then with all the community facilities which the three tiers
provide. It's been most gratifying the way the community has
been involved in the planning of this first sub-division of any
Land Commission in Australia. Their advice has been sought,
it has been given. It is a very good example of full community
involvement.
It is very appropriate that the first Land Commission, the
first sub-division of any Land Commission should be here in
South Australia. There is an historical reason for my saying
that, and that is that Adelaide was the first piece of good
town planning in Australia. It was a magnificent foundatfon
that William Light gave for this city. And it is appropriate
enough that the Premier is over near the area he came from,
Penang, where his father set out another beautiful city,
another beautiful locality.
The other reason why it is so appropriate that we should be
having this opening in South Australia, is that the Government
of South Australia was the first to respond to the proposals
that my Government was making in this regard.
The creation of Land Commissions was proposed at the Federal
election in 1972 and it came from two very obvious propositions.
One is, that the Federal Government had greater financial
resources than the State Governments, and secondly, that the
State Governments had a jurisdiction in land matters which
the Federal Government did not have. So by bringing together
the Federal finances and the State jurisdictions, it would be
possible we thought, to solve one of the great social evils
in Australia today, and do so in a proper economic and environmental
context. 
The Federal Government cannot make laws, it cannot administer
laws, in regard to land use. The State Governments can,
and the Local Government bodies, semi-Government authorities
which they have created, play a big role in that as well.
But the limiting factor was that these days, no State
Government, no authorities created by State Governments,
had sufficient finances to provide all the services together
and to acquire the land. Now the Federal Government, while
not having the limitless funds that many people suggest or
suppose, nevertheless did have sufficient financial resources
to make it possible to acquire the land in good time and to
provide all the services which Governments have to provide
at the one time.
Whatever our idealogies, whatever our philosophies, we all
accept that Government authorities of one sort or another,
Federal, State, Regional, have to provide things like roads
and kerbing and guttering. They have to provide sewerage,
they have to provide telephones, they have to provide most
of the schools and most of the hospitals and most of the
public transport and the great evil which has arisen in
Australia since the war, where we have very large cities
and where a greater proportion of our population lives in
cities than is the case in practically any nation in the
world. In Australia we just haven't hitherto coped. Individuals
can't do it by themselves. Families can't. Communities
can't. It requires to bring together all the people
with the necessary responsibilities, authority and jurisdiction,
and that's what we have aimed to do in these Land Commissions,
and before 1973 was out, the basic legislation was passed and
my Minister, Tom Uren, and his counterparts in South Australia,
were able to make the arrangements under that legislation.
Now Adelaide isn't the largest city in Australia. It maybe
the best planned, but it's not the largest, never likelp to
be the largest. But the ways things are going it's likely
to continue to be the best planned, the best serviced. And
I suppose it not too invidious to say here, by way of comparison,
what still has to be done in the larger cities in Australia
because Sydney and Melbourne still haven't been able to secure
the services which are now being provided for new home seekers,
new home purchasers, in Adelaide. We have made the financial
agreement with New South Wales, not without some difficulty,
but we still haven't got a Commission. And then in Victoria,
we have an undertaking to have an Urban Land Council by the
end of Jdne next but nothing really has been done there. Now
it's a great pity that this time is being lost because it means
that thousands of families, in Sydney and Melbourne, are not
able to realise their hopes yet and where they use the existing
facilities that are made available for home seekers, they will
do so at a greater cost and they will get the blocks of land
less serviced with fewer amenities than they would otherwise
get. Now South Australia, true to its tradition of proper
town planning right from the outset, is leading Australia
again in proper town planning, not only in the square mile
in the centre, but right round Adelaide, in all the areas 
3.
from which people will commute into the city, in all
the areas where they will have community activities,
there will be accommodation and recreation and occupation
and it's been brought about because there has been, in
South Australia, ahead of anywhere else in Australia,
the necessary consultation and co-operation between the
Australian Government, the State Government and the
regional authorities.
It is a model of what can be done, this is not just a
dream, it's not just a theory, it is practical and it is
real and I am delighted, Mr. Deputy Premier, to be seeing
on an occasion like this, the culmination of the efforts
that you, your Premier, your Ministers, my Minister,
many of our colleagues and I, have sought to achieve
over the years. Your Premier, you yourself, I would
have counted as friends for well over a decade and it's
a proud moment when we are able to show to the whole of
the people 6f Australia and particularly to the people
of your State and your capital, what can be done by co-operation
beltween all the spheres of Government in Australia.
Individuals can't do it. They must depend for some action,
some initiative, some co-operation by those whom they elect
to serve them in councils and the South Australian Parliament
and the Australian Parliament and we are able to deliver
the goods now.
This area, these blocks will be $ 1,000 or more cheaper
than comparable blocks in the Adelaide metropolitan area.
They will be fully serviced. The Australian Departments,
I am happy to say, are co-operating in this effort~ and,
not only will there be the basic services, there will also
be some of the necessary amenities.
We want to see the people who come to live in virgin lands
in beautiful, fresh, new settings like this, and so many
of the natural features have been preserved. They will also
be able to get those things that any community wants and
which hitherto we have had to wait for generations to secure.
There will be, we believe, in the near future, proper
community centres in all these areas cultural, sporting,
and so on, and for those who have to stay closest to home,
in their . early years, I am now able to unveil a plaque
in the playground and in doing so I would like to express
the very great pleasure that the boys and girls who are
born and raised in this area will be able to grow up in
an ideal environment and the people who you have elected
in the various fields to serve you, are very happy to meet
so many of you and to be at your service, able to deliver
the goods in the way, I believe we are showing the whole
of Australia that it is possible to do. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I'm not sure that when I get to
the plaque I'll be able to speak as loudly as for you
all to hear. But I have to leave the microphone, so
what I'm going to do over there is unveil the plaque
I don't know what the wording is. This is always a hazard
in this job. You sometimes take away some screen and
thb Sun cartoon or even something offensive or indecent.
Coming to South Australia I suppose I can do it with
complete safety and assurance. Everything over ' 73,
' 74, ' 75 one's been able to co-operate with South
Australia in complete assurance and safety. So sight
unseen, I'm now going in this distinguished representative
gathering to unveil a plaque for the playground in the
first sub-division opened by any Land Commission anywhere
in Australia. was unveiled by me on the occasion of the opening of
the first sub-division of the South Australian Land
Commission, llth April, 1975. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THE COMMEMORATION DINNER, 2y
PORT AUGUSTA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
11.4.
M4r. Wallis, Mr. Smith, Ladies and Gentlemen,
We are meeting tonight at the road and rail crossroads
of Australia and we are meeting on a very great occasionan
important place, an important landmark in our history.
It was from this place in 1912 that the East-West Railway
commencod construction and tomorrow at Tarcoola we will
see the commencement of construction of the biggest railway
project since then.
This has been a remarkable week in the history of railways
in Australia. On Wednesday we tabled in the Federal
Parliament the terms of agreement by which the Commonwealth
Railways acquired' the South Australian Railways with the
consent of South Australia. Yesterday we passed through
both Houses of the Federal Parliament the Australian National
Railways Commission Bill, and, once the Governor-General has
signed that Bill, the Commonwealth Railways will become the
Australian National Railways; the A. N. R. And yesterday, too,
we introduced in the Federal Parliament the Inter-State
Commission Bill to establish that great instrument of national
co-ordination and unityywhich the Constitution ordains.
Before I come to describe some of these things, may I pay
a tribute to the manner in whi~ h the Commonwealth Railways
has just met a great test. For the first time since 19* 12,
the creek at Zanthus flowed and broke through the railway.
Within a fortnight the breach has been restored. The
Commonwealth Railways proved well able to cope with sudden
emergencies, unprecedented emergencies and ruptures.
What I want to speak about tonight is the great constructive,
creative role which is being played by the A. N. R. and, by
railways in general in our nation. In no area of Government
respoonsibility is there a greater need for modernisation and
reform than the railways. In no area have there been greater'
Constitutional and administrative obstacles to reform. The
railways are usually historically regarded as the great
instrument for unifyihng a continent. It was Transcontinentals
that united the United States, united the Canadian provinces
and united the Soviet Union from the Baltic to the Pacific.
One would have thought that railways would be the great
instrument for uniting Australia. It has not turned out that
way, because our railways were started in the middle of last
century by the States and they are still run, with the exception
of the by the States. This occurs in the Australian
Federal system only. In West Germany the railways are run by 
the Federal Government. In Canada there are two great
railway systems, one run by the Canadian Government and
the other by a nationwide, an international company. In
the United States all the railway systems are co-ordinated
by the Interstate Commerce Commission. In Australia, far
from uniting our country, the railway systems have been
organised so as to disrupt the unification of the nation.
They have been used to centralise our settlement, our
commerce, in State capitals. There is, fortunately, a
provision in the Constitution which enables the Commonwealth
with the consent of the States to build or to acquire railways.
It was because the States of South Australia and Western
Australia permitted the Commonwealth to build a railway, that
w.. e got the East-West railway. It was for that reason that
we got the old railway, which is always prone to floods from
Qodnadatta up to the Northern Territory border. It is because
of that provision that the Commonwealth, with the consent of
the State of South Australia, is now acquiring the nonmetropolitan
railways in South Australia. And this will
transform the railway scene in Australia, east and west and
north and south. It will be a very significant system and
it will be an immense re-inforcement and multiplication
of the things that can be done.
I look back to the first year or so I was in Federal
Parliament. The Chifley Government, under a Prime
Minister who was a dedicated railway man, had placed the
orders to modernise the Commonwealth Railways which had
always been the most losing railway proposition in Australia.
I came into Parliament just when the orders were being
fulfilled. The Commonwealth Railways became the first in
Australia to have every locomotive a diesel, to have every
carriage air-conditioned, to have every wagon with bolies.
Within the course of a year they became the most profitable
railway system in Australia. That illustrated to me that,
with proper equipment and proper capitalisation, railways
could be profitable.
But the railway system still ran from nowhere to nowhere
in national-commercial terms. It ran from Port Pinie'to
Kalgoorlie, which meant that every load, every passenger,
every piece of freight had to come over another system.
In 1972 one of the first Acts of my Government was to make
an offer to each of the States to accept responsibility for
the railways of that State. You see the first acceptance
of that offer, by South Australia. We will now have a
system where there will be a merger of the South Australian
Railways and the Commonwealth Railways. It will be possible
to cross the whole continent, east . or west, with the same
carriages, wagons and diesel locomotives. It will put an
end, I hope, to this absurd situation that, even after we
had the same gauge right across the continent,' the locomotives
had to be changed at Broken Hill and at Pinie and 
at Kalgoorlie. It has been a farce up till now. The
Commonwealth Railways, the Australian National Railways,
the are now the key to rail transport, the basic
form of transport in this nation. They will soon join with
the Victorian Railways in operating between Adelaide and
Melbourne. We shall soon see how unified a force, how
excel-lent an investment it is to have railways of a national
character. Railways can more safely, more quickly, more
economically, transport goods long distance than any other
transport mode that man has devised.
I now come to another achievement of this week the Bill to
establish the Inter-State Commission. In my 1972 policy
speech, I said " The Inter-State Commission was intended
to end the centralisation fostered by all the State governments
through their railway systems. It-should now provide not
only for the co-ordination of our six mainland railway systems
and our major ports in the period before the Commonwealth,
like other federal governments, inevitably takes responsibility'
for railways and ports; it is also the ideal instrument for
co-ordinating our major roads and airlines and pipelines."
" A Federal Labor Government-will promptly restore the
machinery the Constitution intended and vest it with the
Commonwealth's full constitutional powers to plan and
provide modern means of communications between the States."
One of the pieces of legislation we were able to put through
last year was the agreement between the Australian and South
Australian Governments for the Australian Government to build
the standard gauge railway between Adelaide and Cryst'al Brook.
When that is finished, it will be possible to go by train from
any State capital to the next State capital and, except for4
Melbourne, from any State capital to any other State capital
without a break of gauge.
One of the great handicaps to profitable railway operation
in this country has been the lack of adequate rolling'stock.
At present railways need over 3,000 extra wagons for intersystem
travel alone. It has been estimated that the Victorian,
South Australian, New South Wales and Commonwealth Railways
lost over $ 65 million in 1972-73 because they were not able
to meet the demands-of inter-system travel. Therefore, in
this year's budget, last September, we embarked upon a
continuing rolling stock purchasing program which, over
the next two years, will provide some 1300 modern bogey
wagons for inter-system use. These wagons will be available
for lease to the States. 
4.
Tomorrow we embark upon the construction of the railway
from Tarcoola to Alice Springs, the largest railway project
which Australia has undertaken since before the First World
War and one which will make an immense difference to the
people in The Centre. It will make a great difference to
the tourist industry, the cattle industry, the mining
industry. I have always found romance in the construction of railways.
Railways were a distinguishing feature of those industrial
countries which were settling vast new areas. The United
States, the old Tsarist Empire, Canada, all did it. Australia
had to wait to do it this century. A new railway has always
carried with it an aura of romance, a spirit of pioneering.
Nothing suggests more vividly the determination of a vigorous
society to develop its resources and improve its communications.
Something was missing from our national life during the long
years when the r4ilways were allowed to decline. Men and
families who have given a lifetime of service to the railways
were encouraged to lose faith in the importance and future of
a great industry. I hope and believe that we are seeing tonight
the rebirth of the railways in this continent, the beginning
of a new era of growth and development. You can be sure that
my Government will do its utmost to see the railways prosper
and resume their rightful, their historic role as the basis
of an efficient, modern and economical transport system.
A remarkable week it has been. A great disaster strikes
the Transcontinental railway; * it is overcome within a fortnight.
We set out to re-establish the Inter-State Commission ordained
in the Constitution. With the consent of South Australia, we
acquire the South Australian Railways. We create the Australian
National Railways. 1
It is appropriate to have this commemoration in Port Augusta
where it all began, where it all passes. Prosperous and
efficient railways are an efficient and essential condition
of a prosperous and efficient nation.
I give you the toast The Railways of Australia. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT TARCOOLA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
FOR INAUGURATION CEREMONIES OF TARCOOLA/ ALICE SPRINGS RAILWAY
12.4 .1975
Everything we say on this platform is being recorded even if it
is not being amplified. So even if you can't hear us today, I've
no doubt you will play the record of the occasion for the rest
of your lives. Maybe.
We were introduced today by our colleacjue Laurie Wallace, the
M. P. for Grey, in which electorate Tarcoola forms the centre
and it was like old times for him, because he lived in Tarcoola
from 1949 to 1952 with Mrs. Wallace, I hasten to add, and his
first political meetings were in Tarcoola and there were no
amplifiers. He was the secretary of the Progress Association,
and now, now that he has become the Member for the district and
serving under a government of his colleagues he's been able to
ensure the progress of Tarcoola.
Now I had the opportunity last night, in the presence of most of
you, at a dinner at Port Augusta to recite the significance of
this occasion. An immensely-significant week, in the history
of Australian railways, Australian transport, Australia's national
development, unity and progress because earlier this week we made
the agreement to acquire the South Australian Railways, and then
we enacted the Australian National Railways Commission Bill, and
then we introduced the Interstate Commission Bill, all in the one
week. But a year ago, Mr. Dunstan and I signed an agreement to build
the Tarcoola/ Alice Springs Railway. It is not possible for the
Australian Government to build or acquire a railway in any
state without the co-operation of the State Government. Andia
the South Australian Government has been magnificently co-operative,
because a year ago it signed the agreement for us to build the
Tarcoola Railway up to the Northern Territory border. It signed
the agreement for us to build a new standard gauge railway between
Crystal Brook and Adelaide and of course it has now signed the
agreement for us to acquire the non-metropolitan railways in
South Australia. So it has been a most fruitful period.
And I suppose we have to concede that there were some supernatural
forces at work, because had it not been for the fact that early
last year there was -the longest interruption in the old narrow
gauge service between Maree and Alice Springs that there had been
in the history of the service. For nine weeks, the service was
out. Sam Calder, whose presence here* I am very happy to see, the
Member for the Northern Territory, gave us no rest at all and we
thought " Right! We can delay no longer in undertaking this new
railway project" an all weather, national and international
standard railway between the East/ West railway at Tarcoola and
Alice Springs. 
2.
And today we are inaugurating, we are commencing this largest
railway project in Australia since Prime Minister Andrew Fisher's
government inaugurated the East/ West railway in 1912. This is
a big occasion. Not only to Tarcoola, not only for South
Australia, and the Centre, but for the nation. A very big
project. $ 100 million. 830 kilometers. And first-rate road
bed and rolling stock. Of course the rolling stock is something
for which I will always remember this day.
I suppose every politician is supposed to be inordinately ambitious.
And I suppose when I became a law student and thought everything
would be terribly easy, I thought " Well, I suppose I'll be
satisfied if I get on the High Court."
It was many years that I was in the House of Representatives
before I thought I'd be able to do this job. I suppose it was
only after for some years I'd been watching people on the other
side. But I never dreamed that my ambition of having a locomotive
named after me would be fulfilled. I
In the early days of federation, the railway stations on the East/
West line were called after Prime Ministers Barton and Reid and
Watson right up to Hughes and so on. But in more recent years,
there have been locomotives called after Prime Ministers, and in
fact, after Ministers of Transport. It started as so many things
did with the Robert Menzies, and since then there's been the John
Gorton, and the William McMahon. All very formal. Then they made
a Ben Chifley, who I think was one of the greatest Prime ministers
and he did in fact know something about locomotives. Then there
was the George McLeay, and the Hubert Opperman, and the Gordon
Freeth, but now, the pride of. the fleet the Charlie Jones and
the Gough Whitlam.
Of course, Jones' initials are C. K. But a lot of people knowing
his addiction to railways think it ought to be the K. C. Caey
Jones a great name in railway history. But be satisfied with
it being called the Charlie Jones.
Now some people have said, unkindly I think, that also locomotives.
ought to be called after leaders on the other side. And in fact
this has commended itself to the railways management because this
would rapidly ensure the replenishment of the whole fleet. I'm
not sure that some of them would be happy about it because they
aren't always happy about people from the wrong side of the tracks.
But Charlie, you needn't worry about my faith in you. Sure I'd
like to be minister-for Transport. But you'd be my second choice.
And you'd do better than some of your colleagues on the platform.
Senator Bishop has been Postmaster-General for quite some time and
he hasn't got me on a postage stamp.* But Charlie Jones has got
me on a locomotive.
Now this is going to be a big occasion. I believe it is going to
take several forms. I have to push a plunger which will, after
some lapse of time, produce an explosion on a neighbouring hillside.
Then, I have to fill a barrel and this gives me the greatest
pleasure, next after naming the locomotive, because I've had to
push one for so many years. All by myself. So I have to go through 
that process. Then there is going to be the plaque on the tree.
One of the few trees on the immediate neighbourhood. And then
there is the naming of the locomotive. Now there will be some
interval. Because I am told that after I bash the plunger, the
magazines on the TV will have to be replenished so any delay will
be due to entirely media compulsions.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a very great pleasure to be here in
the middle of Australia on this very great occasion, because a
great number of people on the maps of Australia from now on will
find Tarcoola writ large and they will remember April 1975 for
a very great number of things. Symbolised, I think, I am sorry
about the fact, that these locomotives so freshly painted will
have to be repainted again next week to make it Australian National
Railways. But all these things are happening at the one time:
the biggest railway project in Australia since 1912; the creation
of the Australian National Railways; the acquisition of the South
Australian Railways; the introduction of the Interstate Commission
Bill. Ladies and Gentlemen, a lot of us have come a long way. But I
believe this will be regarded as a voyage, a trip very much to
be remembered. Thank you very much for coming here today.
I believe the people of Australia will remember what we've all
worked together to achieve today. 



PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH CHANNEL 10, AT TARCOOLA
12.4.1975
A. This is the biggest railway project which has been undertaken
in Australia since the Fisher Labor government commenced the East/
West Railway in 1912, but I think the significance of this occasion
doesn't just depend on commencing this very large project
$ 100 million, 830 kilometers long from the East/ West Railway here
at Tarcoola up to Alice Springs. Sure, it'll be important for the
pastoral and mineral and tourist industries in the whole of Central
Australia. But in this week there have been several very important
things happen. On Wednesday, my colleague Mr. Jones, the Minister
for Transport, was able to table in the House of Representatives
the terms of the Agreement under which the Commonwealth Railways
acquire the South Australian Railways, the and on Thursday
night Mr. Jones brought in~ a Bill to establish the Interstate
Commission, which is mentioned in the Constitution and is designed
to co-ordinate transport systems throughout the continent. So it
is a very big week.
Q. Do you eventually hope Sir that the line will go all the way
through to Darwin?
A. That will depend on the economic need for it, certainly.
The Centre requires a regular traffic means, and as you know, only
two years ago the existing railway to Alice Springs was out of
service through floods for nine weeks. So it just became crucial
to have an all weather railway and a railway, moreover, which was
part of a national system, and of international standard.
Q. Is it going to speed up the development of the Territory greatly?
A. I feel certain it will pastoral, mineral, tourist industries
all depend on a dependable form of transport and this will be such
a form.
A. Getting back to the take-over of the South Australian Railways,
will there be a great change in the service once the Commonwealth
takes over the South Australian Railways?
Q. I believe that now the Australian Government has acquired the
South Australian Railways, they will be able to have the amount of
capital which they require. Any modern railway, modern because it
has good rolling stock and a good signalling system, can be a good
economic enterprise. There is nothing to compare with railways in
long distance travel, and the tragedy has been that the Australian
State railways have never been given enough capital since the War
to provide proper rolling stock and proper signalling systems.
Now the Australian Government has greater financial resources than
the State Governments and just after the War the Chifley Labor
Government placed orders completely to re-equip this East/ West
Railway. And in the early fifties it became the first railway in
r, e 
Australia which had all its locomotives diesels, which had all
its carriages air conditioned and which had all its trucks running
with bogies, and accordingly it became a very fast, safe,
dependable and in fact profitable service. Now I think by
amalgamating the Commonwealth Railways and the South Australian
Railways we will see that the whole of the core of the Australian
railway system in national terms is modernised, because this
railway system works with those of Victoria, New South Wales
and Western Australia direct. It's central to the whole nation.
Q. South Australian Railways are running at quite a loss at the
moment. Do you feel you will be able to overcome that now?
A. We believe that the non-metropolitan railways which are the
ones which the Australian Government is acquiring through the
new A. N. R. will with the new equipment, which will become available,
become an economic proposition.
Thank you very much. 



PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO N. S. W. STATE COUNCIL
OF THE SYDNEY
13.4.1975 It was the Fisher Labor Government which inaugurated the
East/ West Railway and yesterday I symbolically inaugurated
the largest railway project in Australia since that time
a railway of about 830 kilometers costing $ 100 million, and
if I may respond to what John Ducker was saying by way of
introduction, this weekend in South Australia we did two
things which I believe indicate what could be done by
co-operation between a Federal and a State Labor Government.
We inaugurated the first subdivision under the Land Commission
of South Australia. This is a proposal which we came out with
in 1972. The Australian Government can't make laws concerning
land use. Every State Government can. -But the Federal
Government's'financial resources are much greater than those'
of the State Governments. If you bring them together, you can
see ' that by Federal finance you can acquire sufficient land
for expanding urban development, and with State co-operation
you can see that that land is fully serviced and is made
available at cost.
We did it on Friday in South Australia. Then we went on to
the middle of Australia and climaxed the remarkable week
in the history of railways in Australia. Because this week
we tabled on Wednesday morning in the House of Representatives
the Heads of Agreement by which the Australian Government will
acquire the South Australian Railways. That night the Senate
passed the Australian National Railways Commission Act and on
Thursday we introduced the legislation for the Interstate
Commission, which is mentioned in the Constitution, and which
was supposed to make it possible to co-ordinate transporta
modes throughout Australia, and I think I can say that by the
end of June we will have oh incidentally, we will later this
month be making similar arrangements with Tasmania to acquire
Tasmanian Railways by the end of June we will have in operation
in South Australia and Tasmania and maybe one or two other
States, the free hospital services throughout Australia.
I point out that these things are perfectly feasible. There
is no Federal intrusion or aggrandisement. There were free
hospitals throughout Australia when Labor went out of office
in 1949, ' under a five year agreement which the Chifley Labor
Government had made with every State Government, Labor and
Liberal, and after the agreements had run their five years,
the Menzies Government did not renew them, and therefore we
ceased to have free hospital services in Australia except in
those States which kept them on through their own resources.
Of course, only one State has done it Queensland. Sure you
have free hospital services there, but they're the worst
anywhere in Australia. 
And similarly the Constitution has always said that the
Commonwealth can build or acquire a railway in a State with
the consent of the Government of that State. Now we've done
these things. We've restored free hospitals in the two Labor
States, and we have acquired the railways in the two Labor
S-tates. And if that were done everywhere in Australia, all
this nonsense we hear about the financial burdens of the States
would be ended.
And I put it to you bluntly: We won't remain in power federally,
and you'll not get into power in the States if you fall for
this line which was around at the end of last year that the
way to survive was to blast Canberra. It'll get nobody anywhere.
But by co-operation between the Federal Labor Government and
the two State Labor Governments we have in Australia, we will
have solved the financial problems in those two States. We will
have at last decent railway systems in two States and we will
again have free hospital services in two States.
Now. I come back to what I've said. Since I addressed you last
year, our opponents have-changed leaders, both in the New South
Wales Parliament and the Australian Parliament. The interesting
thing is that the new Liberal leader in New South Wales played
a central role in destroying the Federal Liberal leader.
There are important lessons to be drawn from what was done
to Mr. Snedden. There are lessons not only to be learnt by
the Liberals, but by us.
A basic weakness in Mr. Snedden's position was his inability
to establish a sound relationship between the State non-Labor
Parties and the Federal Liberal Party, particularly after the
Queensland elections in December. The State non-Labor leaders
thought the easy way for them, the cheap road topolitical
popularity was just to knock Canberra, to be as unco-operative
and as obstructive as possible. Now the fact is the St~ te
Parties, whether they be Labor or Liberal, cannot live to
themselves. For good or ill, the people are going to judge
the Parties as one. It's true of both the great Parties, and
especially true of the Labor Party. No member, no candidate,*
no leader will get any kudos from the public by joining any
chorus against Canberra. It is easy enough, but'it is deceptively
easy because the people are not at all impressed.
They know that the Labor Government in Canberra is carrying out
the program of the Australian Labor Party. One program for onc
party. We're all going to be judged by our success or failure
with that program. We will succeed with the program to the
extent that the whole Party at all levels gets behind it and
goes out to sell it. There are two aspects about the program
which call for a special effort by all members to promote it.
It's that a great many of our programs are first designed to
benefit those in the community who can't speak for themselves,
or who can't make their voices heard very well. Another aspect
is that some very important issues such as equal electorates and
equal representation don't always make an immediate or dramatic
appeal to the imagination of the general public or, it must be
said, for our own members and supporters. 
The programs most likely to be changed, the programs most
likely to be reversed by our opponents, are those which benefit
the inarticulate and the underprivileged. The programs marked
for the axe are those which benefit those with the least
political leverage. Mr. Fraser has already made it plain that
he will campaign for massive cuts in Government spending.
No more than his predecessor will he be very specific about
the areas in which he would make those cuts. But the
irresistible logic, the logic of economics, the logic of
politics is that the cuts would be made in the politically
expendable areas. Now who is politically expendable for
Mr. Fraser? All those underprivileged groups who were entirely
neglected in their 23 years in office, whose needs we have tried
to identify and to meet. There is already a ready-made list of
expendable programs, the programs imperilled by the High Court
challenge on the constitutional validity of the Australian
Assistance Plan and the Regional Employment Development Scheme.
The challenge was initiated by the Victorian Government and it
is su~ pported by the New South Wales Government. All these
programs benefit the relatively inarticulate or underprivileged.
The beneficiaries are for the most part scarcely in a position
to speak up for themselves. This is why they, as our fellow
citizens, are so vulnerable. This is why programs designed to
benefit them are politically so vulnerable. If we don't speak
up for those programs, if we don't speak up for the people who
would be deprived by their abolition, then no-one else will.
It's impossible to find any consistence in the approach of the
New South Wales Government to our programs. It would be wrong
for me to give the impression that the story has been one of
total non-co-operation. There has in fact been a great deal of
co-operation, although there has too often been needless delay
even in areas where the New South Wales Government has ultimately
decided to come to the party.
It would be churlish not to acknowledge one matter in which
there has been praiseworthy co-operation from the New South
Wales Government, making available highly qualified people to
assist in Australian Government enquiries and commissions.
A great number of New South Wales judges have been made available
by Sir Robert Askin to serve on our enquiries and commnissions.
Let me give you one instance here, where I must say I'm
disappointed by the obstruction one finds in the Labor movement,
and particularly-in the Trade Union movement. It is the proposal
for national compensation. True we've had for years ever since
the Lang Labor Government we've had compulsory workers'
compensation in New South Wales, and ever since the McKell
Government we've had compulsory third party insurance for people
injured on the roads.
But there are still a great number of people for whom there is
no cover at all, and for those where there is cover, or where
there appears to be, it is quite problematical how much you'll
get and how long you'll have to wait for it. Now we've come
out with full proposals here, and it is amazing the link there
is between some trade union people and the insurance companies
in obstruction. 
The fact is that the existing schemes leave thousands
unprotected. For example, people who are injured at home,
many of them women. Our scheme will compensate and
rehabilitate people who are injured or become ill anywhere.
It will be done automatically, and there will be a proper
income until they are rehabilitated.
Now this has been something which many of us have spoken about
for years. It has been in the Party platform for some years.
It was in the policy speech in 1972 and in 1974. 1 must say
I am disappointed, and I resent it that some union secretaries
make an alliance with lawyers and with insurance companies to
keep the old system.
That is are we to be the conservative party? Whose interests
do we have in mind? Now here again the beneficiaries of a
Labor reform are not well organised and they're not able to
drum up pressure. By contrast the opponents, or obstructionists
are well organised some unions, lawyers, insurance companieb.
Someone has to speak up for those who are not in a position
to make their voices heard in any powerful or well-organised
way. That is a Job for all of us in the Labor Party, not just
a few ministers. I do hope all of you will see what is at stake
here, and will speak up for it.
There is not much point in putting things in the platform and
getting a Government which tries to carry out the platform and
then have people, including those in the Labor Party, with very
dubious allies jeopardising it and sabotaging it. Now this is
not only a moral obligation for members of a Party like ourselves.
It is not just an obligation we have because these programs are
part of our pledges put twice to the people. Strong support for
these programs makes sound political sense, at the-. State level
as well as the national level. There is no dividend for state
branches in downgrading national programs or trying to draqw a
distinction between State and national policies.
I heard on the radio that Neville Wran was making the point this
morning in addressing you that the present State Government was
seriously neglecting the growing areas of this State and was
showing concern solely for those areas where it felt it had
political obligations itself.
Now I know that a very great number of people, including people
in State branches and State Parliament resent it if one exposes
shortcomings in the State. That is surely a false patriotism
to assert that everything in the State garden is lovely. It is
not. And we got into power federally because we were able to
convince the people in Sydney and Melbourne in particular that
there were things grievously wrong in the State backyards, that
they could be cured if there was federal interest shown in them,
but they would only be cured if there was a Federal Labor
Government showing interest in them. 
Now many people in the Party think well this means that we
are neglecting existing areas. I'd like you to take this
approach to it. If we were to find a country town grow up
every year of the size of the increase in population in Sydney
we'd want to see that that country town had proper schools
and hospitals and transport connections and so on.
But because it happens in an already large place, like Sydney
or Melbourne, we're neglected. Now what we're saying what
Neville Wran says this morning, what I say this afternoon is
that we must look after those western and southern suburbs,
we are merely acknowledging that governments have an obligation
to people wherever they choose to live, and it's those suburbs
that are the growing areas in this State. It's not that one is
neglecting the areas which are already full, which are already
supplied, which are already serviced, which are relatively
static in population, it merely-is that we say that if people
have to go and live or choose to go and live in those new
areas then it's our obligation, as a Party seeking office to
see that the Governments which we elect of which we are the
supporters and members see that there are proper services
in those new areas.
If you have a city of 20,000 in the country you'd certainly
see that it had proper services. If an equivalent population
comes in some part of the metropolitan area it's no less
obligatory on us to see that there are services there. Now
it is true that since the War, there have been a considerable
number of large country towns which have grown up. The
population of Wollongong for instance has much more than doubled
since the War, or of Mt. Isa, or of Gladstone, or Whyalla, and
very properly governments have seen that they get services
to match.
In Sydney and Melbourne where an equivalent population arises,
State Governments in general have neglected them, and it'gno
less than the statistical truth to say that in the western
suburbs of Sydney there are not the hospital facilities that
there are in the areas where the population is more static as
in the country or the older parts of Sydney. And there are
not the facilities for teachers' colleges or technical colleges
or colleges of advanced education or universities in those areas
that there are in the longer-settled parts of the city.
And it is a false patriotism which says that the Federal
Government has no role to play in interstate highways: of
course it hias. It has an obligation under the Constitution
to look after trade and commerce with other countries and
between the States.
With the Hume Highway, the busiest road in the southern
hemisphere, and one of the worst, the State Governments-. have
not been able to make a decent road. Are people to complain
when you have a Federal Government which will accept its
obligation to see that roads like that at least are made
trafficable all the year round? 
And again, there are areas such as this port of Sydney, the
busiest port in the southern hemisphere, but a grossly
inefficient port. There again it deals with interstate or
international trade, and it ought to be the function of a
Federal Government to see that the communications with that
port from other ports are made efficient.
This is not an intrusion. It is a responsibility of the
Australian Government under the Constitution and we ought to
see that the port is improved. If you lend yourself to the
argument that the Federal Government shouldn't come into the
Hume Highway, or shouldn't come into the port of Sydney,
you're just saying that the Hume Highway is going to continue
to be inadequate and the port of Sydney is going to get less
and less efficient.
Now the way to win a New South Wales State election is to show
that the State Labor Government will co-operate in the areas
and the programs where the Lewis Government has been inactive
or obstructile. When the people have to choose between solid
progriams, solid benefits, and slogans or shiboleths about State
rights, they will come down on the side of the genuine article.
But they have to know what the choice really is. And that means
all of us have to put the case as fully and as forcefully as
we can.
I myself earlier mentioned about the question of distribution
of electorates and so on. Let me give you the figures for
this State because I believe they will illustrate one of the
things where one will be able to draw a very easy comparison
between us and our opponents in the coming months.
The population of an electorate in the House of Representatives
in this state ought to be 63,000, i. e. the average of the
whole State divided by the number of electorates. But tIW
proportion at the moment varies grossly. There are some'I
electorates which are 32% above that amount, i. e. an enrollment
of 83,000 and there are some which are 26% below, namely
46,600. Now if you have electorates that different 83,000 and 46
thousand quite-obviously the people in those electorates are
not having an equal say in electing Members of Parliament.
They're not having an equal share in making the laws. They're
not having equal access to the things which Governments have
to provide. Theseare not exceptions. These are ones which you
can see in many cases. Now I quoted one electorate which had
83,000 people on the rolls at the moment: that is the electorate
of Mitchell. There's another, Robertson which has 81,000.
Chifley has 80,000. MacArthur has-79,000, and Macquarie, a
country electorate incidentally, has 74,000. Now take the
other ones. The smallest one which I have quoted 46 thousand
is Darling. There is Hume which has just under 50,000. There
is Sydney, obviously a metropolitan electorate which has 51,400.
There is Riverina 52,000, and Wentworth, again, a city
electorate, 52,000. Now this is not a fair 4o. 
Some people might say " Oh, you mustn't touch these things.
People will think there is something crook about it." The
fact is it won't deter the Government from supporting an
equal form of distribution. It is the fair thing. It is
the just thing, and it is possible to come out with a
distribution where no electorate has more than 5,000 people
on the rolls than any other electorate in a State.
What we've come out with the distribution which has been
made, which is being proposed ensures that those with the
smallest enrollment are the electorates which are growing
fastest, and those with the largest are those which are growing
slowest.
Now I do ask you to stand on your principles in these things.
You'll get no votes, you'll get no respect by departing from
your principles, and if you look at the facts, you can embarrass
your opponents. You will get respect and success for us.
Silence, obstkuction, conservatism or timidity on such matters
as the equal electorates or what I've mentioned earlier,
national compensation, will not gain votes in a State election
not least because the Australian Government, and I too, will
not cease to advocate. We are not going to back-track on the
platform, or on the undertakings given in the policy speeches.
We have no alternatives. It is a commitment we cannot escape.
It is a commitment for the whole Party. It is a commitment
that no-one in the Party can escape.
Ladies and Gentlemen, don't let's think that just by running
dead or knocking the Government you've had, that you'll help
it or you'll get a State one. The way to provail is to carry
through against the attacks of our opponents, the obstruction
of our opponents, the attacks, the obstruction in the Parliament,
in the papers, in the courts. We won on these platforms and we
will win again on these platforms. If we weaken, if we ae
divided on them we won't survive ourselves and nobody else will
do any better, either, in any section of the Party. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E, G, WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY STATE COUNCIL, NSW. BRANCH,
SYDNEY, 13 APRIL, 1975
SINCE I ADDRESSED YOU LAST YEAR, OUR OPPONENTS HAVE
CHANGED LEADERS BOTH IN NEW SOUTH WALES AND IN CANBERRA.
THE INTERESTING THING IS THAT THE NEW LIBERAL LEADER IN
PLAYED A CENTRAL ROLE IN DESTROYING THE FEDERAL
LIBERAL LEADERX I DON'T WANT TO GET STUCK INTO MR SNEDDEN,
BUT THERE ARE IMPORTANT LESSONS TO BE DRAWN FROM WHAT WAS
DONE TO HIMX THERE ARE LESSONS NOT ONLY TO BE LEARNT BY
THE LIBERALS BUT BY USX
A BASIC WEAKNESS IN MR SNEDDEN' S POSITION WAS HIS
INABILITY TO ESTABLISH A SOUND RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
STATE NON-LABOR PARTIES AND THE FEDERAL LIBERAL PARTYy
PARTICULARLY AFTER THE QUEENSLAND ELECTIONS IN DECEMBER, THE
STATE NON-LABOR LEADERS THOUGHT THE EASY WAY FOR THEM, THE
CHEAP ROAD TO POLITICAL POPULARITY WAS JUST TO KNOCK CANBERRA,
TO BE AS UNCO-OPERATIVE AS POSSIBLEX MR SNEDDEN FELL INTO
THEIR TRAPX HE HAS PAID THE HEAVIEST POSSIBLE POLITICAL
PRICE FOR LETTING HIS STATE COLLEAGUES MAKE THE RUNNING''
2/, 
-2-
WHEN THE SENATE VACANCY OCCURRED WITH LIONEL
MURPHY'S MOVE TO THE HIGH COURT BENCH THERE WAS ONLY
ONE PROPER COURSE OPEN TO THE NEW LIBERAL PREMIER OF
NS. W. AND TO THE NS. W. PARLIAMENT THAT WAS TO
OBSERVE THE ESTABLISHED CONVENTION AND TO APPOINT A
LABOR REPLACEMENT ANY OTHER COURSE NOT ONLY SET ASIDE
A VALUABLE CONVENTION BUT SET ASIDE THE CLEAR WISHES OF
THE PEOPLE OF N. S. W. RECORDED AT THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION
LAST IIAYX MR LEWIS THOUGHT HE COULD PLAY IT SMART4
MR SNEDDEN KNEW WHAT THE RIGHT COURSE WAS, BUT FAILED TO
BRING MR LEWIS INTO LINEX MORE THAN ANY OTHER FACTOR, THAT
FAILURE SPARKED THE EVENTS WHICH LED TO MR SNEDDEN'S DOWNFALL
AS LEADERX HIS FAILURE TO ASSERT ANY AUTHORITY AS THE
NATIONAL LIBERAL LEADER, HIS SURRENDER TO MR LEWIS'
MAVERICK BEHAVIOUR, GAVE HIS OPPONENTS IN THE LIBERAL PARTY
THE AMMUNITION THEY NEEDED TO SHOOT HIM DOWN AND THEY DIDX
NOW THERE IS A LESSON FOR US ALL TO LEARN. AFTER
THE QUEENSLAND ELECTIONS, AND WHEN THE POLLS BEGAN TO GO
AGAINST US THERE WERE SOME PEOPLE IN THE STATE BRANCHES WHO
THOUGHT THAT THE SAFE COURSE WAS TO GO IT ALONE, TO STAND
ASIDE FROM A LABOR GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRAX 14OW THE FACT
IS THE STATE PARTIES, WHETHER THEY BE LABOR OR LIBERAL,
CANNOT LIVE TO THEMSELVESX FOR GOOD OR ILL THE PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO JUDGE THE PARTIES AS ONEK 
-3-
IT IS TRUE OF BOTH THE GREAT PARTIES BUT ESPECIALLY TRUE
OF THE LABOR PARTYX No MEMBER, NO CANDIDATE, NO LEADER
WILL GET ANY KUDOS FROM THE PUBLIC BY JOINING ANY CHORUS
AGAINST CANBERRAA IT IS EASY ENOUGH; BUT IT IS DECEPTIVELY
EASY BECAUSE THE PEOPLE ARE NOT AT ALL IMPRESSED* THEY
KNOW THAT THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IS CARRYING OUT THE PROGRAM
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY ONE PROGRAM, FOR ONE PARTYK
WE ARE ALL GOING TO BE JUDGED BY OUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE
WITH THE PROGRAMA WE WILL SUCCEED WITH THE PROGRAM TO THE
EXTENT THAT THE WHOLE PARTY AT ALL LEVELS GETS BEHIND IT
AND GOES OUT TO SELL ITX
THERE ARE TWO ASPECTS ABOUT THE PROGRAM WHICH CALL
FOR A SPECIAL EFFORT BY ALL MEMBERS TO PROMOTE IT4 ONE
IS THAT A GREAT MANY OF OUR PROGRAMS ARE FIRST. DESIGNED TO
BENEFIT THOSE IN THE COMMUNITY WHO CAN'T SPEAK FOR
THEMSELVES OR WHO CAN'T MAKE THEIR VOICES HEARD VERY WELL)
ANOTHER ASPECT IS THAT SOME VERY IMPORTANT ISSUES LIKE
EQUAL ELECTORATES AND EQUAL REPRESENTATION DON'T ALWAYS
MAKE AN IMMEDIATE OR DRAMATIC APPEAL TO THE IMAGINATION OF
THE GENERAL PUBLIC OR, IT MUST BE SAID, FOR OUR OWN* MEMBERS
AND SUPPORTERS4 
-4-
THE PROGRAMS MOST LIKELY TO BE CHALLENGED, THE
PROGRAMS MOST LIKELY TO BE REVERSED BY OUR OPPONENTS ARE
THOSE WHICH BENEFIT THE INARTICULATE UNDER-PRIVILEGEDA
THE PROGRAMS MARKED FOR THE AXE ARE THOSE WHICH BENEFIT
THOSE WITH THE LEAST POLITICAL LEVERAGE) MR FRASER HAS
ALREADY MADE IT PLAIN THAT HE WILL CAMPAIGN FOR MASSIVE
CUTS IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING No MORE THAN HIS PREDECESSOR
WILL HE BE VERY SPECIFIC ABOUT THE AREAS IN WHICH HE WOULD
MAKE THOSE CUTSX BUT THE IRRESISTIBLE LOGIC THE LOGIC
OF ECONOMICS, THE LOGIC OF POLITICS IS THAT THE CUTS
WOULD BE MADE IN THE POLITICALLY EXPENDABLE AREASK
WHO IS POLITICALLY EXPENDABLE FOR MR FRASER? ALL
THOSE UNDER-PRIVILEGED GROUPS WHO WERE ENTIRELY NEGLECTED
IN THEIR 23 YEARS, WHOSE NEEDS WE HAVE TRIED TO IDENTIFY
AND TO MEETX THERE IS ALREADY A READY-MADE LIST OF
EXPENDABLE PROGRAMS THE PROGRAMS IMPERILLED BY THE HIGH
COURT CHALLENGE, ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT
DEVELOPMENT SCHEMEX THE CHALLENGE WAS INITIATED BY THE
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT, AND IS SUPPORTED BY THE N. S. W.
GOVERNMENTX ALL THESE PROGRAMS BENEFIT THE RELATIVELY
INARTICULATE OR UNDER-PRIVILEGEDK THE BENEFICIARIES ARE,
FOR THE MOST PART, SCARCELY IN A POSITION TO SPEAK UP FOR
THEMSELVESK THIS IS WHY THEY, AS OUR FELLOW-CITIZENS, ARE
SO VULNERABLEX THIS IS WHY PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO BENEFIT THEM
ARE, POLITICALLY, SO VULNERABLE.
q 4 
IF WE DON'T SPEAK UP FOR THOSE PROGRAMS, IF WE
DON'T SPEAK UP FOR THE PEOPLE WHO WOULD BE DEPRIVED BY
THEIR ABOLITION, THEN NO-ONE ELSE WILLK
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND ANY CONSISTENCY IN THE
APPROACH OF. THE N. S. W. GOVERNMENT TO OUR PROGRAMS4 IT
WOULD BE WRONG FOR ME TO GIVE THE IMPRESSION THAT THE
STORY HAS BEEN ONE OF TOTAL NON-COOPERATIONX THERE HAS,
IN FACT, BEEN A GREAT DEAL OF CO-OPERATION, ALTHOUGH THERE
HAS TOO OFTEN BEEN NEEDLESS DELAY EVEN IN AREAS WHERE THE
NS. W, GOVERNMENT HAS ULTIMATELY DECIDED TO COME TO THE
PARTYX IT WOULD BE CHURLISH NOT TO ACKNOWLEDGE ONE MATTER
IN WHICH THERE HAS BEEN PRAISEWORTHY CO-OPERATION FROM THE
NSW. GOVERNMENT MAKING AVAILABLE HIGHLY QUALIFIED PEOPLE
TO ASSIST IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INQUIRIES AND COMMISSIONSX
A NOTABLE EXAMPLE WAS THE WORK OF MR JUSTICE MEARES OF THE
SUPREME COURT ASSISTING SIR OWEN WOODHOUSE OF THE NEW
ZEALAND COURT OF APPEAL ON THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY ON
NATIONAL COMPENSATIONX
I MAY SAY THERE HAS BEEN IN CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE
MOVEMENT A DISAPPOINTING LACK OF SUPPORT FOR OUR PROPOSALS)
WE HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT FOR A PARTY OF CHANGE AND REFORM
THERE IS, SURPRISINGLY, A GREAT DEAL OF CONSERVATISM WITHIN
OUR RANKSX 
-6-
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO THINK THAT JUST BECAUSE CERTAIN
FORMS OF COMPENSATION EXIST THROUGH THIRD PARTY INSURANCE
AND WORKERS COMPENSATION THEN NOTHING MORE NEED BE DONEK
" WHATE'ER EXISTS IS RIGHT" AN AMAZING ATTITUDE TO BE
FOUND IN A REFORMING PARTY) THE FACT IS THAT THE EXISTING
SCHEMES LEAVE THOUSANDS UNPROTECTED FOR EXAMPLE, PEOPLE
WHO ARE INJURED AT HOME, MANY OF THEM WOMENX OUR SCHEME
WILL COMPENSATE AND REHABILITATE PEOPLE WHO ARE INJURED OR
BECOME ILL ANYWHERE. AS I SAID IN THE POLICY SPEECH OF
1972: " WE WILL ESTABLISH A NATIONAL COMPENSATION SCHEME
TO REDUCE THE HARDSHIPS IMPOSED BY ONE OF THE GREAT
FACTORS FOR INEQUALITY IN SOCIETY INEQUALITY OF LUCK." I
HERE AGAIN THE BENEFICIARIES OF A LABOUR REFORM ARE NOT
WELL-ORGANISED AND ARE NOT ABLE TO DRUM UP PRESSURE, BY
CONTRAST THE OPPONENTS OR OBSTRUCTIONISTS ARE WELL-ORGANISED
SOME UNIONS, LAWYERS, INSURANCE COMPANIESX SOME-ONE HAS TO
SPEAK UP FOR THOSE WHO ARE NOT IN A POSITION TO MAKE THEIR
VOICES HEARD IN ANY POWERFUL OR WELL-ORGANISED WAYK THAT
IS A JOB FOR ALL OF US IN THE LABOR PARTY, NOT JUST A FEW
MINISTERS4 i 
THIS IS NOT ONLY A MORAL OBLIGATION FOR MEMBERS
OF A PARTY LIKE OURSELVES; IT'S NOT JUST AN OBLIGATION
WE HAVE BECAUSE THESE PROGRAMS ARE PART OF OUR PLEDGES
PUT TWICE TO THE PEOPLE STRONG SUPPORT FOR THESE PROGRAMS
MAKES SOUND POLITICAL SENSE AT THE STATE LEVEL AS WELL AS
THE NATIONAL LEVEL THERE IS NO DIVIDEND FOR STATE BRANCHES
IN DOWNGRADING NATIONAL PROGRAMS OR TRYING TO DRAW A
DISTINCTION BETWEEN STATE AND NATIONAL POLICIESK THE WAY
TO WIN A N. S. W. STATE ELECTION IS TO SHOW THAT A STATE
LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL CO-OPERATE IN THE AREAS AND THE PROGRAMS
WHERE THE LEWIS GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN INACTIVE OR OBSTRUCTIVE
WHEN THE PEOPLE HAVE TO CHOOSE BETWEEN SOLID PROGRAMS, SOLID
BENEFITS AND SLOGANS OR SHIBBOLETHS ABOUT STATE RIGHTS, THEY
WILL COME DOWN ON THE SIDE OF THE GENUINE ARTICLE, BUT THEYHAVE
TO KNOW WHAT THE CHOICE REALLY ISAND THAT MEANS THAT
ALL OF US HAVE TO PUT THE CASE AS FULLY AND FORCEFULLY AS
WE CANS SILENCE, OBSTRUCTION, CONSERVATISM OR TIMIDITY ON
SUCH MATTERS AS NATIONAL COMPENSATION OR EQUAL ELECTORATES
WILL NOT GAIN VOTES IN A STATE ELECTION NOT LEAST BECAUSE
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, AND I MYSELF, WILL NOT CEASE TO
ADVOCATE THEM.( WE ARE NOT GOING TO BACK-TRACK ON'THEPLATFORM
OR ON THE UNDERTAKING GIVEN IN THE POLICY SPEECHESX
WE HAVE NO ALTERNATIVE; IT IS A COMMITMENT WE CANNOT ESCAPE?\
IT IS A COMMITMENT FOR THE WHOLE PARTY; IT IS A COMMITMENT
THAT NO-ONE IN THE PARTY CAN ESCAPE
Bilge. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH, ST. JOSEPH'S SCHOOL, MOOREBANK, N. S. W.
13.4.1975 It's true that the parish priest revealed that I was looking up
the article on Thomas Moore, not the one that is usually referred
to in this circle, not the saint but the land-owner. He was a
very good citizen. In 1810 he was declared a magistrate for
Liverpool, and he accompanied Macquarie when Macquarie later in
December 1810 surveyed the whole of this area and declared
Liverpool one of the original Macquarie towns.
So in Australian terms, the terms of settlement, European
settlement in Australia, Liverpool and Moorebank, are significant
indeed. But while I must concede, and of course I am a separated
brother too, it might be embarrassing to refer to the fact that
Thomas Moore, the Australian one, had left his property to the
Church of England, and had thus endowed Moore Theological College,
and I must confess that some of the priests who come from there,
are just as tough on me as some of those who come from the
Catholic Centre.
But I did notice, this is why I brought it here, he did in this
district, contribute toward ' s the building of a two-storey church
school and a court house opened in 1813, a Catholic Chapel in
1821 and a Presbyterian Church in 1826, a very early but significant
ecumenical attitude. But how this district has grown. I've
represented it now for well over 20, years and one of the great
joys one has is coming to the opening of new buildings and it's
now possible to an extent that one would never have dreamed when
I first became the Member to get a good education, to have the
whole range of recreation, occupation, education close at hand
in areas like this.
This is a very beautiful use of this site. A high site, an% from
here, one can look over the buildings which are over a century and
a half old, and yet one can be quite close to some occupations
which are as old as that and others which are quite new. We are
living in an area and the children who come to this school will be.
living in an area which is old, but which is perennially new.
And I think they're very fortunate to live in an area * which is
still being developed with a good regard to the environment,
preserving the old and making the new fit in with it.
I notice on the program, and immensely flattering, that I am to
declare the school open. I think we've been beaten to it a bit.
I think the children have been using it to very good purpose for
some time. But nevertheless, I can't help saying that there have
been times in my career and not going back twenty years or so ago
when it would have been utterly unthinkable for a person of my
politics to be asked to declare open a Catholic School, and I
hope you'll forgive me for saying that TI think now by our deeds
you can judge us. 
You can see that a very great numaber of the things which were
said about us were not factual as well as not being particularly
charitable, and it is true enough as Father Duncan said that
there is inflation and so oni but quite apart from inflation,
the amount of money which is being spent on education is
incomparably greater than would be required by any compulsion
of population or migration.
Three years ago, the amrount of money being spent by the Federal
Governmrent on Catholic education throughout Australia was barely
million. This year it is three and a half times as much.
It is over'$ 100 million. Now that is certainly very much more
than would be required by an increase in enrollment or an
increase in inflation during that period, and the principle that
we have adhered to throughout is that it should be possible for
children wherever they live, whatever their parents' means,
whatever their parents' beliefs, whatever their parents' occupatign,
it should be possible for their children to have as good an
education as this country can provide.
And the basis upon which we make that provision is perfectly open.
It's under an Act of Parliament. It is administered by a
Commission, whose membership is appointed by the government of
the day. I've never heard any criticism of the people, the men
and women, both lay and religious who have been appointed to
that Commission. It is a very diligent Commission. It's had
a very serious job to do, and we are shortly to receive the
recommendations that it makes for the school-years 1976 and 1977,
but the ones that it made for 1974 and 1975 have, I believe,
transformed education in Australia, and I would be able to say
that if I went to any State school, if I went to any Catholic
school, or if. I went to any non-government, non-Catholic school.
The fact is we are wanting to see the children, irrespective any of
their faith or means are able to get a good education where they
live. If they're isolated and can't have it where they live, then
there is assistance for them to have it as boarders where the
proper form of education will be available for them. There are
a very great number of other programs, disadvantaged schools,
handicapped children, migrant children, children who don't speak
English at home, where additional special assistance is being made.
Ladies and Gentlemen, three years ago, if I'd come along and said
that there would have been a very great number of doubting Thomases
among you, and -what I-. said would have been received with scepticism
if not disbelief, and it is a very great pleasure on this occasion,
after seeing what has been done, what we've put through the
Parliament, not without difficulty, not without a very great deal
of criticism of " Where's the money coming from, doesn't Government
expenditure produce inflation?", all this sort. of argument. 
We'll have it still more when the next recommendations come in
this year's budget, from the Schools Commission for the school
years 1976 and 1977. I think I can say with complete conviction,
we will not be deterred from government expenditure on things
such as education.
The very best investment that a country can have is in the rising
generation, and having represented areas like this for a long
time, I'm determined to see that areas like this which didn't
have all the schools or as good schools as were needed in the
government or Catholic sectors that they will get as good as any
other areas.
But I can say that at any school. I can say that at any area.
The pattern is open. It is unremitting. It gives me very great
pleasure indeed to see that the young children of this area, this
historic area, this still beautiful area will be able to come to
a good useful, yquthful school. A good staff, good equipment, gqod
grounds, good building. But always I trust getting better. It is
a very great pleasure to have been asked here and it is an immense
compliment to have been asked to declare St. Joseph's Primary
School, Moorebank, officially open. I do so with the greatest
pleasure, and I am sure that all the staff and the parents will
be proud of this school and the children will have a very much
more useful life as a result of going to such a good school. 



QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 4 2? c2
( SUNDAY 13 APRIL 1975) INDO-CHINA
THE TRAGEDY OF INDO-CHINA WHI6+ AS BEEN GOING
ON NOW FOR 30 YEARS ONCE AGAIN DOMINATES THE HEADLINES.
OUR TELEVISION SCREENS AND THE DEBATE IN PARLIAMENTX
FOR THE PAST TEN YEARS AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTERS HAVE
HAD TO REPORT TO PARLIAMENT ABOUT AUSTRALIAN ACTIONS IN
VIETNAMX I AM THE FIFTH AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER TO
DO SO&amp; LAST WEEK, HOWEVER, THERE WAS A DIFFERENCE IN
MY POSITION FROM THAT OF MY FOUR PREDECESSORS THE
AUSTRALIAN ACTIONS I HAD TO TALK ABOUT, INCLUDING ACTIONS
BY MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ARMED SERVICES, WERE SOLELY
HUMANITARIAN AND HAD TO DO WITH EFFORTS TO END THE
FIGHTING, TO REDUCE SUFFERING) IT IS A VERY REGRETTABLE
THING THAT THE 30 YEARS OF SUFFERING BY THE PEOPLE OF
INDO-CHINA SHOULD STILL BE SEEN BY SOME AS A MEANS OF
EXTRACTING POLITICAL CAPITAL AND POLITICAL ADVANTAGE)
FOR INSTANCE, THERE HAS BEEN A PRETTY PATHETIC ATTEMPT
TO CRITICISE AUSTRALIA'S ROLE IN EVACUATION EFFORTS IN
SOUTH VIETNAMX THE BEST ANSWER TO OUR CRITICS HAS COME
FROM OUR AMERICAN FRIENDS) THE UNITED STATES COMMANDER
IN CHIEF IN THE PACIFIC AREA, ADMIRAL NOEL GAYLER, SENT
ME THIS MESSAGE ON 2 APRIL: 
-2-
" PLEASE ACCEPT MY WARM APPRECIATION AND DEEP
ADMIRATION FOR YOUR HELP TO EVACUATE THE
MANY DESPERATE REFUGEES FROM DANANG,
AUSTRALIA CAN TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THE
RAPID DECISION TO MEET AN ABSOLUTELY
ESSENTIAL HUMANITARIAN REQUIREMENT.
WARMEST RESPECT. ( SIGNED) ADMIRAL NOEL
GAYLER, UNITED STATES COMMANDER IN CHIEF PACIFIC."
AND THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR, MR MARSHALL GREEN, LAST WEEK
PERSONALLY THANKED US FOR THE " GREAT SHOW" PERFORMED BY
AUSTRALIAN PERSONNEL IN HUMANITARIAN WORK IN VIETNAMX
A'MORE SERIOUS EFFORT TO USE THE VIETNAM TRAGEDY AS
A POLITICAL FOOTBALL COMES WITH TH+ ETTEMPT AT SOWING SEEDS
OF NEW FEAR AND NEW DIVISIONS IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY)
WHATEVER ONE MAY THINK ABOUT THE SITUATION IN VIETNAM,
WHATEVER ONE'S VIEW OF ITS ORIGINS AND THE RIGHTS AND
WRONGS OF FOREIGN INTERVENTION IN THE WAR, THE FACT IS THAT
VIETNAM HAS NEVER BEEN A QUESTION AFFECTING THE BASIC
SECURITY OF EITHER AUSTRALIA OR THE UNITED STATESg
AUSTRALIA'S SECURITY AND LONG TERM INTERESTS ARE NOT
AFFECTED BY THE POLITICAL COLOUR OF THE RULERS IN SAIGONX 
2( A)
IT WAS THAT FALSE VIEW WHICH MISLED THE UNITED
STATES AND SUBSEQUENTLY AUSTRALIA, INTO ITS INDO-CHINA
INTERVENTIONX IN THOSE YEARS WE HEARD THE STORY THAT
WHAT WAS HAPPENING IN VIETNAM WAS PART OF CHINA'S
ALLEGED DOWNWARD THRUST BETWEEN THE PACIFIC AND THE
INDIAN OCEANX, I DON'T THINK ANYBODY WOULD AGREE WITH
THAT VIEW TODAY)( CERTAINLY IN LAST WEEK'IS DEBATE IN
PARLIAMENT NOBODY DARED TO REVIVE ITX IN FACT, THE
SUPPORT GIVEN To NORTH VIETNAM HAS COME NOT SO MUCH FROM
CHINA BUT FROM THE SOVIET UNIONX IT HAS ALWAYS BEEN A
MISTAKE TO REGARD EVERY COMMUNIST GOVERNMENT AS PART OF
A MONOLITHIC BLOC ACTING IN UNISON, SPEAK ING WITH ONE
VOICEK THE WORLD IS NOT AS SIMPLE AS THAT, IT NEVER HAS
BEENK, THESE OVER-SIMPLIFIED VIEWS THE DOWNWARD THRUST,
THE DOMINO THEORY HAVE LONG BEEN DISCREDITEDX -THE
PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE HAS RIGHTLY DISMISSED THE
DOMINO THEORY AS " tOLD HASH" K WE DON'T HELP AUSTRALIA'S
CAUSE, WE DON'IT MAKE AUSTRALIA STRONG OR SECURE BY RETURNING
TO OLD FALSEHOODS AND OLD MISLEADING MYTHSA OUR REAL
INTERESTS AND OUR REAL STRENGTH LIE IN A CALM EXAMINATION
OF THE REAL SITUATION)( m v 3/ s 
-3-
OUR STRENGTH, OUR SECURITY REST ON FACTORS AND
RELATIONSHIPS ULTIMATELY UNCHANGED BY EVENTS IN INDO-CHINAX
THE REALLY IMPORTANT RELATIONS ARE THOSE WHICH HAVE BEEN
DEVELOPED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCE DECEMBER 1972
OUR RELATIONS WITH OUR CLOSEST AND LARGEST NEIGHBOUR
INDONESIA, OUR RELATIONS WITH OUR GREATEST TRADING PARTNER
JAPAN, OUR RELATIONS WITH CHINA, OUR ACTIVE SUPPORT FOR
DEVELOPMENT OF CO-OPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN MEMBERS, OUR
EFFORTS TO ENSURE THAT THE INDIAN OCEAN DOES NOT BECOME THE
NEXT AREA OF CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THE SUPER-POWERSZ(
ABOVE ALL, AUSTRALIA'S SECURITY, AS WITH THE PEACE OF THE
WORLD, RESTS ULTIMATELY UPON MAKING THE DETENTE BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION A SUCCESS AND WITH
ASSOCIATING CHINA IN A WIDER DETENTE) THESE ARE THE
GREAT RELATIONSHIPS AND THE GREAT FACTORS WHICH DETERMINE
THE SECURITY OF AUSTRALIAX THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HS
BEEN UNREMITTING IN ITS EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN THOSE
RELATIONSHIPS( OUR SUCCESS IN DOING SO IS THE REAL
GUARANTEE OF AUSTRALIA'S LONG-TERM SECURITY)
END 



Jj)_ 4A STRA L A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 493
14 April 1975
LOCATION OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTEMPLOYMENT
The Government has endorsed new criteria for
the location of Australian Government employment in
Canberra and other growth centres.
Most proposals for establishing new units of
Government administration, or relocating existing units,
have tended to assume they would be in Canberra. However
acceptance of all such proposals would place intolerable
strains on Canberra's growth resources in the short
term. The Government has decided that., new government
unit should be located in Canberra when it needs to be
in Canberra for the efficient desptach of its responsibilities
and where its presence contributes to Canberra's role as
the national capital.
The Government will be transferring other new
and existing employment units to new growth centres in
order to ensure that progT. 5; s in these centres is as
rapid and efficient as possible.
Among the criteria which will be considered are:
Relocation will be directed towards relieving
pressure on major cities and at the same time
promoting the growth of regional centres.
Decisions will be consistent with Australian
Government priorities for the development
of particular regions and growth centres.*
Growth centres will have priority, to the
extent of their capacity, in the location of
units of Government administration. New units,
will as far as possible, be located in growth
centres, consistent with the efficient execution
of their functions.
Although Canberra is I growth centre, it is
less in need of growth stimulus than newer
centres. New growth centres provide a viable alternative
to Canberra for the location of units of ' national'
or central office' character. / 2 
Each growth centre will tend to specialise in
certain functional areas. This specialisation would be
balanced by appropriate growth in the private sector and
could be supported by the development of related academic
disciplines in educational institutions in the growth
centres. Functional groupings in growth centres which
are expected to emerge are:
Albury Wodonga: National education, environmental
studies, transport, agencies with a national
' market serving' role Health Insurance
Commission). Bathurst-Orange: Earth resources study and
development, cartography.
Geelong: Biological sciences.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



ijSRALIA~
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 496
April 1975
SECOND ORPHAN FLIGHT
The Prime minister, Mr Whitlam, said a chartered
Qantas 707 would leave tomorrow morning to bring back to
Australia a group of Vietnamese children whose departure
from the Republic of Vietnam for adoption in Australia
had been approved by the Government of the Republic of
Vietnam and for whom a sufficient number of approved
adoptive parents were waiting in Australia.
Arrangements would be similar to those made for
the first flight. RAAF C-130 ( Hercules) aircraft would
fly the children from Saigon to Bangkok where they would
board the charter flight.
Dr W. A. Langsford Acting Deputy Director G~ eneral
of the Department of Health will be in charge of the party
which will include Dr J. Forbes, Head of the Fairfield
Infectious Diseases Hospital in Melbourne ( where the
children will be taken on arrival) and a group of about
medical and nursing personnel.
The medical personnel will fly on to Saigon on
RAAF aircraft and escort the children throughout their
flight back to Australia.
The Prime Minister said that this would be a
smaller uplift than it had been possible to arrange for
the first charter flight. It was expected that there would
be about 77 children brought to Australia. This reflected,
and emphasised, the fact that there were few children in
Saigon waiting for adoption at this stage who fulfilled the
requirements of the Saigon Government and the Australian State
Government S.
The Qantas charter aircraft will carry about
12 tonnes of relief supplies for Vietnam.
The aircraft is expected to return to Melbourne
at approximately 0630 on Friday 18 April.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



A WSIVA IA
PRIME MINISTER April 1975
ADDITIONAL NATIONAL HIGHWAY PROJECTS IN N. S. W.
The Australian Government has approved
additional National Highway projects in New South Wales.
These include construction and maintenance work on each
of the National Highways linking Sydney with Melbourne
and Brisbane, and on the Federal and Barton Highways
to Canberra. The Prime Minister and Mo'mber for Werriwa,
Mr Gough Whitlam, said today that one of the Hume
Highway projects was construction of stages of a
four-lane divided carriage way from the Cross Roads at
Liverpool to near Mittagong.
Other Hume Highway projects are four-lane work
between Mittagong and Goulburn, and preliminary work
on three new bridges at North Goulburn.
Mr Whitlam said that the roadwork would be
carried out under the National Roads Act 1974.
New South Wales will receive $ 136.7 million for national
roads in the State in the period 1974-75 to 1976-77.
The 1974-75 allocation for New South Wales is $ 32.7 million
with a provision of $ 44.8 million in 1975-76 and
$ 59.2 million in 1976-77. Mr Whitlam said that
New South Wales would receive a further million
for National Roads as a result of the February Premiers'
Conference. CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



33
i( A
PRIME MINISTER I
Press Statement No. 494
April 1975
COMMISSION FOR CONSUMER AFFAIRS
The Australian Government has decided to establish
a Commission for Consumer Affairs to co-ordinate consumer
standards and handle public education on consumer matters.
The Commission will be an independent statutory
authority responsible to the Minister for Science,
Mr Bill Morrison. It will develop consumer product standards and
information standards for promulgation under the Trade
Practices Act.
The Commission will provide a focal point for
consumer groups and industry in their dealings with the
Australian Government on consumer matters. It is also
charged with liaison with State Government consumer
affairs bodies. In formulating standards, it will co-ordinate
the work of the various expert standing committees such
as the Food Standards Committee of the National Health
and Medical Research Council. The Department of Health
will retain responsibility for therapeutic drug standards.
The Commission for Consumer Affairs will be
headed by a Commissioner who will have Permanent Head
status. There will be a part-time Advisory Consumer
Council comprising representatives of the Australian
and State public services, consumer and manufacturing
industry organisations, educational institutions and
trade unions. Where necessary, the Commission will hold public
hearings on the preparation of consumer standards.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



., JALSTKALI1A(
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 495
April 1975
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that he would leave Australia on 23 April to attend the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kingston,
Jamaica, and to pay official visits to Peru and the
United States. He would return to. Australia on 11 May.
Mr Whitlam said he would visit Peru from 24-27
April. He would be in Kingston from 27 April 7 May and
would then fly to Washington for a 27 hour visit. He would
s pend two days in Tahiti on his way home.
The Prime Minister said that he would be accompanied
by the Special Minister of State, Mr Bowen.
The Delegation would include the Secretaries of
the Departments of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and of
Foreign Affairs, Mr Menadue and Mr Renouf, the High
Commissioners in London and Kingston, Sir John Bunting
and Mr Hoyle, and the Deputy Secretary of the Department
of Overseas Trade, Mr Scully.
Mr Whitlam reaffirmed Australia's unswerving
support for the Commonwealth as a unique multi-racial
grouping. He recalled in this context that the Commonwealth
was a voluntary association of 34 independent states,
each responsible for its own policies, but consulting and
co-operating in the common interests of their peoples to
promote international understanding and world peace. Hie
noted also the important non-governmental links which
existed between professional and other associations in
Commonwealth cQuntries.
The Australian Gover ' nment, he said, attached
particular importance to the development of co-operative
international arrangements of this kind which would operate
free from special allegiances to power blocs. The periodic
Heads of Government meetings the-last was at Ottawa in
1973 were an important aspect 6f Commonwealth co-operation.
He would be going to Kingston to participate in wide-ranging
discussions with other Commonwealth leaders on international
matters and issues of common concern to Heads of Government.
He and his colleagues would aim to play a full and active
part in promoting further co-operation between member states
in a number of areas where practical programs beneficial
to the peoples of the Commonwealth were already in operation,
such as education, the law, and science and technology. 
lie was also looking forward to a detailed exchange
of views, under the heading of world and Commonwealth trends,
of changing power relationships and of world trade and
financial matters, which he believed would be important
subjects for consideration at this meeting.
Mr Whitlam said that during his visit to Washington
he expected to meet President Ford and Dr Kissinger, as
well as members of the House International Relations
Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
This would be his second meeting with, President
Ford in just over six months and would provide a good
opportunity for discussion of developments in power
relationships, particularly in Indo-China, in the intervening
period. His visit to Peru would be the first by an
Australian Prime Minister toSouth America and he was glad
of the opportunity to meet and hold talks with the President,
General Juan Velasco Alvarado, the Prime Minister,
General Morales Bermudez, and Government Ministers.
He noted in this regard that Peru was an important
Pacific state, which had played a major role in matters
concerning the law of the sea and in the non-aligned
movement. It was also a member of the Organisation of
American States and the Andean Group of States. Australia
has observe status with both organisations.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



APPROPRIATION BILL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
17 APRIL 1975
JUST OVER FIVE MONTHS AGO, ON 12 NOVEMBER 1974, 1
ANNOUNCED TO THE HOUSE A SERIES OF ECONOMIC MEASURES WHICH
SUPPLEMENTED ACTION ALREADY TAKEN IN THE BUDGET. THE
MEASURES HAD FOUR OBJECTIVES:-
FIRSTLY, TO MAINTAIN CONSUMER DEMAND THROUGH
A SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN PERSONAL INCOME TAXa
SECONDLY, TO ATTACK INFLATION BY REDUCING THE
PRESSURE FOR WAGE INCREASES THROUGH A SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT IN AFTER-TAX TAKE-HOME PAY THIS YEARS
THIRDLY, TO ENHANCE BUSINESS PROFITABILITY BY A
REDUCTION IN COMPANY TAX AND OTHER MEASURES.
FOURT'HLY, TO SUPPORT PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES WHERE
SPECIAL PROBLEMS WERE EMERGING,
ANNOUNCING THESE MEASURES IWARNED THAT IT WOULD
TAKE CONSIDERABLE TIME FOR THE MEASURES TO TAKE THEIR FULL
EFFECT AND THAT FOR SEVERAL MONTHS THE FIGURES' UNEMPLOYMENT*
THE COST OF LIVING INDEX -' WOULD NOT BE GOOD, WE ARE NOW
BEGINNING TO SEE THE UP-TURN WHICH WE HAVE SOUGHT SO EARNESTLY. 
-2-
APART FROM THEIR DOMESTIC SIGNIFICANCE THE FIGURES
SERVE TO REMIND US OF THE OUTSTANDING CHARACTERISTIC OF
AUSTRALIA'S PRESENT ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES THEY ARE
INTERNATIONAL, THEY ARE WORLD-WIDE IN CHARACTER AND
WORLD-WIDE IN INCIDENCEY GOVERNMENB IN COMPARABLE COUNTRIES
ARE GRAPPLING WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF HIGH'UNEMPLOYMENT
AND RAPID INFLATIONj MOST GOVERNMENTS HAVE ADOPTED MEASURES
SIMILAR TO THOSE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, ALL
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THERE IS-NO SINGLE OR SIMPLE SOLUTION FOR
OUR COMMON PROBLEMSK NO GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN MORE ENERGETIC
IN THE QUEST FOR A SOLUTION OR MORE FLEXIBLE IN ITS
APPROACH THAN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTi
THE EXTRAORDINARY SPEED WITH WHICH ECONOMIC
CIRCUMSTANCES CHANGE IN ALL MODERN MIXED ECONOMIES REQUIRES
AN ALTOGETHER NEW DEGREE OF FLEXIBILITY IN ECONOMIC
DECISION-MAKING WE DO NOT INTEND TO BE SCARED OFF FRQM
MAKING NEEDED AND PROPER CHANGES BY CHEAP CHARGES OF
INCONSISTENCYy ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES HERE AND THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD ARE NOW SUBJECT TO RAPID CHANGE NEVER EXPERIENCED
IN OUR LIFETIMES/ THE BUSINESS CYCLE WHICH USED TO TAKE
FIVE TO. SEV. EN YEARS FOR ITS COMPLETION NOW APPEARS TO TAKE
ABOUT TWO YEARSA THIS IMPOSES UNPRECEDENTED PRESSURES ON
GOVERNMENTS AND REQUIRES VERY GREAT FLEXIBILITY IN POLICY
PLANNING,. 
-3-
IN THIS SITUATION ONE HAS TO BE EXTREMELY CAREFUL IN
MAKING PREDICTIONS BASED ON THE LATEST SET OF ECONOMIC
INDICATORS, WE MUST BEWARE OF FALSE DAWNS.
NONETHELESS, THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR SOME CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM,
THE SITUATION AT PRESENT IS THAT SOME OF THE MORE SERIOUS
ASPECTS OF DECLINE IN ACTIVITY ARE NOW BEHIND US. CREDIT
IS FREELY AYAILABLE AND THE DEMAND FOR FUNDS, PARTICULARLY
FOR'HOUSING, IS HIGH, IMPORTS ARE NO LONGER EXCESSIVE
AND THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS SITUATION PARTICULARLY ON
CURRENT ACCOUNT IS STRENGTHENING. WE ARE SEEING THE
FIRST REAL SIGNS OF RECOVERY IN EMPLOYMENT. WITH THE
LARGE PERSONAL TAX CUTS, INCLUDING THE HOUSING INTEREST
DEDUCTIBILITY SCHEME NOW BEING REFLECTED IN PAY PACKETS,
DISPOSABLE INCOMES ARE RISING STRONGLY.
THIS FOUNDATION FOR RECOVERY HAS BEEN ACHIEVED BY
NEW MEASURES TAKEN SINCE THE BUDGET. INEVITABLY THE RiTIMATES
OF EXPENDITURE AND RECEIPTS CONTAINED IN THE BUDGET HAVE
BEEN AMENDED. WE MAKE NO APOLOGY FOR THAT, JUST AS'WE MAKE
NO APOLOGY FOR THE POST-BUDGET MEASURES THEMSELVES, THE
INCREASED ESTIMATED DEFICIT IS THE NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE OF
THOSE MEASURES. THE BUDGET ITSELF WAS CRITICISED LAST
SEPTEMBER AS BEING TOO EXPANSIONARY. WITH HINDSIGHT, WE
CAN SEE THAT IT WAS NOT EXPANSIONARY ENOUGH. 
THAT DEFICIENCY HAS SUBSEQUENTLY BEEN CORRECTED. THE
DEFICIT IS NOW ESTIMATED AS MOST LIKELY TO BE OF THE
ORDER OF $ 2,300 MILLION WITH A DOMESTIC DEFICIT OF ABOUT
$ 1,660 MILLION. THAT DEFICIT HAS TO BE PUT IN THE
PERSPECTIVE OF THE SEPARATE ITEMS WHICH COMPOSE IT. THE
CRY NOW IS THAT GOVERNMENT SPENDING MUST BE CUT. THE
FACT IS THAT THE REALLY BIG ITEMS WHERE SPENDING HAS BEEN
INCREASED. MOST, COMPARED WITH THE BUDGET ESTIMATE, ARE
PRECISELY THOSE WHICH ARE CONTRIBUTING MOST TO THE
RECOVERY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
LET US LOOK AT THE DETAILS. LET THE OPPOSITION
DECLARE THAT IT WOULD CUT SPENDING ON THESE ITEMS. HIGHFLOWN
GENERALISATIONS ABOUT GOVERNMENT SPENDING ARE NOT
ENOUGH. SPENDING ON SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE IS UP
$ 210 MILLION ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATE. WOULD THE OPPOSITION
* DENY THE CORRECTNESS OF OUR PENSIONS INCREASE BOTH IN
HUMAN TERMS AND ECONOMIC TERMS? SPENDING ON HOUSING IS UP
$ 234 MILLIONS. DOES THE OPPOSITION CLAIM THAT THIS IS
ILL-DIRECTED EITHER SOCIALLY OR ECONOMICALLY? 115/ 8 
ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY IS UP $ 377 MILLION ON
THE BUDGET ESTIMATE. DOES THE COUNTRY PARTY DEPLORE
OUR ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRIES OR THE LIBERAL PARTY
DENOUNCE OUR ASSISTANCE TO PRIVATE INDUSTRY?
PAYMENTS TO THE STATES AND FOR NATURAL DISASTER
RELIEF ARE UP $ 224 MILLION ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATE.
IS THIS, INCLUDING DARWIN RELIEF, AN. AREA WHERE THE
OPPOSITION WOULD CUT GOVERNMENT SPENDING?
EDUCATION IS UP $ 103 MILLION, IS THIS WHERE THE
CUT SHOULD BE MADE?
DEFENCE SPENDING IS UP $ 142 MILLION. SHOULD WE
HAVE PARED HERE? 6/. 
-6-
THERE IS OF COURSE ONE AREA OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING
-READILY IDENTIFIABLE, READILY MARKED FOR THE AXE. THAT
IS THE SPENDING INVOLVED IN THE NEW PROGRAMS INSTITUTED BY
THIS GOVERNMENT WHICH ARE DESIGNED TO BENEFIT THOSE
AUSTRALIANS WHO HAVE THE LEAST POLITICAL LEVERAGE, THEY
ARE PROGRAMS WHICH ARE POLITICALLY DISPENSABLE BECAUSE
THEIR BENEFICIARIES ARE POLITICALLY EXPENDABLE, THERE IS
A READY-MADE LIST OF EXPENDABLE PROGRAMS THE PROGRAMS
IMPERILLED BY THE HG1H COURT CHALLENGE ON THE
CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME, ALL THESE
PROGRAMS BENEFIT THE RELATIVELY INARTICULATE OR
UNDER-PRIVILEGED IN OUR COMMUNITY, THEY HAVE A SOCIAL AND
HUMAN VALUE FAR BEYOND THEIR FINANCIAL COST, IN ITSELF
RELATIVELY SMALL COMPARED TO THE GREAT TRADITIONAL AREAS OF
GOVERNMENT SPENDING, To CUT THEM WOULD HAVE NO SIGNIFICANT
ECONOMIC EFFECT BUT IT WOULD MAKE A GESTURE IN THE
DIRECTION OF THOSE DEMANDING CUTS IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING,
THAT LOBBY IS VOCAL AND WELL ORGANISED; THE AUSTRALIANS
WHO BENEFIT UNDER THESE PROGRAMS ARE NEITHER, I SUGGEST
IT IS UPON THESE PROGRAMS AND UPON THOSE WHO BENEFIT FROM
THEM THAT THE-OPPOSITION WOULD REALLY LIKE TO SEE THE
GREAT AXE FALL, 
-7-
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE LEDGER RECEIPTS ARE
DOWN BY $ 307 MILLION ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATES. WHY?
BECAUSE OF TAX CUTS ADDITIONAL TO THOSE MADE IN THE
BUDGET. WE HAVE FOREGONE A FURTHER $ 230 MILLION NET
IN REVENUE FROM PERSONAL TAXATION AND $ 105 MILLION IN
COMPANY TAXATION. DOES THE OPPOSITION 1 EJECT THESE
CONCESSIONS?* SHOULD WE HAVE INCREASED TAXATION TO
REDUCE THE DEFICIT? SHOULD WE HAVE INCREASED TAXATION
TO SATISFY THE DOGMA-THAT DEFICIT BUDGETING IS' INTRINSICALILY
IRRESPONSIBLE? IF OPPOSITION SPOKESMEN WILL SPECIFY ONE AREA WHERE
A SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN SPENDING SHOULD HAVE BEEN
MADE EITHER ON THE GROUNDS OF ECONOMIC PRUDENCE OR SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY THEN WE MIGHT TAKE MORE SER IOUSLY THEIR
FOR REDUCED GOVERNMENT SPENDING,. YET. PRATHER THAN
DO THIS THEIR COMPLAINTS ON SPECIFIC ISSU ES IMPLY NOT 4
REDUCED'GOVERNMENT SPENDING BUT INCREASED GOVERNMENT
SPENDING. WHAT ELSE* IS THE CONSEQUENCE OF THE DEMANDS BY
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION FOR INCREASED DEFENCE SPENDING.
OR BY THE LEADER OF THE COUNTRY PARTY FOR EVEN MORE
GENEROUS ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRY THAN WE ARE ALREADY
PROVIDING. THE FACT IS THAT THE AREAS WHERE WE HAVE
INCREASED EXPENDITURE OR FOREGONE REVENUE ARE ALL SOCIALLY
ESSENTIAL AND IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH THEY WERE MADE
ECONOMICALLY CORRECT. THEf EXPANSION UPON THE SEPTEMBER
BUDGET HAS BEEN THE CORRECT COURSE FOR THE CIRCUMSTANCES
UNDER WHICH IT WAS UNDERTAKEN. 188/. 
WE HAVE THUS ACHIEVED NOT FULL RECOVERY BUT THE
CHANCE FOR FULL REVOVERY, THE OPPORTUNITY HAS BEEN
HARD-WON, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT LIKE ALL RESPONSIBLE
GOVERNMENTS IN COMPARABLE COUNTRIES HAS HAD TO MAKE DIFFICULT
DECISIONS AND THERE WILL BE A CONTINUING NEED FOR MORE
DIFFICULT DECISIONS; BUT THE IMPORTANTTHING IS THAT THE
OPPORTUNITY ALL AUSTRALIANS HAVE EARNED SHOULD NOT BE LOST.
THE FACT REMAINS THAT IN 1975 THE REAL DANGER OF A RESURGENCE
OF THE RATE OF INFLATION AND THE REAL DANGER OF A DOWN-TURN
IN EMPLOYMENT WOULD COME FROM WAGE DEMANDS, GREATER THAN
THE ABILITY OF THE ECONQMY TO ABSORB, THIS IS THE REAL
MESSAGE THAT THE TREASURER AND I HAVE TRIED TO CONVEY TO
EMPLOYEES AND THEIR ORGANISATIONS1 THE WHOLE OBJECT OF
THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX CUTS, OF OUR SUPPORT FOR WAGE
INDEXATION AND THE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS WE HAVE
ACHIEVED IN THE PROVISION OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, PUBLIC
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNITY SERVICES HAS BEEN TO SUSTAIN ANDI
RAISE THE REAL STANDARD OF LIVING OF FAMILIES BEYOND THAT
PROVIDED BY THE PAY-PACKET ALONE, OUR'OBJECT IS TO REDUCE
. THE NEED FOR VAST WAGE INCREASES WHICH INDIVIDUALS AND
FAMILIES FEEL OBLIGED TO DEMAND IN ORDER TO CHASE RISING.
PRICES AND'MAINTAIN THEIR LIVING STANDARDS. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IT IS THE MORE ENTITLED TO
EXPECT CO-OPERATION INSOFAR AS WE HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN
OUR EFFORTS TO RAISE REAL STANDARDS AND REAL EARNINGS FOR
AUSTRALIAN-EMPLOYEES, THAT IS FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS. ,19/, 
-9-
INCOMES OF WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS HAVE GROWN
CONSISTENTLY FASTER THAN THE COST OF LIVING SINCE
DECEMBER 1972. BETWEEN THE DECEMBER QUARTER 1972 AND
THE DECEMBER QUARTER 1974:-
THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX INCREASED BY
31.6 PER CENT,
AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS INCREASED BY
46.8 PER CENT TO $ 146.90,
SAVERAGE MINIMUM WEEKLY AWARD WAGE RATES
FOR MALES INCREASED BY 53 PER CENT TO
$ 104 PER WEEK,
AVERAGE MINIMUM WEEKLY AWARD WAGE RATES
FOR FEMALES INCREASED BY 75 PER CENT TO
$ 91 PER WEEK.
REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, BEFORE TAX,'
INCREASED BY 11.5 PER CENT. 0
REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, AFTER TAX,
INCREASED BY 7.3 PER CENT. 
THESE FIGURES FURTHER POINT TO THE BASIC STRENGTH
OF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY AND THE SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE
-OF OUR NATIONAL POLICIES IN MEETING THE INTERNATIONAL
PROBLEMS OF THE WORLD ECONOMY. ISHALL GIVE SOME* KEY
COMPARISONS: -WHEREAS IN AUSTRALIA.. REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY
EARNINGS BEFORE TAX-INCREASED BY 11.5 PER CENT
JN THE TWO YEARS DECEMBER 1972 DECEMBER 1974,
IN THE U. S. THERE WAS A DECLINE OF 5.8 PER CENT&amp;
-IN THE CALENDAR YEAR 1974, AUSTRALIAN GROSS
DOMESTIC* PRODUCT GREW BY 1.7 PER CENT IN REAL
TERMS COMPARED WITH THE PRECEDING CALENDAR
YEAR 1973. IN THE SAME PERIOD THERE WAS A
DECLINE IN THE U. S. OF 2.2 PER CENT; IN JAPAN
OF 3.7 PER CENT AND IN GREAT BRITAIN OF 0.2 PER CENT.
IN WEST GERMANY THERE WAS A' MARGINAL INCREASE OF'
0.4 PER CENT.-IN THE OECD NATIONS AS A WHOLE
THERE WAS A DECLINE OF 0.3 PER CENT IN REAL
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT.
THERE IS NO SUGGESTION IN ALL THIS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS COMPLACENT, BUT THE FIGURES DO SUGGEST THAT
CONFIDENCE IN THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY IS WELL FOUNDED. THE
KEY TO ECONOMIC REVIVAL THI. S YEAR IS THE'REVIVAL OF
CONFIDENCE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR. THE MEASURES TAKEN BY
THE GOVERNMENT. IN THE PAST NINE MONTHS ESTABLISH A GOOD
BASIS FOR THAT CONFIDENCE. 11/. 
-1-
IN'SEPTEMBER, NOVEMBER AND JANUARY, WE TOOK MEASURES
APPROPRIATE FOR EXISTING AND EMERGING CONDITIONS. WE
SHALL CONTINUE THAT APPROACH, THE APPROACH OF A
RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT RESPONSIVE TO THE
NEEDS OF THE ECONOMY, RESPONSIVE TO THE NEEDS OF ALL
SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, RESPONSIBLE IN MAKING THE
DECISIONS TO. MEET THOSE NEEDS, 



J_, X. A1;, I'TC113 2
P rRILX, 2 , L bI
PRESS STATEMENT NO. 497
18 April 1975
TRIBUTE. TO. RAAF
The Prime Minister today paid tribute to the humanitarian
contribution made by the C-130 aircraft of the Royal Australian
Air Force which have been operating in South-East Asia since
March. He did this on the occasion of the return to
Australia of three aircraft which require servicing.
T2he Prime Minister recalled that the aircraft had
originally been sent to South-East Asia to fulfil an urgent
task in the uplifting of refugees at Da Nang. Australia had
been the first country to respond to tL. his request for humanitarian
assistance by providing an airlift capacity : subsequently the
Royal New Zealand Air Force had also provided aircraft.
Since their arrival the C-130 aircraft have been
engaged in relief tasks, most of them connected with the
movement of United Nations supplies. They have also played
a role in the uplift of South Vietnamese orphans for adoption
in Australia. The Prime Minister said that he regretted that there
had been some misleading reports that the aircraft had been
under-employed. In fact, their crews and all those associated
with the carrying of relief supplies had been workina under
very great pressure, in arduous conditions. For example,
about half a million pounds of medical and relief supplies
had been transported from Bangkok to Saigon and much of these
had had to be loaded by hand by RAAF crews.
The Prime Minister recalled that he had already referred
in Parliament to tributes paid to the P. AAF performances.
He said that he had asked the Chief of the Air Staff to
convey his personal appreciation to all those who had been
involved. 2 
The Prime Minister said that there had been
discussions. this week with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Mr. Waldheirm, and the coordinator of
relief assistance for Indo China, Sir Robert Jackson,
about the future role which RAAF planes might play in
assisting United Nations agencies in their humanitarian
tasks in indo China. As a result R F Hercules . ere to
be assigned to the United Nations to play a bridging role
in the transport of relief supplies until United Nations
agencies were able to make satisfactory arrangements for
the chartering of aircraft to meet their needs.
The Prime Minister said he was particularly pleased
that Australian Government aircraft would be able to play
this essential humanitarian role in the service of the
United Nations in transporting relief supplies contributed
by the Australian and many other Governments.
Canberra, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER's SPEECH AT SAN NICOLA BALL, PERTH
19 APRIL, 1975
Thank you very much indeed for the very kind words that
you have used about me and my wife. It is a very great
pleasure again to be guests of the Association of San Nicola
at the Annual Ball.
The last time I was your guest was three years ago and on
that occasion I remember undertaking that if I was translated
from Leader of the Opposition to Prime Minister, I would see
that people who had migrated to Australia, were placed in
as good a position as people who-had always lived in Australia.
In particular,' I remember promising that if anybody in
Australia had-an age, or an invalid or a widow's pension,
then he or she would be able to continue to receive that
pension wherever he or she went to live in the world.
That is, you wouldn't lose the pension if. you left the
country. You earned it, you received it.
Now I realise that it will be a long, long time before any
of you are interested in pensions. But, nevertheless, it
was something that we were able to carry out.
There were some other things we wanted to do for migrants.
We were not satisfied that the interest, the respondibility
of the Federal Government for migrants, ceased when they
arrived in Australia. We wanted to see that when people
came to Australia, they would be happy to remain here, they
would be happy to become citizens and they themselves would
prove the Very best advocates for other people to come to
Australia. We didn't think it was good enough for the
Government always to be looking for migrants. The best
people to persuade migrants to come to Australia, were
people who themselves had migrated to Australia and had
found it a good place to live.
It has given my colleagues and me, the very greatest
satisfaction that the number of people being naturalised
in Australia, is almost double what it was three years ago
and the number of people leaving Australia, is only half
as many as it was three years ago.
To give you an indication in this city of what we have
tried to do. Quite early in the peace, in February, 1973,
we established a migrant education centre in Wapet House,
in St. Georges Terrace. This was to make it easy for people 
to learn English if they wanted to. There are other things
which are being done to see that people at work, or women
at home, are able to learn English easily.
To take something more recently In March last year, we
established in Perth the telephone interpreter service,
which means that anybody who is not familiar with English,
is able to ring up the telephone interpreter service and
seek advice about his problems. The Department of Social
Security in Perth now has people, welfare officers, on its
staff, who can speak Italian. Of course, there are others
who can speak other languages as well. I emphasise Italians
because they are the people who have come to Australia in
greatest numbers after the British and the Irish. Of all
the people who have come to settle in Australia, the British
are the most numerous, the Irish are the next, and the Italians
are third.
The last census in June, 1971, showed that at that time,
there were 289,000 people living in Australia who had been
born in Italy.. Moreover, there have been 160,000 Italian
citizens who have been naturalised as Australians in Australia
so far. It is a remarkable record. The number of people who
have come here and the number of people, who coming here,
have decided to become Australians.
In Western Australia, in particular, Italians came earliest
arnidg hti n frthoem tghree atbeesgti nnniunmgbe rosfu . E urTohepreea n wesreet, t leofm encto urisne , A usIttraalliiaan. s
There was-an Italian in the First Fleet that Captain Phillip
took to Sydney, and there some in the Gold Rush, of course,
later on in Victoria and New South Wales. But until abouta
or 40 years ago, the greatest percentage of Italia-lis in
any of the States was in Perth, Western Australia. Most
in Perth, but of course, there were gold miners and there
were timber getters and so on in the country as well. There
is no doubt that Italians have felt that Australia is one of
the most attractive countries to go. There are very few
countries in the world to which Italians have gone in such
miurbers. I believe it is true to say, there is no country.
in the world where Italians have felt so much at home and
have been so successful.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we want you to be happy here. We
want you to be the great advocates * for other people to come
to Australia, because people are happiest in Australia, if
they already have friends and relatives who are happily
established here. 
S 3.
We have made it easier to become citizens. The same conditions
apply to people from all parts of the world who want to be
citizens. There are the same qualifications, the same period,
three years required, and we have made all the conditions easier.
Some of the things which used to be done to discriminate against
migrants, have been abolished. It used to be possible, for
instance, for anybody who had fallen foul of the law, to be
deported if he was a migrant. That is no longer possible.
There are no double penalties. There is no discrimination.
We have set up in each State, committees, task forces, to make
sure that there is no discrimination against any migrants, any
particular community within the whole community. In this State,
that task force is chaired by my colleague, Mr. Jo Berenson,
the M. P. for Perth.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a very great
pleasure once again to be your guest. I am happy to be able
to come to you and say that I carried out the promises that
I made the last time I was your guest. 


PRESS STATEMENT 499 
21 April, 1975 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT 
The Prime Minister has announced that the Governor-General today approved the change of the name of the Department of the Environment and Conservation to the Department of Environment. The Governor-General subsequently swore the Honourable Moss Cass, M. P. as Minister of State for Environment. 
The Prime Minister said that the former name suggested that conservation was a separate matter from the environment whereas it was in fact a major component of the Government's total environmental program. To refer to it as a separate area of concern was misleading. 
The Prime Minister noted also that “environment” is the term used by all relevant United Nations agencies and the O. E. C. D. and includes all conservation programs of those bodies. 
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



Press Statement No.* 498
April 1975
JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR WHITLAM AND THE
PREMIER OF VICTORIA, MR HAMER
AREA IMPROVEMENT AND NATIONAL ESTATE AGREEMENTS
SIGNED
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the Premier
of Victoria, Mr Hamer, have signed formal agreements providing
for the expenditure in Victoria of $ 4,250,000 under the
Area Improvement Program and $ 1,119,000 under the National
Estate Program during 1974/ 75.
Under the agreements, the Australian Government
will provide financial assistance to Victoria for expenditure
on programs prepared by the State, in collaboration with
the Commonwealth. Grants under the Area Improvement Program will
be made for projects in 28 metropolitan and near Melbourne
municipalities which are designed to-improve community
facilities and other public areas in Melbourne's western,
northern, north western and outer eastern region.
The grants made in the National Estate agreement
will help conserve Victoria's national heritage.
Under the program for this year, historic
buildings will be restored, land will be acquired for
public conservation purposes and conservation studies will
be undertaken. " We. are pleased that these two agreements have
been finalised and we look forward to the successful
execution of the projects in * the programs and the beneficial
effect they will have on urban development and the environment
in Victoria," Mr Whitlam. and Mr Hamer said.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. rjP1b1R" UV: D . u V V 7,1 



PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW
FOR CHANNEL 7 STATE FILE SPECIAL
PERTH, SUNDAY, 20 APRIL, 1975
Interviewer: Is it possible in the next two years to create
a Socialist State in Australia having in mind this awful rate
of inflation which confronts you?
Mr. Whitlam: No. Even in the most favourable economic
conditions and with a completely different Constitutional
set-up, no, one couldn't.
Interviewer: Then it follows, would you rather have come
into Government at a different time than this awful time into
which you have been plummeted?
Mr. Whitlam: Oh sure, it's very bad luck that we have come
into office just at a time when there are economic difficulties
right around the world. Every country like us has the same
sort of economic difficulties. That's bad luck. But at the
same time it's your duty, obviously, to take office whenever
the public drafts you to do so. So you can' * t just choose your
time. You're in that game and you take it for better or for
worse. Interviewer: It does seem Mr. Prime Minister, that you will
be there for the full term this time. There has been a change
as far as the Liberal/ Country Party coalition is concerned.
Does that s urprise you? * 4
Mr. Whitlam: As far as the Liberal Party is concerned.-I'm
sure the Country Party still wants to pursue the old spoiling
tactics of bringing about an election whenever it can do so.
Interviewer: Do you see a change in tactics though as far
as Mr. Fraser is concerned?
Mr. Whitlam: Oh yO-s, very definitely.
Interviewer: Does this surprise you?
Mr. Whitlam: No, I thought he would be more rational or
better conducted. I'm not wanting to say that Mr. Snedden
wasn't well conducted himself although he was always getting
up and saying something without being called 6~ y the Speaker
and that sort of thing but his great error I think was to
allow the Country Party to make a scene every day. Every day
started off with disruption . Now Mr. Fraser, very sensibly,
hasn't allowed that. 
Interviewer: As far as the economy is concerned, Dr. Cairns
has said that the Government deficit is expected to be
$ 3,300 million by the end of the year and you've said in the
dV House that you expect this to be reduced. How are you going
to do it?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't think it will be $ 3 billion it will be
nearer $ 2 billion but what's caused the deficit of course has
been the very large reductions in both personal income tax
and company tax and also on motor cars, sales tax, which
we've brought about. I know it's constantly asserted that the
increase in the deficit is due to increased Government expenditure.
It's not that. It's due to decreased Government revenue. We
deliberately cut the taxes to spur the economy.
Interviewer: But Mr. Whitlam, Medibank looks like being a
certainty. It'Is going to go ahead on 1st July. Critics of
Medibank will say that this is going to increase your deficit
out of ; sight.
Mr. Whitlam: N o, that's not so. After all, Government expenditures
are not going to be any larger than they were previously
for Medibank. There will now be Government expenditures in
addition, where hitherto there has been expenditure by or through
health funds. But the total amount being spent on health services
will not ' increase. Surely itb a delusion to suggest that what
you have to pay up till now to health funds is not a tax. Of
course it's a tax. You don't get anything from the health funds.
You don't get anything from the Government to meet your hospital
or doctor's bills unless you contribute to funds. So sure they
were voluntary funds but there was a compulsion. You got no
assistance from the Government except through funds.
Interviewer: But you aren't going to be allowed to levy special
funds for Medibank.
Mr. Whitlam: That's true. That's not our fault. The Senate
twice knocked out the Bill which would have given a levy, I
think it was 1.35% of your taxable income in order to finance
the Government payment instead of the health fund payment towards
those costs.*-
Interviewer: So the money the people are paying now for private
insurance won't necessarily go to the Government unless you
increase taxes.
Mr. Whitlam: There's an automatic increase so the reduction
in taxes, the reduction in income taxes, will not be as great
as it would have been because there will not be the levy for
the specific purpose of health insurance through the Government
that we propose. After all that's what I undertook at the last
two Federal elections, but of course the Senate knocked that out. 
So it has to come out of income tax directly instead of a
health insurance levy.
Interviewer: Do you expect the non-Labor States to join
Medibank or be forced to join it?
Mr. Whitlam: I think they will. It's true that South
Australia and Tasmania will join as from the 1st of July.
The other States I would expect will join later in the year
and there is quite a good chance that Queensland, which has
always had free public hospital treatment, will come into the
joint funding, Commonwealth and State, of hospitals from the
1st of July. When you talk about Medibank of course at the
moment you are talking about the hospital aspect of Medibank.
The medical aspect of Medibank, the doctor's bills, that will
come in throughout Australia from the 1st of July whatever the
States do but since the States conduct the hospitals, the
hospital part of Medibank can only come in if the States
co-operate. It will only come in in those States which do
co-operate. All we are trying to do is do what was done in
1947 make an agreement between the Commonwealth and States
to share the cost of runninIg hospitals on condition that no
charge is made for hospital treatment in the standard wards.
That is, we are only wanting to do what was done 25 years ago.
Menzies ended it in ' 51.
Interviewer: It's not just Medibank which seems to be a
problem and is a problem I'm sure for a lot of people,
doctors especially.
Mr. Whitlam: The sum total that we will pay either from t~ ces-from
now on or up till now from taxes and compulsory contribution
to funds, will be the same. The system will be simpler and
more efficient in that generally, instead of having a dozen
different funds, you will have one form of insurance.
Interviewer: I would like to lead on from that if I mayto
the beef industry, farmers up in arms'or miserable anyhow,
and companies which are having to curtail their activities.
Do you think it's fear yet in Australia that things are going
to get out of hand, that money's got to come into Australia
from somewhere?
Mr. Whitlam: Money is in fact coming into Australia. The
amount of money which has come in in Australia in the last
six months or so is very high indeed.
Interviewer: Will it save jobs?
Mr. Whitlam: I think so, yes. Obviously most jobs in
Australia, three-quarters of the jobs, are in the private
sector and to have jobs in the private sector obviously the 
private sector must be growing, it must have confidence to
invest. It varies from one industry to another. There are
-some industries in Australia which find it very difficult to
compete with similar industries in other countries producing
similar goods to those that we want to buy here. They're
the cdnes that are in trouble.
Interviewer: Can you predict the ones which are going to go?
Mr. Whitlam: No, I don't. The industries which have found
it tough in the last year are the ones which will never really
in the future be the most thriving industries in Australia.
Textiles and automobiles will not be, automobiles will not be
the great growth industry in Australia in the next 20 years
that they have been in the last 20 years. I think that is
quite clear.-
Interviewer: What about minerals?
Mr. Whitlam: Minerals is going to boom.
Interviewer: In the Government or in the private sector?
Mr. Whitlam: All the minerals are in the private sector except
uranium. All of them. But obviously, Governments have to accept
some respon~ sibility and there has been a change since my Government
took over in December, ' 72, in two respects. We do hiot believe
that the National Government could just wash its hands of responsibility
in two fields, where up till now, the State GoArnments
did wash their hands of responsibility. One is, that we think
our mineral resources should not continue to go into overseas
control. Secondly, we think that the development of our-resources
should pay regard to environmental factors. Now the only way
that the Federal Government can exercise responsibility on
minerals in the States, is in respect of export licences, and
we don't give export licences for future-contracts unless there
is a proper regard paid to Australian ownership and to environment.
Interviewer: On the subject of uranium which you did bring up.
Will any one nation get ' favoured nation' treatment when Australia
decides to export uranium?
Mr. Whitlam: No, obviously there are some-countries with which
we already have an understanding, such as Japan, but the other
countries which are interested, all the E. E. C. countries are
interested and Iran is interested, there will be no favouritism
between them We will obviously be interest6d in having
propositions from them, mainly in order to see that we in
Australia can enrich the uranium. We have known for 20 years
how to produce the yellow cake, the powder, we have done that
back in the ' 50' s in Batchelor, Rum Jungle and Mary Kathleen, 
but we don't know how to enrich uranium. And that's what
we want to learn.
Interviewer: Will there be enough money, briefly,, coming
in from uranium to enable the high standard of living in
Australia to continue?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't say from uranium only. Clearly I
think we can be quite confident that there will be as much
coming in from uranium in the future as there has been from
wool in the past.
Interviewer: The standard of living. Ought we in Australia,
because of the standard of living is so high, be afraid of
what's happening in Indo-China tonight?
Mr. Whitlam: No. I suppose you're referring to the fact
that in Indo-Chinia Governments are being changed but I think
it is quite fantastic to suggest that any Government in Indo-
China can attack Australia. Such a proposition wouldn't be
accepted anywhere else in the world. I don't think it will
be accepted in Australia.
Interviewer: When you were Leader of the Opposition you were
very keen on what you said was open Government and a lot of
people questioned your decision not to table the cables that
you sent to Hanoi and Saigon which were supposedly identical.'
Mr. Whitlam: I quoted what Mr. Fraser himself had said ir 2
that matter and quite properly, that the communications between
Governments are never released because if they are, then you
cease to be able to negotiate with other Governments. That is,
it's never done.
Interviewer: I find it difficult to understand though, why
shouldn't it be done?
Mr. Whitlan: I think all Governments take the attitude, when
they are dealing with things that concern them, international
affairs, the only effective way to deal with them is on a
confidential basis. You just don't get any Government in the
world releasing the cables-that it sends to other Governments
or that other Governments send to it. It just doesn't happen.
Incidentally the particular one in which Mr. Fraser stated that
he wouldn't release the cable or the communications, it appears
that no communication was sent. I'm checking on that. That
was the original communication sent by the Prime Minister of
South Vietnam exactly 10 years ago this month to Sir Robert
Menzies, ostensibly to ask us to come and assist militarily
in Indo-China. I haven't been able to find it. 
Interviewer: As far as South Vietnam is concerned, your
Government was very quick to recognise the new Government
in Cambodia. If the Thieu Government falls, what will be
your attitude?
Mr. Whitlan: Whatever Government takes over and presumably
it would be the we would of course recognise it.
I have said all along and it's the general practice through
the world that you recognise the Government, that is you have
diplomatic relations with the Government which has control of
the capital of a country. The alternative is to recognise
a Government which no longer controls-the capital of the country.
Interviewer: If such a thing occurs though, will you give
consideration to the position of South Vietnamese refugees
coming to Australia?
Mr. Whitlam: We have already. As you know we have already
said that the students can stay until things settle down at
home and secondly, we have brought quite a number of orphans,
that is little kids whom the South Vietnamese Government said
were eligible to leave the country and whom the State Governments
said had approved adoptive parents.
Interviewer: That displays our new attitude in Australia of
humanitarianism and being rational, sensible in foreign affairs.
How do you respond to that criticism which, sounds awful to you
I know, that we are being naive because that with the-~ new
Government in Phnom Penh we hear this weekend that they have
chopped their enemies heads off.
Mr. Whitlam: Well wait a bit. They didn't say whom they had
executed but there were seven people, that is the heads of the
new regime that took over in the last week. There were seven
people, they didn't say which ones they had got.
Interviewer: They did name them beforehand didn't they?
Mr. Whitlam: Oh yes, but I don't know which ones they had got.
There were seven people, don't let us exaggerate
Interviewer: Would you be angry about that?.
Mr. Whitlam: I think they ought to show magnanimity in these
matters. 
Interviewer: And taking that a stage further
Mr. Whitlam: and I have conveyed that view.
Interviewer: This humanitarian line which we take in Australia,
doesn't that leave us defenceless?'
Mr. Whitlam: Are you suggesting that Indo-China, any of the
countries in Indo-China could attack us?
Interviewer: No, the other way around. Suppose you were
angry and the Government was angry at what was going on up
there, have we got anybody to send. I'm leading in to defence
of course.
Mr. Whitlan: Should we send troops? I thi'k it is absolutely
unlikely that Australian soldiers will be sent to Indo-China
again, ever. Let me point out that there is nobody in the
Federal Parliament who has suggested that. No, wait a minute,
there was one man, a Country Party member who was a Colonel up
there, but he is the only one who has suggested it. I don't
think I can usefully spend my time with you-answering suggestions
that no elected person is prepared to make. There are no forces
in the whole of Indo-China that have an aircraft, or a ship or
a missile that could reach Australia and there is no prospect
of anybody supplying them with aircraft, or ships, or missiles
which could reach Australia
Interviewer: I think that we are trying to get at here th~ at
a lot of your critics have said that you are leaving Australia
defenceless, in the sense that we are not building up our own
forces. Interviewer: I am suggesting that if we were in a position
where we wanted to act on behalf of a minority group or a group
anywhere in the world, would we do it?
Mr. Whitlam: We are prepared to send troops, we have them
set aside., We have had them set aside for nearly a year now,
to respond to any United Nations appeal for troops, and our
armed forces are the best for thousands and thousands of miles
around. There is no navy, no airforce, no army which could
compete with ours. Sure, if you were competing militarily on
the land in South East Asia, we couldn't, our army couldn't.
But there's no army that could get to Australia and there's
no navy or airforce within thousands of miles of Australia
which could compete with us. 
Interviewer: We would work with United Nations then?
dr Mr. Whitlam: Yes, but even if we are alone.
Interviewer: With the Americans?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, we have arrangements with the Americans.
There are facilities here which are of very great value to
the Americans. But quite apart from that, let's be clear
about this, there is no airforce within thousands and thousands
of miles of Australia which could compete with the R. A. A. F.
There is no navy within thousands and thousands of miles of
Australia which could compete with the R. A. N. and there are
no armed forces which could land in Australia which the
Australian Army gouldn't promptly eliminate.
Interviewer: On the Western Seaboard then of Australia, ought
we to be concerned about Russian activity in the Indian Ocean?
You want to keep it peaceful?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, we ought to be concerned about the possibility
of the Soviet and the U. S. competing with each other in the
Indian Ocean because none of the countries around the Indian
Ocean want this competition to come about, still less to escalate.
Interviewer:. Is there a balance there at the moment, d1o you know?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, there seems to be.
Interviewer: And does this affect our relationship with South
Africa? It is suggested this week-end that we might be severing
a link with the Republic of South Africa.
Mr. Whitlam: Well certainly there are no military links with
South Africa whatever. I don't suppose anybody is going to
suggest it. Now there is speculation about whether we should
have Qantas going to Johannesburg but these things haven't been
decided. In any case a year's notice has to be given.
Interviewer: Still on an aerial basis, there have been from time
to time, many reports of Russian submarines ' in the Indian Ocean.
One takes these on face value, they must be correct, but will
the Government give consideration to basing a maritime reconnaissance
squadron in Western Australia? There was one opice here in 1951,
but since then nothing. 
Mr. Whitlam: Well the facilities for surveillance of the
Indian Ocean are better than they ever were. For instance,
the airfield at Learmonth will now take any aircraft in
the world.
Interviewer: But they have to come from the Eastern States
to get to here.
Mr. Whitlan: Oh sure, but all the things that need to be
there permanently have, under my Government, been immensely
improved. You don't advertise these things but I suppose
everybody knows how long the airfield is. It is as long as
pretty well any airfield in the world. It will take any service
aircraft which operates anywhere in the world and we are getting
more maritime reconnaissance aircraft.
Interviewer: We haven't made up our mind yet what we are
going to get?
Mr. Whitlam: No, but it's-going to be the Nimrod or the Orion,
that is the military version of the Comet or the military version
of the Electra.
Interviewer: Travel, trips. A lot of critics say you spend
far too much time out of Australia.
Mr. Whitlam: That is no longer said. There was a tlarrific
campaign of course last December and January about this but
I think the critics have been suitably chastened since. 4
Interviewer: You are off again soon.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, of course I am. I'm leaving next Wednesday to go
to the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in the Carribean,
Kingston the capital of Jamaica and surely nobody is going to
criticise an Australian Prime Minister going to a Commonwealth
Heads of Government meeting. After all there are 34 countries in
the Commonwealth and most of them are round the Indian Ocean or
in the South Pacific. It is the most important forum to which
Australia can belong.
Interviewer: The Minister for Foreign Affairs will be away..
Mr. Whitlam: He is attending the ANZUS meeting this coming
week, and surely it's not going to be suggested that Senator
Willessee, the Foreign Minister, shouldn't attend ANZUS. 
Interviewer: The three top men of the nation will be away.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, Dr. Cairns is going to the Asian Development
Bank meeting in Manil.. The Treasurer always has attended the
meetings of the Asian Development Bank since it was established.
Now surely nobody is going to suggest that we shouldn't be
represented by the appropriate Minister at each of these gatherings.
We have always been represented at the Commonwealth Heads of
Government meeting, always by the Prime Minister except in
Menzies time when there was a meeting in Nigeria so we sent an
Ambassador and at the Asian Development Bank and at ANZUS.
Australians expect us to be represented at these bodies and
to be represented by the appropriate Minister.
Interviewer: It is an unfortunate co-incidence that this should
happen at this time.
Mr. Whitiam: Well the Parliament won't be sitting the two weeks
after this coming one, so it will be properly manned and
Mr. Connor, a formidable character, a very competent character,
will be Acting Prime Minister in a week's time.
Interviewer: I don't want to cast any slurs in this at all, but
I remember distinctly asking Mr. Gorton if there would ever. be
a chance, when he was Prime Minister, that this country would be
a sort of Switzerland or Sweden, a neutral country as a catalyst
in the world to bring the nations together. Do you see that?
Mr. Whitlam: No, we aren't a neutral country, we aren't a no
aligned country, but very obviously we have to understand the
point of view of countries which are not aligned since, I think
this is right,-every country around the Indian Ocean and most of
those in the South Pacific, are non-aligned. Where would be the
nearest aligned country to Australia? Japan I would think would
be the only one. You couldn't regard Singapore or Malaysia as
aligned now, that is, everybody in our region is non-al igned
except Australia and New Zealand and Japan..
Interviewer: TPhe latest opinion poll says that if we went to
the polls again tomorzrow, that you would lose Government.
Mr. Whitlam: I don't comment on polls, but I'm certain of this;
tjiat when there is an election campaign and people have to express
their views on which of the parties they would like to form a
Government, they will chose the Labor Party. I have no doubt
that when it's just not a case of ' expressing dis-satisfaction
with the Government-and I don't know of an over-whelmingly popular
Government in any developed nation in the world niow. All the
O. E. C. D. countries, the sort of countries like us, Japan, Western
Europe, Northern America, Australia and New Zealand, the Government
comes in for a colossal amount of criticism but when there is an
election campaign and people have to face up to the question 
11.
Would the alternative be better than what we have had?
I've no doubt that they will choose us again.
Interviewer: As far as State relations are concerned, the
Premier here, Sir Charles Court has often called your Government
an obstructionist government, now how can you convey to him or
establish a better rapport between Western Australia and Canberra?
Mr. Whitlam: When Sir Charles and I get together we are perfectly
civil, courteous.
Interviewer: Yes, he has even said that.
Mr. Whitlam: Ihave no personal arguments with Sir Charles Court,
as a matter of fact I'll be going to the airport with him after
this, but I must say that I get a bit disturbed at the fact that
outside the country he spends just as much time abusing the
Australian Government as promoting the Western Australian
Government and this is just not done and I don't think it helps
him nor the country overseas.
Interviewer: Isn't this an easy out for any non-Labor Premier,
to blame the Federal Government for anything that goes wrong?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, but it's not done and it's not effective if
you do it outside the country. I made a very great number of
visits overseas when I was Leader of the Opposition. I had
very serious disagreements with the Australian Government a4%~
the time but you don't remember that I bucketed the Australian
Government when I was away. Billy Snedden, I'm sad to say, did
do so when he was in the United States over Christmas. I don't
think it does you any good. People in another country look askance
when you criticise the Government of your own country. They know
that you have disagreements with it if you are in the Opposition
but they don't expect for you to disparage it.
Interviewer: But isn't this because of the anxiety of the
Opposition if you like, of the free, private sector, that there
will be less and less money coming into Australia?
Mr. Whitlam: Whatever the reason for it, there is no justification
for it. The money coming into Australia in ' recent months has
been very great indeed. Our balance of payments, whether it is
the flow of money or the sale of-goods, is very favourable. 
12.
Interviewer: What promise would you make to the electorate
looking at an election two hears hence of course If you
were in that situation now, what are the goods things Australia
can look forward to?
Mr. Whitlam: To take the particular angle you have, I believe
that in two year's time, we will have seen very much more recognition
in Australia and overseas, that Australians should determine the
pattern of control and development of their resources. That's
where we camne in. We said it was not satisfactory that all these
mineral resources which had been discovered in Western Australia
and in Queensland in the 19601s, should be progressively passing
under foreign control. Now there are a great number of Liberals
agree with our attitude on this. John Gorton certainly did. He
was right in my view..
Interviewer: Whiat percentage say can you allow the Japanese
trading.-partners to have in companies? You can't really have
100% Australian ownership.
Mr. Whitlam: We think we c an in some things, such as uranium
aid this would be the general attitude around the world. Although
I think uranium, for various economic and strategic reasons, is
regarded as a substance which the National Government should
regulate single-handed.
Interviewer: What about ironi ore and oil?
Mr. Whitlam: As long as there is a preponderant Australian
control, that is satisfactory.
Interviewer: Is that 51%,
Mr. Whitlam: 51% I would think. Control can be achieved without
ownership but the point is from now on we-ought to get the
percentage up instead of letting it go down. We have had
preponderaat overseas control and ownership for our iron ore
and for our-Queensland coal and for our bauxite.
Interviewer: This would make a higher standard of living then,
because all that money which has gone abroad will stay here?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, most of it. 
13.
Interviewer: Makes you wonder what you would do with it.
, Mr. Whitlam: There are plenty of things for us to do with
capital in Australia, but what we need to do of course, is
to concentrate on those things where we are strong and we
are strong in mfinerals. This is the sort of thing where
Australia ought to be marshalling her capital and skills
from now on. There are some things in which we are very
fortunate, where we are superbly equipped. There are some
others where we are no better than any other country. The
sensible thing is to concentrate on those things where you
are fortunate or strong.
Interviewer: Unemployment worries ' a lot of people. Does
your Government seek the situation of full employment or
can you see a reasonable level of unemployment?
Mr. Whitlam: Obviously we are very dissatisfied with the
number of people who have asked for jobs and can't get them
at the moment. Now, what is regarded as a reasonable level of
unemployment is a matter of--discussion but the present one is
obviously too high. We haven't been used to it in Australia.
It's no worse and even better than you get in North America
or in many parts of Europe but that doesn't give you any
satisfaction. It is coming down.
Interviewer: We won't have to wait for two years before it
gets better?
Mr. Whitlam: It's got very much better in the last month
and I think it will continue to get better over the coming
months. Interviewer: Can you put a date on it? Would you say three
months, six months?
Mr. Whitlam: Well every one of those months, the number of
people seeking jobs will go down. I have no doubt of that at all.
Interviewer: You haven't got your fingres crossed.
Mr. Whitlam: Oh no, I'm open-handed. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF CURTIN HOUSE,
PERTH APRIL, 1975
Mr. dhairman, Mr. and Mrs. McLeod, Mr. and Mrs. John Curtin,
Jnr., Sir Paul and Lady Hasluck, Mr. and Mrs. John Tonkin,
Ladies and Gentlemen
A year ago on the eve of the campaign for the 1974 Federal
elections, I laid the foundation stone for John Curtin House
in Canberra. That building, now nearing completion, will be
the national headquarters of the Australian Labor Party.
Today, 2,000 miles across the continent, I have the privilege
of officially opening Curtin House as the headquarters of
the Western Australian branch of the Australian Labor Party.
So, in the national capital, where John Curtin lived and
worked as the Party's Leader and Australia's Prime Minister,
in the city where he died truly on active service and in
this western capital, near his home, his family's home,
his chosen resting place, in these two capitals, the Australian
Labor Party associates his name and memory with its continuing
and livin g work. By so doing, we do not so much honour an
imperishable name which requires no memorial in stone, but
rather dignify ourselves and our Party by being able to
associate our work with that name. He would have been
delighted to think that the work which will go on in this
building, in this site, should be associated with his name.
We are all sorry that Mrs. Elsie Curtin can' t be here. I'm
sure we are all thinking of her because on Tuesday, it will
be her 58th wedding anniversary. I know, because it will be
my 33rd wedding anniversary on. Tuesday. A few years ago,
Mrs. Curtin wrote to Margaret and me and pointed out that
our wedding took place on their 25th anniversary.
The name of these two headquarters in Canberra, in Perth,
symbolises John Curtin's commanding place in the history
of our Party and expresses our recognition of that place.
But in proclaiming him as our chief of men, we also acknowledge
a higher claim for while being our. Leader, he was the Leader
of the Nation. The circumstances of the time, his position
as Prime Minister of a Nation at war and his. own qualities,
made him pre-eminently the authentic leader of the Nation. 
Yet for John Curtin there was no contradiction in his
* role as Party Leader and as the Nation's Leader, nor is
there any contradiction in the honour which we as Party
members pay him as our Party Leader and the honour which
we ds Australians pay him, as our Nation's Leader. Indeed,
in John Curtin's case, his service to the Party was a crucial
and decisive part of his service to the Nation. The intimate
relationship between the two roles has been finely perceived
and is finely expressed by Sir Paul Hasluck who, with his
wife, honours us with their presence today.
On the 25th anniversary of the Pacific victory, which John
Curtin did not live to see, nearly five years ago, Sir Paul
unveiled a memorial at the civic centre, Cottesloe. He
spoke not only as Australia's Governor-General at that time,
but as a frieno, a fellow journalist and a public servant
under John Curtin.
Let me repeat here at the opening of Curtin House in Perth,
what I quoted at the laying of the foundation stone a year
ago in Canberra at John Curtin House. Sir Paul said this on
that occasion at Cottesloe nearly five years ago:
" In 1935 he was elected to the Leadership of the
Parliamentary Labor Party. This decision of Caucus
was one fateful both . for the Party and for the
Nation. When Curtin became Leader, the Party was
dis-united and divided. He lifted it away from.
its divisions and its failures and helped it to
re-discover some central purpose, even if he
couldn't at once remove all of the more deepseated
differences. In doing so, he made the
Labor Party fit to govern and gave the Nation
the alternative Government which under our
democratic usage, was required once the formation
of a war time National Government was found to
be politically impossible. If he had not succeeded
so well in the years between 1935 and 1940, there
would not have been a viable alternative Government
at the critical point in 1941 when one had to be
found.-As Leader of the alternative Government,
he found himself Prime Minister, largely as the
result of the sound, useful work he had done as
a Party Leader in restoring the health of his
own Party. He accepted office as the destiny
of the Party." 
3.
This generous tribute is all the more valuable coming as
it does from one who could speak, not only as a public
servant, an historian, a statesman, but as one throughout
his own long and distinguished political career was a good
Party man, an honourable partisan. Both his tribute to
John Curtin and his own career illustrated one of the great
truths of our democratic system. The strength of the system
depends upon the strength of the two great opposing Parties.
In our parliamentary democracy, partisanship, honourable
partisanship, is not seldom the highest patriotism. Democracy
in Britain and Australia faced the supreme physical test for
survival in the war during which John Curtin was our Leader.
In our own time, when democracy everywhere faces tests and
challenges of a very different kind, it's strength and survival,
rests, I believe, on the strength of the two Party system.
John Curtin not only re-built a broken Party, he not only
restored the Party's confidence in itself, he restored its
confidence in the idea of leadership. He gave it confidence
to lead the Nation by giving it confidence in him as its
Leader. This was the essence of his contribution to the
future of the. Australian Labor Party.
For a generation and more after the great catastrophe of the
First World War, the Australian Labor Party lost faith in the
very concept of leadership. John Curtin restored it. Not, of
course, in any sense of an imposed dictatorship, or unchallenged,
unquestioning authority, but in the sense that the leadership
must provide coherence and cohesion to the Party and its
programme. Curtin's success in re-establishing that trust
as Leader, has left the Party as a whole, in his debt and
equally has left all his successors in his deep debt.
I am proud to acknowledge my own debt to him as his successor,
as Leader of the Australian Labor Party, as his successor as
Prime Minister of Australia.
Ladies and Gentlemen, with John Tonkin, I now unveil the plaque
to commemorate the official opening of Curtin House, the
headquarters of the Western Australian branch of the Australian
Labor Party. 



104
PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW ON CHANNEL
" IN SESSION" PROGRAM
21 April, 1975
Interviewer: Prime minister, your visit to Peru will be the
first by an Australian Prime Minister to South America. Do
you think that this is an area that perhaps we have neglected
for far too long?
Mr. Whitlam: I think so. I don't say that South America
is central to Australia's economic or political concern but
it is important and Peru is the country in South America
from which the discoverers of Australia set out. It will be
quite a symbolic thing for the first visit by an Australian
Prime Minister to South America to take place in Peru.
Interviewer: In terms of Peru, Sir, are there any bi-lateral
issues that you will be raising with the Heads of Government
there? Mr. Whitlam: I think the things where we find ourselves most
in association are in matters concerning the law of the sea.
Peru is possibly the biggest fishing country in the world and
it has been in the fore-front in asserting the right of a
coastal State to exercise jurisdiction and control over the
neighbouring sea and sea-bed.
Interviewer: After Peru, you go to Kingston for the Common~ jealth
Heads of Government Conference. What issues will Australia ' be
raising at that Conference?
Mr. Whitlam: It's not so much what we will be raising. There
are agenda items in which we will all be participating. I'm
to follow the President of Zambia in discussing African matters
which are mainly political matters. We will be there together
for a full week. The Heads of Government and in some cases,;
Heads of State from the 34 Commonwealth countries and most of
them are in-the South Pacific or around or in the Indian Ocean.
So this is a body which is very important indeed to Australia's
concerns political or economic.
Interviewer: The Commonwealth has often been questioned as
far as its role is concerned. Do you think it can play a
meaningful role in terms of the -1970' s?
Mr. Whitlam: Oh yes. I have never doubted th~ e usefulness of
the Commonwealth. After all, if you get 34 countries regularly,
every 1 5 or 2 years, Conferring large or small, European, African,
Asian, Carribean, developing, Christian, Moslem, Animist, all
freely and equally discussing things, then this will have an 
affect in all those bodies where each of us has to vote.
The great virtue of the Commonwealth is everybody is free,
equally to express his views. There is no other body in
the world which has that advantage. Now this means that
at least we understand each other very much better when we
go to the United Nations General Assembly or the various
specialised agencies at the United Nations and have to move
motions or vote on motions.
Interviewer: Do you think that the Commonwealth does have
any issue, for example, that really does pull them together
other than the fact that they are all members of the Commonwealth?
Is there any common ground that can be struck
between the members?
Mr. Whitlam: They are very diverse. Historically there is
the common grouqd that they were all, at one stage or another,
recently or sometimes quite a long distance back, ruled by
Britaini so there is a certain respect for the institutions
which Britain established around the world. Even if countries
depart from the standards, there is still a hankering to return
to them. The fact that there should be eldcted law-makers,
P the fact that there should be responsible rulers, the fact
that there should be impartial judges, the fact that there
should be an honest Public Service all these things are
British traditions and all the members of the Commonwealth
respect them and try with various degrees of success, to carry
them out.'
Interviewer: But can it really achieve anything consjidering
that it only meets every two years the Commonwealth Heads
of State?
Mr. Whitlam: The fact that all these people 34 countriesthe
Leaders of them, take a full week off, to discuss these
things, even if it is every 1 or two years, demonstrates the
importance that each of them attaches to this association.
There is really no body, no organisation in the world which
is better calculated to promote understanding and tolerance
and in fact, practical initiatives. It doesn't take votes on
any proposals but there is a very useful discussion of issues.
Another great virtue of it is that while there are about five
developed countries Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand
and Singapore there is a very great range, political, economic,
geographic range of developing countries and this is very valuable
an interchange of views. In so many organs of the United Nations
and elsewhere, people line up as developed or developing countries.
There is a tussle, there is a confrontation'and there is frustration.
Here, you can at least make some-progress to getting an understanding.
Of course there are some matters disarmament, development, trade
and in fact a great number of social and cultur~ al matters which
concern them all. 
Interviewer: After Kingston you fly to Washington. This will
be the second time you have met President Ford within a period
of six months. What are the bi-lateral issues that are likely
' to be raised in your meeting with the President?
Mr. Whitlam: There might be any number of matters, but I
imagine that the immediate ones will be questions such-as South
East Asia and resources.
Interviewer: One of the points that may be raised, would it
be ANZUS?
Mr. Whitlam; The ANZUS Treaty Meeting is taking place while we
are in Jamaica. The Foreign Ministers will be attending that.
Interviewer: Are there any other issues that are likely to come
up in te* rms of defence pacts between Australia and the United States?
Mr. Whitlam: No, I think ANZUS is one of the very few defence
pacts in the world which is still current and still regularly
discussed by its members.
Interviewer: No doubt you will be putting forward Australia' s
views on recent events in South East Asia, especially in
Cambodia Mr. Whitlam: Oh yes, but I'll also of course be wanting to
hear the views of the Administration and Congress. 4
Interviewer%. You feel that perhaps the meeting with President Ford
will be able to clear up a number of points in terms
Mr. Whitlam: Obviously it will be useful for me to hear from
the President directly what he feels is the present situation
or likely developments and he may be interested in hearing what
our assessments are. Of course, also I'm meeting the Foreign
Relations Committee -of the U. S. Senate and the International
Relations Committee of the House of Representatives.
Interviewer: On your European trip, you made the point that
middle countries, like Australia, had the right to make their
opinions known to the big powers. Is this a continuation of
that point?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes. Very obviously Australia is as important
as any other country in the Southern Hemisphere and we are
very important in our location, particularly in regard to
South East Asia and the developing world. There are very 
many diplomatic and economic matters, where Australia's view,
Australia's attitude is very important.
Interviewer: Are there any differences between Australia and
the United States which you may be attempting to clear up in
your talks with President Ford?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't think there are any questions where there
are any misunderstandings and so on. Very clearly there are
different emphases in Australia itself and also in the United
States herself on a considerable number of diplomatic and resources
matters. It is absurd to think that there is a single United
States view or a single Australian view. It is impossible to
expect this. As you know there are differences in the Australian
Parliament, there are differences in the U. S. Congress and
between the Administration and the Congress. These things, in
our context and in their's, can be discussed in quite a rational'
S and useful manner.
Interviewer: I'm looking forward to accompanying you Sir.
MMrr.. WWhhititllaamm:: WWeellll II'' mm llooookkiinngg ffoorrwwaarrdd ttoo sseeee hhooww yyoouu bbeehhaavvee.. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW CIVIC CHAMBERS AT QUEANBEYAN
MONDAY,. 21 APRIL, .1975
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:
THANK YOU FOR INVITING ME TO OPEN TONIGHT QUEANBEYAN'S
NEW COUNCIL CHAMBERS AND BABY HEALTH CENTRES YOU WILL KNOW
THAT I AM NO STRANGER TO QUEANBEYAN HAVING ATTENDED MANY
FUNCTIONS HERE AND HAVING HELD MAJOR CAMPAIGN MEETINGS HERE
IN 1972 AND 1974X THIS OCCASION AFFORDS ME AN OPPORTUNITY
TO RECALL COMMENTS AND COMMITMENTS I MADE AT THOSE CAMPAIGN
MEETINGS AND AN OPPORTUNITY TO DEMONSTRATE HOW MOST OF THAT
PROMISED HAS'BEEN ACHIEVEDX I CHOSE QUEANBEYAN FOR THOSE
CAMPAIGN MEETINGS AND SPOKE ABOUT THE PROBLEMS OF THE CITIES
AND MY GOVERNMENT' S PLANS FOR IMPROVING THEM BECAUSE I
BELIEVED THAT QUEANBEYAN REPRESENTS, IN MICROCOSM, OUR GREAT
CITIES AND THEIR PROBLEMSX
QUEANBEYAN, LIKE THE CITIES OF SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE,
GROWS AT'SUCH A RATE THAT ITS RESOURCES ARE NOT ADEQUATE TO
MEET THE SERVICES DEMAND WHICH ITS GROWTH CREATESX YOUR"
GROWTH OF 5.5 PER CENT PER ANNUM IS CAUSED BY FACTORS NOT
OF YOUR MAKING OR CONTROLX YOU HAVE A BACKLOG IN THE
PROVISION AND EXTENSION OF SERVICES WHICH COMMUNITIES
RIGHTLY EXPECTX YOUR INCOME IS BARELY SUFFICIENT FOR ALL
YOUR NEEDSX LOAN SERVICING PLACESA GREAT BURDEN UPON THE
STRUCTURE OF YOUR FINANCING AND AS WITH OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS IN THE CITIES OF THIS NATION, YOU MUST COMPETE
WITH SISTER ORGANISATIONS IN THE SEMI-GOVERNMENT LOAN MARKET
FOR THE SAME LIMITED SUPPLY OF FUNDSX s @ 2/ s 
-2-
IN THE POLICY SPEECH WHICH I DELIVERED ON BEHALF
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY FOR THE ELECTIONS OF 1972
I SAID: " OUR PROGRAM HAS THREE GREAT AIMS. THEY ARE:
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY
TO INVOLVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN THE
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF OUR LAND; AND
TO LIBERATE THE TALENTS AND UPLIFT THE
HORIZONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE."
BUT I ALSO SAID IN SPEAKING SPECIFICALLY OF THE
CITIES OF THIS NATION:
" INCREASINGLY, A CITIZEN'S REAL STANDARD OF LIVING,
THE HEALTH OF HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY1 HIS
CHILDREN'IS OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION AND
SELF-IMPROVEMENT, HIS ACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES, HIS ABILITY TO ENJOY THE NATION'IS
RESOURCES FOR RECREATION AND. CULTURE, HIS ABILITY
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DECISIONS AND. ACTIONS OF THE
COMMUNITY ARE DETERMINED NOT BY HIS INCOME, NOT BY
THE HOURS HE WORKS, BUT BY WHERE HE LIVES, THIS
IS WHY LABOR BELIEVES THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
MUST INVOLVE ITSELF DIRECTLY IN CITIES." 3/. 
-3-
BY THE PURSUIT OF THE SECOND AIM WHICH I ASSERTED
IN 1972 TO INVOLVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN THE
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF OUR NATION MUCH OF OUR PROGRAM
FOR THE CITIES WAS DETERMINED BUT WE ALSO WANTED PUBLIC
PARTICIPATION AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF POLICY, ALL THE PROGRAMS UNDERTAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, HOWEVER, HAVE MEANT A GREATER DEGREE OF
INVOLVEMENT BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN MATTERS LIKE
SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND WELFARE THAN HAD HITHERTO BEEN
ACCEPTED IN AUSTRALIA, THE UNDERLYING PHILOSOPHY IS THIS:
IN MODERN COMMUNITIES EVEN THE WEALTHIEST FAMILY CANNOT
PROVIDE ITS MEMBERS WITH THE BEST EDUCATION, WITH THE BEST
MEDICAL TREATMENT, THE BEST ENVIRONMENT, UNAIDED BY THE
COMMUNITY, INCREASINGLY, THE BASIC SERVICES AND
OPPORTUNITIES WHICH DETERMINE THE REAL STANDARD OF LIFE OF
A FAMILY OR INDIVIDUAL CAN ONLY BE PROVIDED BY THE COMMUNITY
AND ONLY TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE COMMUNITY IS WILLING TO
PROVIDE THEM, EITHER THE COMMUNITY PROVIDES THEM OR THEY
WILL NOT BE PROVIDED AT ALL, IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONTEXT
THIS MEANS THAT THE COMMUNITY, THROUGH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT,
MUST FINANCE THEM OR THEY WILL NOT BE FINANCED AT ALL.
.14/, 
-4-
OBVIOUSLY THEN OUR PROGRAMS PROVIDE FOR, OR RATHER
POSITIVELY REQUIRE, A LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT AND INITIATIVE
BY-LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AND BY GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE
COMMUNITY. IN ALL OF THIS, WE HAVE FORGED A NEW PARTNERSHIP.-
A PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES.
IN QUEANBEYAN, NO LESS THAN IN OUR GREAT CITIES OF
WHICH IT IS A MICROCOSM, THIS PARTNERSHIP HAS BEEN EVIDENT.
THERE-ARE MANY EXAMPLES OF HOW WE HAVE TRIED TO ACHIEVE THIS'
PARTNERSHIP, THIS COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION, THROUGH COMMUNITY
ACTION IN DECISION-MAKING AND POLICY IMPLEMENTATION. SOME
OF THESE ARE: AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION
THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM
AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS
THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
IN MOST OF THESE EXAMPLES WHICH I MENTION, YOUR COMMUNITY
HAS PARTICIPATED, BUT IN YOUR CASE, THERE ARE OTHER EXAMPLES
OF PARTICIPATION OR ACTION BY MY GOVERNMENT WHICH ARE NOT
REPEATED ON A NATIONAL SCALE. LET ME MENTION HERE THE
AREAS IN WHICH WE ARE IN PARTNERSHIP, THAT IS, YOUR COMMUNITY
OF QUEANBEYAN AND MY GOVERNMENT WORKING TOGETHER IN WHATI
CALL THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM. a a 
UNDER THE AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM A $ 120,000
GRANT MADE UP OF $ 70,000 FOR THE FIRST STAGE OF A
COMMUNITY COMPLEX. $ 32,000 FOR CLEARANCE OF THE
QUEANBEYAN RIVER AND ITS BANKS, $ 8,000 FOR
INVESTIGATION OF CONSTRUCTION OF AN ADDITIONAL
WEIR, AND $ 10,000 FOR A TREE PLANTING PROGRAM.
UNDER THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION PROGRAM $ 9,926
FOR THE HARRIS PARK PRE-SCHOOL AND $ 9,449 FOR THE
SOUTH QUEANBEYAN PRE-SCHOOL FOR RECURRENT EXPENDITURE
DURING THE PERIOD 1.1.74 31.3.75.
UNDER THEMIGRANT EDUCATION PROGRAMS $ 67,000 THIS
FINANCIAL YEAR FOR MIGRANT CHILDREN EDUCATION.
UNDER THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION PROGRAMS $ 22,870 THIS
FINANCIAL YEAR AND IN ADDITION, $ 9,696 TO TEACHERS
AND SCHOOLS IN YOUR CITY FOR EDUCATIONAL INNOVATIONS1
UNDER AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION DEPARTMENT PROGRAMS FOR
THE PERIOD 1.1.73 11.4.75 $ 53,620,
UNDER THE HOSPITALS PROGRAM -, THE ACCELERATION OF
WORK AT THE QUEANBEYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL BECAUSE
OF THE GRANT OF $ 8.83 MILLION TO NSW FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
AND IMPROVEMENT OF HOSPITALS.
UNDER THE HOME NURSING SUBSIDY SCHEME $ 19,512 FOR THE
QUEANBEYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL DURING 1973 TO 1975. 
-6-
FROM THE GRANTS COMMISSION $ 80,000.
FOR FLOOD RELIEF ASSISTANCE AS PART OF
THE GRANT TO THE N. S. W. GOVERNMENT QUEANBEYAN
RECEIVED ASSISTANCE TO RELIEVE MAJOR FLOOD
DAMAGE IN 1974.
UNDER THE RURAL ARTERIAL ROADS PROGRAM
TOGETHER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF N. S. W,,
$ 159,000 FOR THE QUEANBEYAN RIVER BRIDGE;
$ 130,000 FOR THE APPROACHES TO THAT BRIDGE
AND $ 5,000 FOR THE COMMENCEMENT OF WORK ON
THE RAILWAY BRIDGE ON CANBERRA AVENUE.
As WELL, $ 10,781 WAS PROVIDED TO YOUR CITY
COUNCIL THIS FINANCIAL YEAR FOR RURAL LOCAL
ROADS. FOR A NEW CANBERRA-QUEANBEYAN RAILWAY BRIDGE
HALF THE COST OF CONSTRUCTION.
UNDER THE NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM $ 110,000
FOR AUGMENTATION OF THE QUEANBEYAN SEWERAGE WORKS
AND PUMPING STATION.
UNDER THE AGED PERSONS WELFARE PROGRAM $ 52,000
FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE J. C. GORMAN MEMORIAL
CENTRE AND $ 50,112 FOR A SENIOR CITIZENS CENTRE.
AND, 
-7-
UNDER THE DEPT OF TOURISM RECREATION'S AREA
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM $ 80,000 FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF TIPTOP PARK,
BUT SUCH A LIST DOES NOT DO FULL JUSTICE TO THE
EXTENSIVE RANGE OF MATTERS IN WHICH WE CO-OPERATE. FOR
EXAMPLE, THERE IS CO-OPERATION BETWEEN US IN REGIONAL
PLANNING, IN WATER SUPPLY, IN TRANSPORT TO AND THROUGH
QUEANBEYAN TO CANBERRA, AND IN ASSISTANCE TO YOUR CITY
BY THE NC; D. C. IN LOCAL. PLANNING. PERHAPS THE BEST
EXAMPLE, HOWEVER, OF OUR PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM AND OF YOUR
INVOLVEMENT IN POLICY-MAKING AND IMPLEMENTATION, IS YOUR
PARTICIPATION IN 1973 IN THE REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT SYMPOSIUM,
CONCEIVED BY BOB WHAN, AND SPONSORED BY MY GOVERNMENT,
THAT SYMPOSIUM CONSIDERED THE PROBLEMS OF THE REGION AND
PRODUCED MATERIAL WHICH OUR PLANNERS CAN USE IN THE
CONSIDERATION OF PLANS FOR THE WHOLE SOUTH-EASTERN REGION. ' 4
I SHOULD, HOWEVER, ADD A WARNING. ALL THESE PROGRAMS
I HAVE MENTIONED ARE NOVEL FOR AUSTRALIA AND EXPERIMENTAL IN
AUSTRALIA. BECAUSE THEY ARE NEW, BECAUSE THEY ARETENTATIVE,
THEY LACK THE POLITICAL CLOUT THAT COMES FROM
YEARS AND YEARS OF EXPERIENCE AND EXPERTISE. BECAUSE THEY
SEEK OUT NEW AND NEGLECTED AREAS OF NEED, THEY MAY BE
REGARDED AS POLITICALLY PERIPHERAL, THEY HAVE NOT HAD THE
TIME TO BECOME SACRED COWS, BECAUSE THEY ARE DESIGNED TO
SERVE THE NEEDS OF THE WEAKEST, OF THE LEAST ARTICULATE MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITY, AND BECAUSE THEY INVOLVE COMMUNITIES AND
INDIVIDUALS AT A LOCAL LEVEL, THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS
POLITICALLY DISPENSABLE BY THE OPPOSITION AND BY STATE
GOVERNMENTS. 
MY GOVERNMENT'S VIEW THOUGH IS STILL AS I STATED IT IN
MY POLICY SPEECH OF 1972:-
" WE ARE DETERMINED THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
SHALL BE RESTORED TO THEIR RIGHTFUL PLACE IN
THEIR OWN COUNTRY AS PARTICIPANTS AND
PARTNERS IN GOVERNMENT...". S
8/. 
-8-
LET THERE BE NO MISTAKE ABOUT THIS POSSIBILITY.
OUR OPPONENTS HAVE ALREADY GIVEN NOTICE OF THEIR
INTENTIONS. THEY CRY " CENTRALISM", " SOCIALISM"
AND " BUREAUCRAT ISAT ION" WHENEVER WE PRESS AHEAD WITH
ANY OF OUR POLICY COMMITMENTS. THEY FEAR THAT
UNFEELING PUBLIC SERVANTS IN CANBERRA AND PUBLIC
SERVANTS IN CANBERRA, AS WE ALL KNOW, ARE ALWAYS
UNFEELING WILL DESTROY COMMUNITY INITIATIVE. I
MAINTAIN THE CONTRARY THAT OUR NATIONAL COMMUNITY
PROGRAMS WILL REPLACE THE EXISTING STATE CENTRALISM
WITH GENUINE REGIONAL INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION$
As PROOF OF THEIR INTENTIONS, WE NEED LOOK
NO FURTHER THAN THEIR ACTIONS. THEY OPPOSED OUR
REFERENDUM BY WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAVE GAINED
REPRESENTATION ON THE LOAN COUNCIL AND, TWO OF THE
PROGRAMS I HAVE MENTIONED THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLAN AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEMEARE
BEING CHALLENGED BY SOME OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
IN THE HIGH COURT$
IF THAT CHALLENGE SHOULD SUCCEED, NO LESS
THAN FIFTY-SEVEN NATIONAL WELFARE PROGRAMS, SOME OF
THEM INITIATED BY THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, COULD BE
IMPERILLED. FOR EXAMPLE, PROGRAMS FOR THE AGED AND
HOMELESS, THE HANDICAPPED, ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, ISOLATED
CHILDREN, HEALTH CENTRES, LEGAL AID OFFICES, NURSING
HOMES AND HOME NURSING, MEALS ON WHEELS, THE FLYING
DOCTOR SERVICE, AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION. 84 1/ 9 
THE COMMON DISTINGUISHING FACTOR IN ALL THESE PROGRAMS
IS THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED TO MEET SPECIAL NEEDS OF
THE-WEAK AND INARTICULATE SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY.
IF THESE GROUPS WERE POLITICALLY POWERFUL, IF THEY
COULD MOUNT EFFECTIVE POLITICAL PRESSURE, THE
GOVERNMENTS WHICH DARED TO PLACE THESE PROGRAMS IN
JEOPARDY WOULD BE DESTROYED. BUT AS IT IS, THE THING
PASSES OFF WITH SCARCE A MURMUR.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: YOUR CITY, YOUR
COMMUNITY ESPECIALLY THE NEEDY, WEAK AND INARTICULATE
MEMBERS OF IT HAVE BEEN MUCH ASSISTED BY OUR JOINT
EFFORTS, BY OUR PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM. WE MUST ENSURE
THAT THERE IS NO GOING BACK, THAT COOPERATIVE
INVOLVEMENT IN, AND ASSISTANCE TO, THE COMMUNITIES
OF AUSTRALIA BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BECOMES
ESTABLISHED. IT IS THE RIGHT OF EACH COMMUNITY AND
OF EACH INDIVIDUAL IN IT. WE SHOULD BE SATISFIED WITH
NO LESS THAN THIS. 



Emhbargcl) Sunda'-5 L7 t
PR~ IAEBMINISTER' S OT3EENSTU. 1" i 11ROADCTAST
CONSERVATION
Sunday 20 April 19715
I don't suppose there is a more beautiful State in
Australia than Queensland. Its rich vegetation, its tropical
climate, its diverse natural beauty, its superb coastline
make it a haven for tourists and a constant joy for its ow%, n
citizens. Whatever I may feel about the Queensland Government
from time to time, I hope no one blames me when I come to
Queensland as often as I can for a spell of relaxation.
Queenslanders have a special obligation to preserve the
natural beauties of their State not just for themselves,
but for all Australians and for future generations. It's
distressing to find the State Government neglecting this
important task. They just don't seem to care.
The best way to keep an area unspoiled and beautiful
is to declare it a national park. That means it will always
be protected from mining, from building, from development;
and that wildlife will be safe. Here in Queensland you ought
to have more national parks than any other State. Five percent
of the State's land area would be a reasonable figure The.
Labor Party in Queensland promised a 5 percent -target in their
election policy three years ago. The actual amount now is a
little over half of one percent, and even that low figure has
been achieved only by adding a vast slab of the Simpson Desert.
If we exclude the Simpson Desert, Queensland has as much land
dedicated as national park as Tasmania. That's not good.
Of course it's not possible for the Australian Government
to set up national parks on State territory, but we can help
in other ways. We have established a National Parks and
Wildlife service to manage national parks in Australian territories,
and the professional help of that service is available
to the States. This financial year we are providing $ 9 million
as part of a three-year program to help the States acquire land
for nature conservation purposes. That $ 9 million is a first
instalment. We have launched the National Air Monitoring
Program; and a program to prevent sea. pollution by the dumping
of wastes from ships; and we are insisting that all Australian
Government projects likely to affect the environment are subject
to detailed scrutiny by the Department of Environment. 
Cke very importrint thing iJe Australian Covernmant
can do is create marina national parks to protect parts of
the sea or the coastline. That's wx'iat wer doing around
the Great Barrier Reef. Natural~ y we would like the marine
park established in cooperation wi~ th Queensland, with a park
authority appointed jointly by the two Governments. Unfortunately
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen has shown lift-le willingness to cooperate.
I mentioned in an earlier broadcast the row between
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen and Mr. Gorton over the Barrier Reef.
Mr. Gorton, when he was Prime Minister, wasn't satisfied
that the Queensland Government was doing enough to protect
the Reef and its environment and he was quite justified
in that suspicion. Because of his row with Queensland a
Royal Commission was set up jointly by Queensland and the
previous Australian Government. Wle shall be acting promptly
on the basis of the Commission's report. It declares quite
firmly that there must be no oil drilling or other damaging
activity on the reef. But now Mr. Bjelke-Petersen comes along
and asks us to hold up our legislation for a marine park while
he challenges in the Courts our sovereignty over the Continental
Shelf. He is still waiting for a Court decision on the validity
of some earlier legislation on this subject. Quite frankly,
we are not prepared to wait any longer while he argues the
toss. The Royal Commission's findings are perfectly clear.
Our responsibility to protect the Reef is perfectly clear.
While we would rather set up a Barrier Reef marine park in
cooperation with Queensland, we will, if necessary, go ahead
and do it alone. There has been delay enough already. We
are quite resolved that the Reef a natural asset of unique
beauty and irreplaceable value should be preserved for all
time. I only wish Mr. Bjelke-Petersen, with his oil and mining
interests, showed the same determination.
And it's not just natural beauties we have to preserve.
What we call the " National Estate" includes all the beautiful
buildings, historic sites and parks, and Aboriginal areas that
must be safeguarded by any civilised community. This idea of
a national estate is a fairly recent one. we are the first
Australian Government to recognise its importance; one of the
first things we did was establish a nation-wide investigation
into the places and things worthy of preservation. This year
we are setting aside nearly a million dollars to assist worthwhile
projects in Queensland. The money is there; the projects
have be en recommended; the plans are ready; the agreement with
Queensland has been signed. I regret to say that the Queensland
Government has not yet made a request for payment, and until
they do, not a cent can be paid. All sorts of restoration
works and studies in Queensland cities and towns are waiting
to go ahead the moment the Queensland Government chooses to
request the funds. Let me mention a few : the re-erection of
the beautiful old Bellevue Homestead, formerly situated near
Coominya; the restoration of the old Government House and 
3.
the Colonial stores in Brisbane; the historic City Hall
in Warwick; the Caloundra lighthouse; the Bowen River
Hotel near Collinsville; the James Cook monuments at Round
Hill Head. The list is long. It will be tragic if these works
are neglected, if the Barrier Reef remains at risk, if
our efforts to preserve the natural beauty and wildlife
of this State are frustrated by a State Government that
simply doesn't care enough about the great natural heritage
which belongs to Queenslanders and to all Australians. 



PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO./, L-C-
23 April 1975
JOINT PRESS STATEMENT BY THE1 PRIME MINISTER, MR WHITLAM,
AND THE TASMANIAN PREMIER, MR NEILSON
The Australian and Tasmanian Governments have
agreed on the terms for the transfer to the Australian
Government of the Tasmanian rail system.
The announcements were made jointly toda~ y
by the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam and the Tasmanian
Premier, Mr Neilson. The agreements were concluded at discussions
in Canberra on Tuesday between Mr Whitlam, Mr Neilson
and the Australian Minister for Transpor-t, Mr Jones
and the Acting Treasurer, Mr Stewart.
The Prime Minister and Premier emphasised
that all employees of the Tasmanian Railways will be
employed in the Australian Railways service or the
Tasmanian Transport Commission and that the terms and
conditions of employment would be no less favourable than
those presently applied.
The Australian Government will assume
responsibility for the financial operation of the system
as from 1 July 1975 It will also assume the burden of
the appropriate portion of the railways deficit.
There will be a cash adjustment to the
Tasmanian Government this financial year, and an
appropriate adjustment to the level of financial
assistance grants in future years.
The agreement to transfer the Tasmanian
Railways resulted from the offer contained in the Prime
minister's Policy Speech of November 1972 for the
Australian Government to accept responsibility for the
railways of any State.
" This agreement, which follows on the
agreement reached for the transfer of the South Australian
non-rn etropolitan railways, represents a significant further
step towards the creation of a truly national railway
system," the Prime Minister and the Premier said. 
-2-
" It should provide opprotunity for the improved functioning
of the Tasmanian rail system through better co-ordination
with other elements of the expanded Australian National
Railways and also with the operations of the Australian
National Line."
CANBERRA, A. C. T. nln 



l~&gt; AUSIT AI
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT N._
23 April 1975
ARTHUR BOYD'S GIFT TO NATIONAL GALLERY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that the Interim Council of the Australian
National Gallery has accepted the generous offer
of a gift from one of Australia's most prominent
artists, Mr Arthur Boyd, who has presented to the
Gallery a large collection of his work dating from
his earliest years as an artist. The gift is
conservatively valued at $ 1,900,000.'
Mr Whitlam said that the Interim Council was
most enthusiastic in its praise of this gift, which
includes over two hundred paintings in various media,
from 1938 until 1974, two tapestries, more than
a thousand drawings, a group of ten sculp tures in
bronze and ceramic, and a small group of pastels.
As well, Mr Boyd has given a large and important
collection of his graphic work. This last consists
of approximately 800 etchings, aquatints, drypoints
and lithographs and includes many etching plates
which have never been printed or released. Mr
Boyd is to allow the Gallery to print these in
limited editions and sell them for the Gallery's
purposes. This generous offer is of great value both
to the Gallery and to the public, who will have
available to them in this way the work of one of Australia's
greatest artists.-
Mr Whitlam went on to say that the Gallery's
Australian collection could not but be considerably
enriched by this generous gift from a famous
Australian artist, for it would not only further the
aim of the Gallery to have the best examples of
visual arts in all its forms but also give the
Australian people an opportunity to see in depth the
work of an artist who had played a significant role
in an important stage in the development of Australian
art. 
-2-
The Prime Minister also announced that in
addition to making a gift of his own work, Mr Boyd,
together with other members of his family
Messrs, David and Guy Boyd, Mrs Lucy Beck and
Mrs Mary Perceval had presented the Gallery with a
large group of paintings by their late father, Merric
Boyd. This was another valuable and generous gift
from a munificent arnd talented family which
had contributed much to Australia's artistic
achievements in many fields.
Mr Whitlam also paid tribute to Mr Joseph
Brown of Melbourne, who had acted for Mr Boyd in
making the detailed arrangements which led to the
gift being handed over to the Gallery.
NOTE:
ARTHUR BOYD: Born 11irrumbeena, Victoria, 1920,
studied mily within the family circle. Was
greatly assisted by his uncle, Martin Boyd, the
novelist, who made it possible for Arthur Boyd to
devote himself to painting in his formative years.
After a number of commissions in Melbourne
he went to London in 1960 where his exhibition at the
Zwemmer Gallery was followed by a large retrospective
exhibition at the Whitechapel Gallery, London, in
1962, which established his international reputation.
His work is in all Australian State galleries and a
number of overseas collections.
Mr Boyd returned to Australia to live a few
months ago.
AUSTRALIAN GALLERY INTERIM COUNCIL
Mr R. C. Crebbin, Sydney ( Chairman)
Miss P. Bell, Brisbane
Mrs J. Dawson Boddy, Binalong, N. S. W.
Mr G. Cohen, Oerth,'
Mr L. French, Melbourne,
Professor P. McCauighey, Melbourne,
Mr J. Mollison, Canberra,
Mr D. J. Munro, Canberra
Mr L. Parr, Melbourne,
Mr F. Williams, Melbourne,
Mr D. Wynn, Adelaide
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
-2-
The Prime Minister also announced that in
addition to making a gift of his own work, Mr Boyd,
together with other members of his family
Messrs, David and Guy Boyd, Mrs Lucy Beck and
Mrs Mary Perceval had presented the Gallery with a
large group , of paintings by their late father, Merric
Boyd. This was another valuable and generous gift
from a munificent and talented family which
had contributed much to Australia's artistic
achievements in many fields.
Mr Whitlam also paid tribute to Mr Joseph
Brown of Melbourne, who had acted for Mr Boyd in
making the detailed arrangements which led to the
gift being handed over to the Gallery.
,, iZUIPU . D
NOTE:
ARTHUR BOYD: * Born Mrrumbeena, Victoria, 1920,
studied mainly within the family circle. Was
greatly assisted by his uncle, Martin Boyd, the
novelist, who made it possible for Arthur Boyd to
devote-himself to painting in-his formative years.
* As a Cot a : c
!. fAfter; a number of commissions in Melbourne
he went to London in 1960 where his exhibition at the
Zwemmer Gallery was followed by a large retrospective
exhibition at. the Whitechapel Gallery, London, in
1962, which: established his international reputation.
His work is in-all Australian State galleries and a
number of overseas collections.
Mr-Boyd returned to Australia to live a few
months ago.
AUSTRALIAN GALLERY INTERIM COUNCIL
Mr R. C. Crebbin, Sydney ( Chairman)
Miss P. Bell, Brisbane-
Mrs J. Dawson. Boddy, Binalong, N. S. W.
Mr G. Cohen, Oerth,'
Mr L. French, Melbourne,
Professor P. McCaughey, Melbourne,
Mr J. Mollison, Canberra,
Mr D. J. Munro, Canberra
Mr L. Parr,... Melbourne,
Mr F. Williams,: Melbourne,
Mr D. Wynn, Adelaide
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



4-7
Press Statemnt 24th April, 1975
PRIME MINISTER'S OVERSEAS VISIT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Whitlau, left Australia on
23rd April to attend the Commonwealth H-eads of Government
Meeting in Kingston, Jamaica, and to pay official visits
to Peru and the United States.
He will return to Australia on 11th May. His
itinerary is attached.
Before leaving Australia, Mr. Whitlam reaffirmed
Australia's support for the Commonwealth as a unique multiracial
grouping. He said that the Commnonwvealth was a
voluntary association of 34 independent states, each
responsible for its own policies, but consulting and
co-operating in the common interests of their peoples to
promote international understanding and world peace. He
noted also the important non-governmental links which
existed between professional and other associations in
Commonwealth countries.
The Australian Government, he said, attached
particular importance to the development of co-operative
international arrangements of this kind which would operate
free from special allegiances to power blocs.
He was looking forward to a detailed exchange of
views on changing power relationships as well as world
trade and financial matters, which would be important
subjects for consideration at this meeting.
During his visit to Washington, Mr. Whitlam will
meet President Ford and Dr. Kissinger, as well as members
of the House International Rel~ ations Committee and the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. 2 
This will be his second meeting with President
Ford in just over six months providing a good opportunity
for discussion of developm-ients in power relationships,
particularly in Indo-China, in the intervening period.
Mr. Whitlam's visit to Peru will be the first
by an Australian Prime Minister to South America. In
Peru he will hold talks with the President, General Juan
Velasco Alvarado and the Prime Minister, General Morales
Bermudez. He will also visit historic Machu Picchu.
Mr. Whitlam said that Peru was an important
Pacific state which had played a major r-ole in matters
concerning the law of the sea and in the non-aligned
movement. It was also a mem~ ber of the Organisation of
American States and the Andean Group of States. Australia
has observer status with both organisations.
PRIME MINISTER'S_ ITINERARY
23rd April
24th April
26th April
27th April
7th May
8th May May
11th May
8.00 p. m. Sydney to Tahiti
Tahiti to Lima
Arrive Lima
Visit Cuzco and Machu Puechi
Lima to Kingston
Kingston to Washington
Washington to Tahiti
Tahiti to Canberra
Arrive Canberra 
This will be his second meeting with President
Ford in just over six months providing a good opportunity
for discussion of developments in power relationships,
particularly in Indo-China, in the intervening period.
Mr. Whitlam's visit to Peru will be the first
by an Australian Prime Minister to South America. In
Peru he will hold talks with the President, General Juan
Velasco Alvarado and the Prime Minister, General Morales
Bermudez. He will also visit historic Machu Picchu.
Mr. Whitlam'. said that. Peru was an important
Pacific state which had played a major role in matters
concerning the law of the sea and in the non-aligned
movement. It was'also a member of the Organisation of
American States and'the Andean Group of States. Australia
has observer status with both organisations.
At. "' k
S I
PRIME MINISTER'S ITINERARY
23rd April
24th April
26th April
27th April
7th May
8th May May
llth May
8.00 p. m. Sydney to Tahiti
STahiti to Lima
Arrive Lima
Visit Cuzco and Machu Pucchi
Lima to Kingston
Kingston to Washington
Washington to Tahiti
Tahiti to Canberra
Arrive Canberra 



Jjj AU ~ ALIA( Press Statement
24 April 1975
STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THE HON.
E. G. WHITLAM, ON ARRIVAL IN LIMA, PERU
I am delighted to be in Peru and the historic
capital of Lima. This is the first visit to Peru by
an Australian Prime Minister indeed to any South
American country but it is not the first by a minister
of the Australian Labor Government. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Senator Willesee, visited Peru in 1974
during a tour which took him also to Mexico, Venezuela,
Argentina and Brazil. my visit will therefore build, at
the highest level, a firm and established friendship
between our countries, and develop the diplomatic and
economic links which exist between us.
I believe there is scope for both our countries
to work together more closely and to seek a deeper
understanding of each other's views. Australia and Peru
were members of the United Nations Security Council for 1973
and 1974; there are opportunities for further co-operation
in the United Nations. We. share many interests and
attributes in common. We are both medium powers;
we are both Pacific powers; we were both once colonies
of European powers; we are both rich in resources and
dependent for our economic well being on the export and
development of those resources. Above all, we both
believe there is a role for the medium powers in
shaping a world order based on peace and social justice.
I look forward keenly to my stay in this
important and respected country and to my talks with
President Velasco, Prime Minister Bermudez and other
ministers. With my Special Minister of State, Mr Bowen,
and my officials, I hope to discuss our bilateral commercial
relations, scientific and cultural co-operation, arms
control, resources and the law of the sea and to exchange
views on world problems in our different regions.
Australians admire the efforts of the Peruvian people to
develop their nation and preserve its economic independence
in the same sturdy spirit with which they asserted* their
political independence a century and a half ago.
I hope my visit will help us both move closer* to our
common goals of national progress and international
co-operation.
RELEASED ONLY IN LIMA. PERU 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. OF AUSTRALIA,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TOWN HALL, LIMA PERU 25 APRIL 1975
Thank you Mr Mayor, for the honour you have
done me and all Australians in this ceremony today.
It is surely one of the curiosities of history that
while an Australian Prime Minister was born in South
America, this is the first time an Australian Prime
Minister has paid a visit to the continent. Those
events are separated by 108 years. For the benefit of
Austr Alians who may have forgotten their history, I
remind them that John Watson, the youngest Prime
Minister to take office in Australia, and the first
Labor Prime Minister, was born in Valparaiso. So
I'm delighted that this is the first visit by an
Australian Head of Government to South America.
I'm delighted that my visit should begin in your
historic and beautiful city a city roughly the size
of Sydney, from which I departed three days ago. It is
fitting that these two cities, Sydney and Lima, and our
two countries countries with similar populations and
with many similar hopes and aspirations should be
participants in the first attempt by an Australian
Head of Government to establish direct and personal
links between continents and peoples on opposite shores
of the Pacific ocean.
This morning I laid a wreath at your
national shrine. Some of you may know that today is
also the anniversary of a battle with historic, indeed
sacred, significance in the minds of the Australian
people. Of course our military annals have little in
common, but I was reminded by this concurrence of
events of just how closely the histories of our two
countries are linked with Europe. Australia and Peru
were colonized by great European powers. Both retain,
in their languages, their customs, their histories,
the marks of their former but still continuing links
with European civilization. At the same time both are
the homes of much older indigenous cultures. During
my visit to your city, in particular, to your
archaeological museum and its magnificent collection,
I have seen evidence of the remarkable ancient
civilizations which flourished on the Peruvian coast.
In no city, in no region of the world, is there a
richer and more diverse conjunction of Christian
European and Pre-Christian cultures.-It has been
an unforgettable experience to see the architecture,
and many of the artifacts, of cultures as varied as
the Moche and the Mazca, the Paracas and the Inca
the Brillians and the splendour of whose works have been
rarely surpassed. / 2 
-2-
Like Sydney, Lima is a great Pacific port,
and yesterday, as we flew over the ocean that both joins
and divides us, I was reminded of the important part
the Pacific has played in our histories. It was from
this coast from here, from Callao, and a little
later from further. north, from Acapulco that man
first set out on his conquest of the Pacific. From
here the search for the great southern continent,
Australia Del Espiritu Santo, began nearly 400 years
ago. The Spanish mariners, of course, despite their
courageous voyages, were not the ones to find
Australia, but they went remarkably close. Torres
passed the northern tip of the continent in 1606 and
sailed through the strait which now bears his name.
Forty years earlier, Mendana embarked on a course which
would almost certainly have brought him to the east
coast of Australia in -the vicinity of Rockhampton.
He changed course, however, on the advice of his pilot
Gallego a decision which eventually led him to the
Solomon Islands and deprived him of the opportunity
of anticipating by some 200 years, Captain Cook's
discovery of Australia.
We might well speculate as indeed, many
have done on what would have happened if the Spanish
explorers from Peru had found Australia first. As
things turned out, our histories and development have
proceeded in almost total isolation from each other
during the intervening centuries. I believe the time
has come, the occasion has arrived, to explore once
again the opportu~ nities which lie across the Pacific,
on both sides of the Pacific. It is that belief, that
confidence, which has brought me to your city. Lima
for centuries the capital of most of South America,
is now the capital-of a nation with an important
contemporary role, not only in Latin America but in
world affairs. The second general conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organisation
was held in Lima this year. I congratulate your
Government on the success of that conference and the
significant contribution made by. Peru. It is
appropriate that the outcome of the conference the
declaration and plan of action on industrial
development and coooperation the Lima Declaration
bears the name of this city.
For two nations so long aind so far apart,
it is remarkable how many attitudes we share and how
closely we have worked together. Peru is a member
of the organisation of American states and the
Andean group, to both of which Australia has
observer status. We share an active concern for the
Third World and in particular the non-aligned
movement. We are both rich in natural resources and
our economies depend greatly on the development and
sale of those resources. / 3 
We were founding members of APEF, The organisation of
iron ore exporters. Australia has observer status at
CIPEF, the group of copper producing states a. nd
there is a prospect of further cooperation in silver.
Australia and Peru have almost identical views, as
coastal states, on the law of the sea. We were members
together of the Security Council in 1973 and 1974.
We are both signdtories of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty. Having flown to your city across the South
Pacific and experienced once again the serene beauty of
that vast ocean, I recall with pride the efforts of
Australia and other Pacific border states to resist the
poisoning of our seas and skies by nuclear tests.
Some twenty years ago, Mr Mayor, an
important street in Sydney was named General San Martin'
Drive to commemorate one of the heroes of your
independence struggle. Your country asserted her
political independence one and a half centuries ago.
In the past decade, and in the same sturdy spirit, she
has asserted her economic independence as well.
Australia's political independence was achieved more
recently and certainly more peacefully, but our quest
for economic independence, for the ownership and control
of our basic industries and resources, is still going
forward. Much has been achieved by Peru in working
towards this goal. Widely separated as we are from each
other and from many of the scenes of world conflict
and tension Australia and Peru can profit from each
other's example. As medium powers it is very much in
our interests to associate more often and more closely
to help shape a world whose future belongs to us as much
as it does to the mightiest of nations. That is the
true significance of our meeting the conviction
that smaller states, by winning new friends, by
developing new ideas and challenging old
assumptions, by promoting new alliances and new
perspectives in foreign relations, can be a force for
hope and progress in these dangerous and uncertain times.
I am deeply grateful for the hospitality
and warmth shown to me in your country and particularly
in Lima. In sealing, by this ceremony, the friendship
of the peoples of Peru and Australia, I believe we have
laid the basis for a productive and enduring association
between our countries, one that will lead to many
opportunities for useful cooperation and better
understanding in the promotion of a just and peaceful
world. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
LIMA, PERU
APRIL 1975
PRIME MINISTER: The Prime Minister, General Morales Bermudez
and I will issue a statement to the press on Sunday morning
that will include many of the things, most of the things, that
we discussed yesterday and which some others of his ministers
have discussed yesterday and today. In view of this I suppose
there are some matters which you would like to ask me in
anticipation. QUESTION: Could you give us details of the purchase of the
Nomad aircraft. Has that been finalised?
PRIME MINISTER: No agreement has been made for the sale of the
Nomad to the Peruvian armed forces. Nevertheless there have
been some discussion proceeding for some weeks past. I believe
that the choice is between the Nomad and one other aircraft.
We were gratified that the President himself, General Juan Velasco
Alvaradro, asked about the Australian aircraft industry and of
course of the Prime Minister himself and several of
his ministers are interested in the aircraft. The characteristics
and performance of the Nomad were discussed, in general terms.
But Mr Bowen and I were not here to conclude specific arrangements
of a technical nature such as that.
QUESTION: Did you discuss with the President the alleged subversive
elements here and the CIA?
PRIME MINISTER: I make it a practice not to reveal what is said
in private conversations of this character. There were only the
President and I together there and so I wouldn't identify subjects
or details.
QUESTION: I wonder Mr Prime Minister if you could go into a little
more detail as to the characteristics of the Nomad built-by the state
plant in Australia and secondly, could you tell us whether you
have conversed with the Peruvian authorities on the question of
your becoming a member of the CIPEC group?
PRIME MINISTER: First the Nomad. We believe the relevance of the
Nomad to Peru and to neighbouring countries is the fact that it can
operate from quite short airstrips. In fact it can operate from
airstrips which are not sealed. It is a very sturdy, and rugged
aircraft which can carry freight as well as people and it can do
so from short and relatively unformed airstrips which one finds
in such a mountainous country as Peru or the neighbouring countries.
It has, we think, a very good performance in those difficult and
testing conditions. It could supply isolated centres very well.
You also asked about CIPEC, the organisation of Copper Exporting
Countries, of which the present members are Chile, Peru, Zaire
and Zambia. Australia is an observer at conferences of the CIPEC
countries, and the suggestion was made by the Peruvian ministers
yesterday that Australia and Papua New Guinea and the Philippines 
-2-
might also become full members of CIPEC. This suggestion had not
previously been made to Australia by any of the present members
of CIPEC. It was an interesting suggestion as far as we are
concerned and I'm sure we woul . d give it very sympathetic consideration.
It accords with our general attitude that countries which depend
on the sale of minerals should have a more secure and predictable
market than they have hitherto been able to enjoy. Australia,
like Peru, is a very large mineral exporting country. We have,
like Peru, had greatly fluctuating incomes from our exports.
We want to see that those incomes are more predictable. Also we
want to see that industries in our own countries are based
increasingly on those mineral resources.
QUESTION: A large number of American states have moved to
establish diplomatic relations with Cuba. When do you expect
Australia itself to make such a move and will this be one of the
topics of discussion when you visit Washington?
PRIME MINISTER: Last year Australia received a Consulate from
Cuba. Cuba had made the request to the previous Australian
government which had not responded. My Government did respond
and allowed the Consulate to be established. I think it unlikely
that any diplomatic relations between Cuba would be discussed
in Washington. Naturally, however, while in Peru, I was anxious
to know the assessment of Peru of-the likelihood of Cuba being
re-admitted to the Organisation of American States and any
commercial embargoes against Cuba being lifted. Obviously
Australia's attitude in this matter which is not of the highest
pri ' ority as far as Australia is concerned would be very much
influenced by the attitude of the O. A. S.
QUESTION: Peru and other nations of the copper group have recently
cut back on copper productions in an attempt to get an increase
on the current low world price. Would Australia consider doing
the same to assist these countries in getting a higher price?
PRIME MINISTER: Like. all the copper exporting countries Australia
has suffered from the drop in prices. The CIPEC countries
reduced their exports by 15 per cent in quantity. Australia has
reduced hers by 10 per cent.
QUESTION: I wonder MR Prime Minister whether you intend to sign
any important agreements with the Peruvian Government in the
field of technical and economic co-operation?
PRIME MINISTER: On Sunday morning the Prime Minister and I will
be signing an agreement for an inter-governmental joint commission
in several fields including the particular fields of scientific
co-operation ; you mentioned.
QUESTION: You are the second foreign leader to meet with President
Velasco since February. I would like to know whether he discussed
his health with you and what your assessment was of the President's
health? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't presume to express an opinion about
the health of President Juan Valasco Alvarado. He seemed to me
to be in robust good health and excellent spirits.
QUESTION: What prospects do you see for Australia gaining observer
status at the next conference of the non-aligned movement. And
secondly if I may are we seeking full membership?
PRIME MINISTER: Membership of the non-aligned group has not been
sought by Australia, nor offered to Australia. There are a great
number of members of the non-aligned group in Australia's
neighbourhood, in fact most of Australia's neighbours are members
of the group. In those circumstances it seems to the Australian
Government that it would be appropriate for Australia to have
observer status at the meetings of the group. Accordingly I have
discussed this when I have had conversations with Heads of
Government of prominent members of the group, such as Sri Lanka,
India, Yugoslavia and now Peru. The group is increasingly
interested in economic matters. The Australian Government's
attitude on economic matters in various international forums has
aroused a great deal of interest And support among members of
the group. Australia already has observer status in many bodies
to which Peru belongs. I have mentioned CIPEC already, there is
in addition O. A. S. and the members of the Andean pact, the
Acuerdo de Cartegna.
QUESTION: Observer status is quite often the first step to full
membership. Is full membership of the non-aligned group a longterm
aim of the Australian Government. And also if there was
a strong feeling among that group that they would like to see
you as a full member, would that influence you?
PRIME MINISTER: I have seen no inclination in the countries that
I have mentioned or in any other countries, to offer full membership
to Australia. Australia is in fact an aligned country because there
is an arrangement between Australia, New Zealand and the United
States arising from their association in the Second World War.
Accordingly it wouldn't be appropriate in the present circumstances,
or those that are contemplated, for Australia to seek full
membership. QUESTION: What do you see as the most important development to come
out of this visit, the first of an Australian Prime Minister to a
South American country?
PRIME MINISTER: I believer there is an awareness in Peru of the
relevance of Australia to Peru's interests and aspirations in a
very great number of fields. Very clearly after the direct
discussions between Mr Bowen and me on one side, and the Peruvian
ministers it is realised that the whole question of the exploration
and the development and the marketing of our mineral resources is
something that we can do very much better in consultation and
co-operation with each other than we could at a distance from each
other. Moreover there are a great number of diplomatic matters
in which we have shown an identity of interests. We were through 
-4-
1973 and 1974 members of the United Nations Security Council.
Australia adopted an attitude at the UNIDO Conference in Lima
which was appreciated by the less developed countries. Peru and
Australia were very conscious of the hazards of the environment
of the Pacific through the atmospheric nuclear tests. For
centuries Australia and Peru, in so far as they've thought
about each other at all, have regarded the Pacific as a barrier
rather than a link. I can't say that Australians have been
sufficiently aware of Peru: I don't believe that Peruvians
have been sufficiently aware of Australia. We have during these
days set out to correct this mutual indifference or ignorance.
After all it was from Callalo, half a dozen miles from here that
navigators set out to cross the Pacific to discover the great
South land. There has never been a Peruvian minister visit
Australia. Until Senator Willesee, the Australian Foreign Minister,
came to Peru last year there had never been an Australian minister
visit Peru. There was an Australian Prime Minister born in
South American, John Christian Watson, the first Labor Prime
Minister, but there had never been an Australian Prime Minister
visit South America. So we are redressing this situation.
The Prime Minister, General Francisco Morales Bermudez, has
accepted by invitation to visit Australia at a time which is
mutually convenient to us.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, you said that you had no information
or had received no information from countries on joining the
group. At a Press Conference with the Peruvian Foreign Minister
this afternoon, he pointed out that he would be happy to support
Australia, and gave us the example of Cyprus which was also an
aligned country. In view of this would you reconsider any
point in Australia becoming a member of the group?
PRIME MINISTER: I've got nothing to add to what I have said
previously to this. Most of the countries in the non-aligned
group regard Australia's alignment as disqualifying it. 



JOINT COMMUNIQUE BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, MR.
E. G. WHITLAM AND THE PRIME MINISTER OF PERU, MAJOR GENERAL
FRANCISCO MORALES BERMUDEZ
At the invitation of the. Government of Peru, the Prime Minister
of Australia, The Honourable E. G. Whitlam, accompanied by the
Special Minister of State, The Honourable L. F. Bowen, paid
an official visit to Peru from 24 to 27 April 1975.
The Prime Minister was received by the President of the
Republic, Major General Juan Velasco Alvarado, and the Prime
Minister and Minister for War, Major General Francisco Morales
Bermudez. He also met the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Energy
and Mines, Agriculture, Food and Trade.
The Australian Prime Minister undertook a full program of
activities which included joint discussions with six Ministers
and Senior Officials.
He was welcomed by the Lord Mayor who conferred on him the
title of ' Illustrious Guest of the City of Lima'. He visited
museums and historicpl monuments in the capital and in Cuzco.
During the discussions the Prime Minister and the Peruvian
Ministers reviewed the international situation and a wide
range of bilateral and multilateral developments.
The two Prime Ministers noted with pleasure the wide measdlte
of agreement between their respective countries on important
international issues.
They reviewed political and economic problems of the Pacific
area, bearing in mind the important responsibilities of both
countries in that region.
There was recognition that the countries of the region should
work collectively for the protection of their resources within
a new world economic order based on ideological pluralism
and universality of relations, principles which both Governments
observe. The Prime Ministers discussed the question of disarmament
and arms control, particularly the problem of nuclear disarmament.
They reaffirmed the need for urgent measures ' towards a comprehensive
world-wide agreement to end all nuclear weapons tests
as a necessary step towards complete and general disarmament 
2.
under effective international control. They expressed
support for the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the
hope that countries which have not yet ratified this would
do so in the near future.
The Prime Minister of Australia expressed the deep interest
with which his country followed developments in the non-aligned
movement and his Government's interest in establishing close
relations with it. The Prime Minister of Peru welcomed this
interest which his Government viewed with sympathy.
In the bilateral field they exchanged valuable assessments
and information on broad political, economic and commercial
issues. These exchanges revealed a similar progressive
approach based on rejection of any threats to their people's
freedom of choice and sovereignty over their natural resources
including Maritime resources.
The Peruvian Prime Minister noted with considerable interest
the information provided by his distinguished counterpart
on the general situation in Australia.
He welcomed the domestic measures being implemented by a
friendly nation to further its development as well as its
important initiatives in the sphere of international economic
relations. In turn the Australian Prime Minister received . iith interest
an account of the Peruvian situation, the profound changes
in the political, economic, social and cultural fieldM and
the significant progress already achieved for the benefit
of the Peruvian people. These developments underlined the
importance attached to the Velasco doctrine in promoting
the development of Latin American countries by devoting the
greatest means possible to their progress, and also in
assisting efforts towards world disarmament and universal
peace. The Prime Ministers agreed to establish a mixed Intergovernmental
Commiss-ion for economic cooperation, which will have
the object of examining economic relations and of entering
into basic agreements for cooperation in the commercial,
financial, maritime transport and technical and scientific
cooperation fields.
The Prime Minister of Australia invited the Prime Minister
of Peru to pay an official visit to Australia. The Prime
Minister accepted the invitation with pleasure. A date
for the visit will be fixed in consultation between the
two Governments." A-e. 
3.
3h short we are laying the basis for a happy,
secure life in the peacetime forces of our country.
As one who spent four years in the services I know how
important that is. And with the other reforms we have
made, and the equipment programs under way, I have no
doubt-that Australia is in a better position than she
has ever been to meet any military threat or military
obligation in the foreseeable future. 
S ALTERATIONS TO THE JOINT COMMUNIQUE BY THE
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, MR E. G. WHITLAM, AND
THE PRIME MINISTER OF PERU, MAJOR GENERAL
FRANCISCO MORALES BERMUDEZ
i. In the tenth paragraph concerning the non-aligned
movement the last sentence reads:-
" The Prime Minister of Peru welcomed this interest
which his Government viewed with sympathy and
expressed his support for it."
2. This paragraph is immediately followed by another
which reads:-
" Both Prime Ministers condemned and rejected all
forms of colonialism, neo-colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination."
3. In the fifteenth paragraph, beginning " In turn the
Australian Prime Minister received with interest..."
the second sentence beginning " These developments..."
now reads:-
" These developments underline the importance
attached to the Valasco Doctrime in promoting the
development of Latin American countries by
limiting military expenditures which have warlike
and offensive purposes and by devoting the greatest
means possible to their national development." 



Embargo : Sunday 5 pm
PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 6
DEFENCE
Sunday 27 April 1975
Since the recent unhappy turn of events in Indo-China
the Opposition parties in Canberra have been rubbing their
hands in glee in the belief that they can capitalise on a
supposed weakness in Australia's defences. They have fostered
the myth the damaging myth that our defences are neglected
and run-down. Of course, where defence matters are concerned,
I don't suppose we should take much notice of the men who
bungled the Flil deal and got us disastrously involved in
the war in Vietnam. But it's important that their latest
accusations be promptly nailed. Here in Queensland there
are more major d ! fence bases and installations than in any
other State. Defence is a natural concern to you. The fact
is that Australia's defences are strong and vigorous. We
have highly trained, well-equipped professional forces
better peacetime forces than-ever before.
And the important thing to remember is that under a
Labor Government our defences have been maintained without
conscription. One of the first things we did was abolish
the detested and inefficient call-up of Australia's youth.
We can take it that the Opposition don't object to that
decision because they have sinice told us after some
prompting that they wouldn't reintroduce conscription
themselves. So let's look at the figures that really matterthe
volunteer forces, the professional servicemen who are
making service life their career. In December 1972, when
the previous Government went out, the volunteer strength of
the three services was 69,195. Today it is actually a little
higher 69,200. And the increase we have authorised in the
army strength will take it from 31,500 to 34,000 by the end
of next year the biggest peacetime army Australia has ever
had. Or look at it in money terms. In the last full year
of Liberal-Country Party government, Australia was spending
$ 1217 million a year-on defence. This financial year we'll
be spending almost $ 1800 million the equivalent of $ 5 million
a day. We're not wasting that money on unhappy young conscripts.
We're spending it on the arms, the equipment, the professional
training that will make our defences as good as those of any
comparable country.
The Opposition make much of the Government's supposed
belief that Australia faces no threat for 10 or 15 years.
No one has ever said that an attack on Australia is impossible. 
We have concluded, on the basis of the best advice available,
that such an attack is highly unlikely within 10 years or
more. That is the advice the previous Government received
* and it came from the same authorities who advise my own
Government on the strategic situation. That situation is
constantly under review, Of course there will always be
uncertainties from time to time. No one can guarantee
a period of full uninterrupted peace. But that's no reason
for believing that an external threat is imminent. To
assume that what is possible must be probable would mean
putting the country on a permanent war footing with all
that would mean for the economy and the welfare of our
people. We have to be quite realistic about this and
realism doesn't mean fearing the worst, or, as I sometimes
suspect, hoping for the worst. I have no time for those
who want to whip up panic, weaken the people's faith in
the strength of our forces and the morale of the forces
themselves. Our whole emphasis has been on efficient organisation,
modern equipment and well-paid professional servicemen.
One of our first actions was to amalgamate the separate
service departments into a. strong, combined Department of
Defence. Further reorganisation is still to come. We
have set about a major program of defence procurement.
Last year we announced plans for two new patrol frigates,
53 replacement tanks for the Army, long-range maritime
patrol aircraft and 45 new fire support vehicles. We are
ensuring that Australian industry has a fair participation
in our procurement of equipment from overseas. To date,
the total value of orders placed on Australian industry
under reciprocal purchasing arrangements exceeds $ 72. million.
We are not just buying hardware from abroad.
hb have many other plans for defence equipment and
the modernisation of defence facilities dockyards, naval
bases, training centres and the like. But, first and foremost,
we recognise the need for dedicated, well-paid, secure and
professionally-minded manpower. Only by making service life
attractive and rewarding will we develop the basis of a
sound defence effort. Sometimes I think that retirement
benefits for officers were made so attractive that too many
of them left the services to take advantage of them. -Nevertheless,
we have established a generous new defence force
retirement and death benefit scheme. There is a $ 1000 tax-free
bonus for re-engagements; wider eligibility for defence service
housing loans; a wider application of repatriation benefits;
approval for credit unions in the services; progressive upgrading
of married quarters and other living accommodation;
improved resettlement benefits. We have appointed an
ombudsman for the services whose job is to investigate
complaints of unfair treatment or miscarriage of justice. 
Ih short we are laying the basis for a happy,
secure life in the peacetime forces of our country.
As one who spent four years in the services I know how
important that is. And with the other reforms we have
made, and the equipment programs under way, I have no
doubt-that Australia is in a better position than she
has ever been to meet any military threat or military
obligation in the foreseeable future. 



+ 0Ss
-jj&gt; AUS) T KA L ItA
PRIME MOVOIST PRESS STATEMENT NiO. 503
April 1975
AUSTRALIAN INTERNATIONAL AWARDS SCHEME
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam. announced
today the intention of the Australian Government to
increase the number of Australian International Awards
( AIAS) for Commonwealth Carribean countries to
approximately ten each year. Nominations for awards
would generally be for short-term specialist and
post-graduate studies although undergraduate nominations
would be considered in special cases. The Australian
Government would wish to honor the priorities set by the
nominating Government on types of training. It will
consider and attempt placement in virtually any field
which can be defined as contributing to economic and
social development.
KINGSTON AND CANBERRA 



US r K AL AS
PRMP mol~ r PRESS STATEMENT NO. 502
April 1975
WEST INDIAN CRICKET AWARD
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that the Australian Government has decided to offer
a new trophy for cricketers in the West Indies.
The trophy will be known as the " Australian
Award for the Best West Indian Cricketer of the Year."
It will be awarded on the basis of
performances in the Intra-regional Shell Shield competition
on the basis of the recommendation of West Indian cricket
authorities. The trophy will be passed on from year to
year, but each winner will retain a minature of the trophy.
Mr Whitlam announced the new award when
he hosted a lunch for some Commonwealth Prime M~ inisters,
including several from the Caribbean, in Jamaica today.
KINGSTON AND CANBERRA 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE OPENING
OF COLIN GARLAND'S EXHIBITION OF PAINTINGS
KINGSTON, JAMAICA, 1 MAY 1975
1. NUMEROUS ARTISTS HAVE SOUGHT INSPIRATION IN BEAUTIFUL
ISLAND SURROUNDINGS. ONE THINKS OF GAUGUIN IN TAHITI,
OF DONALD FRIEND IN BALI. IN THE SAME COMIPANY,,
I TRUST, WE SHALL THINK( OF COLIN GARLAND IN JAMAICA.
2. HE IS NOT THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN ARTIST TO MhAKE HIS
NAMERAND ENHANCE HIS COUNTRY'IS NAME, ABROAD. NOLAN
AND BOYD ARE GOOD EXAMPLES. IT WAS WITH GUY MARTIN BOYD,
A MEMBER OF THAT CELEBRATED FAMILY, THAT GARLAND BEGAN
WORKING WITH CLAY AT THE AGE OF 14 IN SYDNEY.
THIS EXPERIENCE, AND HIS FORMAL TRAINING AT THE
EAST SYDNEY TECHNICAL COLLEGE, LAID THE BASIS OF
HIS CRAFTSMANSHIP.
3. WHEN HE WAS 22 HE CREATED THE TINTOOKIES A CELEBRATED
PUPPET FAMILY BELOVED BY THOUSANDS OF AUS-[ ZALIANS.
FIRE DESTROYED THE PUPPETS AND THEIR THEATRE FOUR
YEARS AGO. THE TINTOOKIES TOURED WIDELY IN ASIA
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF PETER SCRIVEN. THUS GARLAND'S
WORK IS FAMILIAR IN TWO REGIONS ASIA AND THE CARIBBEANREGIONS
OF GREAT IMPORTANCE IN THE COMMONWEALTH AND OF
GREAT IMPORTANCE To AUSTRALIA, No ONE HAS DONE MORE TO
DEVELOP THE CULTURAL TIES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND HER
FRIENDS AND NEIGHBOURS. 1 / 2 
HE FIRST CAME TO JAMAICA IN 1962, STAYED THREE YEARS
AND WENT TO LONDON, WHERE HE HELD EXHIBITIONS IN
1964 AND 1965. HE HELD AN EXHIBITION AT THE MACQUARIE
GALLERY IN SYDNEY IN 1966. THE PULL OF JAMAICA WAS
TOO STRONG, HOWEVER. GARLAND RETURNED AND HAS NOW
LIVED HERE FOR NINE YEARS, PAINTING AND TEACHING AT
THE JAMAICAN SCHOOL OF ART. HE WAS AWARDED A GRANT
BY THE WEST GERMAN GOVERNMENT 10 TOUR GERMAN ART
CENTRES, INCLUDING WEST BERLIN, AND IS GRATEFUL TO
THE PRESENT GERMAN AMBASSADOR TO JAMAICA, HIS EXCELLENCY
MR KURT SCHMIDT, FOR HELPING HIM SECURE THIS
OPPORTUNITY,
COLIN GARLAND LIVES A ROUSSEAU-LIKE LIFE-STYLE IN A
HOUSE HIGH IN YOUR BEAUTIFUL MOUNTAINS WHERE THE
DISTANT SEA, FLOATING CLOUDS, BIRDS AND ANIMALS ARE
HIS CONSTANT COMPANIONS. HE HAS IMMERSED HIMSELF
IN JAMAICAN LIFE AND HISTORY, SEVERAL OF HIS PAINTINGS
BEING CONNECTED WITH THE MORANT BAY REBELLION OF
1865. I BELIEVE YOU HAVE LIVING HERE IN JAMAICA A
CONSIDERABLE 20TH CENTURY ARTIST. I AM PROUD OF
HIS AUSTRALIAN HERITAGE AND AM DELIGHTED TO DECLARE
HIS EXHIBITION OPEN, 



PRM MINISTER' COFREC S'
Following-is the transcrip~ t of the Prim-Miister's pr-s
conference held in. Kingston oni 4 May 1975,
Prime Minister's Press Conference, Jamaica Sunday May 1975-
Ques tion: Is it true that you o proposed a Conow.] th Aid
scheme for Vietnam, as was reported in the local press here?
Prime Minister: No. I haventt been able to read the local press
over the weekend. 1 suppose the story would flow from the [ icet
that on Friday just before we broke up For the wecken-cv!
suggested that there should be a refference in the cOf. nuij.
the end of the conference, to int[-ernational siLuce r
reconcilialLon and reconstruction in Vietnam. It-Lwas abcutL
brief as that, I suggested that there ShOUl'J be somk e r~ e
Question: What is you reactionC esi Lion Prim(,! n sc~
Burnham of Guyana, which is; that if aCIL t. tk'f to-get. a.
redistribution of wealth towards the developing couin!. ry a* nd the
developing countries will be justified in setting ppo,-~'
only organisations to secure that change in the disrribution
world's wealth?
Prime Minister: Well son--. ofi you k now mfe and some of yon don, t.
Therefore for the former I will1 rcpeat For the ot. her-I wi. ll
state, that I do nor-answer questions wh-ich are prediLearted onl
somebody else's sumary of what somrre colleague miight. ha-ae said.
When we were discussing the general economic trade mnatters, the
discussion was started by Prime Minister Wilson and the second
speaker was Prime Minister Burnham. Prime Minister Buirnham suggte
that there should be an expert group set up to examine all features
of trade with the objective of sharing the world's wealth more~ / 2 
-2-
equitably. Over the weekend the officials advising the various
Heads of Government have got together and they have produced the
terms of reference for the group of wise men. And I suppose that
those terms of reference and maybe, the personnel in the group,
wil]. be announced before we disperse from Kingston. But Prime
Minister Burnham's basic suggestion was that there should be an
expert committee appointed by the Conference to advise the
Commonwealth Finance Ministers and also delegates from the
Commonwealth to the United Nations General Assembly later in . the
year. And that suggestion has been acted on.
Question: Can you give me your version of the reported friction
between. Australia and New Zealand over the question of nuclear
free zones for the South Pacific?
Prime Minister: The question of nuclear free zones has not been
mentioned in the Conference or, as far as I know, outside it.
I was told there was some reference to friction: there is no
basis for any such report.
Q,' estion: Can I ask your reaction to producer associations per
se, as against producer-consumer associations?
Prime Minister: Well the best thing would be to have producerconsumer
associations. Australia has been a member of such
associations for many years in the past in respect to
primary products. There have in recent years been several
produc. er associations in mineral resources. Australia is a member
of one, she is an observer at another and she is helping to found
a third. The best thing is to have both producers and consumers
in such associations. If, however, consumers will not join s.. ch
associations, producers should go ahead and form their own. It
is certainly one of the trends at the moment that there should be
such associations. One arose from the discussion at the last
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Ottawa the
International Bauxite Association.
Question: Prime Minister what would you reaction be to a
request by white Rhodesians to come to Australia, when they
finally realise that they had to leave their own country or the
country that they are in now? 
-3-
Prime Minister: This is entirely speculative. Australia like
all other members of the United Nations are bound by certain
resolutions of the United Nations. Australia has followed those,
and particularly since my Government came to office, it has followed
them very strictly.
Question: Would you tell us whether your view of world trade is
closer to that of Mr Burnham or Mr Wilson?
Prime Minister: This is far too simplistic a question. Mr Wilson
supported at the end of the debate on this subject Mr Burnham's
proposal that there should be an expert group. And from what I'm
told the British officials, as well as the other officials,
have co-operated in the terms of reference which ha. ve been drawn
up over this weekend. I know it's a fascinating thing to have a
confrontation between Britain and Guyana, it enthralls me I
haven't been able to sleep over the whole of the weekend as to the
outcome of such a confrontation. But these things never seem to be
quite as dramatic in the outcome:.
Question: While here in Kingston Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore, commenting on Australia accepting refugees from Vietnam,
said: " Maybe it was a fit of emotional spasm, a sense of guilt,
maybe some Aussie in a drunken moment may have left something
behind and therefore you feel you have atoned for it, but have you"?
Can I ask you whether that's arational assessment of Australia's
humanitarian efforts. Or alternatively do you regard the
remarks as highly offensive and insulting?
Prime Minister: Assuming you are correctly quoting what Mr Lee
Kuan Yew said, I presume he was inferring that Australian soldiers,
during their service in Vietnam, had left children behind. If
Australian soldiers have children in Vietnam, certainly the
Australian Government would help to bring those children to
Australia. I have not come across any application to bring any
Australian soldier's child to Australia. Perhaps I should add
that there have been quite a number of children brought from
Vietnam to Australia by the Australian Government about 300
of them and they were brought in these circumstances: where
the former South Vietnamese Government had certified that these
children were elegible for adoption and where the Australian
State Governments w, 1o have the constitutional responsibility / 4 
in such matters in Australia certified that there were suitable
parents waiting to adopt. So in those circumstances there has
been a reunion between about 300 eligible children and suitable
parents. My Government arranged some time last year that the
Australian Government would pay the passages of any children from
Vietnam who were coming for adoption in Australia. In this case,
of course, the children were brought in aircraft which belonged
to the Royal. Australian Air Force or were chartered by the Australian
Government. I conclude, I know of no case where an Australian
soldier's child has been nominated to come to Australia. Inquestionably
the Australian Government would have assisted in
bringing any such children to Australia.
Question: But was it done out of a sense of guilt, Prime Minister?
An emotional spasm as Mr Lee Kuan Yew has put it?
Prime Minister: I hesitate to comment on other people's news
conferences, because so often I find that a great deal is lost or
gained in transmission. I've stated the circumstances in which
children from Vietnam have been brought to Australia, and I
believe they are very proper circumstances. There was quite a
deal of agitation to bring many more children, but no greater
number of children could be found for whom the Vietnamese
Government was prepared to give a certificate that they were
available for adoption, or State Governments were prepared to gi'e
certificates that there were suitable parents.
Question: What about adult Vietnamese?
Prime Minister: The Australian Government said that adul. t Vietna imese
could come to Australia if they were the spouses of Australian
citizens or if they were the spouses of Vietnamese students who
were being given temporary permits to remain in Australia to
complete their courses of study. In addition decisions were made in
individual cases where there were Vietnamese adults, whose conduct
in association with Australians over the years would have
placed their lives in jeopardy.
Question: In other words they had to have a connection?
Prime Minister: Of course, yes. 
Question: Last week at the conference you were reported as saying
that multinational companies had too much influence and control.
I was wondering why you raised it at this conference and whether
you were seeking some Commonwea'lth initiative?
Prime Minister: I raised the same matter at the conference in
Ottawa where I was asked to initiate the discussion on trade
and ecc: nomic matters. I made a reference to this subject in
the same item this time. I wanted to make the point that
international trade was concerned with commodities certainly, but
it also depended on a very great number of other matters which
militated against the developing countries and in fact, against
what are regarded as developed countries such as Australia,
because international trade depends for its infrastructure on
credit facilities, insurance facilities, transport facilities,
and these are in the hands, very largely, of international,
multinational companies. Most of the countries in the Commonwealth,
certainly the developed countries in the Commonwealth, have
mixed economies, the private sector is predominant and its
companies very often usually in fact multinational companies
that provide the banking, the insurance and the transport
facilities for international trade. Accordingly to deal
with international trade in terms of commodities alone is
to deal with only part of international trade. It maybe that
commodities are the principle preoccupation of Britain among the
developed countries in the Commonwealth. But itwould be quite
absurd for a Head of Government from Canada or Australia or New
Zealand or Singapore, the other deve. oped countries i. n the
Commonwealth to overlook the aspects of international trade
which turn not on commodities, but on banking, insurance and
transport. I should add that I was concerned also, to see that
the discussion turned on increased processing of commodities in
the country of origin, because unquestionably a country's w,. a] th
depends very largely on the extent to which it is processing
commodities. The countries which produce commodities would be very
much wealthier, the gap between them and the developed countries
would be very much reduced, if they were able to process their
commodities to a greater extent. There again, international
companies provide so much of the wherewithal for processing.
They control, in mixed economies, such matters as technology and
capital. / 6 
-6-
Question: Could I ask you about the British membership of the
European Common Market,. bearing in mind that the British people
will be voting on the referendum in a month's i. ine. Would you
like to see Britain remain a member of the Market?
Prime Minister: Yes. I -said that a few months ago when I was
in Britain and when I was in most of the countries of the
European Economic Community. I said then that there was . no
advantage to Australia in Britain withdrawing from the Market.
I believe the same has been said by the Prime Minister of Canada
and the Prime Minister of New Zealand, in the Common Market
countries including Britain. During the discussion the four
days discussions so far of the Heads of Government Meeting here
there hasn't been a single suggestion that it would be to the
advantage of any of the members for Britain to withdraw from
EEC. There have been several statements that it would be to the
advantage of the members if Britain were to remain in the EEC.
Tribute was paid by several countries to the skill with which the
Wilson Government has renegotiated terms to the advantage of
developing Commonwealth countries. I hesitate to comment on a
matter which is primarily Britaints concern but since this matter
has arisen in the Heads of Government Meeting, since the matter
has been put to me when I have been in Britain, I suppose there
is no particular harm in me giving the same answer as T always have
given. There are many matters of political controversy in my
country and such is the neurosis of some people who were dragged
from the tart shop after 23 years in Government, that
there is any basis whatever for criticising my Government,
that basis will be exploited ad nausem. It is sufficient to
say that my views on Britain remaining in the Common Market haven't
produced a ripple of criticism in Australia. I wouldn't lose a
single vote in Australia by saying that Britain should remain in the
EEC. None of my opponents., none of my rivals, have seen any advantage
for them in saying that I should discourage Britain from staying in,.
I should encourage Britain to get out. This may come as some
surprise to you because it is true that throughout the sixties and
indeed there was an attempt in the seventies, by our opponents
the previous government to make it difficult for Britain to
join the Common Market. Britain is now in. Everybody accepts that
this is the proper thing and nobody thinks it would be to our
advantage and I suppose I am at least entitled to express that,
views on that question nobody believes that it would be to Australia's
advantage for Britain to get out of the Common Market. I
believe there are some people in the Briti'sh Labor Party who
feel that somehow the social democrat governments who are in / 7 
power in Australia, and New Zealand, and Singapore and virtually
in Canada, should somehow rally to the cause of getting Britain
out. The suggestion has been made to all of them. It has been made
for some months. None of them have responded to the
suggestion. Perhaps I could warm to the subject by saying, that
as a person whose ancestors all came from Britain three-quarters
from England and one-quarter from Scotland I don't relish the
thought that England might lapse into the position of Spain
-looking to a mighty empire in the past and a peripheral
influence for the future.
Question: Prime Minister can I revert to your previous question
on the Common Market. In view of what you have said Ministers
have in the past, without perhaps a lot of evidence been saying
in Britian that the entire Commonwealth supports Britain's
continued membership of the European Community. On the strength
of what you have heard here, from your colleagues and in the
Conference and outside it, would you say that they would be
justified in future in continuing to make that claim?
Prime Minister: That the Commonwealth supports Britain's
membership of the European Economic Community?
Question: Yes.
Prime Minister: I believe that would be a correct statement.
Certainly there has been no statement in the Conference which
would in any way cast doubt on that proposition. On the other hand
it would be quite wrong to say that most people have expressed
a view in favour of Britain remaining in. Most people haven't
spoken on this on the relevant items where this matL er would arise.
But everybody who has mentioned it has mentioned it in
two contexts that they believe that Britain should rema-i, in
the Market secondly, that the Wilson Government has been able
to make very beneficial changes as regards each country itself.
Question: But do you think on that second point that there is
likely to be anything in the communique to make that point?
Prime Minister: I don't know. I would certainly support any such
statement in the communique. I think it would be a relevant
feature in the communique and it would be an accurate statement. / 8 
Question: The fact that Britain has used her membership usefully
on behalf of members of the Commonwealth and their relationship
with the community?
Prime Minister: Yes, I believe that that would be an accurate
statement and I believe that it would be a relevant contribution
to the cormmunique. I don't think there can be any doubt that
of all the members of the European Economic Community, none is
in a better place than Britain to speak on behalf of the
developing countries. Britain certainly has a very great
deal of experience in these respects and I think Britain's
heart is in the right place in these matters.
Question: Mr Prime Minister could you explain why your Government
is not able to support New Zealand in its efforts to get a
nuclear free zone in the South Pacific?
Prime Minister: The matter hasn't arisen.
Question: But I thought it has arisen before, if not at this
Con ference?
Prime Minister: It hasn't arisen at this Conference and I'm
only concerning myself with matters at this Conference. I'm
sorry I can't help you to fabricate any confrontation across the
Tasman on this matter. You must be under terrific pressure
from home to substantiate these stories.
Quescion: My question was to explain why Australia does not
support New Zealand?
Prime Minister: The matter has not arisen.
Question: What are the implications for Australia's security of
the fall of Indo-China to the Communists? Do you feel that that
has been discussed enough at this meeting? And do you still feel
faith . in America as an ally for Australia's defence in that area?
Prime Minister: The matter has scarcely been mentioned in the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. The matters which are
given most attention at the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting are the matters which concern several members and
Vietnam has only directly involved Australia and New Zealand.
We were the only nations which participated in the civil war. / 9 
-9-
We did so for several years, but our participation was ended in
each case in December 1972. So you can't really expect that
the question would bulk largely at a Commonwealth Meeting. I
would hope that there would be some reference to reconciliation
and reconstruction in Vietnam because that is something in
which most of us could participate, and I believe, should participate.
You asked me about America's situation. America has been,
is, and will for many years, as far ahead as any of us can see,
continue to be the greatest military country in the world.
What I think we have to realise is that from now on, America's
commitments will require the support of the Administration
and the Congress. People in the past, particularly those adopting
the Westminster system, have found it very puzzling, that if a
Government commits itself to something.. the Parliament doesn't
support it. But of course, in the Aunerican system the President
and the Congress are elected separately and its not for the first
time you have the situation where they have different points
of view. Quite obviously Wilson and the League of Nations is
one that we all remember from our history. But if the President
and the Congress support a commitment then I have no reason whatever
to believe that that commitment would not be effective
in the circumstances which it contemplated. And as regards the
arrangements between Australia, New Zealand and the United States
the ANZUS arrangements I have never heard any President or any
Congressional leader express any doubts as to the validity and
the relevance of the arrangements. And I say in that positive
way because from 1967 onwards I have on visits to Washington
made a point of ascertaining the views of Congress as far as I
could, as well as the Administration. And therefore I can say
that from the last visit I made to Washington which was last
September, Republicans and Democrats, in each house of the Congress,
supported the ANZUS arrangements. I will be seeing these
people as well as the President and the Vice-President next-
Wednesday and Thursday, and I would expect the same situation
to apply. I think we should avoid equating the situation in
South Vietnam with that in any other country in the region.
The reason why South Vietnam's Government failed was principally
two-fold. The first was that they never were prepared to test
public opinion. After the General Agreements in 1954 and after
the Paris Accords in 1973, in each case the South Vietnamese
Government refused to carry out the undertakings to have elections,
or to have a broader-based government. That is, they just
wouldn't budge on that aspect. And of course, they fell. 
And the other reason is their situation was seen by their own
citizens to depend on outside support, And no government can
have the respect or support of its population if it is
regarded as depending on outsiders. However the noble the
motives or however the might the resources of those outsiders,
no government has respect or retains support if it is seen to
depend on outsiders, That situation doesn't apply with any
other country in the region.
Question: Could you tell. us what your attitude would be to an
invasion by North Korea of South Korea?
Prime Minister: That is a hypothetical question.
Question: This Conference has spent almost two days discussing
Rhodesia. On Friday you had every bit of 15 minutes to deal
with a whole range of subjects namely, Vietnam, Papua New Guinea,
the future of Portuguese Timor, the power play in the Indian
Ocean. All matters of considerable importance to the peoples
of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. My question is this:
do you think that this Conference has spent so much time on Rhode La
that other matters of vital importance to the Commonwealth,
particularly in the Pacific and the Indian Ocean have been
virtually shut out' And while we are on the subject, do you
approve of long set speeches being given at this Conference?
Prime Minister: It is inevitable t.: La this Conference should have
spent a very great deal of time on Rhodesi. o, It was dealt with
early because some of those who wanted to take part in it,
had to leave this weekend. But it was inevitable that a very
great deal of time should be spent on Rhodesia because at
every Conference. throughout the 1960s and I think back in tha
very great deal of time was spent on Rhodesia. It is a matter
which concerns a very great number of Commnonwealth countries.
Obviously it concerns the African ones, bIut it is a matter upon
which most of the others feel very intensely indeed. Furthermore
this time there was a very great breakthrough in that since our
last Conference;-Portugal had decided to give up her empire. In
those circumstances I don't think we could have expected that
less time would be spent on Rhodesia Zimbabwe than was spent. ./ 11 
-11-
Now on Papua New Guinea and Timor, these were only passing
references I made. Obviously I would be expected to refer to
Papua New Guinea because the Chief Minister on Thursday sent me
a message asking that the Conference should accept Papua New
Guinea's membership of the Commonwealth when she gained independence,
which will be in a few months time, That was announced to the
Conference on Thursday-and the first business on Friday was
W. accept the proposition. Well natural]. y when I had a few
ninutes I think it was about 10 minutes at the end on
Friday to mention a few subjects which I thought ought to b6
dealt with in the communique I referred to this situation.
Every member of the Comonwealth has been a British colony with
two exceptions, there was Western Samoa and now there is Papua
New Guinea. So inevitably it is a matter which we should acknowledge.
that a colony and a trust territory of ours should be admitted.
Timor was only mentioned in the context of the Portuguese empire.
After all there are some bits of it, apart from Angola, Mozambique,
and Cabo Verde. I would hope later on that there would be some discussion
and that in the coinmuni-que there would be some reference
to the Indian Ocean because about half the Commonwealth countries
are island or littoral or hinterland States of the Indian Ocean.
And several of them have taken initiatives in international
bodies dealing with the Indian Ocean. I think it would be
appropriate for us to refer to them. And the other mater
which I think ought to be mentioned is some aspects of disamname. t
such as the comprehensive test ban treaty which is being
discussed, or this coming week the review conference on the
nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
Question: In the Rhodesia question, as you mentioned you are
going on to Wahsington and this Conference is much concerned
with pressure on Ian Smith of a practical kind. I'm sure
you will be taking up the chrome problem as part of the
sanctions tightening when you're in Washington. But looking at
the thing more broadly, I wonder if you could tell us why either
Australia or other countries remote from Rhodesia should be
concerned with the problem at this summit. I mean in what
sense does it drive you to try to get a formula, why bother
it certainly would be easier politically just not to worry. / 12 
-12-
Prime Minister: I agree with the unanimous Commonwealth view
on chrome. I wasn't proposing to raise it in Washington, its
not a matter which is of prime concern to Australia. There
will be very much more important matters for me to discuss in
Washington. Now you mention about Rhodesia, why should it take
up so much time and what are the political matters.
Rhodesia has concerned people not only in the Commonwealth, but
in the United Nations for quite some time. It's obviously not
a prime consideration so far as Australia is concerned.
Nevertheless Australia has got obligations under United Nations
resolutions. It's faithfully discharged those obligations,
As regards internal politics I don't say that one gains any
votes in Australia by supporting this question but by the same
token any votes that were going to be lost had been lost already.
And from what I see of the spokesman for Ian Smith in Australia
I would not expect or wish that they vote for us. . Externally
it is important, that Australia should be know! n to support
proper principles ' in this question. Australia cannot afford to
be in the si. uatio. n. in regards to South East Asia or the Indian
or Pacific Oceans that South Africa has got into in Africa.
There is no basis for Australia being put in that way, and nobody
should be under any impression that it is. So accordingly we
support the attitude which is universally expressed in the
Commonwealth and in the United Nations,
QuesLion Apart from what's happened about chrome and New Zealand
and the Tasm. an Sea. We recognise that history has been made
in Tndo-China in the past week and that you. know more than we
do that history has. been made and that you yourself have
described the United States as the greatest military power in the
world, has been forced to withdraw from that part of the world,
You yourself have boasted that Australia has made a tremendous
conLribution to the humanitarian aftermath of the Vietnam war,-
Do you not think that there is not a terrific political vacuum
there which you in Australia may be uniquely placed to fill.
Having talks as you do have with President Ford in the United
States in a few days time, do you see yourself as taking an
initiative here to bring the nations of that part of the world..
together to try to make political headway where there is a
terrific political vacuum? / 13 
Prime Minister: No I wasn't wanting to boast of the huge
humanitarian contribution that we have made. All that I was
saying is that we have done more than others. 1. think there
is room for Australia to do more than she has and for others
to do more than they have. I am not thinking of taking any
particular initiative or being cast in any such role. But I do
believe that international organisations and various countries,
preferably through international organisations, ought to.
do something about reconciling and rehabilitating this country.
It is quite tragic that of all the old colonies in South East Asia
and in Southern Asia, Indo-China has had to wait so long for
independence. There was no earthly reason why South Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos should be in so much worse a position than say,
the Philippines, which was emancipated by the United States, I
think in ' 46, India and Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Burma which were
emancipated in ' 47, and Indonesia which was emancipated in ' 49
had to put up a bit of a struggle to do so, but it was then Malay-v
in ' 57 and then later on Sarawak, Sabah, Bangladesh with a
terrific t. raurna in the case of Bangladesh all were able to
get independence. But in Indo-China for nearly 30 years the
war has continued. And there is no reason whatever why the po. ' tion
of Indo-China should be worse than those of all the other
colonies. Now in those circumstances I believe there is a
very great international obligation to reconcile the people
and reconstruct the country. 



Embargo : Sunday_ 5 pm
PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST No. 7
CENTRALISM
Sunday 4 May 1975
I thought I'd talk to you about a subject that is
dear to the heart of the Queensland Premier Centralism.
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen has a regular obsession with centralism,
as we all know. Whenever he objects to something whether
it's a Labor idea or even something from the anti-Labor sidehe
cries " centralism". I don't mind people having bees in
their bonnet, but I think we're entitled to object when their
obsessions hold back the development of a State or interfere
with Government programs that the people have clearly endorsed.
As far as I can understand, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen means
by " icentralism" anything that the Australian Government tries
to do for the people of Queensland. He used to say Medibank
was centralism, but fortunately his Liberal Party colleagues
in the coalition saw the clear benefits of Medibank for their
State. He said our plans to make Townsville a growth centre
were centralism, that our plans to get down the price of land
were centralism, and he used this catchcry to deny Queenslanders
$ 50 million in Federal funds.
The fact is that the powers of the Australian Government
in relation to the States are defined in the Constitution.
If anyone thinks the National Government is overstepping the
mark they can challenge our action in the High Court. That
is the real defence against any centralist policies. In our
federal system the States, the Commonwealth and Local Government
all have a role to play. And we have to play it according to
the constitutional rules.
I have said that it's not just Labor Policies that
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen regards as centralist. He levelled the
same charge at Mr. Gorton when he was Prime Minister.
Mr. Gorton was convinced that oUi? off-shore mineral resources
were the responsibility of the National Government. He was
quite right. Anything that has to do with mineral exports
or overseas trade is a federal responsibility, and other
countries expect to negotiate with the Australian Government
in these matters rather than particular States. Mr. Gorton
got nowhere in his efforts to assert this very clear principle
and Queensland has continued to resist our own efforts to
legislate on off-shore sovereignty. Mr. Gorton had the
same trouble with the Great Barrier Reef. His attempts to
protect the Reef from oil drilling and other damage met
strong opposition from Mr. Bjelke-Petersen. The centralist
slogan was trotted out again. And it was used when Mr. Gorton
sought better tredtm~ rit for Qd.~ eris" I~ iid's Abdrilirids: 
2.
You will remember that the referendum in 1967 -which
was carried overwhelmingly in Queensland gave the Australian
Government clear authority to legislate for the welfare of
Aborigines and, if necessary, to override State laws.
Mr. Gorton sought an end to a number of discriminatory laws
on the statute book in Queensland. Mr. Ejelke-Petersen saw
this as centralism. It is taking a long time to remove
these laws. In the past few weeks my own Government has
introduced legislation in the National Parliament for this
very purpose. One of the great phobias of the Premier concerns
our efforts to make the High Court the final court of appeal
in this country and to end appeals from Australian courts to
the British Privy Council. It was the Holt Government back
in 1967, that stopped appeals to the Privy Council from the
High Court. We think it's time to stop appeals from the
Supreme Courts as well. After all, our Australian High
Court has a reputation second to none throughout the legal
kwortld: oits judgments are everywhere respected. How absurd
have a British Court, sitting in Britain, with judges
appointed in Britain by the British Government, sit in
judgment on Australian courts. Surely it's time surely
we're mature enough to accept that Australians should no
longer litigate their disputes before the Court of another
country. I give you other examples. In his holy war against
centralism, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen has opposed our plan for
an Australian honours system. Never mind that the old
imperial honours are made in the name of an empire that
doesn't exist. Never mind that the Queen herself has
approved the Order of Australia and will confer the awards
herself. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen thinks it's " centralism"
He doesn't want an Australian national anthem either that's
liIcentralist" too despite the fact that a vast majority of
Australians want an anthem of -their own. His silliest idea
of all was to have Her Majesty described as Queen of Queensland.
Imagine if every Canadian province or British county had a
separate monarch a Queen of Ontario, a Queen of Alberta,
a Queen of Lancashire. Where would it end?
It's strange, isn't it, that everything Mr. Bjelke-Petersen
calls centralist" is really pro-Australian, a mark of our true
nationhood and maturity? I wonder what he's really afraid of.
He constantly talks about the meanness and wickedness of
Canberra. The fact is that Queensland has received more in
assistance in hard cash from the present Labor Government
than it has received from any previous Government in history.
No amount of hedging or qualification, no talk of restrictions
or strings or the value of moneXy1 can alter the t?
p~ whxnggr erbust. In t, -I~ t -f4I~ 
3.
Not only does Queensland get much, much more than
she did from the Liberals in Canberra; she gets considerably
more per head of population than other States get now.
Queensland received more than $ 382 per head of population
in 1973-74 compared with $ 343 per head in average payments
to all States. Last year our grants for primary and
secondary education were up 145 per cent on the year before,
tertiary education was up 165 per cent, technical education
110 per cent, welfare housing 20 per cent, aboriginal
advancement nearly 30 per cent. Health and welfare, roads
and urban and regional development in Queensland are all
getting record amounts from my Government.
Next time you hear the Premier talk about centralism,
think of those facts of what the Australian Government
has done for Queensland, and the real help we have given
despite the Premier's obstruction. 



QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. ARTHUR GAVSHON, DIPLOMATIC EDITOR,
ASSOCIATED PRESS
1. In the aftermath of the American withdrawal from Indochina
there have been expressions of doubt about the credibility of
US security commitments. How do you foresee Australia's defence
requirements and the continued validity of the ANZUS and SEATO
treaty arrangements?
ANSWER: There has never been any question in Australia
of the validity of ANZUS. It is more than
years since it was signed and the friendship and
co-operation which underlie it had their origins
in World War Two. SEATO is a different matter,
it has very little political relevance or military
relevance. Australia's long term defence requirements
are based on an expert stragetic assessment which
is constantly under review. There is no likelihood
of any external threat to Australia's own security
in the foreseeable future. The Stability of the
region is more difficult to predict but on the
whole I am optomistic.
2. There has been some emphasis within the United States on
the need for American military aid to go primarily to those allied
nations which help themselves. In your view does Australia now
qualify completely with that requirement? And do you see any
merit in the suggestions of some authorities that Australia should
perhaps enter the nuclear weapons league by building tactical
weapons for the defence of your continent?
ANSWER: Australia has never received American military aid,
though, of course, we have been war time allies. The Australian
Government is resolutely opposed to the production of her
nuclear weapons and indeed, to the production or testing in any
environment of neclear weapons by any other country. We have
ratified the NPT and have constantly urged others to do likewise.
As I have pointed out this week it is regretable that only
17 of the 34 Commonwealth countries have ratified the NPT.
3. Your government has been portrayed as favouring a
" zone of peace" in the Indian Ocean but opposing a " nuclear-free
zone" in the Pacific. If this is a fair portrayal how do you
reconcile the seeming contradiction?
ANSWER: Certainly we have supported the Sri Lanka proposal
for a free zone in the Indian Ocean. The idea of
a nuclear free zone in the Pacific, while unexceptionable
in principle would be exceedingly difficult to implement. 
-2-
The Pacific covers a vast area and the number
of states, within it, or on its borders is very
large. At least one nation is still using it
for nuclear experiments. I might say, however
that Australia has vigorously opposed French
nuclear testing in the Pacific. I am happy that
France has now apparently decided to cease
atmospheric tests.
4. Soon you will be visiting President Ford and Secretary of
State Kissinger in Washington. How in this period of reappraisal
in the United States do you envisage the development of
Canberra-Washington relations?
ANSWER: I look forward to a period of much closer co-operation
and understanding. The American nation has just
come through one of its darkest and traumatic
experiences since the Civil War. The lifting
of that shadow will surely bring America closer
in spirt to her allies in the region.
Do you agree the balance of pwer in Asia now appears tilted
toward the Communist countries? As you see it are the Soviets
or the Chinese People's Republic the main beneficiaries?
ANSWER: After three decades of war I think the main
beneficiaries will be the Vietnamese people.
I don't think it is realistic to talk in simple
terms about the balance of power in Asia.
This is not a confrontation between China and
the Soviet Union, anymore than it was a confrontation
between world communism and western democracy.
It is largely because we saw the conflict in those
terms that the war raged so long at such terrible
cost.
6. Is Australia ready for trade and friendship with the four
regimes of Indochina as it has shown itself to be with the CPR?
And is your government ready to co-operate with those regimes in
the reconstruction of their war-damaged lands?
ANSWER: Certainly. We have made that clear since the signing
of the Paris agreement. As a belligerent nation
in South Vietnam, though admittedly under a previous
administration, Australia has a special obligation
to contribute to the task of reconstruction. 
1 0 -3-
7. Some of the nations of. South East Asia and the Pacific
are moving toward the extension of their zone of " peace, freedom
and neutrality" by hopefully bringing the Indochinese peoples
and Burma into it. Would Australia offer its political support
for such a project.
ANSWER: I think so. The details of this proposal are
still uncertain. But in general we are in
favour of such movements.
8. Do you anticipate the early reunion of North and South
Vietnam? And do you share the view of many authorities who
expect the Indochinese states, under Vietnamese leadership, to
concentrate on reconstruction rather than to expand their
influence and power?
ANSWER: Reunion would, we hope be a logical process.
How long it takes would depend on the governments
concerned. I would certainly expect the
Indochinese states to concentrate on reconstruction.
For the moment they have very little choice. 



4 ' PARTNERSHIP IN THE PACIFIC AFTER VIETNAM'
TEXT OF THE SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C., M. P.
TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, WASHINGTON
THURSDAY, 8th MAY, 1975
It is not quite two years since I last had the honour of addressing
this National Press Club. In that time, as practitioners of our
respective professions, we have all had to cope with tremendous
events and tremendous changes occurring with unexampled speed.
It was therefore with some little trepidation that I retrieved the
remarks I last made to you to see how they stood the test of time.
I find, however, that the very first point I made has been amply
confirmed in a way few of us could have guessed in July, 1973.
i said then that I was honoured to address representatives of the
world's greatest and most free press in the world's greatest and
most free democracy, and that the strength of each was the strength
of both. If this democracy had been less free the constitutional
upheaval of 1974 would not have occurred. If this democracy had
been less strong it could scarcely have survived so traumatic an
encounter. So in'cetn your invitation for a second time, I
again pay. tribute to the manifest and enduring strength of the
democracy of the United States, of which the press is so fundamental
a part.
In the wake of the remarkable events in Indo-China, all of usleaders
in my calling, commientators-in yours are in the process
of reassessing basic policies and relations. For the United States
in particular, this is bound to be a difficult and perhaps'a painful
process. In that reappraisal the last thing the Government or people
of the United States need are sermons and homilies from foreigners.
Certainly, you don't need them from an Australian. It is true that
I happen to lead a political party which strongly opposed the intervention
in Indo-China; It is also true that I am the Prime Minister
of a nation which for many years supported the intervention and
encouraged the escalation of the war. Whatever recriminations we
might have at home, it is no role for an Australian Prime Minister
to lecture the'United States.
It is, however, very necessary that we should prevent the creation
of new myths about what went wrong. And to do that it'is necessary
to look at past mistakes mistakes in which both countries shared.
The great danger is that in an atmosphere of deep emotion andrecrimination
engendered by the suddenness of events in Indo-China,
we should fasten upon explanations and self-justification and
over-simplifications , which would ensure a return to, a repetition of,
the great mistakes of the past. We have, in particular, to resist
the same sort of myths which developed after the revolution in China.
Those myths, those distortions of reality, perverted our relations
with China for more than a generation. They led directly to the
debacle in Indo-China. 
2.
We should have no truck with any new variation of the ' stab in
the back' theory that the war in Vietnam was lost not in Saigon
but here in Washington. The truth is that the United States did
not ' lose' Vietnam, anymore than she ' lost' China. Vietnam was
not America's to lose. What was defeated was not the United States
and her -allies but a policy of foreign intervention which was bound
to fail. There was no time in the past thirty years when such a
policy could have succeeded. The tragedy for us all, but above
all for the people of Indo-China, is that a policy so manifestly
doomed from the beginning should have been carried through for so
long. It was never true that the honour and prestige of the United States
and her allies were bound up with the survival of the Saigon regime,
any more than it was ever true that the honour, or prestige, or
security of the United States were bound up with the fate of
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-Shek.
When I spoke to you last I spoke of the ' second opportunity' we
had gained because of the moves towards reconciliation with China
and with the signing of the Paris Agreement in January, 1973. I
said :' For twenty years I have been appalled at the damage we of
the West have done to ourselves and to other peoples by our Western
ideological pre-occupations, particularly in South East Asia. We
are not going to be readily forgiven for throwing away the chance
we had for a sebtlement. in Indo-China in 1954 after Korea, after
Geneva. We have now been given a second chance. It must not be
thrown away.' Unfortunately my hopes, the hopes of the world, were
not fulfilled after January 1973. The gross breaches of the Paris
Agreements by both sides pol'itical breaches, military breache*
made it inevitable that the final settlement in Indo-China would
be reached by the arbitrament of war.
Yet in the wider sense that second opportunity, that second chance
of which I spoke, still remains, the question now is : What are to
be our relations and our conduct towards Vietnam whether there
be one Government of Vietnam or two? Are we to treat Vietnam
after 1975 as we treated China after 1949? Through fear or
frustration, because of our failure to impose the will'of the
West on Indo-China, are we to treat Vietnam as the new pariah,
the new untouchable among nations? No-one supposes that it is
going to be a simple or easy task to establish meaningful relations
with Vietnam,-a Viet nam emerging from thirty years of civil war
prolonged and deepened by foreign intervention. It is going to
be one of the most difficult tasks for statesmanship, for the countries
in Australia's region and for the United States.
Two hundred years ago on 22 March 1775 -Edmund Burke said
' Magnanimity in politics is not seldom the truest wi-dsom'. It
was his great speech on conciliation with the American colonies.
He was advising another mighty nation which was about to suffer
humiliation at the hands of another small band bf revolutionaries 
3.
-not because that nation was wicked or weak but because it was
committed to policies doomed to fail. Magnanimity in the face of
failure is much more difficult than magnanimity in victory. The
present prosperity of Western Germany and Japan attests America's
unparalleled magnanimity in victory. The other, more difficult,
response lies ahead in Indo-China.
This is very much a time for a realistic assessment of our
strengths and opportunities and for a good deal of confidence
in those strengths and opportunities. There are those who feel
that because American policy suffered a defeat in Vietnam, we
should be pessimistic about American policy elsewhere, and ignore
American achievements elsewhere. Dangerous and difficult as the
Middle East problem undoubtedly is, taxing as it is for Western
statesmanship, it should not blind us to the wider stability and
security achieved in the world during the past two decades. Who
would deny that the world is a safer place -today that it was in
the aftermath of World War II? Who would deny remem bering Berlin,
remembering Greece,, remembering Korea, remembering Cuba that the
threats to peace today are less menacing than those posed by the
critical flashpoints and monolithic confrontations of a decade or'
a generation ago? I hope we shall keep a sense, of perspective and
reality in these matters, keeping in mind the real progress we
have made towards a safer world, and not allow ourselves to be
panicked or dismayed by lesser problems than those we have surmounted.
before. In the specific matter of Vietnam, I am not going to be panicked
by an outcome achieved militarily in 1975 which might have come
about politically in 1954. I am intent upon reaching a modus vivendia
meaningful, constructive relationship with Vietnam in 1975, as
we would assuredly have had to do some time between 1954 and 1975,
and as with such needless and damaging delay we have done with China.
It is not, however, by focussing exclusively upon Vietnam or even
upon Indo-China that we can get the true perspective of our real
strengths and opportunities in the region Australia's opportunities,
or America's strengths. There can be no suggestion of wanting to
shrug off the events in Indo-China. On the contrary there are
great lessons to be learnt. Nonetheless, let's coolly assess both
the present and the future..
If we look at the Pacific Basin area what do we find? The most
developed and some of the strongest of the dozen or so most
significant nations upon or around the four Pacific continents
of Asia, Australia, North America and South America, are flourishing
democracies. The United States' most important friends in this
vast area, countries like Canada, Mexico, New ' Zealand, Australia
and above all, Japan, have never been stronger stronger in themselves,
stronger in their basic friendship twoards the United States. 
The Asean Nations Indonesia, The Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia,
Singapore are working closely and successfully together to
promote their common interests in a natural and viable regional
grouping. These countries happen to be those cast by the theorists
in the role of the dominoes. Not one of them will give any thanks
fok being cast in such a role. Each of them will work in its own
way to accommodate itself to the new political realities in South
East Asia. Each recognises that it is primarily its own internal
strength and resilience which will safeguard it against external
threats. Each recognises that the prime guarantee of national
integrity and security lies in developing the forms of Government
best suited to itself and ensuring that Government is in tune with
national needs and popular aspirations.
There is a further cause for confidence. On the Pacific side of
the Asian region, Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand, Australia,
Fiji, Western Samoa and Tonga, and on'the Indian Ocean side,
India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, are all members of the Commonwealth
of Nations. I have been meeting their leaders in Jamaica this
week. In this rema rkable association of nations not one Head of
Government ' is Communist,. yet not one Head of Government was plunged
into despair because of the events in Indo-China. In our communique
issued on Tuesday the nations of the Commonwealth 34 of them, said
this :' Heads of Government welcomed the end of the prolonged conflict
in Indo-China, urged countries in a position to do so to contribute
to international assistance for the urgent tasks of rehabilitation
and reconstruction and looked forward to the new. Governments of the
region playing their full part in the Community of Nations.' No
panic here, no desperation. Yet, as I point out, many nations of
the Commonwealth are the very nations who are supposed to be the
likely victims of the falling dominoes. The truth is that all of
us have great problems of one kifid or another yet each of us is
basically confident of surmounting those problems in our * own way.
Nor was there throughout our meeting in Jamaica any disposition to
knock the United States, to recriminate against her or to suggest
that the United States will not be a good ally or a trustworthy
friend. Indeed, with the war in Vietnam over, many nations and
Australia is one will have even greater confidence in America as
an ally, for we know that American resolve, American capacity,
American resources will no longer be weakened or dissipated in a
fruitless cause.
President Ford was entirely justified in remarking* two weeks ago',
that because the United States' policy had not succeeded everywhere
it should not be. assumed it had succeeded nowhere. The policy
failed in Indo-China betcause it was foredoomed to failure. The
policy succeeded in Japan and in Europe because it had the necessary
ingredients of success a realistic appreciation of America's own
interests of the people of Japan and Western Europe. It failed
in Indo-China because the policy there was based neither on
America's true interests nor on anything that was possible or
relevant as far as the interests or aspirations of the peoples of
Indo-China were concerned. But the great aims of American policy
can now continue undiminished and undeterred, free of the impediments
and distractions and distortions of Indo-China. 
4 The great thrust of that policy rests upon the detente with
the Soviet Union and with associating China in a wider detente.
Nothing that has happened in Indo-China would warrant the United
States being deflected from that great goal. For the essential
mteaning of detente is simply the prevention of world war, or
world nuglear war. It is precisely because this is the highest
risk that mankind has ever faced the destruction of civilisation
itself--that this is the highest goal a nation could ever set
for itself.
I view with concern and contempt efforts made by some in countries
like Australia and the United States to downgrade or denigrate
the efforts being made towards detente. No one asserts that the
present partial detente really solves the great question of
preserving world peace. But to go back now, to retreat from the
Agreements And undertakings already reached, however slight,
however tentative, is to retreat towards ultimate disaster. I
do not assert that detente as it now exists is complete. But I
do assert that-it must be made complete if any of us are to surviye.
We can begin by efhsuring that regions of the world still largely
untouched.-by great power rivalry continue to remain free of it.
In that connection, Australia has lent her voice to the maintenance
of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. All of us who support such
proposals, all of us who support detente, know that the difficulties
in the way of achieving detente are daunting indeed. But certainly,
upon our success or failure turns the future of mankind. And it
is because of this that the United States remains the true leader
of the world and, as much as she used to be, ' the last, best hope
of the world'. For it is to the United States that the West chiefly
looks for meaningful leadership in that direction, If detente is
to succeed, it will continue to require American initiatives,
American courage, American leadership.
For many years to come, people like us, America ns, Australians,
politicians, journalists, will be examining in arguments, in
articles, in speeches, in books what happened in Indo-China. This
is as it should be. For so great a disaster, so great a mistake,
such great suffering, cannot be easily dismissed or even forgotten.
Ile shall all have to live with it for the rest of our lives. Yet
even so, we have to go on to the future. In the two years since
I last spoke to you America has undergone a vast domestic, as
well as a vast international, catharsis. With those profound traumas
behind you, with their bitterness and misery being purged away,
what better time to profit by experience and build on the true
strengths of American democracy and American idealism? Here is
an opportunity not-just for America but for all of us to end
our long preoccupation with military alignments in Asia, our
ideological confrontations, our cold war hangups, and open a new
chapter in Western co-operation. Let-* the deeper issues of poverty,
overpopulation and mal-distribution of the world's wealth assume
their proper importance in our hearts and minds. These are the
real problems of Asia. These are ' the real problems of the world.
These, I trust, will be the real concerns of the United States.
With your great tradition of moral leadership, your unexampled
generosity, your vision, your energy, your sheer'zest for
accomplishment, you will find new inspiration in this taska
task in which Australia will be a ready and a willing partner.
S C 0 r; 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO
THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB on 8TH MAY, 1975
. Mr. William Broom, President, National Press Club: Our first
question, Mr. Prime Minister. We want to know about your talks
with our President Ford. Did you discuss with President Ford
a program for Vietnamese reconstruction? From your talks with
Congressional leaders in our Congress, did you detect strong
unwillingness to fund Vietnamese reconstruction?
Prime Minister: I think it would have been gracious to add that
also at the top table among the expatriates and the visitors. and
the authors is the Deputy Secretary of State and Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for the part of the region from which I come.
There was some exchange of views between the President and me
on these subjects but not lengthy ones. I can appreciate the
difficulties there are at this stage in asking the American
people to accept greater financial burdens in reconstructing and
re-habilitating Vietnam. I stated the Australian Government's
attitude that was my business and I said that in the Australian
Government's budget for the-financial year which ends this June
there had been provision made for reconstruction and re-habilitation
in both South and North Vietnam and that I had no doubt there would
be provision in the budget which we will be bringing in in August
to continue, and in fact to increase, that provision, and preferably
we would want reconstruction and re-habilitation to take place
through international organisations. Where they have been available,
the Australian Government has . made contributions to them, not only
in the budget but again in the last two months.
Mr. Broom In what way can Australia and the United States
best help in reconstruction and re-habilitation in Vietnam?
Prime Minister Well, I believe in all these matters one has
to consider what are the views of the people of the country itself
and preferably, as I said earlier, these should be ascertained
through international organisations. There may well be some
reluctance, some hesitation, some inhibitions, in the new
Government in South Vietnam, or the Government in North Vietnam
or the Government in Cambodia having relations with the Australian
Government for that matter, or with many other Governments. But
through international bodies, one would hope that there could be
some such consultation. The areas where we have found in Australia
that it was easiest to make arrangements for re-habilitation was
in things like water supplies, hospital facilities and public
facilities of that character, that is material things which were
lacking to a very great extent and in fact had been very largely
destroyed. These are things which are of a non-ideological
character, they are obviously needed and there are obviously
matters in these fields where developed countries, like Australia
and the United States, can and I believe should assist. 
Mr. Broom: Many in our audience wonder what Australia's
policy will be towards Vietnamese refugees. Will Australia
honour its signature to the 1951 United Nations Refugee
Treaty and admit them?
Prime Minister And also to the 1967 protocol. We have
already, some days ago, approached the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to suggest that he should coordinate
an international program to re-settle those Vietnamese who
have fled from their country. It -i somewhat unfortunate
that in the region itself there are very few countries which
have signed the ' 51 convention and the ' 67 protocol. They
include Australia and New Zealand and Fiji, Canada, some
countries which still have colonial responsibilities in the
area, like Britain and France, and I don't believe such
significant countries as the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand
or Japan.
Mr. Broom: Another question: We wonder how you assess future
policies in South Asia and South East Asia of the Communist
powers, the Soviet Union, China and the new Communist States
of Indo China. Do you foresee any attempt to exploit the
current power vacuum in that region and do you see any dangers
ahead? Prime Minister I am not quite sure . hat is intended by a
power vacuum. What has changed, I suppose, is that over the
last two years or more there-has been a withdrawal or expulsion
of American power on the mainland. American power, of course,
in the air. and on the sea is immense, the greatest in the world
and mobile. But I believe that in using the word ' Communist'
we have to realise that there is no monolithic ideology or
action by Governments which are totally Communist or predominantly-
Communist. We have realised for the last fifteen. years that the
Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China, while both competing
for the crown of being orthodox Communist Governments, would be
in very great disagreement on the Communist ideology or the action
which it entails or requires. Now, by the same token, I have no
less doubt that the principal occupation of any Communist Government
around the world, like any other Government around the world, is
and must be what it conceives to be the interests of its nation,
its own nation. That is, a Communist Government does not cease
to be a nationally oriented Government. That is clearly the
intention, the practice of the Soviet Government, of the Government
of the Peoples Republic of China, and I would guess that it will
be the attitude of the new Cambodian. Government and of the Government
or Governments in Vietnam. It would be, I should imagine, completely
unlikely that they would all concert some program in the region.
They will be looking after what each of them concedes to be the
interests of its own nation. And the Vietnamese Government, or
Governments, will have their time very fully occupied in reconstruction,
rehabilitation and quite probably reconciliation. 
Mr. Broom President Ford, earlier this week, proclaimed that
the United States would reaffirm closer ties with the anti-
Communist Governments of South Korea and Taiwan. Is building
an anti-Communist alliance a viable policy in the light of
recent changes in Asia?
Prime Minister As I understand the President as having said,
and if I understand his attitude after our conversation yesterday,
he has resolved to fulfil the obligations of his nation which it
has undertaken to other nations, and of course the United States
has undertaken obligations, bilateral obligations, to each of
the political entities that the questioner mentions. It is not
forming any new association or alliance, it is honouring
continuing obligations.
Mr. Broom Your country was the first to recognize the Khmer
Rouge Government after the fall of Phnom Penh. Will you protest
the atrocities of the new Government which are being revealed
today? Prime Minister We were not the first to recognize the new
Government in Phnom Penh. We were prompt in acknowledging it,
but quite obviously, to take one example that should be in the
minds of everyone, the French Government acted quite some time
before the Australian Government. We do not have any representatives
at the moment in Phnom Penh there are some difficulties of
communication with Phnom Penh or with the Head of State, who
is still resident in Peking. I have no knowledge, therefore,
officially or in any way directly there are no Australian
correspondents either in Phnom Penh as to what is going on
there. If there is any evidence which comes to us directly, of
course we will protest. That is, in the event of any atrocities,
of course we will protest about them. We have done that in all
the countries it has occurred to our knowledge since we came into
office. Mr. Broom Just one more question on events in your part of
the world. How do you believe the question of a nuclear free
zone for the Pacific will be resolved, keeping in mind that only
one of the ANZUS partners, New Zealand, supports it?
Prime Minister I understand that the proposal for a nuclear
free zone in the Pacific, that is an extension westward of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, might be proposed by New Zealand for the
agenda of this year's United Nations. It might come up in the
form of discussing the proposal. Now all I would say, my own
Government's attitude, is that we place priority on achieving
Treaties in the nuclear field to which the nuclear power will
subscribe. That is, we believe the first obligation for the
nations is to secure the support of the United States, the Soviet
Union, Britain, China, France, to these various Treaties. And
we have done what we can to persuade other nations to ' sign and
to ratify such Treaties, in particular, I suppose, the Nuclear 
Non Proliferation Treaty. When my Government came in, it very
promptly ratified that Treaty and it was encouraging to us
that about a week ago West Germany and Italy and the three
Benelux countries also signed it as well. We would hope that
Japan will do so. We are disappointed that Indonesia has not
done so and that India has not done so, but this is the priority
that my Government fixes in matters of disarmament. We want
Treaties of restraint to which the nuclear powers will subscribe.
Mr. Broom Now that the United States Congress has approved
indemnity, will you approve the use of Australia's ports by
United States nuclear warships?
Prime Minister The use of Australian ports by nuclear powered
naval vessels was suspended by the previous Australian Government.
It applied to United States and British naval vessels. It has
been considered quite . recently again, and in particular, in the
light of the fact that the Congress has now approved in effect
a total indemnity against any adverse effects of the operation
of nuclear powered vessels in Australian waters, in any host
country. There is another matter which I imagine will next be.
considered in Australia and that is the environmental aspects
which are very largely a responsibility of the State Governments
in Australia. We adopted a Federal system from the United States,
we imposed it on a British parliamentary system, but it is in a
more rudimentary form. So therefore, while in the United States
you are used to the co-mingling of powers, so that if any area,
such as a port, there are State responsibilities and Federal
responsibilities, the Federal ones prevail. In Australia, this
is not yet so clear. It is a point of view which I would very
much support myself. The Australian naval ports all happen to
be very considerable maritime centres. The biggest naval base
in Australia, for instance is in the harbour of Sydney, and
obviously the State Government would have to be concerned there
because the safeguard arrangements are in the hands of the State
authorities. Mr. Broom We have a lot of questions about your country. How
things are going there, you know it is a long way away from us
and not too many of us get there. One person wants to know how
is the Opera House doing? Do you have any more architecture of
that sort going up?
Prime Minister Fabulously. I hope so.
Mr. Broom And what are Australia's plans for developing a
uranium enrichment industry?
Prime Minister Australia does not have the knowhow nor, I
guess, the capital to develop a uranium enrichment industry. 
We have undertaken jointly with Japan a feasibility study to
see whether we can get the capital and knowhow to estbalish
such an industry. We have some preliminary negotiations in this
respect twith the competing European systems, the one developed
by West Germany, the Netherlands and Britain, and the other
one being developed by France and Italy, and I think Iran is
involved in that also. You might not all realise that Australia
seems to have about one fifth of the known reserves of uranium
in the, shall I say, the West.
Mr. Broom Do you think that might give an OPEC type power
to Australia in the nuclear age?
Prime Minister If consumers are reasonable, no. Let's face
it. The consumers so exploited the employee class and the
colonial economies that they provoked organised retaliation.
What my country prefers is arrangements between producers and
consumers. In respect of renewable resources, crops, we have
followed that policy for decades. We would still like to follow
it. We regret that other countries no longer seem to wish to do
so. In respect of non-renewable resources, minerals, then
Australia has been driven into the situation of considering her
interests in association with other countries which have similar
interests and those associations in which the Australian Government
participated, or in which it is contemplating participating, have
in general been accepted as reasonable by countries, administrations,
like the United States.
Mr. Broom Several questions about food, of which your country
is a great producer. What are your views on world grain stockpiling
to prevent a shortage? Do you fear retaliation from world beef
importers or exporters because of Australia's beef sales during
this time of surplus? What are you doing and what will you do
to aid your ailing livestock industry?
Prime Minister Well, we wish that we could make more beef sales,
and I hope you won't think it begrudging of me if I say that the
United States has somewhat disappointed us in this respect. I
won't say surprised, I will say disappointed. Australia is one
of the few countries which exports beef. There are very few.
After all, most of the world's population doesn't eat meat.
Very few countries indeed can afford to import meat and those
that can are those with which Australia has many associations,
Western Europe, Japan and the United States, and Australia has
supplied all of those markets. Last year, Japan, without any
warning, stopped buying meat. The European Economic Community
without any warning stopped buying meat and America reduced
purchases of meat, and that of course very greatly harmed our
meat industry, our cattle industry. We have certain advantages
of area and climate which make for economies in meat productions.
In those circumstances, we resent the fact that the few customers
that there are in the world, the ones upon which we felt we were
entitled to depend, completely ( most of them) cut off purchases
of meat from Australia. In those circumstances, it is not
surprising there has been a very great depression in some areas 
in Australia and I believe that consumers ought to bear this
in mind. If they want cheap meat, regular supplies of it,
they must be regular purchasers because it obviously takes
some time to produce beasts to the stage where they are to
be killed and so on. Now, as regards wheat and other grains,
Australia is one of the few countries which produces a surplus.
Canada and the United States would be the other significant
ones. By contrast to meat, wheat and grains in general] are
things that everybody in the world consumes and always have
and it is easily transported and easily stored and wherever
there is a drought or a natural disaster in the world the thing
which is easiest to provide to alleviate it is wheat or other
grains. We now find in Australia, and no doubt Canada and
the United States find it as well, that the developing countries,
those that have a population increasing more rapidly than resources,
that they are very happy for us to provide wheat on favourable
terms, credit terms, and so on, which in effect mean gifts.
Now other developed countries, ones which do not have the
productivity of the United States and Canada and Australia, are
very happy to provide. favourable credit terms to developing
countries for the purchase of manufactured goods. Developing
countries do not need them and do not even want them. But we
can never seem to come to some arrangements where developed
countries, such as West Germany or Japan, who can well afford
to help alleviate the conditions in developing countries or to
overcome natural disasters, they don't seem very keen to provide
credit to the United States or to Canada, or Australia, to provide
their surplus stocks. I should . point out that, while Australia
is a developed country in the normal context of its economic
pattern, its production, its investment, its employment is
overwhelmingly i. n the manufacturing field, secondary industry,
yet our overseas trade is still in the pattern of our neighbours
or of other developing countries. We depend on the income we
get for non-renewab. le assets like minerals or renewable assets
like crops, or to a certain extent meat, and in those circumstances
we just cannot afford to be unilaterally benevolent to the rest
of the world. Developed countries ought to get together more
in this respect. Australia has had a very bad deal from Western
Europe and Japan. It has not had too good a deal from the United
States as regards meat and, similarly, here we can ally ourselves
with the United States. The rest of the developed world does
not make it easy for us to use our agricultural productivity
for the benefit of people who suffer natural disasters or whose
human rate of increase is outpacing the rate of increase of their
resources.
Mr. Broom To carry that discussion just one step further,
is there any prospect of an Australia/ New Zealand/ Canada/ United
States common market?
Prime Minister Very little I would think. I don't believe
that this is really what is needed in the Pacific. Inevitably
any such common market would be regarded as being for the benefit
of the manufacturing countries and would be regarded as being
to the disadvantage, certainly being no advantage to the developing
ones. What we have to realise is two things. That is developing 
countries want to see that the price they get for their exports
keeps pace with the price they have to pay for their imports
and secondly, that there is a steady increase in the processing
of their commodities wi. thin their own shores. After all, we
all know that the developed countries, the manufacturing countries,
are prosperous, not just because of the commodities they produce
but because of the processing they apply to those commodities.
Now the prosperity of developing countries is adversely affected
by the fact that they can't depend on the price they get for
their commodities and they find it extraordinarily difficult
to get the capital, the knowhow, to process a fair proportion
of those commodities themselves. And the Pacific, with the
exception of the countries you mentioned, is very much a developing
area. And the proper way to keep them happy is to make it plain
to them so that it is visible and palpable to their populations,
that conditions are getting better and during their lifetimes
they will be getting better still. And that is not achieved,
I suggest, by just having another rich man's club in the Pacific.
That is having a common market. That is how it would be regarded.
For Australia and New Zealand, Canada and the United States, add
in Japan if you like, were to form a common market, then there
is no doubt that the rest of the Pacific would think that we
were out to take advantage of them. And also I would have to
be quite plain with you. There are a very great number of people
in Australia, and still more in New Zealand, who would think that
such a common market was to the advantage of those companies
which are domiciled in the United States.
Mr. Broom What has been Australia's experience with the TFX
or Fill fighter airplane? Did you approve the purchase of that
plane? Prime Minister We are taking good care of them and Australia
has the most formidable air force for thousands of miles around.
There is nobody who could approach Australia with hostile intent
by sea or air. My party when in Opposition was extremely dubious
about the acquisition of the Fill, the TFX, and there was good
reason for it because we found out that a contract had been made
without lawyers'advice on our part. Whatever you say about lawyers,
it is at least prudent to have their advice when you are signing
a contract for some hundreds of millions of dollars and our
predecessors did not take that elementary precaution. The
Prime Ministers at the time were all lawyers but they left it
to people in the Department of Defence, including a Minister
-who had been a pharmacist, to sign the contract. Well, there
happened to be some flaws in the contract and it took about
ten years to get the aircraft. I suppose one would have doubts
whether it was necessary to have such sophisticated aircraft in
our part of the world. It would seem that it is disproportionately
technical but nevertheless I have no doubt whatever that it is
a very effective aircraft and while it seems to be more than we
need to cope with anybody who is ever likely to approach Australia,
yet by the same token, there is no doubt that nobody could afford
to approach Australia with hostile intent. ' Cr I" 
8.
Mr. Broom What sort of retaliation does your Government
plan towards thlie United States if Harry Hopman becomes the
non-playing captain of the American Davis Cup teamn.
Prime Minister This is a sore point that you should bring
along the most distinguished of Australian expatriates to
your hospitable board with me here. We know that Hopman is
the best in the world and we don ' t mind sharing our best with
the United States. ~ 1_ 1_ 



D. P/ Z.
NQ DATE
22 8 9 May 1975
C~ i. O.. V1 -CONN-IUNIQUE
Meeting of ConLmonwealth Heads of Government, Kingston,
Jamica, April/ N', ay 19g75.
Final Communique.
1. Commonwealth Heads of Governm., ent met in Kingston from
29 AprilI to 6 F~ ay. All Commonwe. alth countries w,. ere represented
twenty-eig~ ht by their Presidents or Prime Minister,-. The 2ri me
Fiinjister of Jamaica was i~ n the Chair.
2 This was3 the firzit Hdeof Governmnet Moeting to be
hold, in the Coaribbeari. f] eads of Government expresSed their
gratitude to Commonwealth Caribbean Government-and in part icul'ar
to the iPri. e iNini. ster of Jawaica for the wa.. rm hospitali ty
provided by his Governmen t.
hoads of. Govornmenit Qxtoncd u cordial grec~ ting -to 1-ho
Prime. Pœ inistcr of GIronada whose country had. W becoimre a rn~ iinbc&gt;
the, C ommonwoo2. Ith nocthe proviouo rioctin,. Thaoy affirmn d thiat
a re( 3ueoi; from Papua Now GuAinoa for Commonwealth mrricbershar) on
the attlainment oil itvi indeipeldeofcC would be welcomed.
4.11Ilad of Government pt-id tribu-Ate, to the memory of -thli
lato NIormanx Iirc, Prime Minister of New ZcaJland, arnd recalle-I
with res~ poct Pnl affection hio deep ,: nd practical concern for
hirmaniit y a. nd hia outstanding personal contribution to the
d ovolopmont of the m.-od er Commonwelth.
11eads of Government reaffirmed the value they attch -to
thcse meetings and expressed satisfaction with the constructive
approach and mutual confidence of their deliber:-tions. They
notod with approval the incroasing use being made of Commonwealth
machincry to further the principles of the Coimnonwealth Dciaration
and to promote consultation, co-operation and collaborativa a
action across and within regions. S3uch consultation formed an
important part of the contribution Commonwealth countries mia,~ e
to the development of a new pattern of international relations
which takes account of the significant shifts in political and
economic power. heads of Government urged that the Commonwrealth
initiatives already taken to this end should be intensified so
as to promote peace and security, economic and social justice
and harmony among races. 
2.
6. The reduction of continuing unacceptable economic disparities,
the shifting balance of political and economic power, and
colonialism and racialism in Southern Africa, were the main preoccupations
of Heads of Government in their discussions.
7. Heads of Government recalled the statement in the
Declaration of Commonwealth principles: " We believe that the wide
disparities in wealth now existing between different sections of
mankind are too great to be tolerated", and pledged themselves to
do all in their power to promote a new and equitable economic order.
World and Commonwealth Trends
8. Heads of Government reviewed political developments in the
world which had occurred since they last met, in the light of the
varied interests and concerns of member countries. They acknowledged
the contribution of the spirit of detente to a measure of
relaxation in international tensions and called for its universal
application. They noted, however, that there were some crisis
areas in the world where peace and stability were not yet secured
and which were still subject to super power rivalary and interference.
They stressed that the maintenance of peace ans stability
could not be left to arrangements between the super powers but was
the responsibility to the entire international community. Heads of
Government laid particular emphasis on the opportunities for the
Commonwealth to make a constructive contribution to the problems of
Southern Afica and underlined the special responsibility of Commrronwealth
member countries to work together in the search for a
resolution of the situation in Rhodesia.
Disarmament 9. Heads of Government expressed their concern at the continued
testing and proliferation of nuclear weapons and reaffirmed
the need for urgent measures to facilitate a comurehensive ban on
all nuclear weapons tests as one essential step towards general and
complete disarmament under effective international control,
Cyprus Heads of Government, deeply concerned over the continuation
of the Cyprus crisis, expressed their solidarity with the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus and their determination to help in the
achievement of a political settlement based on the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic
of Cyprus. They reaffirmed their support for the General Assembly
Resolution 3212 ( XXIX) and Secruity Council's Resolutions 365 ( 1974)
and 367 ( 1975) and in particular they called for the speedy withdrawal
of all foreign armed forces from the Republic of Cyprus,
for the taking of urgent measures for the return of all the refugees
to their homes in safety'and for the continued efforts through the 
intercommunal talks to reach freely and mutually acceptable political
settlement. They note the spirit of goodwill with which the
Government of Cyprus approached the resumption of the intercommnunal
talks under the personal auspices and direction of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and expressed the hope that these
would be fruitful.
11. heads of Government, as a concrete expression of their
interest and concern for a fellow Commonwealth country, agreed to
establish a Committee consisting of representatives of the Governments
of Australia, Britain, Guyana, India, Kenya, Mal~ ta, Nigeria
and Zambia to meet with the Commonwealth Secretary-General as early
as possible, to follow developments concerning Cyprus, make recommendations
and assist in every possible way towards the early
implementation of the above-mentioned United b~ ations resolutions.
Viddle L~ ast
12. Heads of Government expressed concern at the renewed
danger of conflict in the Iliddle East. They re-emphasised the
need for the establishment of a durable peace in the area as a
matter of urgency and urged all parties to renew their efforts to
achieve this objective. To this end heads of Government affirmed
their support for the relevant United hations Resolutions on the
N'iddle. East and their belief that to ensure success it was necessary
that the authentic and legitimate representatives of the
Palestinian people participate in the forthcoming peace negotiations
in Geneva.
Indian Ocean
13. Noting that the Indian Ocean was a region of special
interest to a significant number of Commonwealth countries, heads
of Government re-affirmed the desirability of ensuring that it
remasin an area of peace and stabiity. Serious concern was
expressed abou~ t the increase in naval activity in the Indian Ocean Aron
the part of the great poweis and the establishment and expansion
there of military installations. heads of Government called
upon all nations, and particularly the great powers most directly
concerned, to work towards the implementation of the Resolutions
of the United Nations declaring the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.
South Asia
14. The Heads of Government noted that positive steps had
been taken in the process of norralisation among the countries of
the South Asian sub-continent. However, they expressed their grave
concern at the impediment to normalisation of relations posed by
certain outstanding problems resulting in the aggravation of
economic hardship and the retardation of the process of national
reconstruction in Bangladesh. These problems include the repatriation
of nationals and the sharing of assets. Heads of Government 
expressed the hope that the problems will be resolved expeditiously
and satisfactorily through discussions among the countries concerned
in the larger interest of peace and stability in the region
Indo-China Heads of Government welcomed the end of the prolonged war
in Indo-China, urged countries in a position to do so to contribute
to international assistance for the urgent tasks of rehabilitation
and reconstruction and looked forward to the new governments of the
region playing their full part in the community of nations.
The Caribbean
16. Heads of Government strongly reaffirmed the right of
people in each country to choose the form of government which they
considered best able to achieve their social, economic and political
goals. Belize Heads of Government offered their full support for the
aspirations of the people of Belize for early independence. Noting
that talks had recently been resumed with Guatemala, and bearing in
mind the special responsibilities of Britain as the administering
power, Heads of Government urged the parties to take all necessary
action for a speedy solution of the problem, which could be endorsed
by the international community through the United Nations, in
accordance with the principle of the self-determination of peoples
as enshrined in the charter of the United Nations.
Cuba Heads of Government expressed the hope that all countries
would now normalise their relations with Cuba and respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that state and the right
of its people to the government of their choice.
Southern Africa
17. Heads of Government had a thorough and constructive
discussion of the changing situation in Southern Africa and its
implications for the Commonwealth. They considered that the imminent
independence of Mozambique and Angola had radically altered the
blance of forces in the area and tributes were paid to the liberation
movements who had contributed so decisively to this result.
18. Heads of Government re-emphasized that the objective for
Rhodesia was independence on the basis of majority rule. They
welcomed the initiatives taken by the IHeads of Government of
Botawana, Tanzania and Zambia and the President of Frelimo to
achieve this objectibe by peaceful means if possible. The Heads of
Government, meeting informally, heard a statement by Bishop Muzorewa, 
President of the African National Council. The meeting noted that
the nationalist movement now united in the African National Council
was seeking with sincerity and determination the basis for an agreed
settlement. 19. Heads of Government reaffirmed their total support for
the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for independence on the basis
of majority rule and pledged to concert their efforts for the speedy
attainment of this objective. They took note of the determination
of the African freedom fighters, supported by African and other
states, to achieve their objective by peaceful means if possible
and recognised the inevitability of intensified armed struggle
should peaceful avenues be blocked by the racist and illegal regime.
The moral responsibilities in those circumstances would lie with
the minority government and those who had chosen to sustain it.
The meeting noted that South Africa continues to support
the rebel government by affording it the military and economic
assistance on which its survival depends and reaffirmed their view
that South Africa should fulfil its international obligations and
strictly apply the United Nations mandatory sanctions and withdraw
its forces from Rhodesia.
21. It was agreed that the prospects for a settlement would
be greatly enhanced by the strict enforcement of sanctions by the
international community as a whole. Heads of Government undertook
to bring this consideration to the attention of governments outside
the Commonwealth in renew. ed representations where a breach of
sanctions was known to have occurred. They also agreed to take
action at the international level for the reinforcement and extension
of sanctions.
22. In considering the recormmendations of the Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee, and authorising the Committee to continue its
work, Heads of Government emphasised the importance of taking
immediate practical steps to assist and independent Mozambique in
applying sanctions since the great bulk of Rhodesia's exports and
imports is dependent on IMozambioue's transit facilities. They were
unanimously in favour of providing immediate financial assistance
to the new government of 1ozambioue. They also endorsed the
recommendation that an initiative should be taken by Commonwealth
Governments at the United Nations to establish a program of assistance
for I:' ozambioue in terms of Articles 49 and 50 of the Charter.
23.. Heads of Government were deeply concerned that South Africa
continues to occupy Namibia illegally in total disregard to the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of June 1971,
and in defiance of world opinion. Reaffirming that the fragmentation
of Namibia was unacceptable, they recalled the obligation of
the international community to maintain the territorial integrity
of the territory and the right of its people to self-determination
and indepedence. 
24 The meeting looked forward to the time when the Government
and people of Namibia might be welcomed into the Commonwealth, if
that were their wish,
Heads of Government reaffirmed their total and unequivocal
condemnation of apartheid and all forms of racialism. They welcomed
the British Government's decision to comply strictly with the United
Nations embargo on the sale of arms to South Africa and to terminate
the Simonstown Agreement. They condemned the violation of the
embargo by those countries which continue to supply arms to South
Africa or enable them to be manufactured in that country. Noting
the alarming increase in South Africa's defence expenditure, I-eads
of Government express their concern that this military build-up was
bound to increase tension in an area already plagued by dangerous
conflict. Heads of Government also agreed to maintain and intensify
effective pressure on South Africa in the struggle for the elimination
of apartheid.
26. Heads of Government reiterated their support for humanitarian
assistance to the indigenous people of Southern Africa in their
efforts to achieve self-determination and independence. Several
Heads of Government described their contributions to various bilateral
and multilateral programs and indicated their intention to increase
such assistance. The meeting also noted with approval the development
of the special Commonwealth program for assisting the education
of Rhodesian Africans and indicated their desire to expand this
program to meet new and urgent needs. In particular, Heads of
Government recognised the importance of extending the variety of
education and training opportunities available to the people of
Zimbabwe, with special emphasis on technical and industrial training,
" in service" experience and administrative training It was
also agreed that Commonwealth multilateral assistance should be made
available to help in the developmental and training needs of the
people of Namibia,.
. CONOIC MATTEI S
27. Commonwealth Heads of Government recognised the need to
take immediate steps towards the creation of a rational and equitable
new international economic order. They reaffirmed the statement
included in the Commonwealth Declaration adopted in Singapore
in 1971 that " the wide discarities of wealth now existing between
different sections of mankind are too great to be tolerated.... our
aim is their progressive removal", and acknowledged the complexity,
range and inter-related nature of the issues involved. They agreed
that a small group of experts should be invited to draw up for
consideration by Commonwealth Governments, in the context of the
current international dialogue, a comprehensive and. inter-related
program of practic. l measures directed at closing the gap between
the rich and the poor countries. These measures would be designed
to promote development and to increase the transfer of real resources
to developing countries inter alia in the areas of production, 
distribution and exchange of primary and secondary products as
well as services. Heads of Government recognised the importance
in this context of co-operating to achieve an expanding world
economy and world trade.
28. The group of experts should be selected from the Commonwealth
on the basis of their personal capacities and their expert
knowledge of contemporary problems of international economic
development, and should be assembled in a way which would enable the
perspectives of different regions of the Commonwealth and different
national development strategies to be brought to bear on the
problems concerned.
29. The group of experts should address itself to the issues
and proposals elaborated in:
I. The Declaration and the program of action on the establishment
of a new international economic order as adopted by the United
Nations General Assembly: and
II. The relevant principles of the Commonwealth Declaration
adopted in Singapore in 1971, and:
IIT. The concepts and proposals advanced during the discussions
of the international economic situation at the Kingston Ileeting
heads of Government including the presentations by the Governments
of Guyana on behalf of the Caribbean and the Government of Britain.
In drawing up a program of practical measures the group
should pay particular attention to:
I, IMeasures to transfer real resources from developed to
developing countries through international co-operation in the
field of international trade in primary commodities with particular
reference to the integrated commodities program recommended by the
Secretary-General of UNCTAD, current proposals of buffer stocks,
S for indexation, and other relevant proposals, including the proposal
for a general agreement on commodities.
II. Measures which the international community can introduce
for assisting developing countries
To increa. se food production:
To promote rural development:
To promote economic co-operation among themselves at the
sub-regional, intra-regional and inter-regional levels:
and A review of existing organisations for industrial co-operation
and development.
To obtain greater control over, and benefits from, such
activities as shipping, insurance, banking and other
parts of the infrastructure for international trade and
development. 
III. Programs for industrial development involving new and
expanded forms of industrial co-operation, the enlargement of
employment opportunities in developing countries, and more favourable
access to the markets of developed countries:
IV. A review of existing organisations for industrial cooperation
and development:
V. Mechanisms for increasing the flow of long-term development
funds, the transfer of technology and the transfer of real
resources to developing countries: and
VI Reform and where necessary the restructuring of the
international institutions concerned with the management of
interrn-tional trade and finance, and whether means could be found
to increase the effective share of the developing countries in the
decision-making process of the major international financial
institutions. In all of the above matters due regard would be paid to
the special needs of the least developed, land-locked, the most
seriously affected, and islaid developing states with limited
natural resources
31, In drawing up its recommendations the group of experts
should consider the feasibility of utilising relevant concepts and
mechanisms embodied in recent economic co-operation agreements
between certain developed and developing countries.
52. The group of experts should consist of not more than ten
persons. 355 The members of the group should be appointed by the
Secretary-General after consultation with member governments.
54, The group should aim at submitting to governments an
interim report on the results of its work indicating measures which
are amenable to early and effective implementation in time to permit
discussion of this report at the next meeting of Commonwealth
Iiinisters and to enable governments to take this report into account
before the Seventh Special Session of the General Assembly.
It is expected that the group will endeavour to hold its
first meeting by the end of IMay or early in June.
36, It would be desirable that the Secretary-General elect
should be associated at as early a stage as possible with the work
of the group.
37. Heads of Government appointed Mr Alister Mclntyre,
Secretary-General of the Caribbean community, Chairman of the
Expert Group. 
Lome Convention
38. Heads of Government welcomed the conclusion of the Lome
Convention drawn up by the European Economic Community and fortysix
countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific. They
welcomed the increased co-operation within the Convention between
Commonwealth and non-Commonwealth countries in these areas. They
expressed the hope that the principles underlying the Lome Convention
could usefully contribute to the further development of relations
between the EEC and other industrialised countries, on the one hand,
and developing countries, including the Asian and other Commonwealth
countries, on the other.
39. Heads of Government welcomed the valuable support which
the Secretariat is giving to Commonwealth countries in the multilateral
trade negotiations.
Food Production and Rural Development
Heads of Government discussed the Report of the Commonwealth
Ninisterial Meeting on Food Production and Rural Development,
held in London in March 1975. They welcomed the opportunity it
had provided to consider in a Commonwealth setting the proble: ms
of the three auarters of the population of Commonwealth developing
countries who live in rural areas. Heads of Government endorsed
the view that the problems of rural development and food production
should be attacked in an integrated manner and should receive
high priority from individual governments and aid agencies. They
stressed the need for aid-providing agencies to adapt their practices
and programs to meet the special needs of food production and rural
cdevelopment, and endorsed the proposal to establish a food production
and rural development division within the Secretariat. The new
division would enhance the effectiveness of the Secretariat's
already significant contribution to this sector and should be
essentially action-oriented.
41. Heads of Government emphasised the setback to agricultural
production which has resulted from scarcity and high prices of
fertilizer, and welcomed efforts, in the Commonwealth and elsewhere,
to secure adequate supplied of fertilizer at reduced costs. They
also called for similar efforts with respect to farm machinery, feed
stuffs and other agricultural imputs.
Drou ht and Other NIatural Disaster
42. Heads of Government recognised the value of the Commno.-ealth
as a forum in which to consult and concert broad strategies for
action in the Sahelian Zone of Africa and in other natural disaster
are-as and endorsed the recommendation of the r; inisterial Meeting
on Food Production and lural Development that Commonwealth action
should supplement action taken by world bodies. 
Industrial Development Co-operation
43. In underlining the importance of increasing agricultural
production, Heads of Government stressed the parallel and related
need to accelerate the development of industry and endorsed the
expansion of industrial co-operation, particularly between Commonwealth
countries, In this context, they stressed the need for
measures to promote the processing of primary commodities in their
places of origin and the removal of barriers to trade in processed
primary commodities and other manufactured goods.
44. Heads of Government stressed their ccnern to ensure that
the activiti'es of multinational cororations conform with the
policies of host governments and their goals for an equitable
redistribution of wealth. They noted the work done on multinational
corporations by the Commonwealth Secretariat and by bodies in the
UN system. They agreed on the need for countries to build up their
capabilities to deal with multinational corporations.
Development Assistance
Heads of Government affirmed the need for all countries
with the capacity to do so, to maint. ain and, wherever possible,
increase the flow of development assistance to developing countries,
especially to the developing countries most seriously affected by
recent econolmic developments. They should also promote the rapid
industrialization of developing countries.
Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation
46.. Heads of Government reaffirmed their conviction that
mutual help and shared responsibility were essential elements in
Cormmonwealth co-operation. They expressed satisfaction at the
expansion of the Commonwealth Fund for technical co-operation in
the four years since its establishment, noted with approval its
flexibility and its capacity to respond quickly to the reguests of
member countries and commented favourably on its successful management.,
47. Recognising the need for the Fund's resources to keep pace
with the expanding requirements of Commonwealth governments, Heads
of Government noted with appreciation the steady growth in support
for the Fund and welcomed the substantially increased pledges made
by developed and developing member countries. They noted the
intention expressed by a number of governments to increase their
contribution and hoped that further increases would be forthcoming.
Commonweealth Investment Bank
48. Heads of Goverunent noted the studies organised by the
Secretary-General at the request of the 1974 MIeeting of Commonwealth
Finance Ministers, on the financial feasibility and the need for the
services of a Commonwealth investment bank along the lines proposed 
by a Commonwealth expert group. They concluded that a nuriber of
issues still reouired discussion bef-ore the proposal could be put
to governments ' or a final decis-) ion. They requested the Secretary-
Genera~ l to convene a comm-Ittee of Corr,,. onvealth officials to prepare
a detailed. and specific proposal., addressing itself to the unresolved
is., sues w-. hich must be faced. if such an institution is to be set up,
this committee shouild report to th~ e next mneeting of Cormonwealth
Fina~ nce linisters.
Comlmonwealth Scientific Co,: mittee
49.: 10t~ int; the cruota-f. ivpc mof ~ anf sd~~ tce ch'nology
in promnoting social and. econom-. ic development, Heads of G overnmerint
welcoTmed the proposal of the Commonwealth Scientific Committee
for an enlarged program of scientific and tecchnolog( ical co-operation
aogComm,-onwealth membr and f" or thne closer intefy. ratio:-of its
activities wlithin the Secretariut. They express: ed the viev! that
attention should be given to env ironmr ental aspects in the enlarged
progrr, am.
. Cc--iT,( nnw-ea3_ th Youth Progr-ar,
R( ecognisinig, that the popu) lations of' all CommR'onweaO,-3lth
ccuintries included a sijgnj iicant and increasing nwmbjer,. of' young
people w%, hose talents and potential ou(,-ht to be fully utilised in
meien gthe devel opmental ch) alleng-es of their c ommuntics and
niaticns, of overnm-ent noted w,. ith satisfaction the progre: s
vhiji ch inad been~ -made irn the,-Short 1; imo since the establishment of
thI e Coimm. onealth Youth ro-ram and agree that the program should
t Endd be1) cy o nd 197 6
1 eads of Government acknow-. ledged the concern. expressed
over the problems associated with the brain drain arid agreed that
there was an urgrent n'-, ed -for practical measures to reduce -these
difficulties being exocrienced. The specific proposal for the
es tabl ishmient of' a volunteer corps was considered and the Secretary-
General was asked to under tak1e a detailed study for the consideration
of' Cormonwealth governmentzi.
. ren in 1iiublIc Aif f a irs
h2 ilc recog-, nising that thero. was increasing participation
b~ y women in the nationa] affairs of rimany Cormmonwealth. countries,
Hasof' Governm. ent emphasized the need to focus greater: attention
on the right-s of' wom,-en to nsure the availability of opportunities
' or them to participate on a basis of full equality in the politi cal,
economajc andncultuzral. activit!-of their countries. As far
po,_-siblce existing and future Commonwcalth programns should take into
account the riceus ; nd a~ ispirations of women Lnd. genuaine efforts
-hou'ld be made to iurovide -for thei~ r full_ participation in nationalm
: i nternational. affairs, 
12.
Commonwealth Foundation
53. Heads of Government expressed appreciation of the achievements
and progress of the Commonwealth Foundation which they regarded
as having an important role to play in strengthening professional
co-operation throughout the Commonwealth and noted the increased
bugetary requirements for 1976/ 79.
Report of the Secretary-General
54. Heads of Government took note of the Fifth Report of the
3 ec re t ary-G( e n eral.
Election of Secretary-GCeneral
Heads of Government paid warm tribute to the Secretary-
General Mr Arnold Smith C. H. for his distinguished service to the
Commonwealth over the past ten years and elected Hionourable
Shridath Ramphal, Foreign Minister of Guyana, to succeed him.
Next Meeting
56. Heads of Government accepted with pleasure an invitation
by the United Kingdom Government to hold their next meeting in
London in mid-1977 at the time of the celebrations of the Silver
Jubil. ee of The Queen's accession as head of the Commonwealth. 



PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST-NO. 8
TRANSPORT
Sunday 11 May 1975
It's a sad fact that Brisbane has some of the worst
public transport in Australia. You all know what an ordeal
it can be getting to work, or home again or anywhere else
for that matter on overcrowded or dilapidated trains,
often running late into the bargain. Run-down old-fashioned
transport services are not just uncomfortable and slow; they
are uneconomic as well. More and more people are forced to
take their cars to work, and the number of passengers declines.
Transport losses increase, fares keep going up, and still
more people are discouraged from using the services. It's
a vicious circle, It's a problem faced in most of the world's
great cities, but with this difference: other-cities are doing
something about it. Brisbane is lagging behind.
When Labor camne in we.-gave a high priority to upgrading
urban transport services in our great cities. Of course we
can't do this without the ' cooperation of the States. We have
offered the Queensland Government almost $ 20 million over the
next three and a half years to electrify your suburban railways
and upgrade Brisbane transport services generally. No national
Government has ever made free grants for urban transport before.
The Bjelke-Petersen Governmentdithered and delayed for a long
time before accepting our proposals. As far back as 1957 the
Country Party in this State scrapped the previous Labop
Government's plans for suburban electrification. They did
nothing for 18 years until my Government's offer was made
last year. Some of you may remember the modern urban passenger
carriage we put on display in City Square a few months ago.
That's a sample of the comfortable, streamlined trains we
hope to see eventually on all Brisbane's suburban railways.
And it's not just in city transport that a Labor
Government is getting on with the job. Previou ' s Liberal
Governments in Canberra shirked one of the great development*
projects needed in Queensland a national highway linking
her coastal cities wiLth Brisbane and the southern States.
Labor has given the go-ahead for a high-grade all-weather
highway to link Cairns with Brisbane and eventuall' with
Sydney and Melbourne. Despite opposition obstruction we
have passed the necessary legislation to provide $ 1,126 million
for our national roads program over the next three years.
We are the first National Government in Australia to undertake
this essential program. No State. Government has had the
resources to do it alone. No previous Federal Government
cared enough to do it even though they had thq necessary
constitutional powers. We are using those powers. We are
getting on with the job. 
2.
lh are doing a lot for other roads as well. For
example, to improve Mt. Isa's links with the rest of
Queensland the Australian Government will help build
: the Landsborough Highway from Mt. Isa to Brisbane as a
full-scale all-weather road. This will be part of the
national highways program, so Mt. Isa will be linked in
due coburse by first-class roads to Melbourne and Sydney.
On top of that we will spend $ 24 million in
Queensland on northern beef roads over the next three
years. All of this means a first-class rural and intercity
road network for Queensland. It's worth recalling
that the Bjelke-Petersen Government in 1972 promised that
all Queensland State highways would be full bitumen roads
by 1975. Of course that won't happen. But with the help
of the Australian Labor Government Queensland's roads will
be among the best in Australia.
There are two other matters I want to mention in
the transport area. One is the new international terminal
we are building at Brisbane airport at cost of more than
$ 4 million. We expect it to.. be finished by the end of this
year. The other concerns the Australian National Line. We
want to see Queensland's coastal cities served by A. N. L.
ships. There is no reason in the world why Australia's own
shipping line shouldn't~ ply between the ports on Queensland's
coast. But Mr. Bjelke-Petersen won't let them. He insists
that A. N. L. ships should only sail between a Queensland port
and a port in another State. And he's alone among the Premiers
in preventing the A. N. L. providing services between ports in
Queensland. As a result we have the absurd situation of
foreign ships being chartered to carry bauxite from Weipa
to Gladstone -a job that Australian ships could do just as
well. I'm afraid Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's obstinacy hasn't
helped transport services in Queensland. I spoke earlier
of railways. When we came to office the Labor Government
offered to take over financial responsibility for all State
railways. These railways are a crippling burden on State
budgets and financing them puts a heavy strain on a State's
resources. There is no constitutional barrier to the
Australian Government taking over these services in fact
the Constitution specifically envisages such a possibility
in Section 51. We have just reached agreement with South
Australia which will relieve that State of the financial
burden of its non-metropolitan rail services. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen
has refused to discuss our offer. So whenever you hear
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen crying poor mouth, or complaining of a
lack of help from the Australian Government, remember the
opportunity he has turned down to boost his State revenues
and improve transport systems throughout Queensland. My
Government is doing everything in its power to help. It
will be a great pity if Queensland people have to put up
any longer with bad roads or run-down buses and trains because
their Premier won't cooperate with a National Labor Government. 



STATS,',, NT iiY L
Oa 1116 iL'LjiLi, ClGGa-1975
CA1B~~ cA, 11 kl; AY 1975
My overseasvisit achieved threepurposes, I was able to take
part in important discussions at -the Commonwalth Heads of Government
in_, otinL, Uo renew my personal contacts; wi-Lh1 President Ford,
and by visiting, Peru, * Lo establish for the iir., t time close
links betwecn Aus tral ia and a South American country.
Thiero can i) e no d'oubt oif Lhc Commorwaltli's :-rowin,
impoi Lance an intcrijaLional '. orum. Its weibui's represeni
a quarter of thle world'Is people. Thew tilks in Jamaica werei
the i: tosLt productLive arnd hlarmonious Comifiwaltli conference ever
held. There was a remark~ ablc idenity of views on many ol* the
world's problems, incltuding Uie need l" or Q0 i Live . sLuep~ to redreS
-the imbalance between richl and poor natILions.
In Wash inifrton I had ct) 1k: ial. and frv-nk, Laiks with Presidient
vord and other Ai-tericin leaders0 U e ra( hd( eI y
expressions of good will Lovards Aus-trlia, and a.-surances of
Americas s con Li* UA1-, com111imi na Lo hier all ies in our re j ion.
Austi-L ia' s relit,: ions wi Lix1 the IJ. O". have nevur beoxi healtLhier.
Our underst: ni;: lixs ne-vur beeon closer or riore oundly based.
I ex-pect in the next few day6 -Lo rc~ port fully on my vis-it
in a national broadca, t. 



PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH LAURIE WILSON q
CHANNEL 7
TAHITI 11/ 5/ 75 FOR REPLAY 12/ 5/ 75
Question : In general terms, what was the most significant
single thing about this trip as far as you are concerned?
Mr. Whitlam : I wouldn't like to dramatise it in the terms
of any-one particular thing. There were two important things
we did; one was to have the far-ranging, frank exchange of
views at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Jamaica,
and the second one was to have a pretty thorough round-up of
views, exchange of views, in Washington with the Administration
and with the Congress. I wouldn't choose which was the more
important of those two.
Question As far as Jamaica went, there was some suggestion,
some criticism that perhaps you adopted a slightly lower profile
than you would have wanted to and perhaps you should have. I'm
obviously referring to the Vietnam question. Why was it that you
didn't push it a little stronger there?
Mr. Whitlam : What we are intent on doing, of course, at the
Commonwealth, is to discuss those things which interest a fair
number of us. Now I did point out, quite briefly, and everyone
immediately accepted the proposition, that on Vietnam which was
obviously a land-mark in world history, we ought to express the
view that nations should con-tribute as much as they can to the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of that country and to bring
it into the community of nations. I raised that, and in fact
it was raised by Mrs. Gandhi and Mr. Lee Kuan Yew in the general
discussion on world and Commonwealth trends and then I later made
the point that there should be a reference to it in the communique
and there was. There was no dispute about it, so it didn't need
to take up very much time. I have seen some suggestions that we
ought to have spent more time on it, or I should have. I don't
see any basis for that. There was no need to spend more time on
this. There were some aspects of Vietnam, such as refugees, which
of course, I did mention to, I suppose half a dozen Heads of Government
there who were interested in these matters New Zealand, Fiji,
Britain, Canada, Singapore and Malaysia.
Question : Of course later with President Ford, this was a major
point of discussion.
Mr. Whitlam: What was a major point?
Question : Vietnam in general, Indo-China of course.
Mr. Whitlam In the general, regional set-up, in the aftermath
of Vietnam, obviously. This was quite an important thing, not
only with the President and the Secretary of State, Dr. Kissinger,
and Deputy Secretary and Assistant Secretaries of State, but also
of course, with the two Houses in Congress. 
Question: You said in Washington that as regards reconstruction
there, you weren't going -to shirk your responsibility. We would
be a ready and willing partner to the U. S. Exactly what will we
be doing as regards reconstruction?
Mr. Whitlam In the budget for the financial year which is now
expiring, we made provision, and I think we did in the previous
budget, for reconstruction and rehabilitation in Vietnam, both
South and North. I think we spent about five times as much in
the South as in the North because it's taken longer to get the
structure of reconstruction going in the North. They have not
been accustomed to getting it and they've been a bit suspicious
of international organisations through which we prefer to inake
our contribution. Now, the United States is not likely to make
as big a contribution to these matters because of her recent
experiences * Lhere, but obviously countries like Australia, which
are in a position to contribute, should do so.
Question : Would you Place any sort of time period on reconstruction?
Would we be looking at that sort of thing?
Mr. Whitlam : I wouldn't like to say. I mean what do you mean
by reconstruction?
Question Do we presume that we will provide funds for reconstruction
for the next five years or the next fifteen years or can't you
set a time?
Mr. Whitlam I'd say five's more likely. Because if one thing
is clear, it is the astonishing resilience of the Vietnamese people.
They have had a bigger battering for a longer period, than any
nation in modern times. You would have to go back hundreds of
years before you could think of any nation which has been so
battered or so bruised or even brutalised as the people of Vietnam.
But they have shown an amazing resilience, astonishing, and they
will come through this. They are after all, a nation which has a
very considerable history of identity and they've been willing to
fight against people who wanted to buy into their affairs. They
did it against the Chinese before last century, they did it against
the French in the end of last century and the first half of this.
Question : Do you foresee a period of real stability now in the
Indo-China region?
Mr. Whitlam I'm reasonably optimistic that the energies of
the Vietnamese will be devoted to reconstructing their country.
Question You say you are reasonably optimistic. Can you see
anything going wrong? 
Mr. Whitlam : It's obvious that things can go wrong. The
astonishing thing is that all the Heads of Government in
countries which are concerned I've seen -them all for hours
at a time in the last six weeks for instance, President Suharto
came downm to Australia and spent a few days with me and then in
the last couple of weeks in Jamaica, I've been with the Prime
Ministers of Malaysia, Singapore and other countries further away,
such as New Zealand of course and Britain, we have discussed all
these matters as well as in North America.
Question : If I might move on now to the question of refugees.
Where do we stand now on the question of accepting adult refugees
from Vietnam?
Mr. Whitlam : The situation has changed quite clearly from the
time when we set out together from Australia because at that time
there was still a Government in office in South Vietnam and whatever
one did in those circumstances had to be done with the concurrence
of that Government. % Well the Government i~ s now defunct and -there
are tens of thousands of refugees who have fled from the country,
so there's obviously a different situation now.
Question : That means we will be accepting them given some
international programme?
Mr. Whitlam : Yes. There has been, for many years of course,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees organisationan
experienced, a respected body-and we have in all our programmes
for refugees active through that body and that is the sensible,
the humane, the effective way -to work now. We were among the first
to invite the UNHCR to come into this question and we have already
this financial year contributed millions of dollars to his programmes.
Question : When will we work out just how many we are going to
take?
Mr. Whitlam : This will be a matter of international arrangement
clearly. It might be some weeks before one could make any responsible
estiwa. te of such matters.
Question How quickly would you like to see these refugees
catered for? In other words, how quickly do you think we might
see them in Australia?
Mr. Whitlam : Well, obviously, the sooner the better, as long 1
as it can be done effectively or humanely. You want to upset
people as little as possible, you want to settle them down as
quickly as possible. 
Question: Would you expect any sort of backlash for this
idea of allowing adult refugees into Australia?
Mr. Whitlam : I don't think we can overlook the fact that
there will be some resentment about people coming into Australia
at a time of unemployment and also people from a very different
way of life, many of them not speaking English for instance.
Now obviously there will be doubts or even resentment among
Australians in this respect and I suppose it was a bit disappointing
that Australians didn't contribute more generously to the fund
which was set up for these matters. But nevertheless, Governments
have to do the right thing whether it's popular or not, so we
will be taking a fair share of refugees under the auspices of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees the body
which has most experience in this matter, the body which has
done the job best.
Question Do you think that perhaps your whole visit has been
overshadowed by domestic events? Does that disappoint you?
Mr. Whitlam I wouldn't think so. I don't know what you can
suggest. I naturally think that what I was doing was of greatest
importance to the country. The Commonwealth of Nations is an
important body. There are three-dozen of us almost in it and
there is no organisation where the countries of the Indian Ocean
can get together as they can in the Commonwealth and it is also
a valuable body for the countries of the South Pacific. Australia,
really through the Commonwealth, has better assocations with her
neighbours to west and east than through any other organisation.
Then, of course, there was the very timely opportunity to have
an exchange of views with the United States Administration and
Congress at a time when there have been some very big changes
in the world.
Question: You go back to Australia happy with the past two
weeks with no qualms about the coming fortnight?
Mr. Whitlam Of course not. I'm quite content with what we
have been able to do while we have been away. 



D'ARCY AND POWER: IN OS SSION
Monday 12th May 1.9/ 5
FULL TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER AND BILL D'ARCY
FILMED IN TAHITI AT TBE CONCLUSION OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S OVERSEAS TRIP
D'ARCY: Prime Minister, you've been away from Australia for 19 days
now. You've visited Peru, you've been to the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Conference in Kingston, and you've seen
President Ford in Washington. What do you see as. thepositive
achievement of the, trip, what's the most important thing that
has come out of it?
MR. WHITLAM: There are two particular matters. One is the regular
opportunity which occurs every two years to confer with
members of the Community of Nations, the old British Commonwealth.
There were nearly three dozen of us there, and there is no
organisation where there can be such a frank and natural
exchange of views as takes place in the context of the
Commonwealth, and for Australia, this is particularly important,
because there are about 15 Commonwealth nations which are
island or coastal orhinterland states round the Indian Ocean.
There's no gathering place in the world for nationsround the
Indian Ocean to compare with the Commonwealth. Furthermore,
of course, there are several countries which will be entering
the Commonwealth in the South Pacific, Papua-New Guinea being
the conspicuous example. Now the other great.. thing. is that..-,,
I had the opportunity to speak with the American. . a4ministration
and the American Congress, and there have been a great number of
matters where it was interesting for them and.. for us . to exchange
views. There've been some big movements in the world in the
last few weeks and we were able to discuss them. *' 1 
2_
D'AIICY3
MR. WHITLAM:
ARCY:
MR. WHITLAM: Prime Minister, it's known that your relations
with President Nixon were less than warm. It's the second
time now that you've seen President Ford in seven months.
What sort of/ HpoR have you been able to establish with him?
What are the relations between you both?
You slipped in a reference to President Nixon, so I don't
want to respond to what you say, I think you may be exaggerating
it. At any rate, about President Ford, whom I've met twice
in the last seven months, it would be obvious that he is a very
wholesome, decent person, and he is doing a good job in very
difficult circumstances. We have been able to get on very well
on the two good meetings that we've had.
Did you notice, Prime Minister, whether the President has been
able to establish himself a lot during the seven months
between when you saw him last.
He is respected by everyone in Congress as far as I could see.
I thought that this would be the case after what I was told by the
leaders of the two parties in the two houses of the Congress
seven months ago. Now on this occasion I saw-them again and
I saw more members of the Senate and the Congress than on the
previous time actually, and they all respect the President as
a man. They don't always support him,' of. course, and this would
be particularly the case on many domestic issues, but.: the point is,
on those matters where Australia and America are concerned
with eachother, there is total support for the relations which 
we've establiuhed, support by tho Administration, tho
President, the Vice PreSident, the Cabinet, particularly
the Secretary of State, Dr. Kissinger, and the other people
in the State Department, the Deputy, the Assistant Secretaries
and so on, all of whom we met, and it's also the case that
the Congress on both sides, both houses, supports the relationship
which my Government has been able to establish with the United
States.
D'ARCY: A statement issued by the White House after your meeting with
President Ford said that the President has reassured you that
the United States would honour its obligations towards
Australia as far as defence. Did you seek that assurance
or was it
WHITLAM; No, no, this was volunteered, there was no prompting by us
at all, but I hasten to say it came as no surprise to me
because I have kept in touch with successive administrations,
Johnson, Nixon, Ford administrations, and also with Congress
under those administrations. I first started the practice, I think p.
I was the first political leader in Australia to do so, to
confer with Congressional leaders back in June 1967, and I've
never seen any objection or any queries about the relationship
between the U. S. and Australia in that time from Presidentsor
from leaders of Congress.
D'ARCY: Prime Plinister, one of the matters that was raised was the
question of the Vietnam refugees, and you've spoken of the need
to internationalise the refugee programme. Are you disappointed
Sir that Asian countries in general and Singapore in particular
have not joined in that programme? 
MD, WILIAA1sYes, mind you I don't want Australians to got any impression
that there is some obession or confrontation in the United
States on this issue of the refugees. It was mentioned
relatively briefly in the conversation with the President,
and one member of the House of Representatives International
Relations Committee asked a question about it, and one member
of the Senate Foreign Relations Comnittee asked a question about
it, but all the other members on both occasions were interested
in other issues. This is not as big an issue in the U. S.
as many of the press reports have said. Congress, I believe, will
be supporting the administration in placing those refugees who've
got to the U. S. or have been taken to the U. S. You mentioned
the position in Asia in particular. I suppose it is disappointing
that all of us who subscribed back in 1951 to the United Nations
Convention on Refugees, -and then in 1967 to the protocol on refugee.
none of us really, and I suppose Australia must accept some
responsibility in this respect also, have ever put it to the Asian
nations that they should subscribe to the Convention and the Protocol
In the whole of our region, the only nations that have subscribed
to it are Australia, New Zealand and Fiji, and then I suppose it's
relevant to point out, Britain and France have, because they have
colonies in this area. The United States has, of course, Canada
has, but the Philippines, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and the countries further west didn't, they haven't. Now this is a
gap.
' A S. 
r
D IAIICY:
MR. WHITLAN:
D'A ROY:
MR. WHITLAMI: Do you find it ironic, PrJ) i M/ in ister, that the Prime Minister
of Singapore, Mr. Lee Quan Yew, should attack you at the
Commxonwealth Heads of Government Conference, on the question
of students from Singapore in Australia, yet he will not allow
some 3,500 Vietnam refugees who are on ships in the Singapore
harbour to land in Singapore.
You're putting propositions to me for which I have no direct
knowledge. I saw Mr. Lee on several occasions during the nine
days we were in Jamaica together, and I also saw the other
heads of Government, Tuin Razak from Malaysia, Wal Rowling finn)
New Zealand, and Harold Wilson and Pierre Trudeau. We discussed
these matters of refugees among other matters. Now on this
occasion, whatever might have been the situation at the last
Commonwealth meeting in Ottawa in October 1975, Mr. Lee was quite
relaxed and subdued. He wasn't taking a shot at us about
students. He's realised that if unpopular decisions are to be
made about students, he's got to share in those decisions at
least. IBut this was no longer an issue this time.
Prime Minister, can I ask you how many refugees Australia
will take.
No, of course you can't. This has been asked of Dr. Cairns
at home, and he's given you the same answer. No one knows
at this stage. All one can say is that it's clearly a different
situation from the one when we left home where there was
still a Government in Saigon, and what one did about people who
were to leave that country had to be done with the consent of that
Government, and on the other hand there's the situation now where
tens of thousands have left the country, got away from it, so 
D'I AllOY:
Mi. WvJITILM:
D AROY:
MR. WHITLAMs
Dl'AROY: rTphoro in a roal opportunity, I would think, that the country
will now, at last, be abi( e to be reconstructed and conciliated
in peace.
Do you think that some of those displaced persona, some of
those, for example, in Guam, do you think it's possible
for them to go back.
I don't know how soon, but you remember when there were so
many thousanqds who came to Australia after Budapest in 1956,
many thousands in fact went back, and as we now know, there are
a great number of Hungarians settled in Australia, some of them
millionaires, who now quite freely and happily make return visits
to Hungary. Now this is what will happen before many years have
passed in respect of Vietnam.
Prime Minister, one final question. Do you think it's ever going
to be possible for you to make an overseas trip without
Opposition demands for your return home because of some
domestic issue.
Oh, I don't know, I suppose every successive Liberal leader
has to cut his teeth some way or another, they haven't done it
very successfully, I'm now on my fifth. Well I dare say I will
digest him in due course.
Thank you very much. -000--
1-' 4.
A I, I. 2 



/ 3
AUSTRALIA'S MILITARY COMMITMENT TO VIETNAM
This Paper, which the Government has had
prepared on the Australian involvement in
Vietnam, is tabled in accordance with the
Prime Minister's statement in the House of
Representatives on Tuesday, 13 May, 1905. 
AUSTRALIA'S MILITARY COMMITMENT TO SOUTH VIETNAM
This paper has been prepared in accordance with a direction
from the Prime Minister of Australia that an objective appraisal should
be made of Australia' s military involvement in South Vietnam.
The decision in April 1965 to send a battalion for active
service in South Vietnam was the crucial issue in Australia's
commitment. However, that decision can only be interpreted in the
light of the development of Australian policy in the four preceding
years, and the significance of the decision only appears in the two
years following the decision when further forces were committed. This
paper is therefore presented in three parts:
Part 1 Australia Vietnam 1961-64
Part 2 Australia Vietnam 1965
Part 3 Australia Vietnam 1965-67
To reduce the records of seven years of government ( 1961-67)
to a few pages must inevitably result in over-simplification and the
degree of over-simplification must be the measure of any distortion
which results. In highlighting the main issues involved there are
certain generalisations which can be made which will stand under
detailed examination. These generalisations are based only on official
documents and are concerned primarily with Australian provision of aid
of a military nature to South Vietnam. No account is taken of
Australia's domestic political issues, of party pressures or of public
opinion, all of which played a large part in explaining the decisions
and the negotiations mentioned in this paper.
Despite the fact that the Government of South Vietnam on
29 April 1965 announced that the Australian battalion was sent in
, response to a request from South Vietnam, this is not borne out by the
evidence of the documents.
There were requests for aid of various sorts from South
Vietnam to assist in its effort against growing communist insurgency,
but the requests for military aid were largely generated by initiatives
from the United States. These initiatives were political and not
military in motive. The United States did not need the military aid
but it did desire the military presence of its friends and allies in
order to show to the world that the United States was not alone in
its efforts against communism in South East Asia, to show that it was
not replacing French colonialism in the area and in order to re-assure
Governments indigenous to the Area that members of SEATO were in fact
prepared to make a practical contribution to defence against communism.
In providing aid the Australian Government always insisted
that it should be acceptable to the South Vietnamese Government and
many assurances to that effect were received from Vietnam. However, 
-2
in pursuing its paramount concern with the American alliance and
Australian forward defence interests the Australian Government over
a period of time showed in its actions and particularly in the process
of negotiations minimal consideration for Vietnamese wishes.
Nevertheless, the South Vietnamese attitude to the question
of military aid was somewhat equivocal. At first they believed that
they, the South Vietnamese, were capable of solving the problem of
insurgency and they were opposed to the possibility of Western forces
fighting on South Vietnamese soil and killing Vietnamese citizens
whether of the North or the South. However, with the growing success
of the insurgency and with the escalation of aid to the insurgents
from North Vietnam, China and the Soviet Union, successive South
Vietnamese Governments came to accept the realities of their political
and military weaknesses and were prepared to accept Western military
aid. This acceptance was often in response to American pressure.
However, opposition remained; this opposition was due in part to a
fear of the capital which opposition forces both in North and South
Vietnam could make out of a Western presence, and in part to the
national and military pride of the South Vietnamese people and
particularly of the Generals. This produced an official state of mind
which although prepared to accept a Western military presence as an
undesirable necessity was still reluctant to ask directly for military
aid. Moreover, there was widespread resentment of the increasingly
insensitive actions of Western Governments in pressing aid upon them.
Offers of aid could be accepted but direct requests were very
reluctantly forthcoming and on occasion, only under pressure.
Australian military assistance to South Vietnam was not at
any time in response to a request for defence aid from South Vietnam
as a Protocol State to SEATO as a Treaty organisation. Although
successive Australian Governments sought publicly to justify their
actions as being " in the context of" or " flowing from" Australia's
membership of SEATO and the theory of the Protocol State or on the
ground that military assistance under SEATO could be on a bilateral
as well as a collective basis, the commitment was in fact made as a
projection of the forward defence policy to which they were committed.
Australian military aid to South Vietnam was in fact offered
and supplied in response to the known and frequently expressed wishes
of the United States for political support from its friends and allies,
even though the offer of a battalion rather than an agreement to meet
other specific requests from the United States was made to suit the
interests of the Australian defence development program.
The provision of military aid by Australia was decided upon
for political reasons and was in support of the fundamental aim of
Australian policy towards South Vietnam, which was to ensure the long
term defence interests of Australia. These were seen in terms of the
ANZUS and SEATO Treaties and the theory of forward defence against the
victory of communism in South East Asia, an area seen as vital to
Australia's future. This was a policy developed in Australia independently
of any outside pressure. The cornerstone of this policy was 
-3
seen as a compelling necessity to commit the power of the United
States to the Asian area and thus to commit her to a
practical guarantee of active support to Australia through the ANZUS
and SEATO Treaties. Australia's concern over the stability of South Vietnam as
part of the general defence against communism in South East Asia grew
in intensity in proportion to the growing success of communist
insurgency in South Vietnam.
Despite Australia's concern over Indonesia and the possibility,
given Australian commitment in Malaysia, of over-committing Australia' s
limited defence forces, the Australian Government wished to react
positively to American hints for assistance. A growing bense of
urgency as a result of insurgent success produced an increasing
willingness at the political level to make further military commitments
to the defence of South Vietnam. By December 1964 through January
1965 this reached a peak where Australia's policy makers, being most
anxious about what appeared to them to be hesitancy and confusion in
America's policy, were eager to convince the United States of the need
for more resolute policy and more active measures.
The Australian Government' s four decisions 1965-67 to
increase combat forces in Vietnam were logical extensions of the
decision of April 1965. Negotiations concerning these extensions
illustrate once again the dominance in Australian official thinking
of the concept of forward defence, and the importance of the American
alliance. The negotiations also reveal once again constant United
States pressure at political, diplomatic and service levels. The
period is marked also by little concern with Vietnam' s wishes and
national sensitivities. There is one further problem which has been the subject of
public debate but about which it is difficult to come to an~ . fif
conclusion, that is the question as to when Australian forcesysecame
actively involved in combat situations. There is no doubt about the
official directives on this matter. When the first instructors were
sent to South Vietnam, the directive to their Commanding Officer
specifically precluded any activities other than those necessary to a
training role unless the prior consent of the Australian Government had
been obtained. Moreover, despite the wishes of the South Vietnamese
Government to concentrate the Australian instructors in a northern
province subject to insurgent activities, the instructors were located
in base training areas and not in any province likely to be over-run
by insurgents. However, the military authorities, recognising the
realities of the situation, suggested that the instructors would
probably be involved in combat situations produced by insurgent attacks.
Nevertheless, the official directive was given precluding any activity
other than the instructional role. When in May 1964 an additional
instructors were sent to South Vietnam it was then agreed that the
role of the AATTV should be extended to permit their employment in the
field at battalion and lower levels as advisers, and it was recognised
that, in the circumstances, casual~ ties were to be expected. So that 
-4-
the official record is clear, the decision to permit instructors to
move into the field where it was probable that they would be involved
in combat situations was not taken until May 1964. However, whether or
not before May 1964 individual Australian instructors working with
American units participated as advisers in the sort of active patrol
activity that would bring them into " combat situations" can only be
determined by a detailed examination of Australian and American unit
and command reports. Certainly, the Australian authorities knew on
23 May 1962 that the United States advisers were involved in combat
situations nor was this denied publicly, although it was somewhat
qualified in public announcements by the United States. 
AUSTRALIA VIETNAM 1961-64
Early in October 1961 the Australian Government became
aware that the United States was so concerned at the situation in
South Vietnam that it was considering military intervention.
Australian intelligence sources took a similarly pessimistic view,
reporting during November 1961 that within six months Government
forces in South Vietnam might be incapable of mounting significant
offensive operations without massive assistance and that
intervention on the scale of at least two divisions would be
necessary if an adequate breathing space against Viet Cong attacks
were to be ensured. There were nevertheless doubts among some
Australian officials that such assistance would prove effective.
The Charge d'Affaires in Saigon admitted in November 1961 that he
had " serious doubts about the efficacy of introducing Western
ground troops", although he believed that President Diem and his
officials would welcome them; he suggested, however, that Western
naval and air forces could make an important contribution. The
Australian defence authorities considered that although foreign
intervention might contain and even eradicate Viet Cong control
( providing access through neighbouring borders could be sealed
off) it would not be capable of removing the Viet Cong influence
which had been felt by so many for so long.
on 17 November 1961 the Australian Ambassador in
Washington was officially informed that the United States was
considering increasing its assistance to the Republic of Vietnam,
although this assistance would be in the form of equipment,
transport, training and advisers rather than combat forces; an
indication of Australia' s views and willingness to assist was
requested. The Australian Prime Minister replied on 26 November
that he was examining the possibility of increasing Australian
assistance to the Republic of Vietnam and hoped to be able to make
a decision after the coming Federal election.
The first Australian initiative came, however, from~ the
Ambassador in Washington who reported on 5 December that
demonstrable Australian support for the Republic of Vietnam would
make a very favourable impression on the United States Administration
and suggested that Australia might supply counter-insurgency
training personnel, small arms and ammunition. These suggestions
were discussed by representatives of the Departments of External
Affairs, Defence, Navy, Army and Air on 14 December. It was
clear from this meeting that the motivation for providing
assistance was predominantly political and that the Services were
unwilling, for manpower reasons, to make more than a token
commitment to the Republic of Vietnam. Accordingly the Ambassador
in Washington was informed on 19 December that while Australia
could supply some small arms and ammunition it could make no more
thaA' a token contribution in training. 
6-
Suggestions from the United States Administration that
Australia should give military aid to the Republic of Vietnam were
clearly initiated by the State Department rather than the Pentagon.
The United States military authorities in Saigon told the
Australian Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam in December 1961
that no Australian assistance was required in either training or
the supply of arms and ammunition. The United States Ambassador
to the Republic of Vietnam said, however, that he regarded an
early increase in the Australian contribution ( he appears to have
had in mind the use of military personnel at least for the protection
of civilian projects) as a matter of the highest importance. On
16 February 1962 the Australian Ambassador in Washington reported
that there had been considerable resistance in the Pentagon to the
use of non-American foreign military personnel in South Vietnam,
but that the Pentagon had now agreed to a State Department
proposal to ask Australia for counter-insurgency and jungle fighting
instructors. During March 1962 Australia received two approaches from
the Republic of Vietnam on the question of military assistance.
On 13 March the Australian Ambassador in Saigon reported that the
Republic of Vietnam . s Assistant Defence Minister had asked if
Australian military in-3tructors in Malaya could assist in the
training ( in Malaya) of the Vietnamest= Civil Guard. On 31 March
President Diem wrote to the Australian Prime Minister, setting out
the Republic of Vitnms case against the communists and noting
that the Republic " has been compelled to appeal for increased
military assistance and support from Free World countries to help
prevent it from being overwhelmed". The message concluded by
requesting that Australia. should condemn communist aggression.
Between February and May 1962 Australian policy moved
towards military assistance to South Vietnam. On 16 February the
Ambassador in Washington cabled a recommendation that any American
request should be considered favourably because the provision of
even a handful of instructors would help make Australia's mark
with the United States Administration. On receipt of this cable
the Minister for External Affairs asked the Minister for Defence
if the Australian Army could supply suitable officers for training
work in South Vietnam and the latter replied on 14 March that
while Australia could make no more than a token contribution in
training it would be possible to make available 10 officers and
some warrant and non-commissioned officers. At the ANZUS Council
meeting in Canberra on 9 May the Prime Minister told Admiral ! ILD. Felt,
Commander of the United States Pacific Fleet, that Australia was
willing to supply instructors and this decision was endorsed by
Ministers on 15 May, provided that a request was received from
the Republic of Vietnam. Although Felt admitted that Australian
military assistance was not at that time needed, he said that
America regarded our military presence in South Vietnam as most
important and suggested that we might also supply two radar patrol
ships, engineer units, a signals unit and one transport aircraft. 
-7
These suggestions were made known to Ministers on 15 May and although
no specific decisions were made it was agreed that any early
disposition of Australian military forces in South East Asia should
be at the request of the Government involved and preferably carried
out as part of a SEATO operation, to avoid the appearance of a non-
Asian intervention. Two days later the defence authorities agreed
that Australia should offer up to 30 Army training personnel and
one Dakota transport aircraft, but Feltos suggestion of two radar
patrol vessels was not approved.
On 24 May 1962 the Minister for Defence announced
publicly that Australia. was providing military instructors "' at the
invitation of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam". The
correctness of this claim is, however, a matter of interpretation,
unless the Republic of Vietnam's appinaches in March are to be
considered a sufficient invitation. The Australian offer was
communicated to President Diem on 10 May by Admiral Felt, who had
flown straight to Saigon from the ANZUS meeting. Diem was
reported to have expressed great satisfaction. On 18 May the
Republic of Vietnam's Ambassador in Canberra informed the Department
of External Affairs that his Government accepted with pleasure
Australia's offer of instructors, but there appears to have been
no direct approach by Australia until 25 May, when the Ambassador
in Saigon handed a copy uf the Deftnce Minister's statement
( already made public in Australia) to Diem; the latter again
expressed great satisfa~ ction and asked for his appreciation to be
conveyed to the Australian Government
Military 6dvisers recognised that Australian instructors
would be liable to Viet Cong attack at any time and would probably
have to carry arms. The probability that they would become
involved in operations against the Viet Cong was not explicitly
stated in the Defence Minister s public announcementalthough it
could be argued that it was implied. However the official
directive to the Commander of the force forbade any activity other
than training. There remained only a. decision on how the Australian
instructors were to be employed. The Government of the Republic of
Vietnam at first wanted them to establish an independent jungle
training school in the northern province of Quang Ngai, an area in
which Diem feared a Viet Cong breakthrough. Diem's reasoning
appears to have bnen that commitment to such an area ( he likened
it to the Dardanelles) would encourage a deeper Australian
involvement and that any disaster there might lead to massive
third nation intervention. The future leader of the Australian
team visited Quang Ngai and reported that it would be a difficult
but challenging project within the capacity of the team, but it was
strongly opposed by both United States and Australian army
authorities, the latter arguing that it was an area of high Viet
Cong activity in which the team would be likely to become involved
in action outside the instructional field; there was, in any case,
no United States logistic support available and it was undesirable 
-8
to have to depend on South Vietnamese forces. It was then
recommended that the team be divided and integrated with United
States staff, 4 instructors going to headquarters in Saigon, 22 to
three locations in the Hue area and 4 to Due My ( near Nha Trang).
The allocation of the instructors to training establishments was
announced by the Minister for Defence on 26 July 1962, approval of
the terms of the announcement having already been received from the
Republic of Vietnam. The Minister for External Affairs was
obviously disappointed that the political impact of the Australian
contribution should have been diminished by the team's dispersal
and integration with the United States instructors. Three months
later the Minister for External Affairs asked the Minister for
Defence if more instructors could be provided for South Vietnam,
but this suggestion was opposed by the Army because of the strain
it would place on manpower resources.
The next request for assistance came on 14 February 1963
when the Australian Ambassador in Saigon reported that the United
States might ask Australia for a small R. A. A. F. component. He
recommended sympathetic consideration of such a request on the
grounds that the Americans believed that they were winning the war
and that it was time for Australia to make a contribution and get
some share of the credit. The Ambassador was told that Australia
would prefer not to receive sbich a request and he communicated this
to the United States authorities in Saigon, but on 2 April Australia
nevertheless retceived a United SLates request for one Dakota
squadron and 16 additional pilots. The real difficulty posed by
this request was the need to explain a. change from a non-combatant
to a combatant role to the Au~ tralian public. The formal reason
for refusal, which was convcyed to Admiral Felt on 4 April 1963,
was that the possible re-equipment of R. A. A. FO transport with
Caribou aircraft made the supply of Dakotas impossible. The
following month the United States -again asked for 16 R. A. A. F.
Dakota pilots, the request being re-inforced by representations
from the Republic of Vietnam' s Ambassador in Canberra on 24 May
1963. Defence opposed the request because of manpower shortage
and although External Affairs saw some merit in accepting it was
decided that the Army training team was sufficient to demonstrate
Australian support for the United States.
At the April 1964 SEATO Council meeting in Manila it was
agreed that members should if necessary be prepared to take further
concrete steps to support the Republic of Vietnam. On 6 May 1964
the United States Embassy in Canberra delivered a note to the
Department of External Affairs which emphasised President Johnson0' s
desire for more free world countries to " show their flags" in
South Vietnam, listed existing non-American assistance and suggested
that Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom might between them
provide a range of army and air training personnel, pilots,
reconnaissance aircraft, forward air controllers, communications
engineers, shipyard advisers and medical and dental teams. A few
days later the United States Embassy in Canberra delivered a more
detailed list of items specifically requested from Australia. It
included: 
a minimum of 6 three-man battalion adviser teams
an additional training cadre for corps centre
additional special forces personnel
a. helicopter unit
a fixed wing observation and liaison unit
a fixed wing transport unit
2 or 3 surgical teams.
Both the Australian Embassy in Washington and the
Department of External Affairs urged that the American request
should be considered sympathetically. The former cabled on 11 May
1964 that while it was appreciated that there were physical
limitations to what the Commonwealth could do it was recommended
that we should make as prompt and positive a response as possible.
South Vietnam was an area in which we could, without disproportionate
expenditure, pick up a lot of credit with the United States. Our
objective should be to achieve such an habitual closeness of relations
with the United States and sense of mutuail alliance that in our time
of need ( the possibility of a crisis in relations with Indonesia) the
United States would have little option but to respond as we would
want. In Canberra a Department of External Affairs memorandum
suggested that:, while the value of the Australian training team
should not be underestimated, our main object in providing
additional assistance wa~ s that of supporting the United States and
encouraging Thailand. The Minister for External Affairs appears to
have shared these vitw-, sending a cable to the Embassy in Washington
on 14 May which said " We should like the United States Government to
know that we are anxious to rEply promptly and sympathetically to
their suggestions" The United States prapoba16 were referred for consideration
to the relevant defence advisers who reported that South Vietnam was
a key strategic area and that if it. fell the West would be unlikely
to hold Laos, Cambodia and Thailand; this would in turn make the
future of Malaysia, Indonesia and the 7hilippines very uncertain. A
further argument in favour of increased assistance was that it would
influence the obligation -which the United States might feel to
Australia in an emergency. After examining the resources and
commitments of the types of personnel an d equipment requested they
recommended that Australia could offer:
an additional 30 N. C. O. s for the army training team
an army dental team
an army driving/ servicing instructional team together
with a light aid workshop detachment
a detachmenc of 6 Caribou transport aircraft
( by October 1964).
It was also recommended that the role of the army training team
should be extended to permit its employment in the field at battalion
and lower levels as advisers. These recommendations were accepted 
10
by Ministers on 29 May. It was recognised that Australian casualties
must be expected if the army training team were to be employed in the
field. Details of the Australian decision were cabled immediately
to the Australian Ambassador in Saigon with instructions to inform
the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. The Vietnamese Ambassador
in Canberra was informed the same day and reminded of his earlier
discussions with the Department of External Affairs. The Ambassador
agreed that Australia could announce that the increased aid was being
made after consultation with the South Vietnamese and United States
Governments. The Australian Ambassador in Saigon later reported that
Acting Foreign Minister Mau had expressed warm appreciation of the
decision and agreed with the reference to prior consultations with
the South Vietnamese and United States Governments.
The final arrangements were, however, delayed by doubts as
to whether all the assistance offered was actually needed. Mau told
the Australian Ambassador on 1 June that Australia could take it
that there was a requirement for all aid items proposed, but the
United States Charge d'Affaires and military authorities in Saigon
subsequently stated that there was no military requirement for the
army dental teams, the army driving/ servicing instructional team or
the light aid workshop det. chment. They suggested that Australia
should instead send an additional 2. army training personnel. In
consequence the public announcement of Australia's increased
commitment made by the Minister for Defence on 9 June omitted the
items not required by the United States authorities, but noted that
consultations were proceeding for the provision of some 20 army
instructors in addition to the 60 already definitely committed. The
text of the Minister's statement were forwarded to Saigon to allow a
parallel announcement there, but the Vietnamese were given no prior
warning of the changes in the Australian contribution. The Vietnamese
Foreign Minister was also given the text of the announcement and on
June he wrote to the Australian Ambassador expressing his " keen
satisfaction" at the imminent arrival of .30 new instructors and the
Caribou aircraft and at the prospect that 20 other technicians
might also be sent. On L7 June the Australian Ambassador reported
that the Embassy in Saigon had been mildly embarrassed by
successive instructions from Canberra to inform the Vietnamese of
Australia's decision to provide additional aid, to ask the
Vietnamese if these items were needed and then, having been assured
that they were needed, to inforn the Vietnamese chat some of them
would not be provided.
The United States military authorities' request for a
third group of Australian army advisers was supported by a senior
Australian officer who visited Saigon in June 1964 and the team was
increased in number from 60 to 83. The team suffered its first
combat casualty ( one soldier had been accidentally killed on 1 June
1963) on 6 June 1964 when Warrant Officer K. G. Conway was killed
during a Viet Cong attack on a special forces camp 35 miles west
of Da Nang. 
11
During July 1964 the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Vietnam, General Khanh, addressed a written appeal for assistance to
the Heads of Government of 34 countries, including Australia. As
translated and published in Saigon on 25 July the letter expressed the
firm hope " that your government will kindly grant us all the support
you deem possible and opportune in order to help us successfully fight
the Communist aggression". In Australia's case this written approach
was followed up on 5 August by the Republic of Vietnam's Ambassador
in Canberra, who called on the Acting Secretary of the Department of
External Affairs to formally thank Australia for assistance already
given and to request " continuing help". There was no direct Australian
response to these requests, although the Minister for External Affairs
wrote to a number of countries commending General Khanh's appeal.
The Austra. lian Government. continued to view with concern
the deteriorating political and military situation in South Vietnam.
On 3 September 1964 the Minist. r for External Affairs sent a cable to
all Australian representatives abroad emphasising that our national
interests were to
help a government in South Vietnam which would
continue to fight the Viet Cong, oppose North
Vietnam and give some hope of eventually unifying
the : ountry
retain an ac. tivn Uni. t. ed Sta. es presence in
South Vietnam
Spreveat a failure in South Vietnam which would lead
to a collapse of the will to resist, in other countries.
Australia also sought to gain a clearer idea of how far the
Americans were prepared to compipr. them-e. lve. s in Vietnam, but it became
evident that the Ur. it,-d States would maintain only a holding
operation until after the November presidential Clectiono Once the
electioh was over the m. om. ntum of American policy, encouraged by the
ever= worsening situation i. n Vitn. rbam, began to increase. The
Australian Minist. er for External Affairs, who visited Washington in
late November, was tcl. d by D,. feo. ce. Secretary McNamata that if it
became necessary to apply i. ncr. etased pressure on North Vietnam by air
attack it. would be very helpful tc have. Australian aircraft ( ei. her
participating or standing by to protect Thailand, Laos and South
Vietnam. McNamara said that the United States would be looking
chiefly for a public demonstration of Australian support.. On 4
December 1964, White House Adviser William Bundy gave the Ambassador
in Washington a clearer indication of the directi. on of American policy.
This envisaged that, although the instability of the Government of
the Republic of Vietnam at present precluded a sharp new program, any
further dramatic activity by the Vi. et Cong would be opposed by air
strikes in North. Viet. nam and the stationing of surface-to-air missiles
and one division or two battalions of United States marines near the
border between Nort. h and South Vietnam. Bundy said Australia might.
contribute 200 extra combat advisers to such a force, but he did not
have in mind the use of Australian fighter aircraft.
On 10 December 1964 the Republic of Vietnam. Prime Minister
( Huong) made a strong direct request for increased Australian military
assistance to the Australian Minister for Air, who was then visiting 
12
Saigon. Huong asked for more army instructors and air assistance
and argued that Australia's security depended on the survival of
South Vietnam; the Americans, he said, felt lonely and hesitant in
their present position and needed stiffening by the support of
nations like Australia. However, the Australian Ambassador
believed that this request was inspired by the United States.
No doubt prompted by the trend of events in Washington,
Defence already had increased Australian assistance under
consideration when Huong's appeal was received. On 11 December a
committee reported that Australia could supply:.
one infantry battalion
one squadron of the SAS Rngiment
logistic support elements
approximately 10 additional army instructors
HMAS ydney'and 2 frigates/ destroyers for
transporting the above.
Three days later, however, the Prime Minister received a message
from President Johnson which suggested that Australia provide:
200 additional combat advisers
minesweepers LSTS salvage and repair ships
hospital ships.
The list appears to have been drawn up without an adequate knowledge
of the equipment of the Australian armed services, which did not
possess any of the last three items. The recommendation from
Defence, reported on ' 16 December, was that Australia could supply
17 more instructors ( bringing the team in Vietnam up to a total of
100), but that commitments in Malaysian -waters would make it
undesirable and perhaps impracticable to offer any minesweepers.
The Prime Minister sent a personal message to President Johnson on
18 December informing him that Australia was unable to supply
either the ships requested or any significant number of army
instructors. Australia was however willing to send representatives
to discuss the possible positioning of United States, Australian and
New Zealand troops in the northern parts of South Vietnam. This was
followed by a cable from the Minister for External Affairs to the
Australian Ambassador in Washington on 22 December which emphasised
that while Australia was not qualifying her support for the American
effort in South Vietnam, it was important to know how far the
United States was prepared to go and what would be the outcome of
escalation and/ or negotiation. 
13
AUSTRALIA-VIETNAM 1965
The Decision The fundamental reasons for Australia's providing
combatant ground forces in South Vietnam in 1965 are vividly
demonstrated in negotiations between the time in December 1964 when
Australia agreed to contingency staff talks concerning the possibility
of sending troops to South Vietnam, and the actual offer of the
battalion in April 1965.
Ihe basic concept behind the Australian action was that of
forward defence. This rested in turn on a belief in the fundamental
strategic importance in Australia's defence of the South East Asia
area, and on the necessity to prevent the spread of communism and
political instability in the area. Gliven Australia's military
weakness, this policy had to depend for success upon membership of
ANZUS and SEATO, and above all upon the presence of the United
States in the area. To this end it was Australia's aim to ensure
that the United States did not waver in its commitment to South East
Asia and to support the American presence politically, diplomatically
and if necessary militarily. It was believed that only by these
methods could real mEaning be given to the ANZUS Agreement and
Australia's defence bE assured. All these elements appear in the
following review of Austratia's diplomatic activity during the
period January to April ' 19b5.
On 7 January 1965 Australia's Ambassadors in Washington and
Saigon were informed that Ministers were gravely cuncerned at the
outlook in Vietna~ m and recognised the necess ity of taking whatever
steps were puossible-to advance Australia's vital interest in securing
success in So-uth Viet-ram. On .5 January Washington reported long
discussions with the United States officials as to their purpose and
aims, from which it became clear that military staff talks with
Australia must remain in suspense until the political situation in
Saigon was stabilibed. The Australian Ambassador supported the
United States idea uf applying progressive-pressure to North Vietnam
in order to bring Hanoi to nlegotiate. A further report received on
the 7th from Washington explained that United States policy was once
again in the doldrums, nor was it expected that mounting military
pressure upon North Vietnam would be decided upon even after the
American elections. Apparently the President preferred that the
United States should " muddle along" in South Vietnam trying to do
better with policies which had not succeeded in the past. Again on
13 January the Embassy in Washington reported that the political
situation in Saigon -was not suitable for the introduction of phase 2
of America's plans for escalating pressure. The United States was
not prepared to move. In1 Australia. on 13 January military
authorities made an assessment of the current military situation and
concluded that the prospects of victory had become more remote.
They were convinced that without strong and stable leadership or
without the introduction of a new factor such as counter action by
the United States or other nations the situation would deteriorate
Lfurther. 
14
At departmental consultations in Canberra on 15 January, it
was decided that Australia should be forthcoming with the Americans
and that she should encourage the United States to plan for phase 2
( that is for air strikes between the 17th and 19th Parallels
directed against infiltration from the North). Australiaos
willingness to take part in military talks was once more expressed.
On 16 January in Saigon the Americans again raised the question of
Australian aid, saying that the greatest need was for combat
advisers. The next day the Australian Government decided to promise
full public and diplomatic support for the United States if that
country decided upon increased military activity. However on the
19th the Embassy in Washington reported that the United States was
still worried over Saigon's political instability but that military
staff talks with Australia would be relevant if the situation
improved. On 19 January lengthy Ministerial instructions were sent
from Canberra to Washington. Once again the Ambassador was informed
of Australia's grave concern at the outlook and instructed that he
should take advantage of any opportunity to bring certainty to
American policy and planning. He was to be tactful because of the
disproportion in power between Australia and the United States, but
he was to suggest that Australia would give full public and diplomatic
support if the United States were to initiate air strikes against
North Vietnam's infiltration sybtem. He was informed that the
Government did not belicvte that the Viet Cong threat was negotiable
at that stage, but the Government was also worried about the
Indonesian situation and would not support a call for a Geneva
Conference if air strikes resulted in buch a suggestion. When these
views were put to Bundy on 21 January his reply was that the
President would surely say that if we were so concerned then why
could we not contribute 50 more instructors? The necessities of
Australian defence expansion were again explained. Bundy a-gain
pointed out that there could * be no escalation inL Vietnam until the
Saigon Governmerit proved itself. The Ambassador made three points
to Bundy-he emphasised Australia's anxiety over the situation in
South Vietnam, chat it seemed to be that a coherent plan for
increasing pressure on North Vietnam was no longer in operation, and
that Australia was willing to give what help was possible. He
concluded his report by saying that Australia must keep up the
pressure. On 26 January the Ambassador reported that the Australian
Prime Minister visiting Washington shared the anxiety at the way
things were going and thought he might assure the President that we
would support him politically and militarily if pre-emptive landings
became necessary. On 28 January the Acting Prime Minister agreeing
with the Minister for External Affairs sent a message to the
Australian Prime Minister in London expressing the view that
Australia should be concerned to sustain the Americans in their
commitment to Vietnam while Australia. was doing its share in
Malaysia. 
On 29 January the Minister for Defence raised with the
Americans in Saigon the possibility of stepping up the campaign. On
2 February the'Ambassador in Washington reported that we needed to
do all in our power to strengthen the American resolve, to follow a
firm line based on a credible threat against North Vietnam. It was
suggested also that an attempt should be made to clarify the extent
of the United States commitment to ANZUS. With this last point the
Minister for External Affairs disagreed, preferring to concentrate
on the essential purpose which he supposed was to remove any
hesitation on the part of the Americans and with Australia's
limited resources to go with them but not rush out in front. On
4 February Forrestal in Canberra explained that support for
America from other countries and Australia was needed because it
was important politically. In reply Forrestal was informed that it
was feasible for Australia to make a combat battalion available for
service in South East Asia if the Australian Government so decided.
On 7 February Washington reported South Vietnamese and
United States air strikes against targets in North Vietnam in
retaliation for Viet Cong attacks on United States bases and
barracks. Australian Ministers supported the action. On 9 February
the Australian Minister fur Defence told Governor Harriman in
Washington that Australia. was still ready to enter into military
staff talks concerning phase 2 operation6 just as the Prime Minister
had told President J l~~~ the previouz, D _ cember. On 10 February
the Minister for Defence reported frrr Washington that the United
States was at the edge of entering phase 2 and again pointed out,
this time to Bundy, that Australia Wa ready to enter military
staff talks. He refe-rred to Australia's own need for i, 000
instructors, wThich explained our inability to meet United States
requests of this type. When the Minister raised the possibility of
a SEATO operation in Vietnam, Bundy pointed out that for SEATO to
operate South Vietnam would h-, V tLoO dppeal for-help and he doubted
that this was wise fur fear of tt-fusai1 by some members. The same
day the Australian Amrba! ssddur coImm-ented on the new spirit of urgency
and robustness in the United S~ aLLe6 Administration, and believed
the ' beginning of phase 2 wao close. However the stage was not yet
reached w~ herLe staff Lalki could begin. The Minister for External.
Affairs repeated that the Australian aim should be to remove any
hesitation on the part of the Americans and within our limited
resources to give what aid we could. On 18 February the Mini ' ster
repeated to Washington his strong support for all the Americans had
done and his hope that in the imakediate situation the only
determinant of American action would be the effect such action
would have in checking aggres~ ion and strengthening morale in
Saigon. On 20 T'ebruary came the news that the United States was
prepared to inaugurate the staff talks and believed that it would be
necessary to put in substantial1 ground forces but not in the style
of pre-emptive landings as in the phase 2 plans. This was
reinforced by a report that the United States was not at present
considering any initiatives which might lead to peace talks. On
24 February Australia. officially agreed to participate in the
talks but emphasised that this was not an agreement to contribute 
16
ground forces, and that further information as to the planned use of
forces was required. Full departmental consideration followed in
Canberra. Emphasis was again laid on the strategic importance of
South Vietnam and the necessity to give public and diplomatic
support to the American program of increased pressure on North
Vietnam. More information on United States thinking was requested.
On 29 Match the Government informed its Ambassador in Washington
that their firm support for America's present action was based on
the belief that in the present circumstances it would check
aggression, restore confidence in South Vietnam and lead towards
an acceptable settlement.
On 4 April the report on the staff talks in Honolulu was
received in Canberra. The conclusion was that the United States
wished to have a contribution of Australian forces in South Vietnam.
If approved, it was assumed that a request from the South Vietnamese
Government would follow. The Australian representative at the talks
believed that Australia should offer a battalion to the defence of
such a strategically important area. On 6 April Australian military
authorities confirmed the recommendation, believing that it was vital
to Australiaos strategic interests to have a strong United States
military presence in South East Asia., and that it was essential to
show a readinei3s to a. ssist the United States to achieve her aims in
South Vietnam. Australia should therefore offer a battalion. On
7 April the Government agreed to the recommendation and on 8 April
received a me5sage from Saigon that the United States was pleased with'
the Honolulu thslks und that their officials had once more stressed the
value in South Vietnam of " Third Country" flags. It was also
reported that the Premier of the Republic of Vietnam, Dr Quat,
appreciated the military tequiremEnt. b ut had to move cautiously in
view of possible opposition from nationalist elements.
On 9 April the Government decision was explained to the
Australian Ambassador in Washington. The Government had agreed tc
accede to what amounted to a request even though the United States
had stopped short of making a formal request. The Government
believed that the Australian battalion would be important in itself
and of great importance in present and future Australian-American
defence relationships. It ws decided also that when informing the
United States Government of the decision to offer a battalion it
should be pointed out that this would disperse Australian forces
further and would thus limit the Government's military capacity
elsewhere in South East Asia and New Guinea.. Therefore Australia
must look for support from both the United States and British
Governments in dealing with difficulties elsewhere.
However, it was nut until 13 April that the Ambassador
reported that he had made the offer of a. battalion. The delay is
explained by the e fft~ ct of President Johnson' s address at Johns
Hopkins University: it was thought that this address indicated that
the United States was again considering the possibility of
negotiation, in which case the offer of a battalion would have been
inappropriate. The offer was made to the Secretary of State on
13 April and the Secretary responded that the President would be 
1.7=
most appreciative and that in his own opinion the sooner the battalion
was provided the better. The Ambassador also reported that the
Secretary had taken the point that the further dispersal of Australian
forces might require Australia to look for support from the United
States and that the President was fully aware of the United States
commitment pursuant to the ANZUS Treaty.
The Matter of the Request
In the first instance, therefore, the offer of troops by
Australia was trade to the Unitcd States and not to South Vietnam.
Article IV paragraph 3 of the SEATO Treaty stipulates that
" 1no action on the territory of any state designated under paragraph 1
of this Article or in any territory so designated shall be taken
except at the invitation or with the consent of the government
concerned". As the Australian Government used the " umbrella" of the
Treaty publicly to justify its policies in South Vietnam, the
question of invitation or consent on the part of the South Vietnamese
Government requires consideration.
The Australian Government was aware of and participated
with the United States in attempts to elicit the necessary formal
request. These efforts took place between 9 and 29 April. The
negotiations revteal the methods used and the degree of spontaneity
behind the Vietnamese request.
On 9 Aprii the Australian Ambassador in Washington
reported that the requebt would have to come as a matter of form
from the South Vietnamese Government. He added that the State
Department had given instructions that Quat should be specifically
asked to request Australia to supply the battalion.
Despite earlier reports that South Vietnam had been
informed of Australia's willingness to contribute if requested, on
12 April the Australian Ambassador in Washington reported that he
had been advised that General Taylor, the United States Ambassador
in Saigon, had not yet raised the question of the Australian battalion
with the South Vietnamese Government. On the previous day the
Australian Ambassador in Saigon had reported that, given South
Vietnamese nationalist sensitivity and the fragility of the political
front, he saw advantages in having prior consultations with the
South Vietnamese rather than simply having them informed by the
Americans that Australia would respond to a request. Otherwise,
Australian action would be seen as implying that the Australian offer
was prompted exclusively by American advice and the relationship
with the United States, and Lhat Australia was indifferent or
insensitive to Vietnamese needs, taking their eventual request for
granted and not considering them genuinely independent. On 13 April
the Australian Ambassador in Saigon reported that in Taylor's opinion
it would be better if he, together with the Australian Ambassador,
called upon Quat when the time came to inform him of the Australian 
18
Government's readiness to supply a battalion if requested. However
in Washington the American view seemed to be that expressed by
Rusk, also on 13 April, that it would be better for Taylor, by
himself, to sound out Quat before Australia's offer was made.
After discussion among Ministers in Canberra as to
whether or not they should work only through the Americans, it was
agreed on 21 April that the American and Australian Ambassadors
should together see Quat in order to obtain agreement from the
Vietnamese. However in Washington Bundy~ s reaction to this
suggestion was that it would be better for Taylor to see Quat first
to make the point that Australia was ready to contribute if
requested, and only then should the Australian Ambassador approach
the South Vietnamese. The Australian Ambassador again pressed for
a joint approach, to which Bundy now agreed. However in Saigon on
24 April Taylor in fact followed the course outlined by Bundy and
raised the matter with Quat by himself. As a result, the Australian
Ambassador in Saigon on 24 April sought and on 27 April obtained
Canberra's approval to see Quat alone but he was unable to do so
until 28 April. Meanwhile on 26 April the Australian Ambassador had
reported from Washington that Quat had not yet given his agreement
and that no one knew when he would do so. It was felt that Taylor
would have to speak to Quat again if he did not reply very soon.
The Australian Government on 27 April indicated that it was
anxious that a request should be obtained as early as possible, but
on the same day Sai'gon again advised Canberra that because of
Vietnamese sensitivities it would seem desirable in any public
announcement to include references both to the Vietnamese request
and to prior consultations among the Vietnamese, the United
States and Australian Governments. On 28 April the Australian
Ambassador in Saigon expressed a. hcpe that the Vietnamese could be
given prior guidance on the content cf the Prime Minister's planned
statement as consultation with them on the present proposal had
been minimal. He also reported that Quat had on 27 April welcomed
the Australian Government's offer and agreed to an announcement by
the Australian Prime Minister of the decision to provide a
battalion in response to a Vietnamese request. Later, on 29 April,
the Ambassador reported that Quat had not handed him a forffel
written request but had agreed verbally. In an endeavour to
formalise matters the Ambassador planned to hand a note to the
Vietnamese Secretary of State, Bui Diem, confirming the Australian
offer, the Vietnamese acceptance of it and their expression of a
request for the despatch of the force. Also on 29 April, Bui Diem
agreed to send a letter acknowledging the Ambassador's letter and
confirming the Vietnamese Government's request. Later the same day
Quat's letter, which the Australian Government accepted as a r~ quest,
was despatched. This letter stated that the Ambassador's letter
confirming Australia's offer had been received, that the Republic of
Vietnam confirmed its acceptance of that offer and requested the
despatch of the battalion on the basis discussed. Also on 29 April
the Australian Government announced that, being in receipt of a 
19
request from the Government of South Vietnam and after close
consultation with the United States, it had been decided to provide
an infantry battalion for service in South Vietnam. The terms of
this announcement had been communicated to Washington before receipt
of the letter from Dr Quat of 29 April. ' The Vietnamese Government's
off icial communique issued on the subject and dated 29 April began
" Upon the request of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam the
Government of Australia today approved the despatch to Vietnam of an
infantry battalion Despite this communique, it would then appear that, the
offer of the battalion having been made by Australia first to the
United States, the two Governments together ( with the United States
predominating) subsequently arranged for the formal request from
South Vietnam. In terms of Article IV paragraph 3 of the SEATO Treaty,
however, the further question as to -whether Australian military aid
was acceptable to South Vietnam and whether Australian combat
forces were in that country with the consent of its Government needs
to be examined. Prior to April 19,65 there had been other requests from the
Government of South Vietnam and frequent expressions of appreciation
of aid supplied. The request made in general terms by President Diem
in March 1962, the request for pilots made by Ambassador Tran Van Lam
in May 1963, General Khanh's widc and general appeal in July 1964
and the appeal by Prime Minister Huong in December 1964 have been
placed in their context in the chronological survey of Australian-
Vietnamese Relations 1961-64. There is no Evidcnce in Australian
documents to show that the requests by President Diem, by Ambassador
Tran Van Lam and General Khanh were prompted by external pressure,
although it is notable that the Ambassador's request for pilots was
received while Australia. was considering a similar request from the
United States. However, in the ca-se of the strong direct request
from Prime Minister Huong, and of the request from Dr Quat, there is
evidence of such pressure. ' The conclusion suggests itself that
although the South ViEtnamese authorities were initially reluctant
to request external military forces as distinct from general
support of a military nature and continued to display this reluctance
in varying degrees, they were brought to accept the necessity of
such forces by persuasion and by the weakness of their own position,
and they did on various occasions indicate that the forces were
appreciated and welcome. Consequently, the Australian military
presence in South Vietnam can clearly be said tu have received their
consent. 
20
The Relevance of SEATO
The documents show quite clearly that Australian troops
were not sent to South Vietnam as part of or in response to
SEATO Council Planning, nor were they sent in response to an
appeal to SEATO as a collective organisation from South Vietnam
as a Protocol State of SEATO. In the following paragraphs the
mass of evidence in the documents to support this conclusion is
condensed to a brief summary.
As early as 15 May 1962 the Australian Government decided
publicly to justify non-combatant, and later combatant
military aid to Vietnam as being in accord with or in the context
of SEATO. This decision taken by Ministers seems to have been
taken without any departmental advice. It was not until August
1964 that any serious analysis by officials of the relevance of
SEATO appears on the files. This analysis began by admitting
frankly that Australian assistance was in fact given in response
to the wishes of the United States that Australia should provide
some military assistance to Vietnam in the form of a services
" fpresence". The analysis then went on to argue that it was unwise
to endeavour to justify Australian aid as being covered by
a public treaty such as SEATO or in terms of Article IV of paragraph
1 of the SEATO Agreement. This was because the Government of
South Vietnam had not formally invoked SEATO, because of the
non-combatant role of our forces, as well as the very small response
they represented. It was pointed out that Article II
would be a more appropriate justification as it provided for
self help and mutual aid to counter and prevent subversive
activities directed from outside a given state. However, under
the terms of the Protocol, Article II did not apply to Protocol
States. However, it was suggested that paragraph 2 of Article IV
would provide a " useful umbrella" to justify Australian action.
This Article provided that " If in the opinion of any of the
parties the inviolability or the integrity of the territory or
the sovereignty or the political independence of any party in
the Treaty area or of any other state or territory to which the
provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article from time to time apply
is threatened in any way other than by armed attack, or is
affected or threatened by any fact or situation which might endanger
the peace of the area, the parties shall consult
immediately in order to agree on the measures which should be
taken for the common defence".
Because the South Vietnam Government never invoked
SEATO as a Treaty Organisation and because of the difficulties
of interpretation involved in any attempt under these circumstances
to use the Treaty provisions as a justification for
Australian action, the Government preferred not to specify any
particular provision of the Treaty, but to argue in general
terms that Australian action was in accordance with Australia's 
21
obligations under the Treaty. More specifically while using
the-Treaty as a " useful umbrella", justification was based upon
three arguments. The first was that South Vietnam was in the
Treaty area and was for the purposes of Articles IV and III
designated a Protocol State. The second argument accepted past
interpretations made of the Treaty by the United States and
argued that the Treaty obligation was individual as well as
collective and that therefore obligations could be fulfilled
by bilateral agreements as well as by collective action. Thirdly,
it was argued that a collective SEATO policy had been in existence
and maintained over a period of time. In support of this,
reference was made to three Resolutions of the SEATO Council:
that of 29 March 1961 which noted with concern the efforts of
an armed minority with external aid acting in violation of the
Geneva Accord to destroy the Government of Vietnam, and declared
its firm resolve not to acquiesce in any such take-over; that
of 1963 in which the Council expressed the hope that Vietnam
with external support could maintain its advance towards
economic stability and international security; and that of
1964 when the Council gave special attention to the deteriorating
situati on in Vietnam, the official communique stating ( with
France abstaining) that the Council agreed that member states
should remain prepared if necessary to take concrete steps
within their respective capabilities in fulfilment of their obligations
under the Treaty.
Immediately before the Honolulu staff talks Departments
gave some consideration to '' the credibility of maintaining the
view that what we had i~ n South Vietnam flows from our SEATO obligations".
As a result it was clearly realised that the arguments
represented above were exceedingly weak in view of the conspicuous
absence of any collective SEATO activity. Moreover it is notable
that, when the Australian Government came to explain to the United
Kingdom the crucial military staff talks which took place in
Honolulu in March 1965 between Australia and the United States
concerning the provision of military aid to Vietnam, Australia
represented to the United Kingdom that these were informal talks
arising out of ANZUS affairs. No suggestion was made that these
crucial talks as a result of which Australian combat troops were
committed to Vietnam, were in any way part of a SEATO operation.
Again, the status of Australian forces in Vietnam was
not governed by any authority deriving from SEATO but was based
upon an exchange of letters with the President of Vietnam giving
Australian troops in that country diplomatic status on the model
of the Pentilateral Agreement on Mutual Defence Assistance in
Indo-China concluded in 1950 between the United States, Vietnam
and other Governments. No matter what the theoretical arguments which could
be raised concerning the relevance of SEATO to Australian 
22
action, in practical terms the facts are clear.
Although the Government of South Vietnam at different
times appealed to the Heads of Government of over thirty
countries, it did not at any time appeal to SEATO as a collective
treaty organisation. Because there was no request of this type,
the SEATO plans devised by SEATO military advisers specifically
to assist a Protocol State and to counter communist insurgency
in South Vietnam were not used, nor could the Treaty Organisation
operate. There is certainly nothing in the documents to suggest
that the sending of Australian troops was the subject of a SEATO
Council decision. Not only did South Vietnam not appeal to SEATO but the
United States Government was for a variety of reasons specifically
opposed to the use of SEATO as the machinery by which increased
military aid could be introduced into South Vietnam. As a result,
several Australian suggestions to the United States that any
Australian aid should be related to SEATO received no support.
In its early thinking before the commitment of United
States combat forces, the United States occasionally suggested
that the situation in South Vietnam might require SEATO operations
and very occasionally hinted that SEATO provided a justification
for its presence. But the real justification was
always based upon the fact of a bilateral agreement and not
upon the SEATO argument. Moreover, the fact is plain that
American military plans for aid to Vietnam were not of direct
relevance to SEATO and i~ n fact on occasion were in conflict with
SEATO military planning. This was known and understood by
Australian military planning authorities, and was specifically
mentioned in the Honolulu talks. Because of these facts
neither the United States nor Australia, when reporting its
action in Vietnam to the Security Council, did so in terms of
SEATO. In the light of the above evidence and no matter what
the theoretical possibilities of arguing as to whether or not
Australian action could possibly be justified in terms of the
SEATO Treaty, the fact is apparent that Australian troops were
not sent to Vietnam as part of a SEATO operation or as a result
of consultations among the SEATO powers as a treaty organisation. 
23
AUSTRALIA VIETNAM 1965-67
The four decisions made by Australian Governments to increase
troop levels in Vietnam ( announced on 18 August 1965, 8 March 1966,
December 1966 and 17 October 1967 respectively) were all essentially
a logical extension of the 1965 decision to send combat forces to
Vietnam, and a measure of the importance placed on the American
alliance. General support for United States policies in Vietnam did
not necessarily mean unqualified approval of policies of escalation,
nor was it conceded that Australia should increase her forces in
Vietnam progressively as the United States increased its own troop
levels there. Successive Governments retained control of the Liming,
extent and nature of Australia's added commitments in Vietnam, and
each decision was taken. in accordance with assessments of changes in
the political and strategic circumstances of the region and with due
regard for the Government's total defence program and its domestic
commitments. But the option of refusing to increase troop levels was
never considered. The dominant influence throughout the period was pressure
from Americans at political, diplomatic and service levels for
Australia to increase her commitment in Vietna. Australia's contribution
was, of course, too small to be very significant militarily:
the chief United States motive was the need to prove that her Vietnam
policies had the support of other countries, and the more U~ nited States
policies were called into question, the more she required her allies
publicly to proclaim support. AL the end of the period under review
here the pressure which she exerted was described as " extremely strong".
In contrast to the Americans, the Vietnamese only intermittently
exerted pressure on Australia to increase her military aid to
their country. However, before Australia's biggest troop increases
( the commitment of the second and third battalions) discussions took
place between the Australian and Vietnamese Governments. These discussions
did not, according to official spokesmen, result in specific
Vietnamese requests for more troops. Despite Australia's concern that
her increased assistance be justified in terms of Vietnamese requests,
in three of the four cases of increased Australian assistance it was
considered unnecessary to ask the South Vietnamese Government for a
formal request for aid. The Sout~ h Vietnamese Government was merely
informed of the decision either shortly before or after the announcement
by the Australian Government. Twice the Vietnamese Government and the
Australian public were informed that the increase was in pursuance of
earlier requests and once that it was as a result of continuing consultations
between the two Governments.
The First Increase The first increase in the numbers of Australian combat troops
in Vietnam was prompted by a request from President L. B. Johnson to the 
-24
Primc Minister on 26 Ju,; ly 1965, ju.: 7t he Unitccd St. ates was about to
increase her own forccs t~ o L*-4 b-At:. ticn--and to (' ndor the " Search
and destroy" strategy. Similar requt-sr--wcre : cnt to other countries:
the United State. s wanted a " clear : inal LO the world and perhaps
especially to Hanoi of the -_ olid-rity cf inr. crnatio1-3l support for
resistance to aggre. ior in Vi_-tnarn and fo-r a pc'accful settlement in
Vietnam" In a covering nc. c, t'; hc United Stati-i Ch-irge d'Affaires in
Canberra said that he had been, a.,: kcd to _ stc that thc. United States
fully recognised Lt difficuttic:-that-_ would be. inv~ olved in any
additional Austra1laxn co. Lribution ir. Virtnarr during 1965, but it
hoped that when the full _--ope of U'nitcd St-&amp; t. c-dc.: tlcns became known,
the Australian Go--crnmr; nt-mriiht L. 7k r"~ dto~ i build-up measures
that would permit. an car]. icr bti. n tbct pr-nt. t il1itary plans
would allow. The Prime M. Lni.:: Cr apkvd for i-, rnkiEiatc a4; 1_ ri on the request,
as when United Statos' p~ an-wero puabli: Jv -) ncuncktd it might be
necessary for the Au.-trali. n Gc.;.' rnnrt-te 27cmo P-: blic indication
of its own position about . addiricnal IT. C L.
When tLhc rcqu -r w~ i fr, r . r. Ji derci in thE: D:-partro. Ent of
ExternaL Affair:. it-wa&amp; :--t7t~ id thit tls inrnd.-Jte f-uturc. it is
clear that We Lanl only lcek. for rr. rgin,, d *: cntriL-uion,-', of which
" the most att--cti.-n in pclit-iLa3I -r i thc; idc-.-c. 1 building up the
battalion L~ O baILle( zreup". Dep-47[ t-m e. r~ u~ L di doubted that.
Australia zhouIld Plan fcor-, :. Wo-L-aL--t1cn Efort Socuth Victrum
early in 1966, or th, r, -11 pr ap'c-1 the United
State!; T-hould bc info'rrrcd c f themr. C,!-; cti the . r~~ in~ c in
Indonesia, Malay-vi;. and NE~ w G-i.. nL-3, r. o dc : iLion ! 3hniild be taken
without " a zareful ex. An~ r,. tion Lrn thv 1i~ of cont. irning Jnited States
and Britih policie., in SrA-1r. h. : ifld rhi*;, not been done.
AL a n el~ tin2, 2q J, Av 196",, S. v. Dcpairtmentvil
adviB~ sr-. con.-i dcrcd wh-it -c-uttl hr dc~ rEf withi. r; A. 3' pre. 3cnt
capabilit. i. C-r. An -ldtonl2Grc~ n cild d(_: p-rchcd, but if there
were any int~ intion of rir. ru~-cr : 1rtli'l the. Army needed to
have an irnradiatc Jcui.-ior. In ordc. r Lc pi c-fr dr~ pa tch in February
or March 1966. Threc criLeria wCI. _:: Uggi.: tEd for r. ak~ ng ' a recommendation
to the Govrrrr-cnt whar. wi-nt: c * e-r-cfyo r the wmILtary effort in
Vietnam, wha. wa,-nuzf-. ry to cif. L] T'. Jf-17o r-Jr,-Amcrican support in
the area, and whatr would :, di--. VA1p; uli.: opinion and on all
three count,,, It EcrLm.. d unneCLe-C7 _ i1^ t. c0 zc'nr[ u-i n cxtra3 b attalion. In
the following month, thcr, forf*, Lht:. Mi m rcfr Dcftr. n. c recommended
to his collec~ guc_-that. A-u-7t. ria. t ~ huld:
buil~ d thc. Inf; intcry Bat tllvir. ant-c linGru
by the addition of arl. iltdry -1 T. ppOrti1ng units;
retain the National Scr-ii.,-A int: 1kc thc i-xi. iting
figure of 8,400 pcr -inrnu, N~ re~ Vi ' W~ l a.-it hE
end of 1966; 
25
authorise the Army to plan and prepare on the
assumption that a second battalion might be
committed in March 1966;
restrict on a need-to-know basis knowledge
of the planned build-up and its objective;
inform the Americans that we were unable to
contribute more than the forces indicated in
and explain why.
Departmental advice to the Minister for External Affairs,
tendered on 16 August 1965, stressed the impossibility of forecasting
future events in the Malaysia-Singapore-Indonesia area, and urged
again that for this reason no formal indication should be given to the
United States " that we are planning to make a second battalion available
for service in Vietnam in 1966", though she should be told of
the planned increase in the National Service intake, and that
Australia's capacity would be reviewed in 1966. The Department also
thought that Australia should avoid any commitment to " progression"
i. e. that as the Americans increased their forces so Australia should
do more. When Ministers considered the question they endorsed
recommendation&amp; and but directed that no planninz or preparation
whatever should be made on the assumption that an additional
battalion or any other additional forces would be committed to Vietnamr.
The Australian Embas~ sies i~ n Washington and Saigon, and the
High Commissions in London and Wellington were informed of the Government's
decision on 17 August, and asked to inform the Governmentsto
which they were accredited. The Washington Embassy was told that " we
would like you to present it in a way that will make the greatest
favourable impact on the Americans"
There i~ s no evidence in official documents that the South
Vietnamese Government had made any request for further Australian
military aid at this time. Nor is there any firm evidence to suggest
that the Vietnamese were consulted on the question before 18 August,
the day the Australian Government announced its decision. The view was
expres * sed in Australia that it would be necessary to confirm with the
Government of South Vietnam that the further contribution of forces
remains acceptable, but the message actually sent to the Australian
Embassy in Saigon was simply to " inform" the South Vietnamese Government
of the decision, " in context of a step in pursuance of their earlier
request". There were delays in decyphering in Saigon, but the message
was conveyed to the Acting Prime Minister of the Republic of Vietnam on
18 August, some hours before the official announcement, in Canberra
( which took place at 8 p. m. in the House of Representatives). The
Chairman of the National Leadership Committee, Major General Nguyen Van
Thieu, expressed pleasure that the Australian force was being built up. 
26
He asked what the possibilities were if, at some time in the future,
the Vietnamese Government were to make a request for additional forces.
The following day the Vietnamese Ambassador to Australia called on the
Secretary of the Department of External Affairs to convey his Government's
" thanks and appreciation" for the increased Australian military
aid. The Second Increase
The background to the second decision to increase Australian
troop levels in Vietnam ( announced on 8 March 1966) was very different
from that to the first in so far as no formal request was received
from the United States or, until the last minute, from South Vietnam.
In fact, Australian Ministers and officials went to considerable
trouble to ensure that no such request should be made until the Australian
Government was ready to give serious consideration to the matter.
There was nonetheless very intensive lobbying arnd hinting by the United
States for over four months before the announcement. In Washington,
Saigon and Canberra, United States diplomatic and service officials
made it abundantly clear that the United States hoped that Australia
would increase her Vietnam force, while Australian Ministers, whenever
questioned publicly, stated that no formal request for increased aid
had been received. Towards the end of 1965, United States officials took a
gloomy view of the Vietnam situation. In Saigon, United States Defence
Secretary McNamara in an informal talk with the Australian Ambassador*
said that the United States had been surprised by the strength and
violence of the enemy reaction to the American introduction of ground
forces. The choice for the United States as he saw it was between
putting in still more rcops Vietnamese, American and others or
accepting eventual defeat, and the United States would not accept
defeat. McNamara thought that there would be a long and costly military
effort and that neither the military situation nor the preparations
made by the Vietnamese were far enough forward for pacification to be
undertaken on any significant scale. He agreed that negotiations would
carry many dangers as things stood at present. In asking for the
Ambassador' s assessment of the situation McNamara also asked him,
whether action against North Vietnam should be intensified and whether
Australia could send a second infantry battalion to Vietnam. The
Ambassador said the second question was for the Australian Government
to decide, but he was certain that any request would receive prompt and
serious consideration. During December 1965, there were reports of discussions on
many occasions: the Minister for External Affairs during his visit to
Saigon in December 1965 said that both the Americans and the South
Vietnamese raised the question of additional assistance; the Ambassador
* United States Ambassador Lodge, Generals Wheeler, Sharpe and
Westmoreland were also present. 
27
in Washington reported talks with Bundy and with Harriman ( who passed
on President Johnson's thoughts as " background for our decision");
and the United States Ambassador in Canberra spoke to the Prime
Minister. There were also talks in Canberra between United States
Embassy and Departmental officials, and in Washington between the Head
of the Australian Joint Services Staff and Pentagon officials.
The Australian Government was in no doubt, therefore, about
the desire of the United States Government to see an increased Australian
contribution. Ministers, however, saw no need to rush into a
decision: if an extra battalion were committed it could not be done
before March or April 1966; the defence group did not favour further
piecemeal contributions; and a decision should await the outcome of
ministerial discussions with the United Kingdom in the latter part of
January 1966. In the New Year defence planners began a detailed examination
of what increases could be made to the forces in Vietnam, and finalised
their report on 10 February, after the completion of the British
defence review, and after the Prime Minister had defended the United
States' resumption of bombing North Vietnam. The planners outlined
possibilities rather than making recommendations but, as the Departmental
representative explained to the Minister for External Affairs,
the balance of opinion was that Australia should contribute enough
land forces to make up a task force.
Consideration by Ministers was further deferred pending the
visit of United States Vice-President Humphrey, although at a press
conference with Humphrey the Prime Minister wa. quoted as saying that
Australia had been considering for some time what more could usefully
be done in Vietnam. He denied American pressure on Australia and said
that the United States had made no request.
Thus it was not until 3 March 1966 that Ministers finally
decided to replace the force of scme 1,400 men with a -ubstantially
enlarged contribution of forces in the form of a self-contained
Australian task force of s: ome 4,500 personnel under Australian command.
When he told President Johnson of the decision the Prime Minister
commented that his military advisers considered that the provision
of a force of this size represented the upper limit of Army capacity,
having regard to existing military commitments in Malaysia. Furthermore,
while they advised that. the force could be sustained, they had
made it clear that short of a major emergency it would not be practicable
to enlarge it. The Government had believed that the task force
would be the most militarily effective contribution Australia could
make to the allied effort in South Vietnam and it judged that it should
go so far at that time, in consequence of the high importance of the
issues at stake in South Vietnam and to make a clear demonstration of
Australian support for the massive efforts of the United States.
During the months preceding this decision, the Australian
Government was no more anxious to receive a formal request for more
military assistance from South Vietnam than it was to receive one from 
S28
the United States. In an interview with the Vietnamese Foreign Minister
in December 1965, the Minister for External Affairs made it clear that
" the position was that when we were ready to receive a request we would
let him know and he would make one". The Vietnamese subsequently
restricted their efforts to making the Australians " informally aware"
that Vietnam would welcome increased aid. In December 1965 Air Vice
Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, " made what was almost a request" to the Australian
Minister for External Affairs for army and air force assistance,
and Ky repeated this request to an ABC interviewer. Foreign Minister
Tran Van Do, while agreeing not to make a formal request, added that
the Vietnamese Government would, of course, welcome any reinforcement
of the Australian force in Vietnam even if the. se reinforcements were
relatively small.
In the following months there seems to have been no further
communication between the Australian and Vietnamese Governments on this
question, until on 19 February the Australian Prime Minister was quoted
as saying: " we hope to announce soon what Australia can do to supplement
our present forces in Vietnam'. The Australian Ambassador to the
Republic of Vietnam quickly suggested that any such announcement should
be preceded by " adequate prior consultation with the Vietnamese", in
order that it would appear that the Australian decision was taken in
response to a Viettnamese rather than an American request. He al. o
suggested, as had a member of the Department of External Affairs, that
a formal request for aid hould bf: sought from the Vietnamese Gcvernment.
Air Vice Marshal. Ky showed i. nmediate interest in the Princ:
Minister's reported statement, and the Australian Ambassador assured him
" that no decision had yet been taken but that we would omrr. unicate with
the Vietnamese Govzrnment as coon as possible after any such deciiocn
was reached". The Ambassador also informed the Australian Government
that Ky was repcrted to have :-aid previously that existing arrangemrE. nts
would not cover any further military forces that Australia might wish
to send to Vietnam: " there would have t-o be a specific request from
the Government of Vietnam".
On 4 March the Australian Government notified its Ambassador
in Saigon that it had decided upon the ocommitment of the second battalion,
and instructed him to advise Ky of this fact and work out with
him the terms of a letter of request. The letter was to indicate that
it constituted the final formal step following a. series of consultat. icn.-
and should be available for publication. It should be a re( qu st in
general terms only.
The letter was duly obtained from Ky and its contents cabled
to Australia on 7 March 1966, It concluded: " The Governmcnt of the
Republic of Vietnam wishes to request the Australian Government for any
increased military contribution which it might be able tc make in the
present situation". The following day the Victnam-. ne and Australian
Governments announced the decision -inultaneously at 8.45 p. m. ( AEST).
The Australian Ambassador in Saigon reported that Major
General Nguyen Van Thieu and Air Vice Marshal Ky expressed appreciation 
29
of the Australian Government's decision to replace the battalion with
a Task Force and of the continued moral support which this implied.
The Third Increase Towards the end of 1966 United States administrative,
diplomatic and Service officials again indicated that, as United
States presidential adviser William Bundy put it, a possible extra
Australian contribution was " a subject on our minds". But perhaps
because of recognition of Australia's determination to avoid receiving
a formal request during the previous year and appreciation of the
internal difficulties an election posed for the Australian Government,
there seemsto have been greatly reduced pressure from the United States.
The impetus for the third increase in Australia's contribution
came clearly from the Prime Min-ster after he increased his majority
in the November 1966 election, and the speed at which he desired to
move surprised officials and the Minister for External Affairs.
Immediately after the election he told the Secretary of his
Department that he wanted very early Cabinet consideration of sending
an extra battalion to Vietnam, and that he did not want to wait to
consider the question in the light of a review of needs and capabilities
early in the New Year, He asked for a study of all possibilities including
particularly sending an additional battalion from Australia;
and re-deploying the bat. talion at present in Malaysia.
The Minister for External Affairs then asked the Australian
Ambassador in Washington for a personal report of any indications of
further thinking in the United States. The Ambassador replied that
the Embassy had continued to receive hints from contacts in the
White House, the State Department and the Pentagon that an additional
military contribution from Australia would be greatly appreciated by
the Administration and that American hopes of further support from
the United States' allies stemmed as much, and perhaps more, from international
and internal political considerations as from military
necessity. The Ambassador referred to Johnson's need to seek Congressional
approval for a large ircrease his budget the following
January and to the conflicting pressures on one side from the
liberals to " accept negotiations and dangerous concessions to the
Communists" and on the other from those who wanted to escalate the
war with a view to getting it over quickly. The Ambassador believed
that Australia's ability to influence the President's response to
these conflicting pressures would be related to the scale of her
military contribution and the readiness with which it was made. He
suggested that if the fact of an additional contribution would be
at least as important as the nature of such a contribution, this might
provide more flexibility in the Government's consideration of the
' problem. When Service and Departmental advisers presented their
report on 13 December they opened it. with a survey of the state of the
war. They thought that the military situation in Vietnam had improved
over the previous twelve months, but that given the allied forces t. hen 
30
available, defeat of the military aggression from North Vietnam and of
the Viet Cong was unlikely to be achieved for some considerable time.
Concurrently they saw a need for progress to be made in pacification
and civil reconstruction, but this could only be achieved at the expense
of the availability of forces for military operations. Thus the rate of
progress in defeating aggression from North Vietnam and of pacification
was directly related to the size of allied forces available, The report
canvassed several options open to the Government in regard to all three
Services and thought that while the most effective addition to the
Army Task Force would be a third infantry battalion, early deployment
would pose considerable problems. ( Because of these the Army had
recommended against the provision of a third battalion before August
1967.) There were, however, increases ( totalling approximately q00
troops) which were needed to overcome known deficiencies in the existing
forces, some of them specifically recommanded by the Commander of
the Task Force. Anxiety was expressed about making changes in the
Australian contribution to the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve given
the situation in the Malaysia-Indonesia region, and it was agreed that
any such variations should be discussed with the United Kingdom before
any decision was made. As a general observation, the advisers stated
that it was fundamental to Australian defence policy that we should
make a contribution to the security of South East Asia which was
consistent with our national resources and with our vital interests in
the securing of area against communist encroachment. On these
broad strategic, grounds they had previously r-c. ommerded ard the Government
had approvecd a_ substanti. al Australiar forc. e contribution in the
present conflict in Victnam. There were elements in the present situation
including the state of the war, the continuing build-up of
United St. ates forces and the apparent expe( ctat. i. on in the United States
Administration that Australia and other allies would increase their
commitments, which suggested that a further increase in the Australian
contribution would be appropriate. The nat. ure and timing of any increase
were mattc. rs for d. termination by the Government.
The Coverr. TFnt accept. ed their advice against di. patching a
third battalion and irter. fering with arrangements regardlrg the
battalion then in Malaysia, t. decid: d to increase the total number
of personnel serving with the Australian Forces in Vietnam by more
than one-third to a total of 6,300, with increased numbers coming
from all three Services. The Army component was to be raised from
4,370 to 5,200. The Australian Ambassador in Washington was told of
the decision on 16 December, and asked to check points of detail and
acceptabil. ity with the United States Administration so that the
Australian Government could make the earliest possible announcement.
He reported back to Canberra on the same day that United States Defence
Secretary McNamara had expressed particular gratification that
Australia was increasing the level of her ground forces. United
States approval of details was reported on 19 December.
There is no documentary evidence that. the Government of the
Republic of Vietnam was consult. ed about or given prior notification of
this third increase in Australia's forces in Vietnam. The Department
of External Affairs advised in a memorandum of 19 December 1966 that it
did not seem necessary or desirable to seek a specific request from the 
31
South Vietnamese on this occasion. The memorandum added, however, that
there had been a continuing emphasis on consultations with South Vietnam
and with the other allies ( illustrated, for example, by the Prime
Minister's visit to Saigon in April and Washington in June-July and the
recent Manila Conference*). In any event, the broad terms of Ky's
letter of 7 March, together with the continuing consultations at
various levels seemed to provide a satisfactory basis for maintaining
that the additional forces were provided at South Vietnam's request.
It was suggested that, after the proposed aid increase had been made
public, a South Vietnamese announcement of the increase could be useful
if it emphasised the continuing consultations between our two Governments
and with the other allies and drew attention to the increasing
North Vietnamese aggression.
It was in fact some hours after the Australian Prime Minister
had announced the increased assistance in general terms on 20 December
that the Australian Ambassador in Saigon was instructed to inform Air
Vice Marshal Ky of the decision. The information was conveyed through
Foreign Minister Do, who agreed to say that a letter of request was not
necessary because the two Governments had been in continuous consultation
for some time, that Australia was fully aware of Vietnam's
requirements, and that in making further forces available Australia
was acting in the spirit of the Manila Conference.
The Fourth Increase
Expression of American interest in increased Australian aid to
Vietnam during the first half of 1967 followed much the same pattern as
the previous year: the United States made no formal request to Australia
for an additional commitment in Vietnam, but United States military
sources in Saigon and Washington made American wishes quite clear to
Australian officials.
From Washington on 18 April 1967 the Australian Minister for
External Affairs reported a meeting with United States Defence Secretary
McNamara on the progress of the wa-. McNamara had no doubt that America
could no longer lose the war, but they still had the problem of winning
and that could be long and hard and there was no easy way which could
point directly to victorv. After considerable discussion of United
States operation? and the slow progress of negotiations, McNamara asked
The Manila Summit Conference, attended by the political leaders and
foreign ministers; of Australia, The Republic of Korea, New Zealand,
the Philippine.;, Thailand, the United States and the Republic of
Vietnam, was held in the Philippines on October 24-25 1966, " to
consider the conflict in South Vietnam and to review their wider
purposes in Asia and the Pacific". In the Joint Communique released
after the Conference, the participating nations declared their purpose
to be peace in South Vietnam and throughout the Asian and
Pacific area. However they were also determined " that the South
Vietnamese people shall not be conquered by aggressive force and
shall enjoy the inherent right to choose their own way of life and
their own form of government. We shall continue our military and all
other efforts as firrnl. y and as long as ~ wy be necessary in close
consultation among ourselves until the aggression is ended." 
32
the Minister's views about the present level of forces and said that
more troops could do more tasks but they brought with them political,
economic and psychological problems. McNamara then illustrated the
value of more troops by pointing to the specific task in Phuoc Tuy
province being carried out by the Australians with two battalions and
commenting that clearly we could do the same task more quickly with
three. If the Defence Secretary also elaborated on the problems, the
Minister did not report it, nor did he report any comment of his own
on the specific issue of the troop increase.
But if United States probings of Australian intentions were
not particularly insistent during the first half of the year, the
rising level of public controversy in America over policies of escalation
in Vietnam soon made the United States Administration more anxious
to demonstrate that United States policies had the moral and practical
support of her allies. Thus, President L. B. Johnson on 13 July brought
the whole question of increases in troop levels into the public arena
when, together with Defence Secretary McNamara and Generals Wheeler and
Westmoreland, he indicated in a press statement that the United States
would discuss increased contributions with her allies. A week later
the White House announced the visit of presidential advisers Maxwell D.
Taylor and Clark M. Clifford to Asia, Australia and New Zealand. Meanwhile
on 15 July President Johnson wrote to the Prime Miaister pointing
to the need for additional effort, but net making a specific request.
The political situation in the United States was analy. j d by
the Australian Charge in Washington on 25 July. He reported a fluid
situation comprising many conflicting trends in opinion, increasing
public scepticism about the war, and although he did not think the
basic American ccmmitment tc Vietnam was being called into question he
feared tha. t if, following the United Kingdom's announced intentions to
withdraw from South East Asia, America's allies gave a negative response
to proposals for more troops it would have a disproportionately adverse
effect on United States opinion. Under these circumstances Australiacs
response, as the most significant Western ally, was of particular
importance. The Clifford-Taylor talks held at the very end of July were
broad-ranging rather than narrowly fc. cussed cn the question of troop
levels. A number of papers, including a summary of main talking point?,
were prepared in the Departments of External Affairs and Defence for
the use of Ministers. These cover political prospects in South Vietnam,
the pacification program, prospects for ncgotiations, communist use of
Laos and Cambodia, United States plans in regard to bombing as wll as
the issue of troops. Amongst other things the summary noted that the
relatively optimistic picture of the military situation giv n by the
President in his message to the Prime Minister contrasted with our own
military assessment; and with some private United States assessments.
It noted also that the Revolutionary Development program had been making
very slow progress and the South Vietnamese Army was not yet giving it
adequate support. On the question of troops, military advisers expressed
the view that in considering any future contributions of forces to
South Vietnam a tank squadron and additional helicopter support should 
S33
be given first priority. ( A request for the tank squadron had been
received from the Australian Commander in Vietnam and defence advisers
supported the request.) They suspected that a contribution on these
lines would probably fall short of what the United States would have
liked from us, i. e. more ground forces, but sgugested that Taylor and
Clifford might not be fully aware of the important implications of the
British White Paper for future Australian defence arrangements.
At the talks themselves the Australian attitude was not to
deny the substance of the United States view that there was a need for
publicly declared allied solidarity and greater effort, but to bring
into the equation the very considerable stretch already in Australia's
military and economic effort, not only in Vietnam but elsewhere, and
the new pcssibility in the light of recent British decisions that wider
responsibilities would fall on us. For Australia, " effort" was not to
be measured simply in terms of the Vietnam commitment.
The Clifford-Taylor talks thus provided a forum for a mutual
exchange of views; they led to no immediate decision on the part of the
Australian Government.
Defence and departmental officials continued tc consider the
details of possible further commitmints with no great enthusiasm, By
18 August 1967 they had reached agreement that c-ommitment of a third
battalion would pose many difficulties; instead they favoured making
available the additions to the Task Force which had been requested by
the Commander in Vietnam. There was, however, a division of opinion
over whether a positive recommendation against providing a third
battalion should be made. There could be an embarrassing situation, it
was suggested, if the Government were subsequently asked if it had acted
upon the views of its official advisers. Although this suggestion met
with some opposition, the weight of opinion was that the requests for
additional forces received from the Ccmmander of the Tack Force should
be recommended on military grounds; cther possible contributions should
be listed for Government consideration, and the dicadvantages of providing
a. third battalion should be enumerated.
Ministers on 6 September decided in principle to commit the
third battalion to Vietnam, but did not set the date for the announcement.
Thus when the Prime Minister spoke with the United State6
Ambassador to Australia on 7 September, he told him only that he should
let the President know that " we were not going to sleep", but that
there were some important difficulties and complexities in the situation
for the Government, such as the implications of British withdrawal planour
budgetary situation, the local political scene in terms of the
Senate election and the Capricornia by-election due shortly, and uncertainties
still surrounding some aspects of the Vietnamese elections.
There was nevertheless a will to assist.
Just as the Prime Minister had given the impetus to an early
decision on troop levels at the end of 1966, so now he would seem to
have provided the initiative in determining that Australia should offer
more than, by implication, its defence advisers had recommended. When 
the Australian Treasurer was in Washington in early October ( and under
instructions not to inform the President that Australia would provide a
third battalion), he referred to the Prime Minister's leadership in
making clear to Ministers " what the issues involved in Vietnam were
and the critical importance of our association with the United States".
In reporting thi:: meeting with the President, the Treasurer
stated that the pressure put upon him to have our decision indicated
quickly to Johnson was " extremely strong", and that the Australian
Ambassador, who was also present, could not remember stronger pressure
being brought to bear.
In response, the Treasurer explained to the President
Australia's various commitments. The following day ( 3 October 1967)
he suggested to the Prime Minister that the President should be told
personally and confidentially what Australia proposed to do, and on 6
October the Prime Minister did so in a message sent. to the Australian
Ambassador in Washington for transmission to the White House.
He told the President of Australia's plans in regard to the
Malaysia-Singapore region where, he said, what happened in the longer
term would be determined in large part by the outcome of Vietnam and
by the extent of co-operation by the countries in the region in maintaining
their own security. He suggested that Aust. ralia'= continued
military prese; nce would depend on reaching . ome understanding with the
United States in the event of serious trouble developing in the
Malaysia-Singapore region. He thought it desirable to discuss the
United State:;' interest in the security and stLability of South East Asia
generally, the bearing of this on the cecurity of the Malaysia-Singapore
region and the part in this security which Australia and New Zaeland
could play. In Vietnam, he said, Australias fcrce. would be incr: ased by
some 1,700 men tc brine the rnmbers to over 8,000, and thi-, he: a: s ured
the President, put Australia at the f-ll. stretch of present and planned
military capacity. He added that to attempt to go beyond this would
involve the Government in military, . conomic and political deci. ions
which he and hi:; colleagues would regard as publicly unacceptable in the.
existing climate of opinion apart from other considerations cf national
policy. As in the case of the decision in March 1966 to commit the
second battalion, there was consultation between the Australian and
Vietnamese Governments before the third battalion was committed. During
a visit to Saigon in late July 1967, the Minister for the Army discussed
the Aistralian force in Vietnam with both Vietnamese and American officials.
He declared, however, that neither the Vietnam. se nor the
Americans had made a specific request for more Australian troops.
There further, indirect evidence that some month, s later
the Republic of Vietnam's Ambassador to Australia conveyed to the
Secretary of the Department of External Affairs " an indication of a
wish on their / the Vietnamese/ part to have whatever additional, support 
35
we can provide". There followed a suggestion on 10 October 1967 from a senior
member of the Department of External Affairs. Although he no longer
thought it necessary to seek a specific formal request from the Vietnamese
Government for additional Australian forces he thought it important
that the Vietnamese should be informed of our intention well in advance
of the announcement on 17 October. On 14 October the Australian
Ambassador in Saigon was asked to notify the Vietnamese Government of
the decision, which was described as having been taken in the light of
previous requests by the Vietnamese Government for such military assistance
as the Australian Government was able to provide, a request which
the Vietnamese Ambassador in Canberra had confirmed that month. The
Australian Government saw this decision as being in fulfilment of the
undertaking made by the Manila Conference Powers to continue military
aid to South Vietnam as long as aggression continued there.
The Ambassador informed the Vietnamese Foreign Minister of the
decision to increase military aid on 16 October, and the latter
" expressed appreciation". After the Australian announcement of the
decision on 17 October, Directory Chairman Thieu publicly welcomed the
troop increases and praised both the military and civil activities of
Australian and New Zealand troops in Vietnam. 



1W EMBARGO 7.30 P
NATIONAL BROADCAST A
BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
13 MAY 1975
I would like to report to you on the valuable and wide-ranging
discussions I have been having overseas during the Parliamentary
recess. With the Special Minister of State and senior officials
of the Australian Government, I have been attending the Meeting
of Commnonwealth Heads of Government in Kingston, Jamaica. On
the way to Jamaica we visited Peru the first visit by an
Australian Prime Minister to a South American country. And on
the way home I had talks in Washington with President Ford,
Vice-President Rockefeller, Secretary of State Kissinger and
senior members of the United States Congress. So in the space
of a fortnight there have been opportunities for Australia to
exchange views with leaders from every part of the world to
establish new friendships and build on old ones.
0There h as'never been a time when events in the world have
moved so swiftly or suddenly as they have during the past two
years. The extraordinary changes in our own region the recent
decisive events in Indo-China were of course very much in our
minds; but that's only a part of the story, part of the pattern
of change and upheaval in recent years. Since the Commonwealth
Heads of Government met in Ottowa in 1973 there have been farreaching
developments in Africa, in Cyprus, in the Middle East;
the western nations have grappled with inflation and unemployment;
the gap between the developing and the developed nations has
grown wider. So this is very much a time when national leaders
must get together to discuss their problems in an atmosphere
of frankness and intimacy.
I know there is a tendency in some quarters to disparage the
Commonwealth as a debating society, or as the vestige of a
bygone empire. I don't share those views for a moment. Here
we have an organisation that brings together heads of Government-
Presidents and Prime Ministers or their representatives from
34 nations representing a quarter of the world's people, nations
of every kind, rich and poor, consumers and producers, agricultural
and industrial, developed and developing, and from every part of
the world.
There is an obvious value in this diversity, but there is an
equal value in the shared traditions of the Commonwealth partners.
The very fact that all our discussions are in English gives an
ease and familiarity to our meetings that cannot be valued too
highly. It's not so long ago that many member nations were a
little cynical and indifferent about the Commonwealth and
some States were reluctant to join it. There is no sign of
such attitudes today. At the next meeting, for example, Papua
New Guinea will take her seat as an independent nation; and in
the years ahead other newly independent countries of the South
Pacific will be admitted to Commonwealth membership. So year 
2.
by year the Commonwealth gains in numbers, gains in strength,
and I believe, gains in wisdom, experience, and prestige.
The -truly remarkable thing about our discussions in Jamaica
was the readiness of every nation to get down to essential
issues and the striking measure of agreement we reached. You
will remember that Commonwealth conferences in the past were
often occasions for squabbling and grandstanding. There were
endless confrontations between the nations of the old white
Commonwealth and the newly independent states of Asia and
Africa. There was nothing of that sort in Jamaica. On the
particular issues of racism and de-colonisation, for example,
there was complete agreement. Every nation confirmed its
total support for the African people of Southern Rhodesia-
Zimbabwe in their struggle for independence on the basis
of majority rule. Every nation reaffirmed the need for the
Indian Ocean to remain an area of peace and stability and
expressed concern about military bases in the region and
when we remember that something like half the member nations
0 of the Commonwealth are island, coastal or hinterland states
of the Indian Ocean that is not perhaps surprising. Again,
every nation supported the-need for international assistance
in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Indo-China. Every
nation expressed concern at the continued testing and proliferation
of nuclear weapons and reaffirmed the need for a comprehensive
ban on all nuclear weapons tests.
Every nation supported the withdrawal of foreign armed forces.
from Cyprus. I was particularly gratified, on the Cyprus
0 question, that Australia was accepted as a member of a committee
of eight Commonwealth nations which will seek ways of restoring
the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus on the
basis of United Nations resolutions.
On all these issues I was able to put Australia's views, and
in every case the outcome was deeply satisfying not just
because the resolutions of the conference happen to-coincide
with my own Government's foreign policies, but because they
represent the views of so many different states, and were
reached without rancour, without dissension, in an atmosphere
of extraordinary goodwill.
There was one problem in Jamaica that stood out above all othersthe
need to find a new and equitable international economic
order. All of us recognised that many, if not most, of the
world's problems really come down to a single basic issuehow
best to distribute the world's resources, how best to
reduce the disparities between the rich and poor nations,
between the haves and the have-nots in the world. 
3.
In tackling that question the most difficult challenge
facing mankind I believe we were tackling the root cause
-of tension and conflict in the world. of course it would be
rash to pretend that we found the answers, but we did find
a remarkable readiness on every side among the rich industrial
nations as well as the poorer ones to seek the answers.
Everyone agreed on the range and complexity of the issues
involved. Everyone agreed that trade, not aid, is the real
answer to the needs of the developing countries. We agreed
to set up a group of experts who will draw up, for consideration
by Commonwealth Governments, a comprehensive and inter-related
program of practical measures to help close the gap between the
rich and poor countries.
In Washington I was able to give some account of our discussions
to President Ford, as well as hear his own views on current
problems, both-in America and the world at large. In the
wake of the recent events in Indo-China, the President assured
me of America's firm and continuing commitment to her allies
in our region and in other parts of the world. Yet welcome
as these assurances were, they are not the sole basis for my
confidence in Australia's--future, in Australia's security, or
in Australia's place in the world. Everywhere I went in my
talks in Peru, where we have forged a new and valuable link
with a Pacific nation, in my talks in Jamaica with Commonwealth
leaders, in my talks'in Washington I found both great goodwill
for Australia and a calm, steady belief in the strength of our
common institutions, in our friendships and our alliances, in
the ability of nations to overcome their difficulties with
rational programs and united efforts. Nowhere in my talks with
world leaders did I find any disposition to panic, to lose faith,
to lose heart, to lose nerve. The United States, in particular,
having come through her great domestic and international agonies,
will be better placed now to build on her true strengths and
profit by past experience. I said as much in Washington; and
I pledged that Australia would be a ready and willing partner
of the United States in her efforts to build a more rational
world order and tackle the great problems of the developing world.
We still have to beat some problems at home, but they are no
different in kind from those of other comparable countries.
Where we in Australia are truly fortunate is in our strengths
the undoub~ ed strength of our friendships, the rare abundance
of our resources, the tested spirit and steadiness of our people,
the goodwill we enjoy in every part of the world. 



Jj,. AUSTKALl( A,. PRESS STATEMENT
16 May 1975
AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
The Prime Minister and member for Werriwa, Mr Whitlam
announced today that the Liverpool Area Steering
Committee for the Australian Assistance Plan had been
given a special grant of $ 2,000.
Mr Whitlam said that the grant would help
local organisations involved in community activities
to set up a regional council for social development
in the Liverpool region.
The object of the Australian Assistance plan is
to encourage people to get involved in making
decisions about those community amenities and social services
they believe are needed in. their own region.
CANBERRA. 



SPEBCY TH PA, TI IO TEHEN[ 1I( MjSilTOR / RT 5FCEE GC. LiHSETCLENTI0 CH. P
AT GR EE N HI LLSNN, I S IN!
Oil MAY 16, 1975
I AM~ Df ELIGHTI'. D TO BE HERE W'ITH YOU TODA. tY TO
CELEBIRATE THE OP" ENING OF THIS IM-PREssivE E. C, CLOSE CENTRE,
ALDERP~ i,'\ UNICOMB IS A U'NIQUIELY SUCCESSFUL ADVOCATE OF
INVITATIONS TO V'ISIT THE M~ AITLAND REGION. IHE INSISTED
THAT I COIME WERE FOR THE HEART Olt -rHE HUNT'ER FrESTFIVAL
LAST OCTOBER, AND HERE I AM BACK AGAIN JUST SIX M"' ONTH9S
L ATE. I' ONLY SORRY I DIDN'T MAKE IT FOR THE VINTAGEI
N IACH YOU NIIGHT RECALL THAT IHAD INTEINDED TO ACCEPT
YOUR INVWITA7ION TO LAY THE FOUNDATrIOi. STONE OF THE CLOSE
CENTrRE' A YEAR AGO YIEST'E-RDAY. UNFORTUNATELY I WA" S HIEAVILY
INVOLVED IN. AN ELECTION CAMPAIG'Ni AT THIE TIME THE H1AY 18
FEDERAL ELECTION A YEAR AGO * THIS WNTEEKEND. fYCOLAU
LAiNE BARNARD DEPUTISED FOR ME HERE IN G R EENt HI LLS AND
PROINISED THAT I WOULD BE BACK FOR THE OFFICIAL OPENING.
IAM GLAD THAT THE ELECTION RESULT WqAS SUCH THAT I WA S
ABLE TO IKEEP HIS PROMISE JUST ONE YEAR I-ATER. 21.. 
W. H EN I HEARD THAT DAW, 1N FRASER WOULD BE HER'PE
THIS EVEN ING TO GIVE A DEMONSTRATION SWIM1 ALONG ', I1TH
LAT ER AUSTFRALIAiN GLY," PIANS MIuKE ViENDENJ AIND YOUR O'WN'
WORLD P. EcOR50o YREAIKINGC GRAY,. I w,. As RE113N DED OF ONE
OF fMY EARLIEST DE-CISIONS AFTER BECOMING-10 PRIME 11IINISTER
I N DE CEMIB3E R 1972, FOR, A FEW DAYS * FHEHl, LtilicLE BAR\ 2i--D
AND I WIERE THE WHOLE CABI, 3NET, AND W'E DECIDED THAT THE
AUSTRAL IAN GO0/ V ENT WOUnLDj ENAB3LE DTwN jo . AVn; s--rL:
TO AMilERICA'S SPORTI., G 1HALL OF FAH. E I N FLORDIDA WHERE HER
AMAZN SWIMMIlNG PROWESS HAD ENTITLED HER TO A PLACE OF
HONOUR TH: FIRST AUSTRALIAN WOMAN O, 51 MAN SO HOi\ UREDL
IAM PROUD OF THAT DECISION.
TH. AT~ DECISIO0N WAS THEL-FIRST M,' ANIF: ESTATION OF
THE UNfDERTAKING I GAV'E IN OUR LABOR POLICY SPEECH FOR
T HE 1972 EL. ECTIONS,. NAMNELY THAT MY GO'VERNIMENT WOULD BE
THiE FIR'ST TO IMAKE DIlRECT GRANTS AV'AILABSLE FOR SPORTING
AND RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES. TALKING OF THE ISSUES
RAISED B'jY THE PROSPECT OF IN4CREAoSING LEISURE TIME, I
SAID ' FI[ HERE IS NO GREATER SOCIAL PROBLEM OF ALL MO] CDER-N
AND WNEALTH( COtiMUN ITI ES FOR SUCH URI AN ISED
NATION AS OURS,. THIS-MAY VERY WIELL BE THE PROBLEM1 OF
THE 19o80' s; SO WE 1M1UST PREPARE NOW PREPARE THE
GENERATION OF THE 80" S rHE CHILDREN AND YOUTH OF THE
TO BE ABLE TO ENJOY AND ENRICH THEIR GROWNING HOURS OF
LE ISURE" 3 
Tw/ vr I S THE DAI FOUR CONIT-ifT ASI THE REQ I ON
TAKIN\ G IN INEWCASTLE ANMD filAITLAND, Cr-SsNaC'. ANI) lUSViELL'-R0) K,
THE SIESOr: S INGLETON'l AND PA TrZICK PLAI'NS
LA !, E MA COUAR IE , DUNGOG A1ND) SOE A1: 1-( GLOUCESTE1 HIA S
DE'NEFITED FROlMl THIS POLICY,
tINDTRE .1974// 5 CAP IITAL AS sI STANCE PiROGRAMi
( AND 1NCk'lLUDIfNG IPOEMN RAN!\ TSC) A TOTAL OF $ 406, 500
HAS BEEN ALLOCATJiED TO THOSE CITIES AND SHIRESl~ l BY THE
AUSTRALIAN4 MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND RE--CREATION THIS IS
I N ADDI T ION1-TFHIE ! 3/, 0O0 DE AVAILA"' LE IN 1973/ 74,
Tins YEAR'S GRANTS OtCLUiDE $ LQ 00FO UCONsTRUc" rio1
ANDT. D! RE7SSI!\ NG: FACILITIES AT THE l[ iAITLAND OLY1MP1IC POOL;
W, 000 FOR THnE LUILDIN; G OF A t'U:-LTI-PURPO. SE SPORTING
AND ODC-AN ISA-TIONA L FACI LITY INi TH-E Du! t. 1; oe-SHIRE A-ND
$ 75,000 FOP. A SWMIGCOMPLEX AT CHAf LESTFO! AN IN THE
LAKE JIACQUAR IE SH IRE8 OTHIER. GRANTS HAVE GONE TOWARDS
IMPRO\ VING FACILITIES AT SPORTING, PICNIC AND CAMPING
SPOTS CATERlIN. G FOR THE WH!,-OLE CONJAUNITY.
TRUE, 14o FEDERAL GRANT WAS NM~. TOWARDS THIS
MAGN IF ICENT SPORTS CENTRE WNHICH IS A COMMERCIAL VENTURE
AVAILAB1' LE TO0 THE COM" MUNITY, AND ONE WHICH CANNOT BE
PRAISED TOO HIGHLYLl 
I IDiL: D THE PLAINN I NHG AllD OPERAT I ON OF TH IS COM;' PL-EX
MIAY 1E L. L PROV'IDE A LESSON FOR iN1UN IC IPAL I\ UY! lOPRI TI ES
CO NEM L AT NC AN YTfI ING S I IN IL A F OR THfiE IR AR E AS T HE
EMPHASIS KEEIS O. N, PROVIDING THE OPPORTUNIITY FOR PEOPL-[-E
OF AlL AGE--S T0 TAKEl AD j.( AZ TV7 OF SPORTING FACI LITI E--S
WHICOH, W, 1HILE MOT REU~ GTEArI1 PARTI CI PAION, STI LL
ENABLE PE-OPLEr-TO IKEE FPIT AND HEALHY'N MATTER HOW
FAR THllEY NIGHT BE FIRM TEAM SELIECTION STANADArNDS,
IN PAR MU ARLY -PLEASED, If N ITERNAT IONiAL ' NOMEN ' S YEr-AR,
TO INOTE THAT TH ETECATERS FOR ' NWMEN'S RECREA\ TIONAL
NEEDS BY THE PROVISION NOT ONLY OF SPECIAL CLASSES BUT
ALSO OF A CHILD MIN1IG ROOM TO MAKE ATTEND'AINCE AT SUCH
CASSMORE THAN PIlPE: DREAMI'j
To GET BA, 4CK TO FUiNDING,": FOR,") A lf11iGENT, PRIORITY
SIM'* PL-Y t-ULSTl GO IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO IBUILDIilG UPIN
MANY CSE HELPING TO PURCHASE THE LAND FOR PUB3LIC
SPORTS FACILITIES ' W!' iICH HAVIE LIMPED ALONG FOR SO 1AINY
YEAR'' S WITHOUT ASSISTANCE FROM 1EITHER STATE o r? FE DE': RA L
G ov miEvr-s, TL--vFPY IDEA OF HAVI! G SEPARATE DEPA. RTMENTS
OF TOURISM AND RECREATION RC'FC N N1QIEBY
THE WILDEST DREANIS OF GENTLE:-ME--N LIKEC-FlR. EDARJD CHARLES CLOSE
AFTER WHO1M THIS C-EN~ TPlz IS NAtM" ED, 
BuT-f SO0H; EON; AS AS HE 1VU\ S IN THE
DAY--' rO--DAY ADUN TxTO'] AID D!: YLVLOlP1I: N1' OF THiI S
AREA1 WAS THE 1( 1T NP OF P) ERSON WHOAl1 1C ENTURY LATER/
VIOULD HiAVE APPIREC JATED1 THE NFED TO ESTAD, L I SF1 COMUHI TY
CREKIOK' CETPES FO02 HIS PECLL
IT IS ENTIRELY FITTrING THAT THIS CEiNTRF SIHOULD
D~ E DEDICA* TL! hD TO TH E MORY OF THIS VERY SPECIAL PIONIEER,
IHA". VE G. REAT PLEASURE IN DECLAR''% ING OPEN TH-E , C CLOSE CENTPEI 
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE HUNTER REGION
AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
HUNTER REGIONAL COUNCIL FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT HAS
RECEIVED $ 29,000 OF $ 40,000 ALLOCATED TO THEM IN
1974/ 75 FOR ADMINISTRATION COSTS.
IN ADDITION $ 8,600 HAS BEEN PAID OUT OF THREE
ADDITIONAL GRANTS OF $ 12,000 PER ANNUM EACH FOR
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS APPROVED FROM 1/ 1/ 75,
LQCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE HUNTER REGION 1974/ 75
DENMAN SHIRE COUNCIL
DUNGOG SHIRE COUNCIL
GLoUCESTER SHIiR COUNCIL
GREAT LAKES SHIRE COUNCIL
GREATER CESSNOCK CITY COUNCIL
LAKE MACQUARIE SHIRE COUNCIL
MAITLAND CITY COUNCIL
MERRIWA SHIRE COUNCIL
MURRURUNDI SHIRE COUNCIL
MUSWELLBROOK MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
NEWCASTLE CITY COUNCIL
PATRICK PLAINS SHIRE COUNCIL
PORT STEPHENS SHIRE COUNCIL
SCONE SHIRE COUNCIL
SINGLETON MUNICIPAL COUNCIL 37,000 60,000
47,000 20,000
$ 342,000
$ 870,000
$ 228,000 26,000 18,000 70,000
$ 716,000 33,000
$ 130,000 62,000 60,000
$ 2,719,000 
RED SCHEIE
MAITLAND CITY COUNCIL PROJECTS APPROVED
GREEN HILLS LANDSCAPING
BROUGH HOUSE IMPROVEMENTS
BOLWARRA LOOKOUT
GILLIESTON HEIGHT PAVILION
JOHNSON RESERVE TOILET BLOCK
KERBS AND GUTTER ( 1)
HAROLD CRIGSON PARK LANDSCAPING
WOODBERRY COMMUNITY HALL
STREET NAME PLATES ERECTION
CLERICAL ASSISTANCE
KERBING AND GUTTERING ( 2)
PARK DEVELOPMENTS
CEMETRIES $ 15,680 4,450
$ 17,495
$ 21,900 6,086
$ 33,980 8,650
$ 99,000 3,140
$ 12,010
$ 56,780
$ 66,668
$ 44,350 
GRiANTS MADE~ B1 TDE DEPATM~ ENT OF
TOU0ItSM' AND J~ 2LATiW TO IRiGTION N I. E',
1 973 74 i ba~ nl Ae l2-. co Procz." am
Dungo{ gs re Basketha1ll and tennis
C ourts
Lake MaIo: quariu Sportin g f'i. elds Belmont
8&gt; i. _ c
Lah Macquarie Sj) 2tiflng filc9ds, Warners Bay
ShIre Tot al
1974/ 75 GrVwitalAss istaunee Pio ' iram ( inc: ui n g A 2,0( 0
30,000 5,000
37, 00')
10 j
Ncweasl City
Na: it: Land City
Greater Cessnock
City
Grcatcr Coss ' ock
C i ty
Singl elon
Municipal Shire
Hurrurunldi Shire
Mu rru junci Shire Swi: Lrni. ng cent: c at WaisI Coud
pools and arenitiecs
M': a: i. tlanid Oimp. c : ool
Ieconstruion and dresg i.
fuiaclIitiec3
Lighting Kurr. i spo: rts ground
Facitj.: Lics fCr St. o: rld
iiluthy's Sports Ground
AmelLti. t: es for James Cook Park
Amenities Warkworth Cricket
Ground fImrove fi: Ll. raton3 system
White Memorial. 1FPool
Purad. sc Park amenities and
itmprovement for picnicirig
Picnic faciii. lies and
amenit ies Norvil3 le Memor: ial: i
Park 73,000
' iO 7,500
15,000 30,000 8,000
30,000 8,000 / 2
I 
19 7AI 7Caia_ b per ' I~ y C!
Sco-neo r
Great bake ShII r'e
Groeat, * Lak! e ShI-Ire
Gloucester Shire . Dovrc-ow7-c) i of: Bury) aJn
B3u 14 of* e uI~ ros
C, c 1 1 Li Pg li o ;' ga z,. t o nal
fac i; U L
P. LWo sion oa to : 1 t fac : i. 1 s
a-t recr. ftiOn o. er'
Do veIopplant of li~ e ' cs
I~ oo 1 amndLdeoe aprit sof
rec jo ation Pa: i . Liesat
Gloucester District Park
Lake &gt; lacqiizric
S hi e C ~ I'm s t ompe t75 ,000
T ot1al 4/ 06, 500
OVERATLA TPOTAL 18, 000
70,000
15,000
15,( 00
15,000
4' 1500
A. rI-' tfj, 31 ud i. a1r: c
15ThIi2y1 
CHILDHOOD SERVICES PROGRAM
Capital Grants Approved
Maitland Nursery School ( extensions) $ 12,000
Singleton Pre School Kindergarden ( extensions)
Currie Currie ( new Pre School) $ 31,000
Recurrent Assistance 1974/ 75 till 31 March 1975
Staff Costs in Pre-School Centres
Maitland Nursery School
East Maitland Kindegarden
Catherine Child Care, East
Cessnock Kindergarden
Singleton Kindergarden $ 2,607
$ 4491
Maitland $ 7953
$ 6699 $ 28,000
$ 6285 



FRPRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
ON HIS VISIT TO PARKES, N. S. W.,
17 MAY 1975
Parkes is typical of the country towns and
cities benefiting from the policies of the Australian
Government. For toro long people in country tow n s
have been putting up with services and amenities inferior
to those in the capital cities. The Labor Government is
determined that townspeople in the country will enjoy a
standard of living equal to the best in Australia.
Our opponents seem to think that a
Government's responsibility in country areas ends with
the farmer, the man on the land. Certainly we recognise
that prosperity in country areas depends largely on a
prosperous rural community. At the same time, we are
not going to neglect the millions of Australians
employees and families who live in towns like Parkes.
They deserve the same standards of education, the same
standards of housing, the same opportunities for health
and recreation as Australians in the major cities.
One of the first acts of this Government
was to empower the Grants Commission to recommend
W assistance for local authorities. In this way the
Grants Commission will be able to alleviate inequalities
between regions, in the same way that it has acted to
remove inequalities between the States. In its first
set of recommendations, the Commission allocated more than
$ 21 million for local councils in New South Wales. Parkes
Municipal Council received $ 76,000 for 1974-75.
That money has been provided free of interest,
as a non-repayable grant. It can be used as the council
sees fit for-the benefit of the people of Parkes.
Under the Regional Employment Development
Scheme, the Australian Government has approved
assistance to the Parkes Municipality amounting to
$ 395,000 to date. The Parkes District Hospital has
received REDS grants totalling $ 253,000 for 7 projects
which have created 73 new jobs. Shires within the
Parkes Employment Office Area have received Government
assistance under REDS totalling $ 765,000. / 2 
e -2-
Grants to Parkes and Forbes since 1972
for aged persons' homes and hostels total $ 1,497,171.
The pre-school in Dalton Street, Parkes,
has qualified for Australian Government recurrent
assistance since January 1974.,' In the present
financial year the school is receiving $ 4491. Recurrent
grants totalling more than $ 41,000 have been made
since January 1973 to 5 non-government schools in'
Parkes Holy Family Primary School, Marist Borthers'
Primary School, St Joseph's Infants School,
Westview Special School and Our Lady of Mercy College.
As part of its program to improve health
care sercvices throughout Australi1a, the Goverrnment is
establishing a Community Health Resources Centre to
serve Parkes, Cowra, Forbes and Wlest Wyalong. The
centre Will recruit and manage a team of nurses and
other health workers to care for people and staff
existing baby health centres. The project has been
allocated $ 89,690 this financial year. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
ON THE OPENING OF LACHLAN VINTAGE VILLAGE,
FORBES, N. SXW 17 MAY 1975
1. SOMEONE HAS GOT THE IDEA THAT I'M INTERESTED IN
HISTORIC SITES AND OLD RUINS, THESE ARE THE BEST
SIMULATED RUINS I'VE SEEN IN AUSTRALIA, AFTER MY
LAST VISIT To EUROPE, I OPENED OLD SYDNEY TOWN AT
GoSFORD; AFTER MY. VISIT TO. JAMAICA I'M OPENING
LACHLAN VINTAGE VILLAGE.
2. I'M SORRY THERE AREN'T MORE STATE GOVERNMENT MINISTERS
AT THIS OPENING CEREMONY; AT LEAST ONE STATE MINISTER
DECIDED TO BOYCOTT THE OCCASION. ISUPPOSE THE
STATES ARE USED TO LIVING IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
ANYWAY. BOB HAWKE WANTED TO COME.. HE THOUGHT A
VINTAGE VILLAGE HAD SOMETHING TO DO WITH WINE TASTING.
3. THIS IS OUR BIGGEST TOWN PLANNING PROJECT SINCE
ALBURY-WODONGA. TOME UREN IS COMPLAINING THAT WE ARE
BUILDING MORE OLD TOWNS THAN NEW ONES.
1 MUST CONFESS THAT WHEN I WAS INVITED TO OPEN
" AUSTRALIA'S LIVING MUSEUM" I IMMEDIATELY THOUGHT OF
THE SENATE. I KNOW BEN HALL CAME FROM FORBES, BUT
THERE ARE QUITE A FEW BUSHRANGERS IN MY OWN
PROFESSION. 
CERTAINLY THE PEOPLE OF FORBES AND ALL AUSTRALIANS
CAN BE PROUD OF THIS SPLENDID AND IMAGINATIVE PROJECT,
IT WILL BRING GREAT DELIGHT TO TOURISTS, THE
COLONIAL HISTORY OF NEW SOUTH WALES IS RICH IN
INCIDENT AND ADVENTURE, THE OLD LACHLAN DIGGINGS,
THE ORIGINS OF AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE AND THE
DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL TRANSPORT HAVE ALL BEEN
PAINSTAKINGLY RECREATED IN THIS DISPLAY, THE RESULT
IS A TRIBUTE TO THE SKILL OF BUILDERS, DESIGNERS,
WORKMEN, CRAFTSMEN AND TECHNICIANS OF THE DISTRICT,
6, THE COMPLETED VILLAGE WILL CONSIST OF 30 TO 40 HOUSES
MUSEUMS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, SHOPS, BANKS INSURANCE
OFFICES, PERHAPS? IF COUNTRY PARTY MINISTERS WON'T
ATTEND AT LEAST THE AiMYLP, SHOULD BE HERE,
7, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS CONTRIBUTED $ 100,000
TO THIS PROJECT, IN ADDITION THE GOVERNMENT HAS
CONTRIBUTED $ 105,504 TO THE SCHEME THROUGH
GRANTS UNDER THE REDS SCHEME, THEREBY PROVIDING
ADDITONAL WORK IN THE FORBES DISTRICT,
8, I WISH THIS PROJECT EVERY SUCCESS, I KNOW IT WILL
ATTRACT MANY THOUSANDS OF VISITORS AND MAKE AN
IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE ECONOMY AND PROSPERITY
OF THIS DISTRICT, IT WILL ALSO PRESERVE AN AUTHENTIC
FOLK TRADITION AND REMIND US OF THE ARCHITECTURE,
THE TRADITIONS AND THE LIFE-STYLES OF AN EARLIER
AGE, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
FOR A CIVIC RECEPTION IN
FORBES, NISW. 17 J'AY 1975
1, I AM DELIGHTED TO BE MAKING MY FIRST OFFICIAL VISIT
To FORBES, THIS CITY, BORN IN THE GOLDRUSH DAYS OF
THE 1860' s, IS NO W THE CENTRE OF A THRIVING
AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRY, LIKE SO MANY
TOWNS OF THE PERIOD IT RETAINS MANY OF THE BUILDINGS
AND MUCH OF THE CHARACTER OF ITS EARLY YEARS,
TOGETHER WITH THE SIGNS OF MODERN COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT$ a
2, FOR TOO LONG PEOPLE IN COUNTRY TOWNS HAVE BEEN PUTTING
UP WITH SERVICES AND AMENITIES INFERIOR TO THOSE IN THE
CAPITAL CITIES. THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED THAT
TOWNSPEOPLE IN THE COUNTRY WILL ENJOY A STANDARD OF LIVING
EQUAL TO THE BEST IN AUSTRALIA,
3. OUR OPPONENTS SEEM TO THINK THAT A GOVERNMENT'S
RESPONSIBILITY IN COUNTRY AREAS ENDS WITH THE FARMER,
THE MAN ON THE LAND,. CERTAINLY WE RECOGNISE THAT
PROSPERITY IN COUNTRY AREAS DEPENDS LARGELY ON A
PROSPEROUS RURAL COMMUNITY. AT THE SAME TIME, WE ARE
NOT GOING TO NEGLECT THE MILLIONS OF AUSTRALIANSEMPLOYEES
AND FAMILIES WHO LIVE IN TOWNS LIKE FORBES.
THEY DESERVE THE SAME STANDARDS OF EDUCATION, THE SAME
STANDARDS OF HOUSING, THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES FOR HEALTH
AND RECREATION As AUSTRALIANS IN THE MAJOR CITIES. 
-2-
ONE OF THE FIRST ACTS OF THIS GOVERNMENT WAS TO EMPOWER
THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO REC"~ END ASSISTANCE FOR LOCAL
AUTHORITIES. IN THIS WAY THE GRANTS COMMISSION WILL BE
ABLE TO ALLEVIATE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS, IN THE
SAME WAY THAT IT HAS ACTED TO REMOVE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
THE STATES, IN ITS FIRST SET OF RECOMMENDATIONS, THE
COM1MISSION ALLOCATED MORE THAN $ 21 MILLION FOR LOCAL
COUNCILS IN NEW SOUTH WALES. FORBES MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
RECEIVED $ 90,000 FOR 197' 4-75,
UNDER THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS APPROVED ASSISTANCE TO THE
FORBES MUNICIPALITY AMOUNTING' TO $ 665,000 TO DATE.
SHIRES WITHIN THE FORBES DISTRICT HAVE RECEIVED
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE UNDER REDS TOTALLING $ 765,000,
6, No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE TO ALLEVIATE THE EFFECTS
OF NATURAL DISASTERS. WE ESTABLISHED THE NATURAL
DISASTERS RELIEF ORGANISATIONt WHICH HAS ALREADY
PROVED ITS VALUE BY ITS MAGNIFICENT WORK IN DARWIN
AND DURING THE BUSHFIRES LAST SUMMER IN NEW SOUTH
WALES. WE ARE ESTABLISHING THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INSURANCE CORPORATION TO PROVIDE INSURANCE COVER
AGAINST NATURAL DISASTERS AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE COST
TO HOUSEHOLDERS. MAJOR FLOODING OCCURRED IN FORBES
AND THE SURROUNDING AREA DURING AUGUST AND SEPTEMBER
LAST YEAR. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROVIDED $ 100,000-
ON A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR BASIS WITH THE STATE FOR RELIEF
MEASURES AND WILL GIVE FURTHER FUNDS FOR RESTORATION. s 9 ,/ 3 
7. RECURRENT GRANTS TOTALLING MORE THAN $ 101,000 HAVE
BEEN MADE SINCE JANUARY 1973 To 6 NON-GOVERNMENT
SCHOOLS IN FORBES PIARIST BROTHERS' COLLEGE/
OUR LADY OF NERCY COLLEGE, SACRED HEART INFANTS
SCHOOL; ST LAWRENCE PRIMARY SCHOOL AND LACH-HAVEN
SPECIAL SCHOOL.
8. THE M1INISTER FOR HEALTH HAS APPROVED A GRANT OF
$ 57,014 TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT TO
CONSTRUCT AND , EQUIP A SCHOOL DENTAL CLINIC AT
FORBES, THIS IS PART OF A PLAN FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE SCH~ OOL DENTAL SERVICE IN NEW SOUTH WALES,
FOR WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADY
APPROVED MORE THAN $ 5.5 MILLION,
9. GRANTS To FORBES AND PARKES SINCE 1972 FOR AGED PERSONS
HOMES AND HOSTELS TOTAL $ 1,497,1711
As PART OF ITS PROGRAM TO IMPROVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, THE GOVERNMENT IS ESTABLISHING A
COMMUNITY HEALTH RESOURCES CENTRE TO SERVE FORBES/
PARKES, COWRA AND WEST WIYALONG. THE CENTRE WILL RECRUIT
AND MANAGE A TEAM OF NURSES AND OTHER HEALTH WORKERS
TO CARE FOR PEOPLE AND STAFF EXISTING BABY HEALTH CENTRES,
THE PROJECT HAS BEEN ALLOCATED $ 89,690 THIS FINANCIAL
YEAR. p 
-4-
11, SEVEN GRANTS TOTALLING MORE THAN $ 4,700 HAVE BEEN
MADE TO ARTS AND CRAFTS GROUPS IN THE FORBES AND
PARKES DISTRICT,
12. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE AVAILABLE
$ 53,000 IN GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR EXTENSIONS TO
HOUSES ON THE NANIMA RESERVE, WHERE MOST ABORIGINALS
IN THE DISTRICT LIVE. 



. QUEENSLAND BROADCAST.. NOI... 9 ( qy'
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION
LATELY ON RADIO AND TV AND IN THE NEWSPAPERS
THERE S BEEN A HIGHLY EXTRAVAGANT AND TOTALLY MISLEADING
CAMPAIGN BY THE INSURANCE COMPANIES AGAINST OUR PROPOSAL
FOR AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION, THE
AIR HAS BEEN THICK WITH CRIES OF NATIONALISATION,
SOCIALISM AND GENERAL DISASTER. LAST TIME WE HAD A
CAMPA. IGN OF THIS KIND, YOU LL REMEMBER, IT WAS THE DOCTORS
CRUSADING AGAINST MEDIBANK BUT AS SOON AS PEOPLE
REALISED THE TRUE BENEFITS OF ' EDIBANK THE WHOLE
CAMPAIGN COLLAPSED, SO I MAKE THIS PREDICTION: WHEN
PEOPLE uNDERSTAND WHAT OUR INSURANCE PROPOSALS REALLY
MEAN, THE CAMPAIGN BY THE JNSURANCE INTERESTS MANY
OF THEM FOREIGN OWNED WILL BE EXPOSED JUST AS
QUICKLY AS THE FALSE PROPAGANDA FROM THE DOCTORS, 
-2-
BASICALLY, WHAT WE ARE DOING IS ESTABLISHING A
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE COMPANY TO COMPETE WITH THE
PRIVATE INSURANCE FIRMS, YOU MAY ASK: WHY HAVE A
GOVERNMENT CORPORATION WHEN THERE ARE PLENTY OF
PRIVATE INSURANCE COMPANIES ALREADY PROVIDING A GOOD
SERVICE TO THE PUBLIC? THERE ARE TWO MAIN REASONS,
THE FIRST IS COMPETITION, THE MORE COMPETITION
GENUINE COMPETITION THERE IS IN ANY INDUSTRY,
THE BETTER THE SERVICE TO THE PUBLIC AND THE CHEAPER
THE RATES. THE SECOND REASON IS WIDER COVERAGE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION
WILL BE PROVIDING INSURANCE COVER THAT CANNOT BE
OBTAINED FROM TH1-E OTHER COMPANIES, EITHER BECAUSE
THEY'RE NOT INTERESTED OR BECAUSE IT'S NOT
SUFFICIENTLY PROFITABLE,. ./ 3 
-3-
THE PEOPLE OF BRISBANE HAD THEIR OWN HARSH EXPERIENCE
OF THIS PROBLEM DURING THE FLOODS AT THE BEGINNING OF
LAST ? EAR. AT THE TIME OF THE FLOODS, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT ACTED PROMPTLY AND GENEROUSLY TO PROVIDE
RELIEF AND THE NECESSARY FUNDS FOR THE TASK OF REPAIR
AND RECONSTRUCTION. WE DIDN'T STINT ON THAT. BUT
THOUSANDS OF BRISBANE RESIDENTS FOUND THAT-THEIR
HOUSEHOLD POLICIES SIMPLY DIDN IT COVER THEM AGAINST
FLOOD DAMAGE., DARWI-N PEOPLE HAD THE SAME EXPERIENCE
AFTER THE CYCLONE LAST ClI11RISTi1AS, THE ONLY PEOPLE FULLY
COVERED IN THE FLOODS OR IN THE CYCLONE WERE THOSE
INSURED UNDER THE DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES SCHEME
ADMINISTERED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION WILL PROVIDE SUCH
INSURANCE FOR EVERYONE WHO NEEDS IT -AND PROVIDE IT
AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE COST. IT WILL OPEN THE WAY
TO MORE WIDESPREAD INSURANCE COVERAGE AGAINST LIVESTOCK
AND CROP LOSSES ARISING OUT OF NATURAL DISASTERS, SO IT
WILL BE OF PARTICULAR VALUE TO THE MAN ON THE LAND$ @ 9IA 
-4-
I DO ASK YOU TO IGNORE THIS ABSURD TALK ABOUT
NATIONALISATION, SINCE WHEN HAS IT BEEN
" NATIONALISATION" FOR GOVERNMENT ENTERPRISES TO
COMPETE FAIRLY AND ON EQUAL TERMS WITH PRIVATE
ENTERPRISE? THERE ARE MANY EXAMPLES OF SUCH
COMPETITION, H' 1O ONE SUGGESTS THAT THE COMMONWEALTH
BANK ISN'T COMPETING FAIRLY WITH THE PRIVATE BANKS
AND NO ONE SUGGESTS THAT THE BANKS HAVE BEEN
NATIONALISED, No ONE SUGGESTS THAT THE AIRLINES
HAVE BEEN NATIONALISED BECAUSE TAA IS COMPETING WITH
ANSETT, IN EVERY CASE THE BENEFITS OF SUCH
COMPETITION HAVE BEEN PLAIN. FOR EXAMPLE, IT'S
CHEAPER TO INSURE YOUR HOUSE WITH THE COMMONWEALTH
SAVING BANK INSURANCE SCHEME THAN WITH ANY PRIVATE
INSURANCE COMPANY, IF THE COMINONWEALTH BANK CAN DO
THIS FOR ITS CUSTOMERS, WHY SHOULDN T THE SAME LOW.
PREMIUMS BE AVAILABLE TO EVERY HOUSEHOLDER? WE WANT
TO SEE THAT THEY ARE$ 
IT'S WORTH REMEMBERING THAT EVERY STATE
HAS HD A STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE
FOR MANY YEARS, AND VERY EFFICIENT ENTERPRISES
MOST OF THEM HAVE BEEN. HERE IN QUEENSLAND YOU HAVE
A STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE THE SGIO:
ITS BUILDING IS A PROMINENT LANDMARK IN BRISBANE.
I DON'T SUPPOSE EVEN MR BJELKE-PETERSEN WOULD
SUGGEST THAT INSURANCE IN QUEENSLAND HAS BEEN
NATIONALISED. THE FACT IS THAT UNDER THE
CONSTITUTION THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS AS
MUCH RIGHT TO ESTABLISH AN INSURANCE CORPORATION AS
IT HAS TO ESTABLISH A BANK, IT HAS AS MUCH RIGHT
TO ESTABLISH AN INSURANCE CORPORATION AS THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS HAVE, ! O ONE TODAY WOULD DREAM OF
DISBANDING OR RESTRICTING THE OPERATIONS OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICES. THEY HAVE
SERVED THE PUBLIC WELL. THEY WILL CONTINUE TO DO
SO, / 6 
REMEMBER THIS: FOR ALL THEIR PATRIOTIC TALK,
A LARGE PART OF THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA
IS CONTROLLED DY OVERSEAS INTERESTS, LESS THAN
TWO YEARS AGO THE LEVEL OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP OF
GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS CONDUCTED IN AUSTRALIA
WAS NEARLY 46%. A GREAT DEAL OF AUSTRALIAN MONEY
IS BEING CHANNELLED TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES, I KNOW
THERE ARE SOME GREAT AUSTRALIAN FIRMS, AND I PAY
TRIBUTE TO THEM; BUT AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INSURANCE CORPORATION WILL HELP REDUCE THE FLOW OF
FUNDS OUT OF AUSTRALIA AND COULD WELL ENCOURAGE MORE
MONEY INTO AUSTRALIA, GENUINE AUSTRALIAN-OWNED
INSURANCE COMPANIES HAVE MUCH MORE TO FEAR FROM
GRO'ING FOREIGN COMPETITION THAN THEY HAVE FROM
COMPETITION FROM AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CORPORATION.
WE'VE MADE IT PERFECTLY CLEAR THAT ACROSS THE GREAT
RANGE OF ITS BUSINESS, THE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
CORPORATION WILL BE OPERATING ON EXACTLY THE
SAME COMMERCIAL AND COMPETITIVE LINES AS THE REST OF
THE INDUSTRY, ANY SUGGESTION THAT IT WILL BE GIVEN
UNFAIR ADVANTAGE IS SIMPLY UNTRUE. UP TO NOW, THE
UNFAIR ADVANTAGE HAS BEEN WITH THE PRIVATE COMPANIES,
THEY HAVE' LAVISHED FUNDS ON EXPENSIVE OFFICE
BUILDINGS AND IN SPECULATIVE REAL ESTATE
DEVELOPN. ThTS; THEIR INVESTMENT IN HOUSING LOANS HAS
FALLEN STEEPLY, A LARGE PART OF THEIR FUNDS HAS GONE
OVERSEAS; AND IMPORTANT FIELDS OF INSURANCE IAVE BEEN
NEGLECTED, 
-7-
REMEMBER THESE FACTS NEXT TIME YOU SEE YOUR
PREMIUMS BEING WASTED ON COSTLY AND MISLEADING
ADVERTISING, AIMED AT A GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
CORPORATION THAT WILL PROVIDE MUCH NEEDED
COMPETITION, AND A COMPREHENSIVE INSURANCE COVER
FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS WHO NEED IT, 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, 20 MAY, 1975
Prime Minister: Perhaps I should express my great satisfaction at
the progress that the Family Law Bill has made yesterday and today.
The central parts of the Bill have received the approval of both
the Senate last year and now the House of Representatives.
Australia, in consequence, will have the most advanced, most
enlightened matrimonial and family law in the world. The
medieval concepts of guilt and fault will be removed from divorce
proceedings. The sole ground for divorce will be the irretrievable
breakdown of marriage, manifested by 12 months separation. An
entirely new court, the Family Court of Australia, will be se~ t
up to handle divorce proceedings and to administer an extensive
machinery for reconciliation. The whole tragic business of
divorce will be handled in an atmosphere now of dignity and
compassion, taking full account of the welfare of children and
the interests and feelings of the partners. By recognising the
fundamental status of marriage as a profoundly personal human
relationship, a relationship requiring the full consent, the
continuing consent,. of two partners, a contract founded on the
free, voluntary and absolute commitment of both sides yet vulnerable
to the human frailties of * either side, the Bill will give frash and
meaningful stature -Lo -the institution of marriage itself.
This has been an essehtially non-party measure; it was in the
Senate, it was in the Senate Committee which considered it, it
has been in the House of Representatives, both on the second
reading and now in the Committee stages. Yet I see it as the.
most progressive and extensive social reforif achieved during the
-term of my* Government. I believe Australians owe a lasting debt
to the architect of the Bill, the former Attorney--General,
Mr. Justice Lionel Murphy. We have come a long way since the
marriage and divorce laws in this country were dispersed in a
confused and-generally repressive tangle among the statute books
of the six different States and the different Federal Territories.
And on this occasion I don't forget the role played by Mr. Justicoe
Joske, by the present Chief Justice of Australia, Sir Garfield
B~ arwick, when he was Attorney-General and I think abbve all now,
Mr. Justice Murphy.
Are there any questions?
Question: Will you give an assurance now, Sir, that you will
honour your election promise to abolish the means test in the life
of this Parliament?
Prime Minister: Yes. This Parliament has until the middle of 1977
to run. And by that time I'm certain that every man and woman of
or above will have the age pension without means tests.. I've
given that undertaking on behalf of the party so often that I
shouldn't think that anybody would now doubt it. 
Question: It's a subject of discussion at the moment,
Sir, that's why I raised it.
Prime Minister: Maybe, but you asked me and I gave the answer
that I would have given throughout.
Question: Are you satisfied with the performance of
Dr. Cass as Minister for the Environment?
Prime Minister: I believe that the question of the environment
will be handled more effectively and expeditiously from now on.
Question: In view of your apparent acceptance that sand
mining will not harm the environment at Fraser Island, can you
state your attitude now to oil drilling on the Barrier Reef?
Should the Queensland Government grant leases?
Prime Minister: Now, you misrepresent my attitude. I'm not
saying that I'm satisfied with sand mining on Fraser Island.
I've never said that. What I have asserted is that it is not
possible, constitutionally or legally, in my view, and the
view of the Government, to make our procedures retrospective.
That's what I've saidaand the companies which were given
authorisation by the responsible Minister to export sand
minerals from Fraser Island had been engaged in preparation
for that for many years. The dates were given at question
time today. And they had completely complied with the law.
Now the attitude that my Government has taken throughout has
been that in respect to contracts for sales overseas, it will
not break those contracts, it will not force the breaking of
those contracts. It will see that contracts are honoured. And
we have taken that attitude throughout. We can't take a different
attitude on Fraser Island to the attitude we have taken previously.
You mention the question of the Barrier Reef and oil drilling
there. The legal position is different there. There has not
been drilling there in recent years, it has been suspended for
over four years pending the Royal Commissions issued by the
Australian and the Queensland Government to Mr. Justice Wallace
and his two colleagues. The Australian Government will be
considering those Royal Commissions report on Friday morning.
I would expect that we will adhere to the point of view which
I had forecast that we will accept Mr. Justice Wallace's recommendation
that in the present state of knowledge, oil drilling
should not take place on the Barrier Reef. Now in our view,
and it has been asserted, of course, in the Seas and Submerged
Lands Act, at present under challenge in the High Court,
substantially, almost precisely, the same Bill that Sir Reginald
Schwartz introduced under Foreign Minister McMahon, under Prime
Minister Gorton in April 1970, the sea bed there is within Federal
jurisdiction. And therefore, the granting of permits of this
character in the sea bed around the Great Barrier Reef is a
matter of Federal jurisdiction. Similarly, of course, it's a 
matter of Federal jurisdiction in respect of the Northern
Territory, in particular in respect to uranium and bauaxite found
which are principally in -the Northern Territory. Now there's
a different situation as regards sand mining, coal, iron ore
and so on, in the States. My Government...
Question: Why wasn't export approval given for those two
leases?
Prime Minister: Because there was no legal grounI to refuse
the export authorisation. No legal ground. The companies
had for years, before my Government was elected, complied w:!-th
the reautrements of the Queensland law. There has been an
environmental public inquiry about three or four years ago,
before we came in, under Queensland law. All the leases and
all the conditions had been granted, observed under Queensland4
law. In those circumstances it was not possible for us to set
the law aside. The position is different on -the Barrier Reef,
or at least the sea bed i~ n our view, because we believe
that's Federal jurisdiction and in the Northern Territory where
everybody agrees it's Fede~ ral jurisdiction.
Question: What led you to believe that . the environment
would be better managed i~ n the future?
Prime Minister: Because I bi . ieve the delay by the Departrnent
and the Minister have now been brought sufficiently to theirattention.
Question: When you say that there is no legal ground to
refuse exports surely that flies in the face the export powers
you have which Mr. Connor has used, on other occasions, and
has threatened to use, for instance, in relation to coal with
Utah State onshore mining, with gas onshore from central Australia,
etc. etc., and South Australia exports, the power has been plantCed
on a num ber of occasions to clearly lie with the Federal
Governfment. EHow can you say that there'are no legal grounds to
refuse exports?
Prime Minister: Well if you don't mind, I don't want to argue
the constitution law in detail with you
Question: Just very briefly would do
Prime Minister: No well, I'll bear with you. The constitution
gives the Federal Parliament the responsibility to pass laws
with respect to trade and commerce with other countries. There
may be some other powers which don't apply in this case, for 
instance, the external affairs power, but there's no treaty
or international convention covering Eraser Island, or
defence power. But there's no aspect of defence power involved
in Fraser Island. Now the whole question is do environmental
factors come within trade and commerce with other countries?
Quite-apart from that, there is the question of making a law
retrospective. There was no Federal law, until last December,
none at all, and in those circumstances, whatever the constitutional
situation may be, it would be quite wrong to make
a law retrospective, that is a basic tenet and any court would
lean against making it, making an action or contract illegal
retrospectively. Question: Does your decision mean that you'll grant
export permits for the remaining leases of Dillingham Murphy
Ores, and with all due respect to your legal expertise, Sir,
do you think you compromise your party's environmental impact
policy? Prime Minister: No, I don't think we have. We were the
Government which extended the export prohibitions from iron
ore and uranium, where they were under our predecessors, to
coal and to bauxite and to beach sands. I mean, we did that,
and we brought in the law, the Environment Protection Impact
Proposal Act last December. We amended it again last week.
We are bringing in, probably this week, the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park legislation. We are drafting marine environment
protection legislation. We are doing this. I must emphasise
that you jeopardise a very great deal if you purport to make
anything which was legal, illegal retrospectively. Incidentally,
export permits or authorisations and they are the same have
not been sought in respect to the other leases. There will now
be a public inquiry under the Federal legislation, and that ought
to be concluded within the next few months, and it may be that
shortcomings in the mining on Fraser Island would be revealed
by that inquiry as they were not revealed by the State inquiry
of 1971, and if they are, then public opinion or State pressure,
or coordination, cooperation, Federal and State, might preclude
any damage.
Question: You mentioned the Marine Environment Bill and
the Barrier Reef Bill. Those Bills I take it, are proceeding
on the basis that you already have power over the offshore
areas despite the fact that the High Court hasn't made a
decision on the Seas and Submerged Lands Bill.
Prime Minister: Yes that's right, that is so.
Question: Are you worried at the suggestions that the
High Court may take up to a year to make that determination?
And in the meantime, how are you going to stop the States
granting and renewing leases in offshore areas? 
Prime Minister: I'm not going to speculate how long the
Hfigh Court may reserve its decision in this matter. The
l] egislation which is about. ' to come in -it was approved by
the Legislation CommittLee this morning -is based on the
assumption that successive Federal Govern~ ments have made
for over five years now, that the sea bed is within Federal
jurisdiction.
Question: Regarding the Mayaguez affair. Do you bealieve
that President Ford was justified in sending in the M'arines, or
do you think -that his action was precipitate, coul d have rislked
the securilty of the area, and finally have you sent any note
or any message or any communication or cable to President Ford
about thc mat-ter?
Prime Minister:, No, I've sent rno communication, note, cable
or let-ter, to use -the terms of the Melbourne ' Age', and I
have no comment -to offer.
Question: Have you been appraised as-yet of -the A. C. T. U.' s
decision on indexation in Perth?
Prime Minister: No.
Question: I understand -that it was announced by Mr. Hawke
about 45 minutes ago, and th~ at they support the principle of
indexation. and call on all Australian trade unionists to do
the same.
Prime Minister: Good.
Question:. Apart from good, do you have any comment?
llrimne Minister: No, I'm very pleased. They've done the right
-thing as the Government did.
Question: In view of reported denials this morning of your
allegations concerning the Vietnamese family's entering Australia,
could you tell us when and how the Australian authorities were
misled in regard to this incident?
Prime Minister: I'll quote what I said to the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on Parliamentary Committees last night
" I should refer to what Senator Mulverhili says about this
Austral. ian of Vietnamese origin. What happened there was
-that ho misled -the authorities. He said that the Acting
Prime Minister, hie said Connor, had given authority for him 
to bring certain extended relatjves. Connor denies it, so
for greater precaution I thought he might have meant Cairns
Cairns denies it too. He got them in by misrepresentation."
The situation is that a cable came from Guam to the Department
of Labor and Immigration on 11 May from an experienced officer.
" Sponsor travelled to Saigon after speaking to acting Prime
Minister, Connor. Sponsor claims to have been told by Acting
Prime Minister that should he succeed in getting rest of family
out of Vietnam they w. ould also be approved." Mr. Connor denies
that he ever spoke to him or that he ever told him anything
of the nature.
Question: Soon after Labor came to power a uranium mining
company in Australia entered into a contract which was signed
and written with a Japanese electricity firm for the supply of
uranium. So far Mr. Connor has refused to honour that contract.
Under what law is he refusing to do so, other than the export
powers? Prime Minister: lie assured the House today that he would honour
it, and it will be honoured. The uranium
Question: I'm talking about a contract entered into after
Labor came to power, he's only previously said that he will
honour contracts entered into before Labor came to power.
Prime Minister: Well the contract to which you refer will be
honoured. It was approved by the Government. The uranium
which the company is entitled to receive by whatever ' date
it is will be received by that company. The Australian
Government is in a position to ensure that that uranium will
be delivered in the terms of the contract. I made it plain
earlier, that in regard to the Northern Territory, the
Australian Government has all the powers that any State
Government has in these matters, in addition to export powers.
Question: What is your attitude to the application by
B. H. P. for a price rise?
Prime Minister: The Australian Government is responding to the
suggestion that it should provide counsel to assist the tribunal
in determining this application, and I expect in the next few
days to be conferring with the relevant Ministers on the general
terms of the view that will be put by the Government.
Question: Efforts are being made to get the trade unions
to prevent any mining on Fraser Island. If they succeed what
would the Government's attitude and actions be?
Prime Minister: The Government has responsibilities in this
matter and I don't see that unions do. 
7.
Question: Have you received any communication from the
U. N. on the distribution of refugees from Guam and can you
give us any idea on the numbers although you've said that
this is going to be left up to the U. N. largely. Have you
had any discussion about the numbers that are likely to come
to Australia?
Prime Minister: No, I can give no estimate of that at all..
There might have been some communications with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the last day I
haven't seen it. The UNHCR's representatives have been
operating rather in Hong Kong, and have been trying to operate
in Singapore rather than in Guam. One feature which has not
been sufficiently emphasised is that it is quite likely that
increasing numnbe:-s of refugees and they're the only categories
with which the Australian Government would be concerned, and
even of evacuees, might be returning to Vietnam. All the
forecasts and in fact the propaganda about bloodbaths and
holocausts have not materialised and there may, therefore,
be a very considerable number, very considerable increase in
Vietnamese returning to their own country. That of course
would be the best outcome.
Question: Are you satisfied with Mr. Connor's performance
as Minister for Minerals and Energy?
Prime Minister: In the matters we have been discussing here
which is all I suppose you are asking about, of course. I
think he has been a very effective and successful Minister.
He has gone as far in asserting the national interest as the
law allows. I know that some people choose to disparage him.
There was some reference to Utah by one of the earlier questioners.
Let me point out, that the previous Labor Government federally
made the Joint Coal Board arrangement with New South Wales, and
because of that, in New South Wales, Mr. Connor is able to assert
proper environmental conditions. In Queensland there is no such
arrangement and, therefore, he has to rely on persuasion alone.
Mr. Connor has a longer experience and a deeper involvement in
environmental matters than any of us.
Question: What mechanisms exist for the Department of the
Environment to be made aware of projects for the export of mining
products and at what stage of the projects proposal to the
Federal Government do those mechanisms come into operation?
Prime Minister: I don't know the details here. You should ask
the Ministers concerned. The Fraser Island one, of course,
the Fraser Island chronology, I know well and I cited it at
question time today. 
Question: Suppl. ementary quest ion regarding the Viet -axese
question You did say they gained entry by misreprcse-fLation
or words to thatE effect, " Out what was tChe actual misrepresentation?
H-ow did they get in 24 of then.?
Prime Mini'ister: I have no suj-p. emn. ente,-ry answer.
Question: Dur-ing your discussions with the President of
the World Bank, Mr. Robert 14cNamara in Washingto,, n, was the
question of thE Bank's Third Window Project raised w,. ith you?
Prime Iinisterc: Yes.
Question: Did 71r. McNamnara ask yvou for a contribution,
dLid hie ask fort Australia to contribute towards that projecL-?
And to. what extent wo7(, uld Austraiia hDeco-rite financiallyv involved?
Prime Minister: He raisedl these matters with me. I pointed
out, of course, that no commnityen;: could be made except in
the Budget context and the Budget %, ouidn' L be announced until
19 August. But I did ltell him that I would,. qu it c soon, let
him have a tent~ ative response, but not as to amounts.
Question: When 6o you hope to renew the aids programmRes
in South VietLnamr, the civil aid p-fograiXmC?
Prime Minister:. As soon as we can establish cortmunications with
the Revolutionary Goverrnmert of South Vietnamn. Wie have, toflay,
inStl'UcLed our Ambassador-in Hanoi-to estciblish contact with
the representatives of the Revo: lutioiiary GovernmentL of South
Vietnam. When we have that contact, then of cour-se, we w. ill
be able to resume the quite extensive aid programmes we ha-ve
in the South. We also, of course, will be able to mnake our
own asses: sment about cond-itions for reconstruct'Cion, ' resettlement,
repatridtLion.
Question: Are you concerned that the Government's o'vertulres
to the now rulers,_ the new Governmeint ini Phinom Penh, have yet
to be acklicwledged?
Prime MinistLer-. think we are having the same time lag as
every other country is flaying in establishiLng relations with
the new Governme,-nt. in Phnomn Penhi. 



Z. I U Th
Press Statement
j w~ 23 May 1975
The Prime Minister and member for Werriwa, Mr Gough
Whitlam has reminded pensioners that they can soon
expect lump sumR payments of pension benefit/ increases
backdated to I May. The pension increases had been
del. ayed by Opposition tactics in -the Senate, and
reflected the low priority the Opposition parties gave
to social welfare payments.
" The standard rate of pension for aged persons,
invalids, widows and supporting mothers has risen by
a week. to $ 36 a week," Mr Whitlam said. " The rate
for a married couple has been increased by $ 8.50 a week
to $ 60 a week," he added. Additional payments f or
children of pensioners and other beneficiaries have also
been increased by $ 1.50 to $ 7 a week for each child.
" Most importantly, this latest legislation has*
kept the Australian Government's promise to abolish
the means test for people aged between 70 and 74 years,"
Mr Whi-tlam said. This meant that an estimated 56,000
people in that age group who were previousl~ y ineligible
for pensions under the means test were ncw entitled to
draw pensions. Mr Whitlam urged people to apply to the
nearest office of the Department of Social Security if they
thought they were now entitled to a pension. Ile stressed
that this was especially important for first-time pensioners.
The full pension will also be paid to about 43,000
aged between 70 and 74 who had only been getting partpensions
because of -the means -test. Mr Whitlan said the
full pension payments would be backdated to 1 May.
However, Mr Whitlam pointed out that guardians
allowances, additional payments for children and supplementary
assistance would remain payable subject to existing means tests.
In addition, " fringe benefits" such as entitlement to a
Pensioner Medical Service card would also remain subject -to
a means test.
Mr. Whitlam explained that widows and supporting mothers
would receive a special cheque about June 4, covering the arrears
back. to the May 6 payment date. They will receive benefit at
the new rate of $ 36 a week in their normal cheque on June 17. 
2.
Old ago and invalid pensioners will receive a single
cheque on June 12, covering the fortnight's payment at the
new rate and lump sum payment backdated to May 1.
Mr. Whitlam. said he was proud that since the Australian
Labor Government had been elected in 1972, the standard rate
of pension had been increasad by 80% and the combined married
rate by nearly 74%. Costs generally had risen only 31 .6%
in that time so it meant that pensioners had more real purchasing
power now. 



Press Statement No. 504
23 May 1975,
GREAT BARRIER REEF PETROLEUM DRILLING
ROYAL COMMISSIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr. E. G. Whitlan, Q. C.,
announced today that the Australian Government had taken
decisions on the recommendations of the Report of the
Great Barrier Reef Petroleum Drilling Royal Commissions.
The Government agreed with the stand of the
Chairman of the Commissions on the principal -term
of reference ( No 3) that no drilling should be
permitted in the area of the Reef until such time as
reliable scientific information is available on the
effects of oil on the Reef and its organisms.
Mr Whitlam said that he would be writing to the
Premier of Queensland immediately, seeking the
support of the Queensland Government in this decision.
The Commissions were appointed on 5 May 1970
and their Report was presented to the two'Governments
on 1 November 1974.
The remaining terms of reference were
largely subsidiary to No 3 and dealt with the risk of
leaks during drilling: the probable effects of leaks;
probable benefits of drilling; and appropriate
safety precautions.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
BRISBANE,. FRIDAY. 23. MAY, 1975....
Mr. Wvhitlam: I thought I would begin by announcing a decision
we made in Canberra this morning. It was on the Royal Commissions
into the protection of the Great Barrier Reef. You remember
the Australian and Queensland Governments appointed joint Royal
Commissions in May 1970 and the report camne to hand six months
ago. Cabinet considered the report this morning. We decided
that there should be no drilling in the area of the Reef
until more scientific evidence is available about the long term
effects of possible oil pollution on the Reef and its ecosystems.
You might remember there was a difference of opinion between the
three Commissioners on the degree of' risk involved. We came down
firmly on the side of taking no risk at all. All the Commissioners,
all three of them, were agreed that no drilling should be permitted
on any cay, island, reef or national park or marine park when
declared. Two of the Commissioners, Dr. Smith and Mr. Moroni,
felt that with certain strict safeguards, drilling might be
permitted in designated areas around the Reef. The Chairman,
Mr. Justice Wallace, the former President of the Court of Appeal
of New South Wales, felt that this would be an unacceptable risk
and that all drilling should be prohibited until further scientific
inquiries had been made and the degree of risk established. We
accepted Sir Gordon Wallace's view. I wrote to Mr. Bjelke-Petersen
this morning, informing him of-our decision and seeking his
support for our stand, suggesting that our respective Ministers
should consult as soon as possible about carrying out the decision.
To put the safety of the Reef beyond doubt, we on Thursday,
yesterday, introduced a Bill to establish a Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park. This is in accordance with an undertaking I gave
here six months ago. I hope the Queensland Government will
cooperate with us in establishing a joint authority to administer
the Park for the protection of a great natural and national asset.
Are there any questions you would like to ask?
Question: Can Queenslanders expect that you will give the
Barrier Reef better protection than you have given Fraser Island?
Mr. Whitlam: The Barrier Reef in our view, falls within Federal
jurisdiction. Fraser Island does not. Federal jurisdiction
covers the Northern Territory, the Australian Capital Territory:.
there's no doubt about that. We also believe that the seabed
around Australia falls within Federal jurisdiction. You remember
it was on this basis that Mr. McMahon when he was Foreign Minister,
in April, 1970, sponsored a Bill, when Mr. Gorton was Prime
Minister, to declare Australian jurisdiction over the seabed.
That Government, including Mr. McMahon's Government, when he
ousted Mr. Gorton, didn't proceed with the Bill. We passed it.
All theStates have now challenged it in the High Court. We 
are confident, however, that we have power there, so we
exercise it. But on Fraser Island, that is State territory
and, accordingly, any authority we have starts at the stage
of exports only. That is, we can't say that people can mine
or cannot mine. We can't say on what conditions they can mine.
All we can do turns on whether they can make exports. Now you
asked me about Fraser Island in particular. You are referring
to the fact that we have said, in effect, we can't stop the
export of minerals under arrangements which were operating
before we came into office or before we passed any laws about
it.
Question: YourcCabinet decision on the Barrier Reef Is
that an attempt perhaps to recoup some of the bad publicity
you received on Fraser Island?
Mr. Whitlam: We have been committed to having a Great Barrier
Reef National Park, Marine Park. I'm sure I promised it in
the 1974 policy speech and I'm pretty sure I promised it the
1972 policy speech. It's a very complicated piece of legislation
because it wants to rely on all the Constitutional authority we
have the seabed, international treaties, and so on. You look
at the Bill we brought in last night. We promised to do this,
we believe we are entitled to do it, now we have done it.
Question:
decision? Wouldn't this seem to pre-empt the High Court
Mr. Whitlam: You can't wait until you get the decision. If
we wait until all the challenges there are about half a dozen
different challenges and each of those is supportedby more than
one State if we waited until the High Court handed down its
judgement in all these half dozen challenges, we would have to
just mark time. We take the view, as the Gorton Government took,
and as I believe Mr. McMahon personally took, that the Australian
Parliament is entitled to pass laws concerning the seabed around
Australia, so we have gone ahead on that basis.
Question: I understand the Queensland Government considers
that the granting of oil drilling permits is within its jurisdiction.
What can the Federal Government do if the Queensland Government
continues along that line?
Mr. Whitlam: When this Act goes through, and I would expect
that it would go through the House of Representatives by the
end of next week and through the Senate by the end of the
following week, that will then, we think, be the law. If any
drilling goes ahead, we would think it would be in breach of the
law. I suppose we would have to wait for the High Court decision
there, but people who would undertake drilling now, and it has
been suspended for some years, anybody whoundertook drilling
now, would do so with the full knowledge that the Federal
Parliament has passed the law and unless the High Court declares 
that law invalid, then that's a law which the person starting
drilling would have to obey. He would be committing a breach
of the law if he went ahead. The law has been passed and
therefore they would breach it at their risk.
Question: Is this, legislation then virtually a challenge
to the High Court?
Mr. Whitlan: No, we are going ahead on the basis, partly,
that we do have the legislative authority over the seabed.
There are, in addition, some international conventions covering
it and we would rely on those too.
Question:. Are you not challenging the High Court to find
in. your favour?
Mr. Whitlam: The* States,. all of them, have challenged our
Seas and Submerged Lands Act, which is the same piece of
legislation that Mr. McMahon introduced under Mr. Gorton,
five years-ago last month. The States have challenged the law.
Question: But you could go-and establish National Parks
and then have the High Court rule them as out of order because of
State territories.
Mr. Whitlam: That could be. But in the meantime, I hasten to
say, we offered I think, at least six months ago, we offered
to the Queensland Government.. I wrote to Mr. Bjelke-Petersen
saying let's have a Joint Board or Commission running the
National Park. And under the Bill which we brought in last
night, we would propose to ask Queensland to appoint people
to it. We want a joint one.
Question: Is it true that you expect that ,: cooperation from
the State Government in view of what's happened in the past?
Mr. Whitlam: I'd go no further and say that I hope. The offer's
been there for at least half a year. I think I wrote to
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen just after the elections last year, that's
in May I think.
Question: Will you be very disappointed if he doesn't
give that cooperation?
Mr. Whitlam: I will be disappointed, yes.
Question: Is it correct, that Cabinet has decided against
extending the minimum floor price for wool? 
Mr. Whitlam: The decision that the Cabinet made this morning
on this matter will be given by the Minister for Agriculture,
Senator Wriedt, to the Australian Wool Industry Conference.
Question: What reaction
Mr. Whitlam: I don't know that, but that's when it will be
given. Question: What reaction will you get from wool growers, Sir?
: Mr. Whitlam: I've . given an answer to that one.
Question: Will. that be on Tuesday, Sir?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't know when the Australian Wool Industry
Conference is to meet the Minister.
But Cabinet has made a firm decision on it?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes.
Question: Has it rejected it?
Mr. Whitlam: I've given an answer to this one.
Question: Cabinet also today decided to appoint a three
man Royal Commission into pecuniary interests of parliamentarians.
Could I ask you, Sir, why a Royal Commission, why an inquiry
at such a high level?
Mr. Whitlam: The parliament resolved that there should be a
judicial inquiry. That meant an inquiry by judges. Now the
best way, we believe, to have an inquiry by judges is to appoint
them as Royal Commissioners. Once you appoint them as Royal
Commissioners, they can require people to give information in
reference to them. If you don't make them Royal Commissioners,
then they can ask somebody to give them information and that
person can defy them.
Question: inquiry? Can you give us the terms of reference for this
Mr. Whitlam: I haven't got them with me, but they were
substantially stated in the resolution of the parliament
Question: * r 
three weeks ago.
Question: Has any decision been made as to who will make
up the Commission?
Mr. Whitlam: No. Even if there had been,* I wouldn't tell
you those, because obviously one has to wait until the
Governor-General appoints them, but I can tell you we have
not approached judges at this stage. After all, we only
decided this morning that it would be a Royal Commission
and that there would be three Royal Commissioners. But: it's
been known for at least three weeks that there would have to
be at least one judge or retired judge conducting it. So.
we decided that there should be three judges, or retired judges,
and that they should be Royal Commissioners.
Question: What about the suggested changes in ministerial
responsibilities for some members of your Cabinet? Is this in
fact true that you will be making--. changes in the near future?
Mr. Whitlan: ' There's one change that I'm going to make. When
the Telecommunications Bill and the Postal Services Bill are
passed by the House of Representatives, the Telecommunications
Commission and the Postal Commission will come into operation
and the Postmaster-General's Department will be abolished.
Senator Bishop will be the last Australian Postmaster-General
and he will take over one of Mr. Enderby's portfolios-
Police and Customs.
Question: What about Housing? Will that be taken off
Mr. Johnson and given to Mr
Mr. Whitlam: You ask me directly: no But frankly there is
no basis whatever for this speculation. It's significant
that this was in the papers earlier in the week and I suppose
I'm asked more questions at question time than anyone and
nobody thought there was sufficient strength in that speculation
to ask me. If they -thought I'd be embarrassed by this in
parliament, they would have asked me, but nobody asked. There's
no strength in that whatever. We created the Department of
Housing and Construction. We created it.
Question: What about Mr. Connor's standing after this
$ 2,000 mhillion loan business that's been causing such a scandal?
Mr. Whitlam: Be more precise. What do you mean scandal? 
Question: According to Mr. Anthony it is a scandal.
Mr. Whitlam: Mr. Anthony talking about scandals! Don't
hide behind him. Let him say that to my face. You put
something directly to me yourself.
Question: Did the news of the loan affect Australia's
overseas credit rating? Was that reason, or one of the
reasons why Mr. Connor's authority was revoked?
Mr. Whitlam:" No, I told the parliament yesterday that you
can only raise one" loan overseas at a time and we were raising
a loan in the United States. Now that being. so, you've got
to end any other. negotiations you're carrying on for loans.
There are two big. nations which lend money the United States
and West Germany and each of them makes that requirement.
I stated that . yesterday. 1.
V" , I I
Question:: Will the authority be given back to Mr. Connor
to re-negotiate this loan?
Mr. Whitlam: We'll wait until there's some proposition before
anything like that comes':. up.
Question: Any comment on Mr. Gorton's resignation from
the Liberal Party and his decision to stand as an independent
for the Senate in the A. C. T.?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't come into such painful political questions
as that. You'll be asking me about the split up in Western
Australia next and. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's visit there. What canI say
about Mr. Gorton? Obviously it is an astonishing thing when a
former Prime Minister leaves the Party he led. That's big
news but I don't want to say anthing more about it. I've
made a couple of references to Mr. Gorton in earlier comments
to you. As you know, I support, always have supported, my
Party's always supported, some of the things for which he has
stood. After all, he was the first Australian Prime Minister
to show any interest in the Barrier Reef. He was the first
Australian Prime Minister to show any interest in the Australian
seabed. He persuaded Mr. Bjelke-Petersen to appoint the Royal
Commission into the Barrier Reef. He got through his Parliamentary
Party federally, the Bill to declare Australian jurisdiction
over the seabed. I support very much some of the initiatives
he took and I'm proud that I was able to consummate those
initiatives. His crowd let him down. We have pushed them through.
Question: What sort of penalties are you thinking of in
this oil drilling legislation? Any special penalties for
people who break the law in that particular regard, with oil
drilling in the Great Barrier Reef?
_ C 
Mr. Whitlam: No. I can't remember what the penalties are.
I frankly can't remember. But there are penalties. I think
we should remember that penalties are of three kinds. One is
you can have a jail sentence, one is a fine, one is just getting
the Courts to enjoin somebody from breaking the law,. and then,
of course, if any person breaks an injunction like that, he
goes to Court for contempt of Court. It could be in any of
those three respects.
Question: You mentioned the loan negotiations going on
in the United States. How long had they been going on before
it was realised that you had two negotiations going at once?
Mr. Whitlam: The negotiations in the United States have just
started this week.
Question: Why didn't you continue with negotiations for
the $ 2,000 million that
Mr. Whitlam: You've got to choose which one you go ahead with.
You can't have competing loan negotiations. You have one or
the other.
Question: Can you say what that $ 2,000 million that
Mr. Connor was negotiating was to be used for in Australia?
Mr. Whitlan: In connection with energy matters, that is, to
maximise the development of Australian energy resources.
Question: Could you be more specific, Sir?
Mr. Whitlam: Well, look at the energy resources we have here.
We have natural gas, we have uranium, we have coal, we have both
black coal and Jignite, we have some hydro.
Question: Could you explain a little more explicitly, Sir,
as to why the United States loan negotiations were continued?
Mr. Whitlam: Why they were commenced?
Question: Why you decided to drop these other negotiations
in favour of the United States?
Mr. Whitlam: We decided the United States one was specific and
immediate. 
Question: There was more chance of obtaining money from
the United States rather than from this $ 2,000 million loan?
Mr. Whitlam: It was immediate and specific.
Question: Were you happy with the Queensland
Can I ask a question of the poor showing in the
Mr. Whitlam: This is a bit far back now, isn't
six months ago, really. I think it's been much Labor image?--
State elections
it. That's.
improved.
Question: Will the money to be raised in the United States
be of a similar amount to the $ 2,000 million.
Mr. ' Whitlam: . No, no.
Question: Will it be used for the same purposes as you
outlined in Mr. Connor's 3? 1;
I I
Mr. Whitlam: No.
Question: What will it be used for?
Mr. Whitlam: General governmental purposes in Australia, that's
all general ones.
Question: Why have you decided to drop these measures that
you wanted the $ 2,000 million for?
Mr. Whitlam: We aren't dropping those measures at all. We
are intent on doing all these matters in the energy field.
After all, we established the Pipeline Authority, we established
the Petroleum and Minerals Authority, we have expanded the operation
of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission. In all these respects,
it is very obvious that we are pushing ahead with the development
of one of Australia's principal strengths, namely our energy
resources.
Question: Then it is possible that you could re-open
negotiations for the $ 2,000 million
Mr. Whitlam: That's your speculation. 
Question: You've told us that you think the Labor image
in Queensland has improved since the election, and yet we
see just recently and because of the Caucus vote on Fraser
Island, a deepening rift between Mr. Burns and his Deputy.
Does this concern you?
Mr. Whitlam: I only know what I see in this afternoon's paper
and I have learned from long experience to look behind the
headlines.
Question: Would you attempt to mediate if you find
Mr. Whitlam: Now, wait a bit. I have stated where there is
Federal jurisdiction.. I want you to get clear what the Federal
jurisdiction is in matters within State boundaries. Why the
Federal Government decided to allow the Fraser Island people
to export the minerals which they've been mining there, is
because they were entirely within the law in what they had
done. They had got the leases within the law. They had been
subjected to a public inquiry on environmental issues. They
had undertaken to comply with the findings of that public inquiry.
They had undertaken operations on those leases in accordance
with those environmental conditions. They had done all those
things before my Government was elected. Furthermore, when
my Government was elected, there was no law preventing the
export of any minerals other than iron ore and uranium. our
predecessors had no laws forbidding the export of minerals.
It was one of the very first things we did. It was one of
the very first submissions before our Government. It came
from Mr. Connor and it was to prevent the export of any mineral
from Australia without the authorisation of the Minister for
Minerals and Energy. Let's get this quite clear. It is true
there are divisions of opinion in the Labor Party purely on this
question Should any Government make something illegal retrospectively?
Should you say that something that was quite legal.
when it was done, is now to be retrospectively made an offence?
And the Government has decided that it shouldn't. Now let's
look on the other side of politics. The mining is going on
there under a State law. The leases were granted by
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen as the responsible Minister himself. In
our parliament, federally, Mr. Fraser, Mr. Lynch, the Leader
of the Opposition, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. Anthony, the Leader of the National Country Party,
Mr. Sinclair, the Deputy Leader of it, have never said a word
of criticism of the mining on Fraser Island or the exportation
of the minerals mined on Fraser Island. They've not said a word.
Some of you may know Mr. Anthony's family has interests on
Fraser Island. Now do at least be a bit relevant. There are
differences of opinion within the Labor Party. I believe that
no Government should make a legal action retrospectively illegal.
We have passed the law now. Anybody who now seeks to mine on
Fraser Island and any new lease where there's been no mining
up till now, knows that we require an environmental impact
statement and a favourable result from any public inquiry,
before we will give authorisation to export the mineral. 
They know that. That's now the law, but you can't fairly,
justly make a law retrospective.
Question: Do you foresee a clash between the Unions and
the Federal Government over the Fraser Island sand mining issue
now that the Unions have decided to black ban the company's
operations in Australia?
Mr. Whitlam: Have they? i'
. i i : I
IL-r r r~ ; J. i:
Y
J 1 ? r
Y c,
J9
L j
d&gt; 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME fIINISTER,
FOR THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE
BRISBANE DEUTSCHER TURN-VEREIN,
BRISBANE, FRIDAY 23 MAY 1975
1. ONE OF THE GREAT FEATURES OF MIGRANT LIFE IN AUSTRALIA,
IS THE STRENGTH OF ETHNIC SOCIAL CLUBS AND OTHER
COMMUNITY GROUPS. IN EVERY CITY I VISIT I FIND
FLOURISHING MIGRANT ORGANISATIONS, CLUBS, SPORTING
GROUPS AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE NEWSPAPERS. I HAVE SPENT
MANY HAPPY HOURS AMONG ITALIANS, GREEKS, GERMANS
AND OTHER NATIONALITIES IN SURROUNDINGS SUCH AS THESE.
EVERYWHERE THE ATMOSPHERE IS WARM AND THE HOSPITALITY
IS EXCELLENT,
2. I SOMETIMES FEEL MORE AT HOME WITH THE GERMAN COMMUNITY
IN QUEENSLAND THAN I DO WITH THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY.
I KNOW YOUR PREMIER IS OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN EXTRACTION,
BUT HE HAS NEVER INVITED ME TO DINNER. THE ONLY TIME
I INVITED HIM TO DINNER HE DECLINED TO ATTEND.
3. I KNOW YOU WILL BE HAPPY TO BE REMINDED THAT I WAS IN THE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY ONLY FOUR MONTHS AGO, I
HAD TALKS WITH CHANCELLOR SCHMIDT IN BONN AND PAID
VERY HAPPY VISITS TO THE CITIES OF COLOGNE AND HAMBURG,
I WAS ABLE TO REMIND MY HOSTS OF THE GREAT CONTRIBUTION
MADE BY GERMAN MIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA AND OF THE STRONG
ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL LINKS BETWEEN US. I WAS THE SECOND
AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC
THE FIRST SINCE SIR ROBERT FiENZIES IN 1959. s o s/ 2 
-2-
4, GERMANS WERE AMONG THE VERY FIRST PEOPLE TO SETTLE IN
QUEENSLAND, A GROUP OF GERMAN MISSIONARIES ARRIVED
IN THE MORETON BAY DISTRICT IN 1838. THEE WERE
SENSIBLE ENOUGH TO REALISE THAT MORETON BAY IN THOSE
DAYS WAS PART OF NEW SOUTH WALES, THE STATE GOVERNMENT
WAS PROBABLY MORE PROGRESSIVE THAN THE ONE YOU HAVE NOW,
SHORTLY AFTER THE ESTABLISHMENT OF QUEENSLAND AS A
SEPARATE COLONY I N. 1859' -THE COLONIAL GOVERNMENT
-I SUPPOSE WE COULD : STILL CALL, IT THE COLONIAL GOVERNMENT
BEGAN TO ENCOURAGE IMMIGRATION FROM EUROPE. AT . THE
: FIRST QUEENSLAND CENSUS IN 1861 THE COLONY HAD 2124
SGERMAN-BORN PEOPLE.' TODAY THERE ARE ROUGHLY 10,000
QUEENSLANDERS BORN IN GERMANY, THE 1971 CENSUS ALSO
SHOWED THAT APPROXIMATELY 31,000 QUEENSLANDERS HAD EITHER
ONE OR BOTH PARENTS BORN IN GERMANY.
6, IN RECENT YEARS THERE HAVE BEEN STRONG CULTURAL CONTACTS
BETWEEN GERMANY AND AUSTRALIA, THE STUTTGART BALLET
HAS COME TO AUSTRALIA AND THE SYDNEY SYMPHONY
ORCHESTRA HAS PLAYED IN GERMAN CITIES. VERY MANY GERMANS
HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THE ARTS, SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY
IN AUSTRALIA, S../ 3 
-3-
7, GERMAN-AUSTRALIAN CONTACTS GO BACK TO THE VERY
BEGINNING OF AUSTRALIA. GOVERNOR PHILLIP'S
FATHER WAS A GERMAN; A GERMA. SURVEYOR, THEODORE
ALT, SAILED WITH PHILLIP iN THE FIRST FLEET;
FREDERICK BRECKER, REGARDED AS THE FATHER OF THE
QUEENSLAND MERINO, STOCK, SETTLED IN QUEENSLAND IN
THE EARLY 19TH CENTURY: THE EXPLORER AND
NATURALIST, LUDWIG LEICHARDT, MIGRATED FROM GERMANYIN
1842; GERMANWINEMAKERS ARE FAMOUS IN AUSTRALIA";'
SKARL RASP CAME TO AUSTRALIA IN 1869, DISCOVERED
" SILVER, LEAD AND ZINC DEPOSITS AT BROKEN HILL, AND
FOUNDED A SMELTING COMPANY WHICH WAS THE FORERUNNER.
OF B. H. P.
8. CLUBS SUCH AS YOURS ARE KEEPING ALIVE THIS
GREAT TRADITION OF FRIENDSHIP AND INTERNATIONAL
UNDERSTANDING. IT IS GOOD TO BE AMONG YOU AND
TO SHARE YOUR CONFIDENCE IN OUR COUNTRY AND ITS FUTURE, -a' 



J4) pAU ST A LL
Press Release for Queensland
24 May 1975
EMPLOYMENT IN QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, predicted today that
-the employment situation in Queensland would soon improve.
He said traditionally, Queensland had higher unemployment than
other States, but the present rate was unacceptably severe.
He said legislation introduced last Wednesday would
enable Queensland beef producers to obtain carry-on finance
at 3k per cent interest.
The Australian Government would make available
million for this purpose in Queensland, matching the State
Government's contribution.
Mr Whitlam said the re-opening of the market for
beef in Japan was another reason for greater confidence.
Employment activity in the beef industry would accelerate as
the Japanese market expanded.
He said the sugar industry had enjoyed a recordbreaking
year and this would improve the economic climate
in many areas of Queensland, producing more jobs.
The Prime Minister said that while unemployment
remained at its present level thoere would be no cut-backs in
relief funds provided by the Australian Government to Queensland.
lie said Queensland had received more money from the RED scheme
than any other State but N. S. W.
The Australian Government had provided $ 29.5 million
for 955 projects in Queensland. Total cost of the project was
$ 33.5 million and 9,893 unemployed workers had found jobs
under the scheme.
Mr Whitlam said he was concerned by reports of
anomalies and inefficiency in the RED scheme. He said it was
up to local authorities and other sponsors to ensure the
proposals they submitted were sensible and useful projects.
The Australian Government did not plan individual projects but
only approved those submitted to it by the local sponsors.
Money was allocated to areas with the highest unemployment.
It was disturbing that the State Government's own unemployment
relief scheme was discriminating against these areas because they
were receiving RED grants.
Mr Whitlam also appealed to the State Government to
maintain its own employment levels. He said there should be no
basis for talk of lay offs from State Government departments. 
-2-
The State Treasurer Sir Gordon Chalk had made a most
thorough assessment of Queensland's needs prior to the Premiers
Conference on 14 February. The Queensland Government had received
$ 47.5 million all it asked for, and more specifically to
maintain its own employment levels, and re-employ people
who had been laid off.
If lay-offs were now being predicted again it meant
either that Sir Gordon Chalk had miscalculated his needs or
that the funds had been used inefficiently.
BRISBANE. 



QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO.
THE ENVIRONMENT MAY 1975
ON FRIDAY I ANNOUNCED A MOST IMPORTANT
DECISION BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE PROTECTION
OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF. THE GOVERNMENT HAD BEFORE IT
THE REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSIONS WHICH WERE APPOINTED,
YOU'LL REMEMBER, IN 1970 TO CONSIDER THE PROBLEM
OF OIL DRILLING ON THE REEF. THAT REPORT MADE IT CLEAR
THAT WE ARE STILL VERY MUCH IN THE DARK SCIENTIFICALLY
SPEAKING ABOUT THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF OIL ON
THE REEF AND ITS ORGANISMS. I DON'T WANT TO OVERSIMPLIFY
WHAT ARE REALLY COMPLEX MATTERS,, BUT IT'S FAIR TO SAY
THAT THERE IS. STILL ROOM FOR DOUBT ABOUT THE DEGREE OF
RISK WHICH OIL DRILLING WOULD POSE. Two OF THE THREE
ROYAL COMMISSIONERS FELT THAT WITH CERTAIN SAFEGUARDS
AND PRECAUTIONS, DRILLING COULD BE SAFELY PERMITTED IN
CERTAIN AREAS AROUND THE REEF, THE CHAIRMAN OF THE INQUIRY,
MR JUSTICE WALLACE, FELT THAT THIS WOULD BE TOO GREAT
A RISK TO TAKE, HIs OPINION WAS THAT NO DRILLING AT ALL
SHOULD BE ALLOWED NEAR THE REEF UNTIL WE DISCOVER MORE
ABOUT ITS LONG-TERM SCIENTIFIC EFFECTS. THE GOVERNMENT
CONSIDERED ALL THESE VIEWS, WE DECIDED ON FRIDAY THAT
WITH A NATURAL ASSET AS PRICELESS AS THE REEF, WE WOULD
NOT BE JUSTIFIED IN TAKING ANY CHANCES. WE ACCEPTED
THE MORE STRINGENT VIEW. OF THE COMMISSION'S CHAIRMAN. WE
HAVE THEREFORE DECIDED THAT THERE SHOULD BE NO DRILLING IN
THE AREA OF THE REEF UNTIL MORE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE IS
1-41A 
-2-
FOR US, THE PRESERVATION OF THE REEF IS PARAMOUNT
I HAVE ALREADY WRITTEN TO MR BJELKE-PETERSEN EXPLAINING
OUR DECISION IT WAS CERTAINLY TIME FOR SUCH'DECISIVE
ACTION. I DON'T NEED TO REMIND YOU OF THE LONG HISTORY
OF WRANGLING BY OTHER GOVERNMENTS WHICH LED UP TO OUR
DECISION. IT STARTED FIVE YEARS AGO, WHEN MR GORTON
WAS PRIME MINISTERS HE TOO WAS CONCERNED ABOUT OIL
DRILLING ON-THE REEF DRILLING PERMITTED AND
ENCOURAGED BY THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. IT WAS MR
GORTON'S AGITATION AND I GIVE HIM CREDIT FOR IT
WHICH LED TO THE APPOINTMENT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSIONS
BY THE QUEENSLAND AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS, BUT MR
GORTON WASN'T JUST CONCERNED ABOUT THE REEF. HE TOOK THE
WIDER-VIEW SUPPORTED BY MY PARTY THAT ALL OFF-SHORE
AREAS, THE WHOLE CONTINENTAL SHELF AROUND AUSTRALIA, WAS
THE PROPER RESPONSIBILITY OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT,
NOT THE STATES. e/ 3 
-3-
THE REASONS FOR THIS ARE SIMPLE ENOUGH:
THE OFF-SHORE AREAS LIE OUTSIDE OUR LAND BORDERS; THEIR
DEFINITION INVOLVES QUESTIONS OF FOREIGN RELATIONS;
AND MOST OFF-SHORE ACTIVITIES, SUCH AS MINING AND MINERAL
EXPLORATION, AFFECT NOT ONLY THE ENVIRONMENT BUT OUR
TRADE AS A NATIONS So THE GORTON GOVERNMENT IN
APRIL 1970 BROUGHT IN LEGISLATION TO BRING THESE AREAS
UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, WELL,
THERE WAS A GREAT HOWL FROM THE MINING INTERESTS AND
STATE-RiGHTERS, AND MR GORTON'S SENSIBLE MEASURE WAS PUT
IN COLD STORAGE. THE LIBERALS IN CANBERRA. WENT TO WATER.
WHEN WE CAME IN WE REINTRODUCED THE LEGISLATION; THE
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT PROMPTLY CHALLENGED IT IN THE HIGH
COURT, WE ARE STILL WAITING FOR THE COURT'S JUDGMENT. THAT'S
FAIR ENOUGH; BUT MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS BEEN USING HIS
COURT CHALLENGE TO TRY AND HOLD UP ANOTHER POSITIVE
MEASURE TO PROTECT THE BARRIER REEF. WE WON'T GO ALONG
WITH THOSE TACTICS. THIS WEEK, IN THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT, WE
INTRODUCED A BILL TO CREATE A GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE
PARK. IT'S A MAGNIFICENT SCHEME; IT WILL ENSURE THAT THIS
SUPERB AREA,* THIS UNIQUE PART OF AUSTRALIA'S NATURAL
HERITAGE, WILL BE SAFEGUARDED FOR ALL TIME. WE TOLD THE
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT THAT WE WOULDN'T ALLOW THEIR COURT
CHALLENGE TO DELAY THE BILL, WE SAID WE WOULD PREFER TO
COOPERATE IN A JOINT AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER THE MARINE
PARK WITH QUEENSLAND, BUT IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
WOULDN'T COOPERATE WE WOULD GO AHEAD ON OUR OWN, ONCE
AGAIN, THE FUTURE OF THE REEF WAS PARAMOUNT TO US. 
THOSE ARE JUST TWO OF THE INITIATIVES
WE HAVE TAKEN TO SAFEGUARD THE ENVIRONMENTS THEY ARE
AREAS IN WHICH WE HAVE CLEAR CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS, OR
ARE CONVINCED OF OUR POWERS. WHERE WE HAVE THE POWER WE
HAVE ACTED PROMPTLY1 WE HAVE POWER IN THE TERRITORIESAND
IT'IS IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY THAT MOST OF OUR
URANIUM IS MINED. HERE WE HAVE IMPOSED STRICT
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS ON URANIUM MINING BEFORE IT
STARTS1 AND HAVE APPROVED FULL LAND RIGHTS FOR THE
ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. WE ALSO HAVE POWER OVER-THE
EXPORT OF-MINERALS, WHEREVER THEY ARE MINED. THE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENT REALLY ONLY CONCERNED ITSELF WITH THE
EXPORT OF. URANIUM AND IRON ORE. ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTS
AS A GOVERNMENT WAS TO ASSUME-FULL CONTROL OVER THE
EXPORT OF AU.. MINERALS. WE DID THIS FOR A NUMBER OF
REASONS NOT JUST ENVIRONMENTAL ONES -AND ONE RESULTO
THANKS LARGELY TO THE WORK OF REX CONNOR AND HIS
DEPARTMENT, HAS BEEN TO QUADRUPLE THE EARNINGS FROM THE
EXPORT OF QUEENSLAND COALS 
WHEN IT COMES TO ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
WITHIN~ THE STATES, WE HAVE SOUGHT RESULTS BY AGREEMENT
WITH THE STATES OR BY BRINGING IN LEGISLATION WHICH THE
STATES AGREE TO SUPPORT. THAT'S NO EASY TASK. AWAY
BACK IN APRIL 1973 MORE THAN TWO YEARS'AGOIFIRST
WROTE TO THE PREMIERS SEEKING THEIR COOPERATION
IN PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT WHENEVER THEY REQUESTED
FEDERAL FUNDS FOR STATE GOVERNMENT PROJECTS. IN
JANUARY LAST YEAR 16 MONTH -S AGO WWR OTE AGAIN TO THE
PREMIERS$ I SUGGESTED A PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, WE
WANTED SOME PROCEDURE FOR JOINT ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRIES
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES. IT'S
SURELY ABSURD TO HAVE TWO INQUIRIES INTO THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT OF A* PROJECT WHEN ONE WILL DO, THE RESPONSE FROM
THE STATES WAS FRANKLY DISAPPOINTING1 BUT THAT DIDN'T
STOP ME FROM ACTING ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROJECTS
WHICH FALL WITHIN OUR OWN RESPONSIBILITY. ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT INQUIRIES HAVE BEEN STANDARD PRACTICE FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCE THE BEGINNING OF LAST YEAR. S,
LEGISLATION. TO MAKE THESE PROCEDURES COMPULSORY WAS
PASSED IN DECEMBER, FROM NOW ON, EVERY PROJECT AFFECTING
THE ENVIRONMENT WHETHER MINING1 BUILDING, OR
DEVELOPMENT WILL BE SUBJECT TO THE MOST SEARCHING
SCRUTINYS 
-6-
IT'S ONLY WHEN WE GET THESE MATTERS INTO
PROPER PERSPECTIVE THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND WHAT
HAPPENED WITH FRASER ISLAND. LET ME BE QUITE CLEAR
ABOUT THIS: NOTHING WE DO CAN STOP THE MINING ON
FRASER ISLAND. THE MOST WE CAN HOPE TO DO IS PREVENT
THE EXPORT OF MINERALS THAT ARE ALREADY MINED, THE
QUESTION WAS WHETHER WE COULD DO THAT LEGALLYOR
HONOURABLY. DON'T IMAGINE THAT THIS PROBLEM
SUDDENLY TOOK THE GOVERNMENT BY SURPRISE A COUPLE
OF WEEKS AGOi ALMOST A YEAR AGO, MY MINISTERS,
wMR CONNOR AND DR CASS AGREED -AND I ACCEPTED THEIR
ADVICE -THAT WHEREVER POSSIBLE THE GOVERNMENT
SHOULD.-USE ITS POWERS OVER MINERAL EXPORTS TO
DISCOURAGE MINING OPERATIONS WHICH COULD DAMA GE THE
ENVIRONMENT. ONCE AGAIN IT WAS ON 9 JULY LAST
YEAR -IWROTE TO THE PREMIERS POI NTIN G OUT OUR
CONCERN, AND STRESSING THAT ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS
WOULD BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT WHEN FUTURE APPLICATIONS
FOR MINERAL EXPORTS WERE CONSIDERED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TOOK SIX MONTHS TO REPLYo AND THERE
IS STILL NO AGREED PROCEDURE ON THE NECESSARY.
ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRIES. a17 
-7-
I ASK YOU TO REMEMBER THAT MINING HAS BEEN
GOING ON ON FRASER ISLAND FOR YEARS, THE PRESENT
MINING LEASES WEREN T APPROVED BY US THEY WERE
APPROVED YEARS AGO BY MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HIMSELF.
THAT'S ONE REASON WHY THERE HASN T BEEN A WORD OF
CRITICISM BY THE LIBERALS OR THE COUNTRY PARTY OF THE
MINING ON FRASER ISLAND. WHEN WE CAME TO OFFICE THE
MINING COMPANIES ALREADY HAD THEIR LEASES; THEY HAD
ENTERED INTO FIRM CONTRACTS, AND THEY HAD THE RESULTS
OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRY BY THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT WHICH GAVE ITS BLESSING TO THE SCHEME, SUBJECT
TO PRETTY STRINGENTSAFEGUARDS. THE WHOLEOPERATION WAS
PERFECTLY LEGAL. SOME SAY WE COULD STOP THE EXPORT
OF MINERALS NOW BY MAKING ' OUR LEGISLATION
RETROSPECTIVE, BY SAYING " THIS RULE WON'T JUST APPLY
IN FUTURE, WE RE GOING TO APPLY IT TO PAST CASES AS WELL$
-WE'RE GOING TO KNOCK OUT MILLIONS OF DOLLARS WORTH
OF MINERAL CONTRACTS ALREADY MADE IN GOOD FAITH."
WE WEREN'T PREPARED TO DO IT$ WHAT WE ARE DOING IS
MAKING. SURE THAT FROM NOW ON, ALL FUTURE MINING OPERATIONS
WILL BE CAREFULLY STUDIED FOR THEIR EFFECT. ON THE
ENVIRONMENT. DR CASS HAS ANNOUNCED A FULL ENVIRONMENTAL
INQUIRY INTO THE WHOLE FUTURE OF FRASER ISLAND TO HOLD
THE LINE AGAINST ANY FUTURE DAMAGE. 
-8-
WE HAVE ACHIEVED GREAT THINGS ON THE
ENVIRONMENT AND YOU CAN BE SURE WE WILL PRESS ON
WITH OUR PROGRAM AS VIGOROUSLY AS EVER. THAT
PROGRAM WILL MOVE AHEAD MORE QUICKLY WITH A
LITTLE LESS HYPOCRISY FROM THOSE WHO DID NOTHING,
DURING 23 YEARS IN GOVERNMENT, TO PROTECT OUR
NATURAL HERITAGE.
I 



ONE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E, G. WHITLAM, M, P.
TO THE FEDERATED MUNICIPAL AND SHIRE COUNCIL EMPLOYEES'UNION
26 MAY 1975
No GROUP OF AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES HAVE HAD GREATER
RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED UPON THEM THROUGH-THE POLICIES
OF MY GOVERNMENT THAN EMPLOYEES IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT. EQUALLY,
NO GROUP OF AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES HAVE HAD THEIR OPPORTUNITIES
MORE ENHANCED THAN THOSE EMPLOYED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT$
IN ACCEPTING YOUR INVITATION I ACKNOWLEDGE THIS, ACKNOWLEDGE
OUR DEBT AND AFFIRM OUR MUTUAL OPPORTUNITIES. THE POLICIES
OF THIS GOVERNMENT CANNOT SUCCEED WITHOUT YOUR CO-OPERATION,
IN A VERY REAL SENSE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
ARE THE FRONT-LINE TROOPS IN OUR BATTLE TO PROMOTE THE
QUALITY OF LIFE IN AUSTRALIA'S CITIES AND REGIONS, AND TO
PROMOTE EQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS. FRONT-LINE TROOPS MUST,
OF COURSE, EXPECT TO COP A GREAT DEAL OF THE FLAK, WE CAN
* ALL ANTICIPATE IN THE COMING MONTHS A STRENGTHENING OF THE
ATTACK ON THE GROWTH OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR, ON THE SO-CALLED
BLOATED BUREAUCRACY. " THESE ATTACKS ALWAYS HAVE ONE AIM
TO DIVIDE THE COMMUNITY, TO BUILD'UP RESENTMENT AGAINST
PUBLIC INITIATIVES,_ TO DEPICT-THE WORKFORCE AS BEING COMPOSED
OF TWO MUTUALLY HOSTILE SECTORS THE WORKERS VERSUS THE
DRONES. FOR THE PURPOSE OF THAT PARTICULAR EXERCISE,
THOSE PAID BY GOVERNMENT FEDERAL, STATE OR LOCAL ARE
DEPICTED AS THE DRONES. THIS COMPARTMENTALISATION IS
ESSENTIALLY PHONEY. IT IS IMPOSSIBLE, IN TERMS OF PRODUCTIVITY
OR SOCIAL WORTH, TO DRAW A DISTINCTION BETWEEN EMPLOYEES IN
THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND THOSE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR. 
-1A7
ACCORDING TO THE FALLACY OF PRIVATE WORTH VERSUS PUBLIC
WASTE, THE CLERK IN ONE OF THE 110 PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS
IS ECONOMICALLY PRODUCTIVE WHILE THE CLERK DOING EXACTLY
THE SAME WORK THROUGH MEDIBANK IS A BLUDGER. THE PRIVATE
BUS OPERATOR PRODUCESJ THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT WORKER IS
A PARASITE. THE BREWERY WORKER CONTRIBUTES TO THE
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT; THE WATER BOARD MAN DOES NOT.
THE SHIRE ENGINEER IS IN SOME WAY A LESS USEFULj,, LESS
PRODUCTIVE CITIZEN THAN A PRIVATELY-EMPLOYED ONE,
OF COURSE THIS ' IS ALL SO MUCH NONSENSE. 
-2-
ECONOMICALLY AND SOCIALLY, THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND
THE PUBLIC SECTOR ARE INTERDEPENDENT. No MODERN COMMUNITY
CAN SENSIBLY OR MEANINGFULLY DRAW A SHARP DISTINCTION
BETWEEN THE PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROVISION OF GOODS AND
SERVICES, WHOEVER PRODUCES OR PROVIDES THEM. IN MODERN
COMMUNITIES, THE PROVISION OF SERVICES, EVEN MORE THAN
THE PRODUCTION OF GOODS, DETERMINES THE REAL LEVEL OF
A COMMUNITY S WELFARE AND A FAMILY S STANDARD OF LIVING.
AND INCREASINGLY THOSE SERVICES MUST BE* PROVIDED BY THE
COMMUNITY ITSELF, OR THEY WILL NOT BE PROVIDED AT ALL,
WHO WOULD NOW ARGUE THAT THE PRODUCTION OF PRIVATE CARS
WAS A MORE ACCURATE OR MORE RELEVANT MEASURE OF
PROSPERITY THAN THE QUALITY OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT? WHO
WOULD NOW ARGUE THAT A SUBURBAN HOME STOCKED WITH
EVERY GLITTERING MODERN APPLIANCE WAS SATISFACTORY IF'IT
LACKED THE BASIC AMENITY OF SEWERAGE?
I SET OUT THE BASIS OF AN APPROACH IN THE
POLICY SPEECH OF 1972 IN THESE TERMS:
" EVEN-THE MOST ENLIGHTENED AND EQUAL APPROACH
TO SOCIAL WELFARE CAN ONLY SCRATCH THE SURFACE OF THE
BASIC PROBLEM OF EQUALITY AND WELL-BEING OF MOST OF OUR CITIZENS$
WE CAN DOUBLE AND TREBLE SOCIAL BENEFITS, BUT WE CAN NEVER
MAKE UP THROUGH CASH PAYMENTS FOR WHAT WE TAKE AWAY IN
MENTAL AND PHYSICAL WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL COHESION THROUGH
THE BREAKDOWN OF COMMUNITY LIFE AND COMMUNITY IDENTITY. 1-1/ 3. 
-3-
INCREASINGLY, A CITIZEN'S REAL STANDARD OF LIVING, THE
HEALTH OF HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY, -HIS CHILDREN'S
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION AND SELF-IMPROVEMENT, HIS
ACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, HIS ABILITY TO
ENJOY THE NATION'S RESOURCES FOR RECREATION AND CULTURE,
HIS ABILITY TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DECISIONS AND ACTIONS
OF THE COMMUNITY ARE DETERMINED NOT BY HIS INCOME, NOT
BY THE HOURS HE WORKS, BUT BY WHERE HE LIVES. THIS
IS WHY . LABOR BELIEVES THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST
INVOLVE ITSELF DIRECTLY IN CITIES AND CENTRES WHERE
MOST PEOPLE LIVE,"
THE MAJOR INSTRUMENT FOR THE PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION
OF THAT PHILOSOPHY IS LOCAL GOVERNMENT. WHAT IS NOW
UNDERWAY IS A TRANSFORMATION OF THE ROLE OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND CONSEQUENTLY A TRANSFORMATION OF THE ROLE
OF LOCAL* GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES. OON'T FORGET AND DON'T
O LET THE PUBLIC FORGET THAT WHEN BUSINESS, AND THE PRESS
ATTACK THE BUREAUCRACY, THEY ARE NOT JUST AIMING AT THE
CANBERRA PUBLIC SERVANTS; THEY'RE AIMING AT YOU AND YOUR
FELLOW-MEMBERS AS WELL. IN FACT IN 1974-75 THE FASTESTGROWING
SEGMENT OF THE PUBLIC WORK-FORCE WAS NOT THE
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE BUT EMPLOYMENT THROUGH LOCAL
GOVERNMENT. THE GROWTH OF THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE
WAS THE LOWEST OF THE THREE FEbERAL, STATE AND LOCAL. 
-4-
FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT FROM MARCH 1974 TO MARCH 1975
INCREASED 4.8 PER CENT, STATE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT
BY 6,4 PER CENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT BY
11,4 PER CENT, I SHOULD POINT OUT THAT THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT FIGURE SIGNIFICANTLY REFLECTS THE OPERATION
OF THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME, THE
FIGURES DO, HOWEVER, EXPLODE THE MYTH OF UNCONTROLLED
GROWTH OF THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE,
I SHOULD FURTHER POINT OUT THAT ONE OF THE
MAJOR FACTORS DETERMINING THE RATE OF GROWTH OF
THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE IS THE NEED TO RECRUIT
STAFF TO PLAN AND OPERATE PROGRAMS DIRECTLY RELATED
TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES, THIS GOES MUCH
FURTHER THAN THE CREATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE CITIES
COMMISSION AND THE NEW INVOLVEMENT OF THE GRANTS
COMMISSION IN REGIONAL AFFAIRS, A GREAT NUMBER OF
FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS ARE NOW WORKING DIRECTLY WITH
STATE AND LOCAL GOVENMENT TO DEVELOP A WHOLE. RANGE
OF NEW LOCAL PROGRAMS; INCLUDING SOCIAL SECURITY,
HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR AND IMMIGRATION, ABORIGINAL
AFFAIRS, TOURISM AND RECREATION, TRANSPORT, AND
HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION, 
THIS EXPANSION OF ACTIVITIES HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH
CENTRALISM. IT DOES MEAN VASTLY EXPANDED. OPPORTUNITIES
FOR CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE THREE LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT
AND A VASTLY ENHANCED ROLE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT. WE
HAVE SOUGHT TO MAKE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A GENUINE PARTNER
IN AUSTRALIA'S FEDERAL SYSTEM,
WHEN As LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY
IBEGAN TO BR ING LOCAL QUESTIONS TO THE CENTRE OF THE
NATIONAL DEBATE I WAS SAID TO BE DEMEANING BOTH THE
DEBATE AND MY SELF, REMEMBER THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
THOUGHT IT HILARIOUS THAT A NATIONAL LEADER SHOULD
SUGGEST, FOR I NSTANRE, THAT SEWERAGE WAS A-NATIONAL
QUESTION. MY APPROACH WAS AND IS THAT THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT MUST ACCEPT A GREATER INVOLVEMENT IN A WHOLE
RANGE OF MATTERS WHICH WERE ONCE DEEMED TO BE THE SOLE
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE OR OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
THAT IS-NOT BECAUSE OF ANY BELIEF IN THE INHERENT
SUPERIORITY OF CANBERRA. IT IS SIMPLY THAT UNDER THE OLD
APPROACHj. THE SERVICES WHICH A MODERN COMMUNITY NOW
REQUIRES SHOULD BE PROVIDED THROUGH ITS ELECTED
REPRESENTATIVES WERE EITHER PROVIDED INADEQUATELY
OR NOT AT ALL, WERE FINANCED INADEQUATELY AND UNFAIRLY,
OR NOT AT ALL, IT IS NOW INEVITABLE THAT THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT SHALL ACCEPT INCREASING RESPONSIBILITY TO
FINANCE THESE FUNCTIONS AND SERVICES FAIRLY AND ADEQUATELY.
WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TRIED TO DO IS TO CREATE
THE INSTITUTIONS AND MACHINERY, AND TO APPOINT THE MEN AND
WOMEN WHEREBY THIS INEVITABLE GROWTH OF RESPONSIBILITY
CAN BE DISCHARGED EFFICIENTLY AND FAIRLY. 
-6-
THE GREAT OBJECTIVE HAS BEEN TO EXPAND OPPORTUNITIES AND
EQUALISE OPPORTUNITIES BETWEEN REGIONS, THE MAJOR
INSTRUMENT IN THIS TASK IS THE GRANTS COMMISSION. THIS
YEAR $ 56 MILLION HAS BEEN MADE AVAILABLE TO 806 LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES UNDER RECOMMENDATION MADE BY THE
COMMISSION, I MENTIONBRIEFLY SOME OTHER NEW PROGRAMS WHICH
DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY PROVIDE NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR
YOUR MEMBERS. LAST YEAR WE PROVIDED $ 28 MILLION UNDER OUR
NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM. THIS YEAR THE ESTIMATE IS
$ 108 MILLION AND THE PROGRAM. HAS BEEN EXTENDED TO TOWNS
WITH A POPULATION OF MORE THAN 10,000,
FOR THE. FIRST TIME WE HAVE MADE URBAN LOCAL
ROADS ELIGIBLE FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN. GOVERNMENT,
THIRTEEN'AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS COSTING $ 14 MILLION
ARE NOW OPERATING.
THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION AND
OTHER AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENTS SUCH AS DEPARTMENT OFURBAN
AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ARE CONSULTING AT LOCAL LEVEL ON
THE RECREATIONAL NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE. 
-7
OUR GRANTS PROGRAM HAS MADE A START TOWARDS MEETING THOSE
NEEDS. WE HAVE THIS YEAR ALLOCATED $ 2.25 MILLION FOR
GRANTS FOR LOCAL TOURIST ATTRACTIONS AND FACILITIES. WE
ARE ESTABLISHING ADVISORY COMMITTEES FOR CONSULTATION WITH
LOCAL GOVERNMENTo REGIONAL TOURIST ORGANISATIONS AND
INDUSTRY REPRESENTATIVES TO PLAN REGIONAL TOURIST DEVLEOPMENT1
WE HAVE EXPANDED THE PROGRAM OF LOCAL OWNERSHIP OF
AERODROMESS LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS PARTICIPATED IN THE INTERIM
PROGRAM FOR PRE-SCHOOL AND CHILD-CARE SERVICES. ABOUT
HALF OF THE 122 CAPITAL PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN THROUGH OUR
CHILD-CARE PROGRAM WERE SPONSORED BY LOCAL.. GOVERNMENT BODIES.
WE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE MORE THAN $ 3k MILLION
IN DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHOR ITIES FQLR
ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT IN THE PAST YEAR. MOST OF THAT
WAS ALLOCATED UNDER THE SPECIAL WORK PROJECTS SCHEME
ADMINISTERED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES.
WE HA VE COOPERATED CLOSELY WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THROUGH THE CREATION OF THE REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
ASSISTANCE PLAN. II I 
-8-
THE LEGISLATION FOR THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION PROVIDES FOR THE COMMISSION TO
MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO BE MADE
AVAILABLE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AFTER CONSULTATIONS WITH THE STATES., THE
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM AND THE COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTHI
ALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY PROGRAM, BOTH INTRODUCED
IN 1973, PROVIDE FOR DIRECT GRANTS TO* LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS, LOCAL GOVERNMENT NOW HAS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO PARTICIPATE DIRECTLY IN THE PROVISION OF A WIDE RANGE
OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES AT THE COMMUNITY
LEVELI WHERE IT9 PARTICIPATION CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVE, 
p THROUGH ALL THESE AND OTHER PROGRAMS, WE ARE
STRIVING TO EXPAND AND EQUALISE OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
REGIONS AND AS BETWEEN REGIONS. IT IS NOT ONLY A MATTER
OF IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR ALL CITIZENS, FOR
ALL PEOPLE LIVING IN AUSTRALIA, WHEREVER THEY LIVE IN
AUSTRALIA THOUGH THAT IS THE BASIC AIM. THESE PROGRAMS
WILL INEVITABLY PROMOTE THE OPPORTUNITIES OF YOUR
MEMBERS, NOT JUST FOR EMPLOYMENT, BUT FOR MORE REWARDING,
MORE SELF-SATISFYING EMPLOYMENT. WHEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WAS TREATED AS THE CINDERELLA OF GOVERNMENT, WHEN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS POORLY FINANCED AND LOWLY REGARDED,
ALL THOSE ASSOCIATED WITH IT, AND EMPLOYED THROUGH IT,
PAID A PRICE IN SALARY AND WAGES AND IN PUBLIC
ESTEEM. THIS IS NOT ENDED YET: THERE IS STILL A
LONG WAY TO GO. MUT UNTIL LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS A
GENUINE, A FULL AND COMPLETE PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL
SYSTEM,. THOSE EMPLOYED AT THAT LEVEL WILL SUFFER..
THE FACT IS THAT STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES HAVE
BEEN LOUSY EMPLOYERS. THIS IS THE PRINCIPAL REASON WHY
MOST STRIKES THE MOST FREQUENT STRIKES, THE WORST
STRIKES, THE LONGEST STRIKES OCCUR IN THE GREAT SERVICE
INSTRUMENTALITIES AND AMONG EMPLOYEES UNDER THE GREAT
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES, STATE OR LOCAL. IN RAISING THE
LEVEL AND PRESTIGE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HOPES, NOT ONLY
TO PROMOTE THE QUALITY OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE, BUT TO MAKE IT
POSSIBLE FOR THOSE PUBLIC AUTHORITIES TO GIVE THEIR OWN
EMPLOYEES AS GOOD CONDITIONS, AS GOOD REMUNERATION, AS
GOOD OPPORTUNITIES, AND AS GOOD A CHANCE FOR A DECENT,
FULFILLING OCCUPATIONAS ANYJEPLOYEES IN AUSTRALIA. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT SWEDISH TELEPHONE LINK-UP
ON MONDAY, 26TH MAY, 1975
I'm to open Swedish Technical Week, but that's not what is
worr ying me it is this phone call which I have to take
immediately I have opened the Week.
I sometimes have the feeling, I suppose all of you do, that
when you are making phone calls, somebody may be listening in.
Well, on this occasion, I know they are,-hundreds of you.
Of course, this means that the phone call will have to be
exceptionally discreet and formal. I hope you will pardon
me because really on the telephone, I'm quite relaxed ordinarily,
quite forthcoming, quite natural. This is not the real me that
you will hear on the phone.
It gives me very great pleasure to open Swedish Technical Week,
because there is no country in the world, whose model my
Government has sought to emulate in so many respects. I suppose
I must confess to being a little ideologically prejudiced.
The Swedish Government is formed by a fraternal party of my own.
It's been in office for over 40 years, yet Sweden is one of the
most complete democracies in the world a vigorous contest
between political parties and we've won for over 40 years.
Of course, naturally, I want to emulate the Swedish example.
But let me be completely dispassionate in this matter. Let
me just look at the facts and the statistics. When the Swedish
Social Democrats came to office in the early 1930' s, Sweden
statistically was the poorest country in Europe. It would be
invidious to mention the countries which are now regarded as
the poorest in Europe, but which at that time, had a higher
average per capita income than did the Swedes. Now, by any
tests, Sweden has the highest per capita income in Europe.
It is probably the richest country in the world. I believe the
conclusion to be drawn is obvious. The society is fair, the
economy has been transformed. And it has . come about, I believe,
because the Swedes have concentrated on their strengths. They
are naturally an educated, healthy people, a real democracy,
complete freedom of parliamentary and media exchanges. At the
same time, they have concentrated on those natural resources
where they are strongest. They are very rich in minerals, and
one only has to look not only at the income that the Swedes
derive from the export of minerals, but also look at the income
they derive, the employment they secure, from the processing
of minerals and not least, the whole of the metal skills upon
which so much of their reputation in the world is based. In
every respect, the raw materials, the basic industries, the
crafts and designs, the Swedes excell. 
d f
2.
Inevitably, in these circumstances, they have built up a
very healthy trade with Australia. So often when people
visit Australia, they say the trade balance is very much
in Australia's favour. I have to point out that the trade
between Australia and Sweden, the trade balance, is immensely
in Sweden's favour much more in Sweden's favour than the
trade balance is in Australia's favour with any country in
the world. But I don't resent that, I don't object to it.
Minister Bengtsson has pointed out the close ties which have
developed between our two countries in the last two years.
I suppose you could say the last two years and five months
to be precise.
Nobody would say that I haven't tried to visit Sweden! It0
was about six years since I made my first visit there and
try as I might, I couldn't extend my mission to Europe over
last Christmas and January,, to include Sweden. But I couldn't
restrain my Ministers from visiting it. I think more of my
Ministers have visited Sweden than have visited any other0
country quite a record I can assure you. In so many
international gatherings, we confer with the Swedes, whether
it is in economic, or social, or diplomatic issues, we study
in every case, what the Sweddes'are doing, or what they have
done and they have been very good colleagues indeed. It's a
delight to have Minister Bengtsson here again. We appreciate
any visits from him. The Swedes have an extraordinarily fine
Public Service, an extraordinarily fine diplomatic service
and we have the Ambassador and a distinguished Minister here
with us today. Moreover, there are a very great number of
Swedish businessmen and Australian businessmen visiting
Australia in this Swedish Technical Week.
I don't know when the phone call is coming through, but I
suppose to make it available and to take this call, to beS
formal and discreet, I had better get this informal part over,
and I now declare Swedish Technical Week 1975 in Melbourne,
Australia, open. 
TELEPHONE LINK-UP DISCUSSION
Mr. Whitlam: The trade balance between our two countries
is very much in your favour.
Mr. Palme: Yes, but the important thing is that it will
expand both ways, I hope.
Mr. Whitlam: I'm sure it will.
Mr. Palme: Really, our contacts have developed in a very
capable way in all spheres during the last few years.
Mr. Whitlan: They have indeed.
Mr. Palme: We-are very happy for that.
Mr. Whitlam: I must say that I was sorry that I couldn't
extend my European visit, 5 months ago, to Sweden, but I
want to express my appreciation to you and your Ministers
for your hospitality to so many of my Ministers, who, whenever
they're within a thousand miles of Sweden, make sure that they
visit Sweden.
Mr. Palme: In the first place, we are looking forward to
seeing you in the future. I remember we met at a restaurant
here in Stockholm.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes
Mr. Palme: Six or seven years ago.
Mr. Whitlam: When you were the heir apparent to Erlander.
Mr. Palme: I just returned from Vienna a couple of hours
ago, where I met two friends of yours, Willy Brandt and H. Schmidt,
and they both extend their best wishes to you. I understand
that Willy Brandt has also talked to you over the phone once,
to Australia.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes he did, last year. But it was not so refined
a technique as this where we are speaking on telephones. In
that case we-were on television. We were picked up by television
sets, but here, of course, we are onEricsson telephones.
Mr. Palme:
to year. So the technical development proceeds from year 
Mr. Whitlam: I was happy to be able to see Willy Brandt
last January in Bonn and, of course, found him in excellent
spirits and we have some hope that he may be visiting Australia
next year.
Mr. Palme: He mentioned that. He was looking forward to it.
We were discussing particularly, the present situation in the
world and in Europe. Naturally the fact that the unemployment
is so large, the OECD area is causing us very great concern,
but we are hoping that there will come some up-turn later in
the year, which would be very beneficial.
Mr. Whitlam: We hope so, because all the countries at this
stage of development that the OECD countries are, big ones
and medium sized ones like Sweden and Australia, have these
terrible twin problems of unemployment and inflation. But
it looks as if the position is improving steadily, although
slowly, in all our countries.
Mr. Palme: I believe so. The important thing is to tie it to
the development of the United States. As long as they lag
behind, it will be difficult, but there is a hope that there
will be a change this year.
Mr. Whitlam: They seem to have changed their policies in
order to relieve the unemployment.
I would like to assert to you, face to face, how much my
Government has appreciated working with your Government
and its representatives in international bodies in the last
two and a half years. We find ourselves ' on the same wavelength
in so many social and economic and diplomatic issues, and
whenever we are deciding a course of action we shall take
as Australians in any of these bodies, we ascertain what the
attitude of the Swedish Government will be.
Mr. Palme: May I immediately reciprocate, because whatever
the field is, whether it be the environment, or in disarmament
questions or in the General Assembly or in the Security Council
in the United Nations, we always have the same experience that
our representatives can work very much on the same lines. And
I feel that it is important that countries of our size try to
both take an active part to show solidarity in all the international
affairs.
Mr. Whitlam: We are not so large that other countries suspect
our political motives or fear our economic power. They can
believe that what we are trying to do is, in fact, good
international relations, fraternal relations.
Mr. Palme: In my contacts around the world, I see more and
more that this type of cooperation of the medium sized and
smaller countries is wanted, not least in the many countries 
of the Third World that now are finding their rightful
places. Mr. Whitlam: Well, of course, Australia is surrounded by
developing countries, countries of the Third World, countries
which in the last generation, or in the case of Indo-China,
within the last couple of months, have achieved independence,
and, accordingly, we are very much aware of the needs of
developing countries for trade as well as aid, and that
they need to have international self-respect. We applaud
the efforts that Sweden has taken under your Government and
Mr. Erlander's Government in this respect in Indo-China,
the attitude you expressed politically and also -the assistance
that you have given with aid and rehabilitation. It's been
a noble precedent and we try to emulate it.
Mr. Palme: Your position is very important. Just because
you are in the region where there are many countries of the
Third World, where you have much more first-hand contact than
many other countries have. In this international cooperation,
I think what we are doing right now is important because there
is in many places, a reaction against technical development
and against the advances of industrial society. This can be
understandable when technology leads to undesirable social
results, but on the other hand, one must never forget that
it is the technical development that has allowed our countries
to come up from poverty and misery and to create welfare for
our peoples. Therefore, we had to control technology, and
also give it the possibility to develop for the benefit of all
countries and for mankind, and I think it is important to stress
this in the modern world..
Mr. Whitlam: In our area it is true that in many of our
neighbour countries, there is some revulsion against advanced
technologies because they have often increased the distance
between the people in office or in power, through whose hands
the new techniques pass, and the rest of the population. It
would be a tragic result if higher techniques increased the.
disparities, the inequalities in the developing societies.
Nevertheless, as I was saying to this gathering at this
function in Melbourne, it is by concentrating on its strengths,
that a country like Sweden in the course of just over 40 years,
has come from the poorest country in Europe to the richest
country in the world the smallest per capita income to the
largest. You have concentrated on your strengths and it is
something that we aim to copy in Australia. You have preserved
democracy, you have a welfare state and you have a thriving
mixed economy.
Mr. Palme: I don't think you need to copy anything because
really, you are following the same path with a very developed
industrial economy on a mixed economy basis and the extended
welfare for the people. We can thus, because we are on the
same level of development, learn a lot from each other, in the
social fields and the labour market field, and many others., 
6.
So we are really learning much from you and I see my colleagues
are very eager to come over there and discuss with your
people.
Mr. Whitlam: We have Mr. Bengtsson . of course, with us today.
Mr.. Palme: I hope he behaves.
Mr. Whitlam: We haven't got these two-way Ericsson telephones
on him the whole time, but I believe so. Both as Environment
and as Labor Minister, he is a very good colleague. My
colleagues in these fields have shared experiences with him
to our advantage and he seems to enjoy it too.
Mr. Palme: Last year we had Mr. Cameron. I had a long
discussion with him. I suppose you see him often. Would
you give him my regards.
Mr. Whitlam: I see him constantly. He is constantly on
radio talk-back programmes. If he were on a programme like
this, there would be no holding him! I will tell him that
you remember him and that you speak so kindly of him. Thank
you very much for your reference to him.
Mr. Palme: I hope that this Technical Week will be of
some interest to you . and show you what we are trying to
develop in this very small country. We try to specialise
in certain things.
Mr. Whitlam: I'm most glad that Swedish technology has
brought us face to face again. I hope that it will not be
too long before you, in my country, or I, in your country,
can speak face to face without scores or hundreds of people
watching us. It's very good for my Government to be working
so closely with your Government in so many fields and I have
very much appreciated the opportunity of speaking to you
face to face again through the Swedish technology and the
opening of Swedish Technical Week-in Australia.
Mr. Palme: I really look forward to seeing you again in
person in my country and I'm glad that technology gave us
this chance of ' a preview of our future meeting.
Mr. Whitlam: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
Mr. Palme: MTr. h aPlnmek: you, goodbye. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THlE LAUNCHING OF
' THE AUSTRA\ LIAN CONSTITUTION' BY GEOFFREY SAWYER
ON MONDAY, 26TH MAY, 1975
I suppose I have been brought in to launch this book to
direct some attention to it and I'm very happy to fulfil
that purpose. I'm certain that anybody looking at the
book will find it interesting. It will be accessible to
a degree that very few books can be accessible because it
is being published by the Australian Government Publishing
Service and it will be available at all its outlets. It will
not only be accessible, it will be stimulating.
Geoffrey Sawyer is one of the most scintillating of our
academics. I w-. as first exposed to him getting on in the*
middle ' 50' s, when I was sitting on the Constitution Review
Committee of the Federal Parliament both Houses, both sides
of each House. There were very many distinguished witnesses
who gave their views and the one whose views I remember most
dazzlingly, was Geoffrey Sawyer.
There are a great number of academics these days who write
for the newspapers and particularly for the Fairfax press.
It's no compliment to say that Geoffrey Sawyer is the best.
Some of the others are fallible in proportion to -their dogmatism.
I've never known professors to be so unfailingly in error.
But Geoffrey Sawyer is better than most. He is certainly as good
as any. This is not patronising. One has to remember that
judges don't agree and their word is final. How many unanimous
decisions do you get from the High Court? In recent years we
have learnt how the Privy Council, of course, wasn't unanimous
always. A lot of things must have been decided by majority.
So if judges can disagree, there is no shame i~ n academics also
disagreeing and being wrong because the judge is only right if
he is in the majority. For all that, this book will be accessible,
it will be stimulating.
The important thing is that we should encourage people to
know the framework within which all the Australian Parliaments
have to operate. We are one of -the very few federal systems
in the world and we are the most litigious of them all. There
is West Germany, United States, Canada and Australia. There
are other federal systems, India, Mexico and Brazil and so on,
but one never really finds there the constitutional contests
in the courts such as you find in the three English speaking
federations and you don't find them in West Germany either.
I wish people would read the Constitution and see what it says.
I've had some people in the States just blowing their heads,
they are just beside themselves with outrage when anybody
suggests that perhaps we should take some responsibility for
seeing that there is a trafficable road between Sydney and
Melbourne. That's always been in the Constitution trade
and commerce between the States. True, at the time the thing
was written there weren't motor-cars and people, of course, 
wouldn't go the whole of that distance in a horse and dray,
but there are roads now, and people do travel between Sydney
and Melbourne, but they can't do it on the road provided.
Nov, what is unreasonablie in using the trade and commerce
among the States it's perfectly feasible, right from the
beginning.
Again, I wish -they'd read what is said about hospitals. It
w,. as regarded as utterly outrageous, provocative arnd irresponsible
for me to suggest that if in large centres of population, such
as outer suburbs, which of course have larger popula-t-ions than
any country towns, any provincial centres except Newcastle,
-that if they haven't got hospitals provided by the States,
then the Australian Government could provide the hospital.
This was absolutely unheard of but since 1946 we have always
been able to provide medical services.
As it turned out, they disturbed themselves in the States
and they have now laid a few foundation stones. But I just
give you those practical examples. People do want to travel
between Sydney and Melbourne by road, people do want to have
hospitals near where they live, or are injured or are confined.
If the roads or the hospitals are not adequate, there's nothing
to say that the Federal Governizent shouldan't provide them.
One of the things which distresses me, of course, is how
negatively people regard these things. I don't mind the
limitations in the Federal Constitution on federal action
in terms o. f civil liberties or human rights, such as they
are there. I thnk it is monstrous that the provision providing
for jury trial has been by-passed by a shabby dodge but,
nevertheless, it meant well jury trial for serious crimes.
And again, acquisition of property on just terms. I don't cavil
at those at all, but nobody ever seems to think why shouldn't
the same things be applied to the States in the Constitution?
We had a Constitutional convention about 18 months ago, and
out of its deliberations people suggest that there should be
acquisition on just terms provided in the territories. Of
course there should be.. Nobody seemed to -think there should
be in the States too. What's the use of having a safeguard
like that which is applied only partially. It should be made
universal. Defective as the safeguard! of jury Lrial is under
federal criminal law, it should be tidied up but it should
also apply no less to State criminal laws. I wish people
would look at these things in a more basic way, in a less
conservative, restrictive and negative way.
Of course, the constitutional provisions are always taking on
new aspects. It's happened only a year ago. For -the first
time there was a double dissolution on several Bills. The
previous double dissolution had been on a single Bill. We
had them on six Bills. The currenit rate is over a dozen. 
For the first time after a double dissolution, -the Bills
had to be rejected a third time so there was a joint sitting,
the first that ever had been. For the first timn, lasL May,
there were some referendums on another Provision of the
Constitution which said that if the Senate twice rejected
referendums, then Bills, then they could be put to the peop.* Ie
willy-nilly. The Senate can prevent a Bill being passed but
i~ t cannot prevent a referendum being put. Of course, the
Constitution is always taking new forms.
I want to pay tribute to the High Court and the way it has
developed it. It has done much more than the people ever
have at referendums. I was referring to the Constitution
Review Committee report in the late ' 501s. An am-tazing degree
of unanimity was reached there. There were never any of
our recommendations which were supported by fewer
than 11 of the 12 members. Most of them were unanimous. It's
only last year that it was found that there were objectionable
features about some of them. But in the meantime, some of the
provisions in our report have come about. We were much agitated
about the limitations of -the National Parliament's power over
civil aviation. Under the external affairs power, we now have
it, coupled with the import power. No, the Federal Parliament
doesn't need to amplify its civil aviation powers now it's got
them. Again, we were concerned about television which, naturally,
was not contemplated -in 1900 when the Constitution was drawn up.
Nobody worries that we haven't in the Federal Parliament, now
got jurisdiction over television. We were agitated about trade
practices. In the light of the concrete pipes case, the
corporation's power, we can effectivel~ y deal with trade practices.
So, one way or another, things develop.
I do urge that people should read the Constitution. A lot
of people think that if something is not used, that -there's
something improper about it. Take the Interstate Commission
an emminently reasonable body. But because it hadn't been
used for over half a century, people think that there must be
something improper about bringing it to pass. In the United
States, they would never think. of abandoning it. In West
Germany and Canada, they now have similar bodies. And so one
could go on. B~ ut I wish people would just be rational enough
to look at the Constitution; not just look at it in a restrictive
and negative, a cussed way, but to see what can be done if ii:
i. s necessary or desirable or preferable to do something. There
are very considerable shortcomings in it. A great amount can
be done by cooperation between the Federal and State bodies,
but at least one needs -to be clear where each of them stands
under the Constitution.
While I'm immensely flattered by what the Minister has said
about me, I suppose in many ways, all I can claim is that I
brought a lot of these m-atters to a head. I've made the
Parliameznt face up to them. I've made the State Parliaments
and Governments face up to them and I am trying to exercise
them internationally as well. 
One of the most fascinating things about this book of
Geoffrey Sawyer's is that it makes the whole subject live
in human and political terms. I naturally regard political
terms as essentially human. That may have an elemet of
rationalisation about it. But, the Constitution was, in
terms of British colonies at the end of last century, a very
bold initiative. Most of the other Federal Constitutions in
the world have come about as a result of external pressures.
That was the case in America, in Canada and West Germany.
They have arisen from successful national liberation movements
or unsuccessful wars and the newly emancipated colonists have
resorted to federal systems or the banquished have resorted to
federal systems or had them imposed upon them. We did it,
largely, voluntarily. While I suppose you can say in retrospect,
the horizons were those of colonial politicians at the time, yet
nevertheless, there can be no doubt of the vigour of the debate
which took place. Of course the book is well illustrated. The
next edition ought to be still better illustrated, with some
of these fascinating cartoons here. It's one form of art or
controversy in which Australians have always been innovative
and excellent. But between us, the Australian Government
Publishing Service, Geoffrey Sawyer and the current Government,
I suppose constitutional matters will continue to be exciting
for quite some time. There can be no question that the public
is more interested in politics than it has been for 40 or
years. The 1920' s or 1.930 was the last time that there was
the interest in politics in Australia that there is at the
moment. If you are to understand Australian politics, you have to
have some acquaintance with the Australian Constitution.
With a scintillating author and a pretty good lawyer, we
now have the material readily accessible and I'm certain
people of all ages and all conditions, will be better and
wiser through reading ' The Australian Constitution' written
by Geoffrey Sawyer and published by the Australian Government
Publishing Service. I'm very happy now to launch it. 



CONSTITU'TION AlTERAl ION STIULTANOUS ELECT IONS,) i1 1 97
SECOND R) EADING SPEECH
1 3) p27/ I1j\
TH'. E HONOUIRABIE G. WHITLAN. C. P.
PR?. IME MINISTER
MR SPEAKER, I MOVE:
T'IAT THIS BILL BIE READ A SECOND TIME.
THIS BILL IS IDENTICAL WITH ' THAT INTRODUCI: I) INTO TillS
HOUSE BY ME ON 11 FEBRUARY 1975 AND PASSEI: D BY AN ABISOLUTE
MAJORITY ON 18 FEPR?. UARY. THIE SENATE RECEIVED TiHAT IPTL . ON
19 FEBRUARY AND REFUSED IT A SECOND REA1) DING ON 25 F. VB3UARYo
I SHALL NOT TAKE THE TIME OF THE HOUSE TO PUT
FORWARD AGAIN THE REASONS THAT HAVE LED TIHE GOVERNNENT TO
RESUBMIT TIIS LEGISLATION. THEY ARE SOUND AND REASONED. THEY
WERE SPELT OUT BY ME IN MY SECOND READING SPEECH IN THiE HOUSE,
AND IHONOURABLE MEMBERS HAVE THEM RECORDED IN IIANSARD
PP 53-54 OF 11 FEBRUARY 1975.
THE HONOURABLE MEMBERS FOR MORETON, DARLING DOWNS
AND BENNELONG WHO SPOKE FOR THE OPPOSITION ON THE 13BILL EAILIER
THIS YEAR CLAIMED THAT THEY OPPOSED IT BECAUSE S] IMULTANEOUS
ELECTIONS WOULD DISTURB THE IRELATIONSHIP BFTI'WEEN THE TWO HOUSES,
DAMAGE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE SENATE AND ALTER ITS ROLE.
THllS, OF COURSE, IS NOT SO. THE INDEPENDENCE OF Tl'E
SENATE WAS NOT FOUNDED ON ELECTIONS BEING HELD FOR TIHE TWO
HOUSES A'T' DIFFERENT TIMES. IT IS CLEARI THIAT TIIE FR?. AMERS , OOFU R
CONSTITUTION DID NOT REGARD SEPARATE ELECTIONS IN TillS SENSE AS
BASIC TO TiHE SENATE' S ROLE AS AN INDEFENDENT IHOUSEF. fNDEEP. 
BEFORE TliE JOINT ARLIAMENTARY CONN'ITTEf: E ON CONSTITl'TI. ONAll
REVIEW RRCOMNKNDED THIS . PARTICULAR~ l HEFORM IN 1959 WITH ONLY
ONJ". MI IKB ISSENTING THERE HAD BERN ONlY T1REE OCCASIKS ON
WHICH AN ELECTION HA BERN HELD TO ELECTMCHBR1? S OF ONE HOSI;:
ONLY THOSE FOR THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES IN 1929 AN 195.1
AND FOR THE SENATE IN 1953.
SINCE 1959, IOWEVFR, THERE HAVE BEEN NO 1: SS THAN
NINE NATIONAL ELECTIONS, FOUR OF TIN FOR THIS HO0USE AIONEK
AND THREE OF THEN O? THE SENATE ALONE,
I POINT OUT ALSO THAT THE JOINT COMMI. TT'E CONCLUDI)
THAT THE ORIGINAL CONCKPT OF TiHE SENATE' S ROLE AS A STATE S
HOUSE HAD NOT BEEN REALISED; NOR HAD ITS INTENDED ROLE AS A
HOUSE OF REVIEW THE WEAPON OF REJECTION HAD ALWAYS BEEN IN
PAITY HANDS. IT WAS THE JOINT COMMITTEE' S VIEW THAT SINULTANEOUS
ELECTIONS WOULD BENEFIT IT. ESPONSTHk1E GOVERNMENT IN MANY WAYS.
APART FRO N THE OBVIOUS CONVENIENCE., SIMULTANEOUS KLECTIONS
WOULD PROOTE GOVERNMENT IN ACCORDANCE WIL KHNEO ST PRCENT
EXPRESS. ON OF THE WILL OF TIHE PEOPLE AND DISCOURAGE CAPICIOUS
IEJECTION OF LEGISLATION PASSED BY THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATI VES.
IN SHOUT, THE RTGHTS AND INDEPENDENCE OF T E SENATE
WILL IN NO WAY BE AHOGATED BY THIS BILL. BUP THE BILL WIL. L
ENABLE THE ELECTORS TO RE-CONSIDER WHETHER. TiEY WISH TO CONTINU i:
TO HAVE FREQUENT AND COSTLY SEPARATE ELECTIONS FOR THE TWO
HOUSKS AS IS THE POS'TION NOW OR WHETHER TIEY WISII SIMULTANIOU-S
ELECTIONS TO 13K HI) FOR TH HOUSE OF I?. EPiHESNTAT. I VKS AND ONK
HALF OF ' I'llE SENATE,
I COMMEND THE BILL TO THE HOUS. K 
ELECTORAL BILL
AT ITS JOINT SITTING ON 6 AUGUST 1974,
PARLIA' 1HNT PASSED THE COMMONWEALTH ELECTORAL ACT WHICH HAD)
BEEN ONE OF THE BILLS ON WHICH THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION HAD BlEEN
GRANTED IN APRIL, 1974V THIE ACT PROVIDES THAT IN ANY ELECTORATE,
THE NUMBER OF VOTERS SHALL NOT BE MORE THAN 10% ABOVE OR nELOW
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF \ VOTERS IN ALL THE ELECTORATES OF THE
STATE CONCERNEDV IN PASSING THE BILL, THE PARLIAMENT THEREFORE
DECIDED THAT THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONERS, IN ESTABLISHING THE
BOUNDARIES AT A REDISTRIBUTION, SHOULD BE PERMITTED A VARIATION
BETWEEN ELECTORATES WITHIN A STATE OF NOT MORE THAN ONE-TENTH
INSTEAD OF ONE-FIFTH VARIATION PERM4ITTED UNDER LEGISLATION THEN
EXISTING BY PASSING THE ACT THE PARLIAMENT INTENDED TO ENSURE
THAT TPE NUMBER~ OF ' VOTERS IN EACH ELECTORATE SHOULD BE MUCH
CLOSER TO THE IDEAL OF EOUALITY, THE PASSING OF THAT LEGIS--
LATION EXPRESSED SOMETHING RATHER THAN MORE THAN THE WILL OF THE
PARLIAMIENT, THE WILL OF BOTH HOUSES SITTING JOINTLY, IN A VERY
REAL SENSE IT EXPRESSED THE DECISION OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
BECAUSE AS I HAVE SAID, THE BILL FORMED ONE OF THE GROUNDS FOR
THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION AND WAS THEREFORE ONE OF THE ISSUES PUT
BEFORE THE PEOPLE AT THE ELECTIONS LAST M~ AY. 
2
SPEAKING AT THE JOINT SITTING, SENATOR STEELE
HALL SAID: " IT IS QUITE CLEAR THAT THE OPPOSITION PARTIES IN
BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT SET UP THE ELECTION AS A TEST FOR
THE GOVERNMENT, THEY SAID SO CLEARLY IN SO MANY WORDS AND AT
VARIOUS TIMES MENTIONED SPECIFIC ISSUES, THERE IS NO DOUBT
THAT THIS GOVERNMENT HAS A VERY FAIR CLAIM TO THE BILLS WHICH
IT IS PRESENTING TO THIS JOINT COMMITTEE THERE IS A VERY
REAL NEED TO UNDERSTAND THAT THESE ISSUES ARE ONES TO WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT NOW HAS A VERY FAIR CLAIM ANY PERSON WHO STUDIES
THE HISTORY OF THE GENERATION OF THIS JOINT SITTING WILL KNOW
THAT ANYONE WHO STANDS AGAINST EXTENSION OF THE FRANCHISE STANDS
AGAINST HIS OWN POLITICAL FUTURE,.
AS A RESULT OF THAT JOINT SITTING AND IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE CLEARLY EXPRESSED WISHES OF THE PEOPLE, THE COMMONWEALTH
ELECTORAL ACT BECAME THE LAW OF THE LAND, LAST WEEK, THE SENATE
REFUSED TO ADOPT REDISTRIBUTION PROPOSALS WHICH IMPLEMENTED THE
LAW, THE SENATE HAS TRIED TO ENSURE THAT THE LAW REMAINS
INOPERATIVE A DEAD LETTER, IN REJECTING THE PROPOSALS THE
SENATE HAS TRIED TO NULLIFY THE LAW OF THE LAND, THERE WAS NO
POINT IN SENDING THE BOUNDARIES BACK TO THE COMMISSIONER TO BE
REDRAWN, THE COUNTRY PARTY HAS MADE IT PERFECTLY CLEAR THAT IT
WILL REJECT ANY REDISTRIBUTION AT ALL. WE THEREFORE PROPOSE TO
EMBODY THE PROPOSALS IN LEGISLATION. BY SO DOING ' E RE-ASSERT
THE INEVITABLE AND NECESSARY CONNECTION BETWEEN THE LAW AND THE
PROPOSALS, BETWEEN THE ELECTORAL ACT PASSED AT THE JOINT SITTING
AND THE REDISTRIBUTION WITHOUT WHICH THAT ACT IS A NULLITY,
FURTHER, IN THE EVENT OF CONTINUED SENATE OBSTRUCTION, WE SHALL
ALLOW THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA YET ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY TO
ENDORSE, AS THEY DID LAST HAY, THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUALITY OF
REPRESENTATION, ,/ 3 
IF THE SENATE AGAIN REJECTS THIS PRINCIPLE,
THAT REJECTION WILL AGAIN LE AN ISSUE ON WHICH THE PEOPLE
WILL BE ABLE TO PASS JUDGMENT,
THROUGHOUT THE DEBATE, IN BOTH HOUSES, NO SERIOUS
OBJECTION WAS MADE TO THESE PROPOSALS ON THE GROUNDS OF
UNFAIRNESS, THEY ARE SCRUPULOUSLY FAIR, IN THE WORDS OF
IR, MALCOLM M ACKERRAS, AN ACKNOWLEDGED ELECTORAL ANALYST:
' IN OVERALL POLITICAL TERMS, THE 1975 REDISTRIBUTION IS THE
FAIREST SET OF PROPOSED BOUNDARIES EVER TO BE PRESENTED TO
ANY AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT IN MY LIFETIME, THE COMMISSIONERS
HAVE BENT OVER BACKWARDS TO AVOID ANY SUGGESTION OF GERRYMANDERI
IG, THEY HAVE SET OUT TO DRAW BOUNDARIES SO PATENTLY
FAIR THAT REJECTION BY THE SENATE WOULD REFLECT DISCREDIT ON
THE SENATE NOT ON THE COMMISSIONERS,
I HAVE HEARD NO OBJECTION FROM ANY QUARTER TO THESE
PROPOSALS ON THE GROUNDS OF UNFAIRNESS, NO REFLECTION HAS
BEEN MADE ON THE INTEGRITY OF THE COMMISSIONERS OR THE
SCRUPULOUS IMPARTIALITY WITH WHICH THEY HAVE CARRIED OUT.
THEIR WORK, .4 
THE REDISTRIBUTION IS BOTH URGENT AND NECESSARY, AN
ELECTION HELD ON THE PRESENT BOUNDARIES WOULD BE A TRAVESTY.
I INVITE HONOURABLE " iEMIBERS TO CONSIDER HOW FLAGRANTLY THE
[ NUMBER OF VOTERS VARIES BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT ELECTORATES
AT PRESENT, IN QUEENSLAND HALF THE ELECTORATES, NINE OF
THE EIGHTEEN, DEPART BY MORE THAN 10% FROM THE QUOTA AND
FOUR DEPART BY MORE THAN 20%, I N i'Ew SOUTH WiALES, TWENTY OF
THE FORTY-FIVE ELECTORATES ARE MORE THAN j. 0 ABOVE OR BELOW
THE AVERAGE QUOTA, FOUR OF THEM ARE MORE THAN TWENTY PERCENT
ABOVE THE QUOTA AND TWO OF THEM ARE MORE THAN TWENTY PERCENT
BELOW IT, IN VICTORIA THERE IS A VARIATION GREATER THAN TEN
PERCENT IN FOURTEEN OF THE THIRTY-FOUR ELECTORATES AND A
VARIATION GREATER THAN TWENTY PERCENT IN SEVEN OF THEN.
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA FOUR OF THE TWELVE ELECTORATES DEPART
BY MORE THAN TEN PERCENT FROM THE QUOTA AND TWO BY MORE THAN
TWENTY PERCENT,
IN EACH OF THESE STATES THE QUOTA FOR AN ELECTORATE IS
ABOUT 64 000 VOTERS, YET IN QUEENSLAND, THE ENROLMENT BETWEEN
THE LARGEST AND SMALLEST ELECTORATES VARIES BY I'' 3,000 VOTERS.
IN IlEW SOUTH WALES IT VARIES BY 35,000 VOTERS. IN VICTORIA
IT VARIES BY 38,000, IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA IT VARIES BY
31,000 VOTERS. THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, AND WITHIN PARTICULAR
STATES, SOME SEATS HAVE MORE THAN 70% MORE PEOPLE ON THE
ROLLS THAN OTHERS, THUS SOME PEOPLE'S VOTES ARE WORTH MORE
THAN 70% MORE THAN OTHER PEOPLE'S. IN QUEENSLAND ONE SEAT
HAS MORE THAN TWICE AS HANY VOTERS AS ANOTHER, THIS IS
A DENIAL OF THE VERY ESSENCE OF DEMOCRACY AND A TRAVESTY
OF THE ELECTORAL PROCESS, 
LET ME GIVE SOME SPECIFIC EXAMPLES FOR OUEENSLAND.
AS AT 25 APRIL, THE SEAT OF MACPHERSON HAD 94,024 ELECTORS
ON THE ROLL. BY CONTRAST, MARANOA HAD 46,456 ELECTORS.
KENNEDY HAD 50,890 ELECTORS, THAT IS THE KIND OF
VARIATION THAT OPERATED JUST AFTER THE LAST ELECTION,
LET US ASSUME HOWEVER, THAT THE PARLIAMENT RUNS ITS FULL
TERM, THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER HAS PROVIDED A PROJECTED
ENROLMENT AS AT MAY 1977 FOR THE THREE EXISTING SEATS WITH
THE HIGHEST ENROLMENTS.
AT APRIL 25, 1975 MACPHERSON HAD AN ENROLMENT OF
94,000, BY 1977 THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER FORECASTS IT
WILL BE 104,000, BOWMAN IS PROJECTED TO INCREASE FROM
79,000 TO 87,090 AND PETRIE FROM 77,000 TO 84,000, AN
ELECTION HELD IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES WOULD BE A MOCKERY.
THE DEBATE ON! THE PROPOSALS IN BOTH HOUSES ILLUSTRATED
VERY CLEARLY THE MOTIVES BEHIND THEIR REJECTION IN THE SENATE,
IT SHOWED HOW COMPLETELY THE LIBERAL PARTY HAD CAVED IN TO THE
PRESSURE OF ITS COALITION PARTNER, IN THIS HOUSE, NO SENIOR
LIBERAL INTERVENED. THEIR CASE, SUCH AS IT WAS, WAS LEFT TO
THE FLEDGLING MEMBER FOR BENNELONG, WHO SPOKE ON THE PROPOSALS
FOR THREE OF THE FIVE STATES CONCERNED, NEITHER THE LEADER OF
THE OPPOSITION NOR THE DEPUTY LEADER SPOKE, HOW COULD THEY?
THEIR OWN SEATS PERFECTLY ILLUSTRATE THE DISPARITIES WHICH
THE REDISTRIBUTION SEEKS TO REMOVE, THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
REPRESENTS 53,360 VOTERS IN ' IWANNON. THE DEPUTY LEADER REPRESENTS
79,665 VOTERS IN FLINDERS, lOW COULD THEY RECONCILE THEIR
INTERESTS? 
-66-
THE DEPUTY LEADER'S VOTERS ARE WORTH ONLY
TWO-THIRDS THOSE OF HIS LEADER, THE LEADER'S VOTERS ARE
WORTH HALF AS MUCH AGAIN AS HIS DEPUTY'S, IT MIGHT BE
URGED THAT THE LEADER'S COUNTRY SEAT DESERVES SUCH AN
ADVANTAGE OVER THE DEPUTY LEADER'S METROPOLITAN SEAT, BOTH
OF THEM, HOWEVER, COME FROM A STATE WHERE A TOTALLY LIBERAL
GOVERNMENT HAS JUST PROCURED A REDISTRIBUTION OF ELECTORAL
DISTRICTS FOR THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, IN WHICH ENROLMENT
FOR COUNTRY DISTRICTS VARIES BETWEEN 23,561 AND 25,095 AND
FOR METROPOLITAN DISTRICTS BETWEEN 26,092 AND 29,353,
THUS A LIBERAL GOVERNMENT FREE FROM fNATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY
PRESSURE DOES NOT TOLERATE THE DISPARITIES WHICH EVEN THE
LEADER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF THE LIBERALS IN THIS PARLIAMENT
MUST ENDURE, iiOREOVER THE VICTORIAN DIVISION OF THE
LIBERAL PARTY ON 14 NOVEMBER LAST WROTE TO THE ELECTORAL
COMMISSIONERS FOR THE STATE AS FOLLOWS:
" GIVEN THE CRITERIA IN THE ACT, WE HAVE
TO AGREE WITH THE LABOR SUBMISSION OF A REDUCTION OF
ONE SEAT FROM THE RURAL AREA AND AN INCREASE OF ONE IN
THE SOUTH-EASTERN AREA,"
THE LIBERAL PARTY SUBMITTED A COUNTER
SUBMISSION WHICH WOULD HAVE PRODUCED ENROLMENTS FOR RURAL
DIVISIONS VARYING BETWEEN 59,/ 40 AND 68.923 AND FOR
METROPOLITAN DIVISIONS BETWEEN 59,379 AND 68,860, THE
LIBERAL PARTY ITSELF SUBMITTED THAT THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
SHOULD REPRESENT 63,464 VOTERS AND THE DEPUTY LEADER 62,81,5
LAST MONTH THEY REPRESENTED RESPECTIVELY 53,360 AND 79,665,
THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER'S PROJECTION FOR 1977 is 53,000 AND
81,0O00, * M i[ l i , e c""
j A--' fL L K b_
, i \ 51
i:\ I~ c'! 7 
0
TO PUT IT ANOTHER WAY, A LABOR VOTER IN IAKEFIELD IS WORTH
TWICE AS IMUCH AS A LIBERAL IN BONYTHON, THAT IS THE
REAL ISSUE, FOR THERE CAN BE NO QUESTION OF PARTISANSHIP.
TIHE VOTE OF A SOUTH AUSTRALIAN IS TO BE VALUED NOT BY PARTY
BUT BY PLACE OF RESIDENCE, NOT BY FOR WHOM HE VOTES ' UT
BY WHERE HE VOTES, AND OF COURSE THE SAME PRINCIPLE APPLIES
TO THE PROPOSALS FOR THE TASMANIAN, QUEENSLAHD
AND VICTORIAN STATES.
!' HO OBJECTS TO THESE PROPOSALS? NOT THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY, ALTHOUGH MY PARTY IN FACT IS WEAKENED ELECTORALLY
BY THE PROPOSED REDISTRIBUTION IN QUEENSLAND. NOT THE
LIBERAL PARTY WHICH MAY WELL BENEFIT, THE OBJECTION IS
FROM THE NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY, WHICH MADE ONLY ONE OFFICIAL
SUBMISSION TO THE COMMISSIONERS, ITS SUBMISSION WAS NOT
ABOUT HOW. THE BOUNDARIES SHOULD BE DRAWN BUT WAS SIMPLY AN
OBJECTION TO ANY REDISTRIBUTION AT ALL,
UNDER THE PROPOSAL, ONE OF THE TEN NON-METROPOLITANSEATS
IN DUEENSLAND DISAPPEARS, YET THIS CHANGE IS NOT A
RESULT OF THE OPERATION OF THE NEW ELECTORAL ACT NOT A
RESULT OF THE REDUCTION OF THE PERMITTED VARIATION OF ONE--TENTH,
FOR THE FACT IS THAT EVEN WITH A 20 VARIATION THE COMMISSIONERS
COULD NOT HAVE DRAWN UP ANY SET OF PROPOSALS WHICH WOULD HAVE
PRESERVED TEN NON-METROPOLITAN SEATS, IT IS NOT THE ACT WHICH
HAS CREATED THIS SITUATION; IT IS THE PATTERN OF QUEENSLAND'S
DEVELOPMENT. 
O
So LET'S BE QUITE CLEAR ABOUT THIS. THE COUNTRY PARTY'S
OBJECTION IS NOT TO THE PROPOSALS BUT TO THE FACT OF ANY
REDISTRIBUTION AT ALL. THEY HAVE A VESTED INTEREST IN
PRESERVING A STATUS QUO WHICH UTTERLY VITIATES ELECTORAL
JUSTICE, IN VICTORIA, THE ELECTORATE OF WIMMERA HAD
19,200 ELECTORS AS AT 25 APRIL 1975, THE ELECTORATE OF
DIAMOND VALLEY HAD 87,522. THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER'S
PROJECTIONS FOR 1977 IN THOSE ELECTORATES IS 92,000 AND
9,00 RESPECTIVELY., DIAMOND VALLEY IS OF COURSE ONE OF
THOSE SEATS WHICH THE LIBERAL PARTY MUST WIN IF IT IS EVER
AGAIN TO FORM A GOVERNMENT. LET THE LEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION JUSTIFY TO THE PEOPLE OF DIAMOND VALLEY WHY
THEIR VOTE IS DEBASED TO SCARCELY A'HALF T1E VALUE OF
THE VOTE OFT HEAA OPPTEEERR SSOOOF: , N) LLIIVVIINNGG EELLSSEEWWH-EERREE IINN VVIICCTTOORRIIAA. 
WHY SHOULD THE LIBERAL PARTY COP THIS SORT OF
SITUATION? THEY KNOW THAT THE COUNTRY PARTY WILL ACCEPT
NO REDISTRIBUTION UNLESS IT DICTATES THE TERMS, LAST
WEEK THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION HAS HAD A SHARP LESSON
ON THE SORT OF LOYALTY HE CAN EXPECT FROM HIS COALITION
PARTNERS IF THEY FAIL TO GET THEIR WAY, IF THEY FEEL THEIR
NARROW AND SELFISH INTERESTS THREATENED IN ANY WAY,
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION SHOULD TAKE SIR CHARLES COUIRT'S
PLIGHT TO HEART, IN GOING ALONG WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY,
IT IS DAMAGING ITSELF IN TWO WAYS, FIRST IT COMMITS
ITSELF TO DOMINATION BY THE COUNTRY PARTY; MORE. IMPORTANT,
IN THE EYES C THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, IT COMMITS ITSELF TO
THE PERPETUATION OF A FLAGRANT BREACH OF ELECTORAL JUSTICE.
IN EFFECT IT COi" ITS ITSELF TO A GERRYMANDER BY OMISSION,
A GERRYMANDER OF WHICH THE LI: ERAL PARTY ITSELF IS THE
VICTIM EVERY BIT AS MUCH AS THE LABOR PARTY, AND ABOVE
ALL, IT DENIES TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE LIBERAL VOTERS
EVERY BIT AS MUCH AS LABOR VOTERS THE BASIC DEMOCRATIC
RIGHT OF EQUAL REPRESENTATION, S, ,/ 11 
-11.-
I URGE THE MEMBERS OF THE LIBERAL PARTY TO
UPHOLD THE PRINCIPLE PUT FORWARD BY THE JOINT COMMIITTEE ON
CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW ESTABLISHED BY SIR ROBERT i'ENZIES
ALL PARTIES WERE REPRESENTED AND UNANIMOUSLY THE
COGMIITTEE REPORTED, "' THE COM; MITTEE FEELS CONSTRAINED TO SAY,
HOWEVER, THAT THE ONE-FIFTH MARGIN ON EITHER
SIDE OF THE QUOTA FOR A STATE WiHICH THE ACT
ALLOWS MAY DISTURB QUITE SERIOUSLY A
PRINCIPLE WHICH THE COMMITTEE BELIEVES TO BE BEYOND
QUESTION IN THE ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE
NATIONAL PARLIAMENT OF A FEDERATION, NAMELY,
THAT THE VOTES OF THE ELECTORS SHOULD, AS FAR AS
POSSIBLE, BE ACCORDED EQUAL VALUE, THE FULL
APPLICATION OF THE MARGIN EACH WAY TO TWO
DIVISIONS IN A STATE COULD RESULT IN THE
NUMBER OF ELECTORS IN ONE DIVISION TOTALLING
PERCENT MORE THAN THE NUMBER OF ELECTORS
IN THE OTHER DIVISION, SUCH A POSSIBLE DISPARITY
IN THE VALUE OF VOTES IS INCONSISTENT
WITH THE FULL REALISATION OF DEMOCRACY', 
-12-
THnE COMMONHWEALTH ELECT ORAL ACT PASSED BY THE
JOINT SITTING UPHELD THAT PRINCIPLE TFHE FULL REALISATION
. TQfDEMOCRACY, THE PROPOSALS REJECTED L. AST WEEK UPHELD THAT
PRINCIPLE, THESE BILLS UPHOLD ! HE PRINCIPLE, LET US
ENSURE THAT THE~ NEXT ELECTION IS HELD ACCORDING TO T:
LAW OF THE LAND, LET US ENSURE THAT THE NEXT ELECTION
REPRESENTS A FULL REALISATION OF DEMOCRACY, By PRESENTrING
THESE BILLS; WE ARE GIVING THE LIBERAL PARTY A SECOND CHAM'CE
A CHANCE TO UPHOLD THE BASIC PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL REPRESENTATION,
A CHANCE TO REDEEMl THEMSELVES IN THE EYES OF THEIR OWN
SUPPORTERS' i 



Press Statement No. 505
28 May 1975
MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The Prime Minister today announced the membership of
the Ministerial Committee established to co-ordinate the
Government's programs on science and technology.
The Committee will be the channel through which the Australian
Science and Technology Council ( ASTEC) will advise the
Government on matters relating to the development and
utilisation of science and technology.
The members are:
The Minister for Science ( Chairman)
The Treasurer
The minister for Minerals and Energy
The Minister for Agriculture
The Minister for Health
The Minister for Manufacturing Industry
The Minister for Environment.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



NATIONAL GALLERY BILL 1975
SECOND READING SPEECH
BY
THE HONOURABLE E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
PRIME MINISTER
The purpose of the Bill is to establish an Australian
National Gallery in the national capital to develop, maintain
and exhibit a national collection of works of art and to
provide an art focus for the whole Australian community.
Like the Australia Council Bill, this is another
historic initiative taken by the present Government to promote
interest and activity in the arts in Australia. Our intention
to introduce this legislation was announced in the
Governor-General's Speech at the opening of Parliament on
27 February 1973 and again in the Speech by Her Majesty
The Queen on 28 February 1974. Our commitment was reiterated
in the Policy Speech for the 1974 election and confirmed in
the Governor-General's Speech on 9 July 1974.
Honourable members will be aware of my longstanding
interest in a National Gallery and the Hansard record of my
questions over many years stands testimony to my concern
about the growth of our national collection of works of art.
I shall not dwell on the chequered history of the
idea of a National Gallery but it is worth remembering that it
is as old as the master plan for the national capital itself.
Provision for it appeared in the list of requirements prepared
for competitors submitting designs for the future city and
Walter Burley Griffin in his own plan allowed for two such
institutions. For a time the idea was obscured by depression, war
and the other great forces which were reshaping Australian
society; but the vision was not lost and it was the force
and vigour of Sir Daryl Lindsay, in particular, which once
more brought it to the fore./ 2 
On 10 September 1965 the then Prime Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies, announced the establishment of a National
Art Gallery Committee of Inquiry under the Chairmanship of
Sir Daryl Lindsay. The Committee's report was presented to
the new Prime Minister, Mr Holt, on 14 March 1966. Mr Holt
tabled it and paid tribute to it in a ministerial statement
on 1 November 1967. The report recommended as the basis for
all else that the Gallery be given statutory authority. The
committee suggested that construction of the gallery might
commence when the National Library was due for completion
during 1968 and hoped that the opening of the gallery in 1970
would be a fitting means of recognising in the National Capital
the 200th anniversary of the discovery of eastern Australia
by Captain Cook.
On 26 October 1971 the then Prime Minister,
Mr McMahon, announced his Government's intention to legislate
for a permanent Council as a statutory body to administer the
Gallery. He also announced at that time his Government's
intention to appoint Mr James Mollison as the Gallery's
first director. The design of a Gallery building was entrusted to
Edwards, Madigan, Torzillo and Briggs Pty. Ltd., architects
and town planners of Sydney. A contract for construction of
the building was issued by my government in April 1973, and on
7 November of that year I unveiled a foundation plaque
commemorating the beginning of construction on the banks of
Lake Burley Griffin nearby.
A fine gallery building is not, however, an end in
itself. In the final analysis, an institution is judged by what
it offers and how effectively it does this, and in large measure
this will depend upon the soundness of the principles on which
it is based and the quality of the people who run it. / 3 
The Australian Government believes that the
National Gallery Bill 1975 represents the best basis devised
to this time for such an institution in our kind of society.
It will be an independent statutory authority in
many respects similar to the National Library of Australia.
It will be responsible for the national collection of works
of art and be expected to make the most advantageous use
of the collection in the national interest.
The affairs of the Gallery will be conducted by
a Council, including the Director of the Gallery, and not
more than 10 other members chosen with regard to their
knowledge and experience with respect to the visual arts
or other areas of knowledge relevant to the affairs of the
Gallery. It is in mind that there should always be a
proper blend of the artistic and other interests most likely
to optimize the effectiveness of the institution.
A novel feature of the Bill is that it provides
for two statutory offices, the Director of the Australian
National Gallery and the Secretary and Manager of the Gallery.
The Director shall have overall responsibility to the Council
for the running of the Gallery and its artistic direction,
and the Secretary and Manager shall, under the Director,
manage the day-to-day administration of the affairs of the
Gallery and act as secretary to the Council. This provision 
has been introduced to avoid the problems which have arisen
so often elsewhere, where unlikely and unreasonable
combinations of different expertise and experience have been
demanded of the one person, usually with unfortunate results.
It is hoped that by this means there will always be a proper
complement of artistic and administrative skills with the
most satisfactory use being made of what each office-holder
is best able to offer.
The Gallery will engage its own staff on terms
and conditions determined by the Council but subject to
the approval of the Public Service Board. This measure of
flexibility is seen as essential to allow the Gallery to
obtain the services of the best professional staff available
whether in Australia or overseas, whether from other
galleries or from universities or other areas.
In its financial affairs the Gallery will operate in
much the same way as most other statutory authorities. It will
be required to submit estimates to the Minister in the
normal way and it will be funded by annual appropriation.
It will operate its own bank accounts, but it will be required
to keep proper accounts and records of its affairs which will
be subject to inspection and audit by the Auditor-General. It
will also prepare annual reports to the Minister which will
be tabled in Parliament. 
I shall not go into other features of the Bill here;
I believe that altogether they will ensure the proper control
and accountability of one of the ration's important cultural
institutions, while at the same time providing the vital
elements of independence and flexibility which the institution
requires to achieve the greatest measure of effectiveness.
Much has been said over the last year or two about
some of the Gallery's acquisitions of contemporary art from
overseas. On balance, I think this has been for the good.
Many art-interested Australians have been obliged to reconsider
some of their values and tastes and I believe that this is a
salutary experience for us all every once in a while. I
should like to remind honourable members, however, that the
Gallery's collection is indeeed not confined to contemporary
art from overseas. In the view of the Director, the Gallery possesses
close to the finest, balanced collection of Australian art
anywhere in the country and it is virtually complete to this
time. It is building a fine collection of primitive art
based primarily on Pacific and African cultures. It is not
neglecting the arts of our neighbours in Asia and the Far
East nor the early civilizations of South America. The
Gallery is assembling a major collection of graphic arts,
and it already possesses the very fine Felix Man collection
of lithographs tracing that art form from its very origins
to recent times. A great sculpture collection is also being
developed. / 6 
6.
No Australian artist of importance has been
neglected, and names like Constantin Brancusi, Alexander
Calder, Honore Daumier, Auguste Rodin and Giambattista Tiepolo
should leave no doubt that the Gallery is seeking the best
of more than one period or place.
We have here the beginnings of an institution which
it is my hope, and the Government's, will be a source of
pleasure and artistic stimulation for generations of
Australians to come, a worthy addition to our growing national
heritage, and an endeavour in which we might all take pride.
I commend the Bill to the House.
I 



EMBARGO: AUST. 8.00pr EST
i. i LONDON: 11.00 pm BST
J T?' AIIA L
7-I
Press Statement No. 506
29 May 1975
VISIT BY PRINCESS MARGARET
The following statement has; been issued from Kensington
Palace, London today:
" The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon has
accepted with the greatest pleasure an invitation
from the Australian Government to visit Australia
in October to attend in Sydney on Friday 31 October,
engagements connected with the forthcoming
anniversary of the formation of the Women's
Royal Australian Army Corps of which Her Royal
Highness is Colonel-in-Chief."
Princess . Margaret is expected to arrive in Canberra on
Wed:; nsday 22 October. In addition to undertaking engagements in
tha Australian Capital Territory and New South Wales, Her Royal
Highness will also visit Victoria.
Lord Snowdon who earlier this year visited Australia
privately, was regrettably unable to accept the Government's
invitation to accoirpany Her Royal Highness.
I share with my colleague the Minister for Defence,
great pleasure in knowing that Her Royal Highness is able to
come to Australia to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the
formation of the Women's Royal Australian Army Corps.
Princess Margaret, among her many interests in Australia,
is President of the Girl Guides' Association, of the Doctor
Barnardo's Tiomes, and of the Victoria League for Commonwealth
Friendship. Her Royal Highness is also Grand President of the
St John Ambulance Association and Brigade.
Consultations will now take place with the State
authorities in New South Wales and Victoria to prepare a program
of engagements for the visit. Those details will be publicly
announced when an approved program has been decided.
CANTBEPRA. A. C. T. 



7
J A U A
I i , d b I
Press Statement No. 507
May 1.975
UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION AND CO4MISSION ON ADVANCED
EDUCATION
The Prime Minister, the Hon E. G. Whitlam, stated today
that after consultation with the Minister for Education, the
Hon Kim E. Beazley, he has decided to amalgamate the Universities
Commission and the Commission on Advanced Education into a
single statutory advisory body to the Australian Government on
universities and colleges.
The Prime Minister said that notwithstanding the
close working relationship which exists between the two Commi sions,
the balanced development of the provision of university and
advanced education throughout Australia would benefit from
the creation of a single body.
The Secretary of the Department of Education,
Mr K. N. Jones, the Chairman of the Universities Commission,
Professor P. H. Karmel, and the Chairman of the Commission on
Advanced Education, Mr T. B. Swanson, have been asked to
reconLmend how the amalgamation may best be put into effect.
The panel, with Mr Jones as convenor, will consult with
interested parties and will make its recommendations in time
f.' r legislative action to be taken during the Budget Session
of the Parliament later this year.
CA'NBERRA. A. C. T. 



ADDRESS Y THiE PRIME ' IllISTER
11 IEi1 O N. E. G. ' iiTLVI, 1l., P. " 1
TO T! E APIA CLU3, SYD'EY
SUNDAY 1 JUNE 1975
IT IS JUST OVER A YEAR SINCE I ATTENDED A GALA DINNER
IN SYDNEY OF THE APIA CLUB. IN AGAIN PAYING TRIBUTE TO APIA, I AGAIN PAY
TRIBUTE TO THE ENTIRE ITALIAN COMMUNITY, TO THE ENTIRE MIGRANT COMMUNITY,
TO ITALY HERSELF, TO EUROPE AND OUR EUROPEAN CONNECTION. NOT ONLY DOES
APIA PROVIDE A VITAL FOCUS FOR THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY THE LARGEST
SINGLE GROUP OF NON-BRITISH MIGRANTS IN AUSTRALIA IT PROVIDES A
LIVING SYMBOL OF AUSTRALIA'S LINKS WITH EUROPE. MORE THAN ANY OTHER
SINGLE ORGANISATION YOUR CLUB HAS COME TO REFLECT THE STRENGTH, THE
IMPORTANCE, THE DURABILITY OF AUSTRALIA'S RELATIONSHIP WITH ITALY, HER
MAINFOLD LINKS WITH THE OLD , CRLD AND ALL THOSE WHO HAVE COME TO US
FROM THE OLD WORLD," I REJOICE ON THE PARTICULAR OCCASION THAT BRINGS US
TOGETHER TODAY. IT IS AN HONOUR TO BE WITH YOU TO OBSERVE THE 19TH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE PROCLAMATION OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC. 2 JUNE 19l6
SAW THE FINAL STEPS IN THE RESTORATION OF ITALIAN DEMOCRACY. ITALIANS
VOTED IN A REFERENDUM FOR A REPUBLIC; AT THE SAME TIME THEY HELD THE
FIRST ELECTIONS FOR A CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY, WITH THE OVERTHROW OF
FASCISM ITALY REBUILT HER DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS WITH SPEED AND VIGOUR. 
/ 7 2-
I FOR ALL THE DIFFICULTIES THE WESTERN NATIONS H/ VE
FACED SINCE THE SECOND W½ fORLD WAR FOR ALL THE GREAT ECONOMIC,
SOCIAL AND MILITARY CRISES THE CONTINENT HAS ENDURED THE
FOUNDATIONS OF MODERN ITALIAN DEIOCRACY HAVE SURVIVED. CN
THOSE FOUNDATIONS WAS BUILT THE GREAT POST-WAR MIGRATION PROGRAM
TO AUSTRALIA ONE OF THE BIGGEST PLANNED MOVEMENTS OF POPULATION
IN ALL HISTORY. THE HSTORY OF ITALIAN MIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA IS FAMILIAR
TO ALL OF US, THERE ARE FEW COUNTRIES WITH WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS
HAD A LONGER CONTACT, THESE CONTACTS GO BACK MUCH FURTHER THAN
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MODERN REPUBLIC; FURTHER EVEN THAN THE
ESTABLISHMENrT OF APIA: WE KINOW THERE WAS AiJ ITALIAN ON THE
ENDEAVoL. V,-HEN CAPTAIN COOK CAME TO AUSTRALIA; WE KNOW THERE WAS
AN ITALIAN IN THE FIRST FLEET. DURING THE 19TH CENTURY MIGRANTS
ARRIVED IN AUSTPALIA IN SMALL BUT GROWING NUMBERS; PARTICULARLY
AFTER THE IMPETUS OF THE GOLD DISCOVERIES OF THE 1350' S.
RAFFAELLO CARBONI WAS ONE OF THE MINERS' LEADERS AT THE EUREKA
STOCKADE IN 1854. GiISEPPE GARIBALDI, THE GREAT FIGHTER FOR
ITALIAN UNIFICATION, ONE OF THE BUILDERS OF THE MODERN ITALIAN
DEMOCRACY WHOSE ANNIVERSARY WE OBSERVE TODAY, WEIGHED ANCHOR IN
THE BRIG CARMEN OFF TASMANIA IN 1352. SINCE THOSE EARLY BEGINNINGS
THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY HAS GROWN TO BE THE BIGGEST, THE MOST VIGOROUS,
THE MOST VALUABLE OF ALL NON-BRITISH NATIONAL GROUPS IN THIS COUNTRY.
/ 3 
9-
f'bRE THAN 3WXW AUSTRALIAN RESIDENTS WERE BORN IN ITALY,
ACCORDING TO THE BEST ESTIMATES, THERE ARE VORE THAN A MILLION
AUSTRALIANS OF ITALIAN DESCENT. IT IS EASILY FORGOTTEN THAT
AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF THE WO) RLD S GREAT MULTI-NATIONAL COMM~ UNITIES,
' PE HAVE HAD ENORMOUS BENEFITS FROM THE INFLOW OF
EUROPEAN MIGRANTS. THE LEAST OF THOSE BENEFITS IS THE
REMINDER OF OUR LINKS WITH OTHER NATIONS AND THE INTERDEPENDENCE
. OF ALL NATIONS IN SOLVING OUR CO~ tAN PROBLEMS. AUSTRALIA'S
GEOGRAPHIC ISOLATION HAS PLACED US FAR FROM THE ANCIENT CENTRES
OF POWER AND IDEAS. IT WAS NEVER MORE ESSENTIAL THAN IT IS
TODAY FOR AUSTRALIANS TO STRENGTHEN THEIR CONTACTS WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES AND DEVELOP CLOSER RELATIONS WITH THE NATIONS OF THE
OLD WORLD THE NATIONS OF EUROPE. TH-AT WAS THE ESSENTIAL
PURPOSE OF MY VISIT To EUROPE LAST DECEMIBER AND JANUARY. YOU
WILL REMEMBER THERE WAS SOME MILD CRITICISM OF THAT MISSION IN
AUSTRALIA AT THE TIME. THIS IS NOT THE OCCASION FOR POLITICAL
SELF-JUSTIFICATION, BUT I AM CERTAIN THAT NO ONE IN THIS ROOM,
NO ONE WITH ANY AWARENESS OF AUSTRALIA'S PROPER ROLE IN TH-E WORLD,
NO ONE WITH ANY FEELING FOR THE DE. PTH AN4D RANGE OF OUR CONTACTS WITH
THE NATIONS OF PEOPLES OF EUROPE, COULD DOUBT THE IMPORTANCE OF THAT
MISSION, AND, IF I MAY SAY SO, THE IMPORTANCE OF WHAT IT ACHIEVED. 
I HAD THE VERY GREAT PLEASURE OF VISITING ITALY,
NOT FOR THE FIRST TIME AS PRIME MINISTER, BUT THE SECOND.
LIAM PROUD TO SAY THAT ROME IS THE ONLY CAPITAL ON THE EUROPEAN
CONTINENT WHICH I HAVE VISITED TWICE SINCE MY GOVERNMENT WAS
ELECTED. IN JANUARY I MET PRESIDENT LEONE AND HAD TALKS WITH
, SENIOR MINISTERS INCLUDING PRIME MINISTER i'bRO AND FOREIGN MINISTER
'* RUMOR. WE REVIEWED THE BUOYANT TRADE RELATIONS BETWEEN ITALY
SAND AUSTRALIA. ITALY IS ONE OF AUSTRALIA'S MAJOR TRADING PARTNERS
OUR TWELFTH MOST IMPORTANT EXPORT MARKET AND OUR EIGHTH MOST IMPORTANT
SOURCE OF IMPORTS. MY GOVERNMENT HAS MOVED TO ENSURE THAT THERE
IS A CONTINUING AND HEALTHY TRADE 3SETWEEN US. LAST YEAR THE
THEN MINISTER FOR OVERSEAS TRADE ANNOUNCED THE FORMATION OF THE
ITALO-AUSTRALIAN TRADE ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO PROMOTE DEVELOPMENT
OF COMtERCIAL RELATIONS BETWEEN ITALY AND AUSTRALIA, THE COMMITTEE
WAS FORMED BY A GROUP OF ITALIAN AND AUSTRALIAN BUSINESSMEN TO
PROMOTE COOPERATION AND STREAMLINE PROCESSES BETWEEN THE BUSINESS
COiMUNITIES OF BOTH COUNTRIES, J'
L
' U WLr&gt;*-7jj_ l
JL' tCj.' U,/ bC,&amp;/ C
-Z L y i L
f/ L C 
AGAIN, WHILE IN ROME, I SIGNED A CULTURAL AGREEMENT
BETWiEEN ITALY AND AUSTRALIA AS A TANGIBLE EXPRESSION OF THE
CULTURAL AND HUMAN CONTACTS BUILT UP OVER A GUARTER OF A CENTURY.
THE AGREEMENT SPECIFICALLY RECOGNISES THE CONTRIBUTION WHICH THE
ITALIAN COMMIUNITY HAS MADE TO THE QUALITY AND DIVERSITY OF LIFE IN
AUSTRALIA. AND SEEKS TO PROMOTE THE DEVELOPMENT OF-BILATERAL
RELATIONS IN THE SOCIAL, CULTUJRAL, ARTISTIC, SCIENTIFIC AND
SPORTING FIELDS. IGIVE ONE EXAMPLE OF THE SORT OF COOPERATI. ON
WE CAN EXPECT. THE AGREEMENT PROVIDES THAT AUSTRALIA AND ITALY
WILL EXCHANGE TEACHERS TO FACILITATE THE INTEGRATION OF ITALIAN
CHILDREN INTO THE AUSTRALIAN CO IMUNITY, WHILE MAINTAINING THEIR
CULTURAL TIES WITH THEIR BIRTHPLACE.
SIGNIFICANT AND SYMBOLIC AS THESE THINGS ARE,
THE REAL IMPORTANCE OF MY VISIT TO ITALY AND OTHER NATIONS OF
EUROPE WAS IN THE OPPORT-UNITY WE HAD TO EXCHANGE VIEWS ON
COMMON PROBLEMS, ON WORLD PROBLEMS. IN A SPEECH I GAVE IN
ROME ON 8 JANUARY .1975 1 SAID THIS: 
1~
j " I DOUBT IF THERE HAS EVER BEEN A TIME
WHEN CONSULTATION AID CO-OPERATION BETW! EEN
NATIONAL LEADERS WAS URGENT OR
IMPORTANT. AUSTRALIA AND ITALY HAVE GREAT
CULTURAL AND SOCIAL TRADITIONS IN COPON:
MORE SIGNIFICANTLY, WE SHARE WITH ALL
COUNTRIES OF THE WESTERN WORLD GREAT SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. INFLATION AND
UNEMPLOYMENT POSE A GRAV/ E AND GROWING
THREAT TO DEMOCRATIC VALUES AND SOCIAL
ORDER AND COHESION. IF WESTERN NATIONS
ARE TO SOLVE THESE PROBLEMS WITHOUT A
RECOURSE TO AUTHORITARIANISM OR A
RELAPSE INTO ANARCHY, THEY WILL DO SO
ONLY BY RESTORING FAITH IN THE DEMOCRATIC
SYSTEM. IT IS TIME FOR GOVERNMENTS, FOR
POLITICIANS, FOR ALL FREE POLITICAL PARTIES
TO RENEW THEIR COMMITMENT TO THE FORMS AND
VALUES OF A DEMOCRATIC SOCIECTY. THERE IS NO
MORE URGENT TASK FOR MODERN STATESMEN THAN
TO LEAD, TO INSPIRE, TO NOURISH THIS COVMITNENT.
THE BREAKDOWN OF DEMOCRlACY IN ONE COUNTRY,
ATTACKS ON DEMOCRACY IN ONE COUNTRY, MUST BE
RECOGNISED AS AN ATTACH ON DEMCRACY EVERYWHERE.
I BELIEVE THE LEADERS AND PEOPLES
OF ITALY AND AUSTRALIA. ThID NATIONS WITH
DEMOCRATIC SYSTEMS, CAN PLAY A PART IN
REBUILDING THE WORLD'IS FAITH IN THE FLEXIBILITY
AND STRENGTH OF DEMO1CRACY." i as118~ 
7
/ 7-THAT IS OUR URGENT TASK, THAT WAS THE RELED/ ANCE
OF MY MISSION TO EUROPE. THAT IS THE LESSON TO B13KEE PT IN
MIND WHEN WE CELEBRATE THE ANNIVERSARY OF POST-WAR DEMOCRACY IN
ITALY. DEMOCRACY IS STRONGEST WHEN IT PROVIDES ITS
. CITIZENS WITH THE MEANS TO A FULL LIFE AND A MEASURE OF
MATERIAL SECURITY AND SPIRITUAL FULFILMENT. FOR TOO LONG
IN AUSTRALIA MIGRANTS LACKED THESE ESSENTIAL THINGS, THE
SLABOR PARTY WAS THE FIRST TO IDENTIFY MIGRANTS AS ONE OF THE
PRIME DISADVANTAGED GROUPS IN AUST. RALIAN SOCIETY, CUR
POLICY SINCE WE CAME TO GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN TO RECTIFY A LONG
TRADITIONr OF INJUSTICE AND DEPRIVATION, TO GIVE MIGRANTS THE
SAME REWARDS AND OPPORTUNITIES AS OTHER AUSTRALIANS.
WE NO LONGER CONCENTRATE ON BRINGING VAST NUMIBERS
OF NEW SETTLERS TO AUSTRALIA. ARE NOT INTERESTED IN NUMBERS
FOR THEIR OWN SAKE. THE BEST INVESTMENT WE CAN MAKE IN OUR
FUTURE IS TO ENSURE THAT MIGRANTS ALREADY IN AUSTRALIA LEAD
SECURE AND HAPPY LIVES. AUSTRALIA'S MIGRANT INTAKE IS NOW LARGELY
DETERMINED BY MIGRANTS THEMSELVES, THIS IS BECAUSE WE HAVE
GIVEN PRIORITY IN THE SELECTION OF MIGRANTS TO THE REUNION OF
FAMILIES, NO TESTS OF ACCEPTABILITY BEYOND THOSE OF SOUND
HEALTH AND GOOD CHARACTER ARE APPLIED TO THOSE ,' vHO WISH TO
JOIN THEIR FAMILIES IN AUSTRALIA. 1,/ 8 
WE BELIEVE THE PEOPLE ' MOST LIKELY TO SETTLE HAPPILY IN
AUSTRALIA ARE THOSE WHO COME HERE TO JOIN MEMBERS OF
THEIR OWN FAMILY. CUR SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE
PROGRAMS HAVE VASTLY IMPROVED THE LIVING STANDARDS OF
MIGRANT PEOPLE, AND JUST AS IMPORTANT, HAVE HELPED TO
INVOLVE THEM MORE CLOSELY IN COMMUNITY DECISIONS AND
PLANNING, PROGRAMS SUCH AS THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
! PLAN, COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRES AND REDS IMPORTANT AS
i THEY ARE FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS ARE OF PARTICULAR BENEFIT TO
MIGRANTS BECAUSE OF THE ENCOURAGEMENT THEY GIVE FOR
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS AND GOVERNMENT
ACTION. IT IS TIME GOVERNMENTS GAVE MORE TANGIBLE
RECOGNITION TO THOSE WHO HAVE DONE MUCH TO BUILD) AUSTRALIAN
SOCIETY, THE ITALIANS WHO CAME TO AUSTRALIA CONTRIBUTED
GREATLY TO OUR WAY OF LIFE. AUSTRALIANS OWE A LASTING DEBT
TO THE ITALIAN CANEGROWERS IN [ ORTH QUEENSLAND, THE ITALIAN
GOLDMINERS IN W'ESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE ITALIAN TOBACCO GROWERS
IN VICTORIA AND W'ESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE
GROWERS OF VICTORIA AND iEW SOUTH !" I'ALES, THE SNOWY ' MOUNTAINS
SCHEME WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE WITHOUT THE WORK OF ITALIAN
RIGGERS AND ENGINEERS, THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY HAS HAD A
REAL INFLUENCE IN THE SMALL BUSINESS FIELD AS WELL AS
IN LARGER ENTERPRISES SUCH AS THE TRANSFIELD CORPORATION.
[ RY GOVERNMENT HAS SOUGHT TO RECOGNISE THIS CONTRIBUTION
TO AUSTRALIAN LIFE AND PROSPERITY BY THE APPOINTMEiNT-OF / 9 
DR. EVASIO COSTANZO TO THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL, CLAUDE PLCORSO
TO THE UNIVERSITIES COMMlISSION, AND NOT LEAST, YOUR CLUB PRESIDENTd
e fj 3BAYUTTI, TO THE BOARD OF QANTAS.
ONE OF THE GREAT REWARDS OF MY 23 YEARS IN PUBLIC
LIFE HAS BEEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO MEET AND MIX WITH MEMBERS OF THE
AusTRALIAN ITALIAN COMMUNITY. IHAVE MADE MANY DEEP AND LASTING
FRIENDSHIPS; I HAVE SPENT MANY HOURS IN HOSPITABLE SURROUNDINGS
AMONG ITALIAN PEOPLE. I HOPE THE TIME WILL COME WHEN OUR GREAT
MIGRANT COInlNITIES WILL NO LONGER SEEM SEPARATE OR DISTINCT GROUPS
BUT INTEGRAL PARTS OF SOCIETY; WHEN HAVING AN ITALIAN NAME WILL
SEEM NO MORE REMARKABLE THAN HAVING AN ENGLISH OR AN IRISH NAME. WE
HAVE OF COURSE MOVED A LONG WAY IN GENERAL SOCIAL ATTITUDES
IN THE SPIRIT OF TOLEANCE AND ACCEPTANCE SINCE THAT GREAT MASS
MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE BEGAN WITH THE PROCLN ATION OF AN ITALIAN
REPUBLIC 29 YEARS AGO. WE STILL HAVE FURTHER TO MOVE. FOR MY
PART I NEVER FORGET AND I SAID AS MUCH IN ROME THAT ALMOST
EVERYTHING THAT IS BASIC TO AUSTRALIAN LIFE THE ORIGINS OF OUR
CULTURE AND CIVILISATION, OUR ART, OUR SOCIAL AND SPIRITUAL VALUES,
MUCH OF OUR LANGUAGE CAME-TO US FROM ITALY. IT IS A LONG HISTORIC
PROCESS. IT IS STILL CONTINUING. IT IS NOURISHED BY ORGANISATIONS
SUCH AS APIA AND BY THE VIGOUR, THE CHARM, THE INDUSTRIOUS SPIRIT,
THE GREATNESS OF THE ITALIAN PEOPLE, 



PRIME MINISTER ON MONDAY CONFERENCE
MONDAY 2 JUNE 1975
THIS PROGRAM WAS RECORDED IN CANBERRA ON
SUNDAY EVENING, 1 JUNE
EMBARGO, 9.30 E. S. T. 2.6.75 Z 
PRIME MINISTER ON ' MONDAY CONFERENCE'
2 JUNE, 1975
Bob Moore: Very recent public opinion polls have suggested
that your Government and your own popularity are on the down-tpurn
again after being on the up-turn, after being on the down-turn.
Why do you think this is at present? Why the down-turn now?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't know. I don't concern myself too much
with these regular polls. The two matters I always have in mind
are these that when there is an election and the voters have to
make a real choice, then they are much more likely to vote for the
Labor Party than for the other parties. There is no use just
protesting against the Labor Government. They will come to see
that we are better than the others, or a sufficient number will.
And the second thing is I think that during an election campaign,
people get for the first time exposure to the positive things that
we are proposing or that we have done.
Bob Moore: In practical terms, what affect has Mr. Fraser
being Leader of the Opposition, made to you as compared with
Mr,. Snedden being Leader?
Mr. Whitlam: The main thing is that the Parliament behaves
better. Mr. Snedden didn't control his followers and didn't
attempt to control the Country Party which just ran amok.
Mr. Fraser has done a much better job in that respect. I don't
know how important conduct in Parliament is, outside. I don't
know this. I thought that Mr. Fraser would be much less responsive
to whatever was the latest newspaper story. He is more, as.
Mr. Snedden always was. I think Mr. Fraser is falling into that
error of getting absorbed in just temporary issues instead of. looking
at the long-term objectives. But I think his big trouble,
compared with Mr. Snedden, is that he has never had to work for
a living. Mr. Snedden always did and Mr. Snedden had lived
where most people in Australia live. Mr. Fraser never has.
Alan Ramsay: And yet, Prime Minister, you once said, not so
long'ago that you thought Malcolm Fraser had-. been born to lead
the Liberal Party.
Mr. Whitlam: I think that would be his view and the people
who put him there, would have had that view too.
Bob Moore: In general terms, do you agree with Mr. Fraser's
proposition that barring exceptional circumstances, a party that
has a majority in the Lower-House should normally expect to run
its three year term.
Mr. Whitlam: 0f course I do. I think Mr. Snedden's great
error was to allow the Country Party to overwhelm him on that
issue a year ago when he had a premature election. It was against
principle. it was the wrong thing to do and finally, he was the 
one who suffered.
Creighton Burns: How much easier would life be for you, Prime
Minister, how much more effective do you feel your Government
would be if you had a smaller Cabinet than the 27 you have now?
Mr. Whitlam: I have told the Cabinet, I've told the Caucus,
the our Government would be twice as good if it were half the
size.
Creighton Burns: Told them recently?
Mr. Whitlam: About a month or so ago. Of course that's
obviously the case. You've got to face the fact that we inherited
an act of Parliament which says there are 27 Ministers. It's
an extraordinary form of self denial for any Party to reduce such
a benefit 27 people are bound to be* Ministers. What about Fraser,
of course, now, is a Shadow Cabinet of over
Alan Ramsay: Did you give the Caucus any reasons why you
thought life would be much easier if in fact the Ministry was
half the size.
Mr. Whitlam: I forget what context it came up in.
Alan Ramsay: Are you likely, in fact, having said this, that
we are qoing to see something in the near future whereby the
Ministry right be smaller?
Mr. Whitlam: There is quite a lot of discussion in the Party
along these lines, but mind you I think the way in which it could
come up, is to have a Cabinet and then Ministers outside the Cabinet.
I think that's a possibility. / 2A 
Creighton Burns: You've never really, for any sustained period
had what would be called a ' kitchen Cabinet' have you?
I mean in the period before the last Budget when there was a
small group of Ministers around you and you were really
operating in an informal Cabinet system in a sense. But
that didn't last for long. Is this a tactic, is this a
possible system?
Mr Whitlam: There are several matters which come before a
group of 5 or 6 Ministers, that's true, which don't go to
t Ministry as a whole.
Bob Moore: You've said that you are in favour or that you
prefer the idea of the Cabinet being elected by members of
the Parliamentary Party, compared with the Prime Minister
appointment. But leaving that aside in general, are there any
details of the procedure by which Ministers are elected by
Caucus that you would like to see changed. / 3 
Mr. rhitlam: These are all technicalities.
Bob Moore: There's nothing substantial?
Mr. Whitlam: Nothing substantial. I strongly believe, as
I always have believed, that it makes for greatest cohesion and
harmony in a Parliamentary Party, to have the Party as a whole,
elect its Ministers. Where you have a Prime Minister appointing
Ministers, you immediately have the people who aren't Ministers
blaming, not the Party as a whole, but blaming the Prime Minister
1nd those that the Prime Minister has appointed take it for granted.
4iiey think that their virtues are self-evident.
Alan Ramsay: There is some support in your Party though that
possibly a compromise could be reached between a wholly elected
Ministry and possibly the Leader of the Party, choosing, say,
twelve and Caucus electing the rest. Would you support this?
Mr. Whitlam: No, Iviuld-still think that who are to be the twelve,
the Cabinet, should be decided as we decide who are to be the
Ministers as a whole, namely, at a secret ballot. I wouldn't
want the burden of choosing which are the best twelve Ministers.
I would want to know who the Party thought were the twelve best.
Alan Ramsay: Yes, but I don't mean electing the twelve best.
In other words, the Leader having the right to choose twelve
members of the Ministry as a whole.
Mr. Whitlam: I don't seek that. Those that were not in the
twelve, who were in the rest of the other 15, they would blame
me for being left in the second 11. I would rather the Parliamentary
Party, as a whole, take that responsibility.
Alan Ramsay: Would you accept then that the fact that your
Caucus elects the entire Ministry breaks down the principle of
Cabinet solidarity?
Mr. Whitlam: It does to a certain extent, yes. But it has
the virtue that was so obviously lacking in the McMahon and the
Gorton Governments, where people who were not Ministers, or people
who were Ministers and not in Cabinet, blamed their plight on the
Prime Minister. I don't think that that makes for harmony or
cohesion in the Government Party. I support the fact that the
Ministry and any Cabinet within the Ministry, should be chosen
at a secret ballot by all the members of the Parliamentary Party.
Alan Ramsay: Would you prefer that the Cabinet of 27 or 12,
or whatever in fact it might be, who having arrived at a decision
then be-bound by that decision within the Caucus or do you go
along with the concept as it happens now, that Ministers go around if 4 
they oppose a decision in Cabinet?
Mr. Whitlam: Some do. But I don't want you to think that
most do that. Most do not. The practice we have reached is
this where after the Cabinet has made a decision, any member
of the Cabinet feels so strongly about it that he wants to
oppose it in the full Parliamentary Party, the Caucus, then he
should tell his colleagues in the Cabinet, that that is his
intention.
Alan Ramsay: Do they do that?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes they do. Most do. There have been a few
people who have not, who have been underhand but only a few.
Alan Ramsay: And you go along with this?
Mr. Whitlam: I think that's the way it works. I can see
the argument that it's unfair that a person who feels very strongly
on a matter, should be silenced and not only silenced but should
be dragooned into voting for a Cabinet decision in the Party as a
whole, which he thinks is wrong.
Alan Ramsay: You have got a committee of the Caucus in fact
looking at your Caucus standing orders.
Mr. Whitlam: There has been for some months.
Alan Ramsay: And they in fact will come up with some
recommendations on this very question of the election of Ministers.
I don't know what they are going to be.
Mr. Whitlam: I expect so, that's their charter'to come up with
such prbposal's to simplify the'election. The' trouble is that up
till now we've had three stages for electing the 27. One of the
suggestions it is one that I would support is. that the whole
Ministry should be elected on the one ballot. It is more likely
to produce the choice of the Parliamentary Party as a whole. What
we have at the'mombnt means that those'that don't get in the first
two-ballots you know the Ministers all join forces to get the
remaining positions available on the third ballot.
Alan Ramsay: Would you expect this review to come up with
the support of the principle of an inner Cabinet of 12 or 14?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't know. I'm not sure what their thinking. is
on that. 
Bob Moore: Last week, Dr. Coombs, in addressing a Public
Servce socation in Melbourne, suggested that mnaybe the*
convention ought to be changed in accord with Labor Party practice.
What he was saying was, that under a Labor Government, Caucus'
has, at times, such a powerful policy role, maybe Caucus should
have the kind of access to Public Service advice that only
Cabinet has under the convention. Do you see any merit in this
suggestion?
Mr. Whitlam: Public Servants can, and constantly do, speak
to Caucus committees. That's always been the possibility or
the practice and, in fact, they speak to Opposition co. mmittees.
Any member of the Opposition or any of the opposition commrittees
that want, to speak to particular Public Servants or people from.
particular Government instrumentalities, such as the airlines or
the banks, or anything like that, only have to ask and we arrange
for people to go along to talk to them. And the same happens, of
course, in the Government committee meetings. But it is quite, I
suggest, erroneous to think that the Caucus or Caucus committees
can be policy-making things. They are too leisurely and too
incohate in their composition and procedures to do that. Of
course, the Cabinet makes the proposals. That is the case with
any Executive. Sometimes the Cabinet's views don't prevail but
that's very rarely. Obviously you can't have a Government run
by so large a body as 90 or 100 people such as you have in the
Parliamentary Labor Party. Policy matters, initiatives, are
taken, after all, by individual Ministers usually, and principally
by the Prim-e Minister.
Alan Ramsay: The Caucus does, in fact, have the overriding
authority to say yes or no to a decision?
Mr. Whitlam: Of course it does. Under our practice, ever
since there has been Labor Party representatives in Australian
Parliaments, the people who will be voting in the Parliament
decide, collectively, how they will vote on any-proposition coming
up in the Parliamrient.
Alan Ramsay: You don't think Caucus has too much power?
Mr. Whitlam: No, that's reasonable enough, after all. When
the public vote for a Labor member of Parliament, they know that
he Will participate in deciding at meetings of the Parliamentary
Party, how1-he will vote in the Parliament. They know that he
will have as much opportunity as any other Labor member of
Parliament to decide how the Party will vote and he will abide
by majority decision of the Party on that question, how he'll
vote. That's always been the practice. It's what all the
parties do but as in so many things, the Labor Party pioneered it. 
Bob Moore: In the* debate over the $ 2,000 inillion or*
$ 4,000 million loan, do you feel that the* Government was let
down by the Treasury?
Mr. Whitlam: Be more specific.
Bob Moore: Were you not told things that you should have
been told and were other people told things whi'ch they should
not have been told, in your view?
: 1r. Whitlan: I should have been told one particular -matter,
that's all, one particular matter, but I don't think that the
person who raised that, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition,*
Mr. Lynch, was told very much, because obviously his allegations,
it turned out, were without foundation. Mr. Lynch is very free
in what he says. He said on one of the A. B. C. programmes that
he suspected that there had been no meeting of the Executive
Council. of course there was. That was his first allegation.
The second allegation was, that the intermediary, to use his
term, had a criminal record and that Scotland Yard has reported
on him. A couple of days later, he said that there was a report
from Scotland Yard in typewritten form on Treasury files. I
hadn't heard of this so I called in the Secretary and he told
me~ that there had been an oral inquiry from Scotland Yard and the
response was that there was nothing detrimental known about the
intermediary. I wasn't told but after all, there was nothing
to tell me, was there? Lynch was obviously astray.
Alan Ramsay: It mus-t have embarrassed you that Mr. Lynch,
in fact, knew more about this business than you did from your
own Government people?
Mr. Whitlam: Well he obviously didn't. He had fabricated it.
Alan Ramsav: Are you saying he fabricated it or the people
who gave it to him fabricated it?
Mr". Whitlam: If anybody gave it to him, they misled him, or
he fabricated it. The fact was that there was nothing in typewritten
form from Scotland Yard on Treasury files. treasury
had made an oral inquiry from Scotland Yard and Scotland Yard
didn't say there was a criminal record and they made no report on
it. They said they knew nothing detrimental to him. This is a
very reckless, and irresponsible, improper thing for Mr. Lynch
to say. obviously, he didn't get the information from Treasury
which he used in the allegation he made in a question without notice.
Alan R~ amsay: You are quite certain that none of this information
that he got, whether he built on it or fabricated it or otherwise,
came from the Treasury? 
Mr. Whitlam: I don't know. It seems funny that the word
Scotland Yard occurred. It may be somebody in the Treasury
let the word Scotland Yard drop in Mr. Lynch's hearing, but
obviously there was no basis for what Mr. Lynch alleged, that
the man had a criminal record, or that there was a Scotland Yard
report in typewritten form about him.
Aklan Ramsay: Are you trying to find out that in fact anybody
in Treasury did give this, or any information, to Mr. Lynch or
the Opposition?
Mr. Whitlun: No, of course I'm not trying to. I don't assume
that anybody in Treasury did. Quite obviously, anything thfat
came from Treasury would not have justified what Mr. Lynch alleged.
Creighton Burns: Apart from the petrodollar affair, have you
any other reason, Prime Minister, to feel that you and your
Government haven't been properly and loyally served by Treasury
or any other Department?
Mr. Whitlan: No. Let me say this. The only criticism I
would maka is that when this question by Mr. Lynch, using the
words Scotland Yard, came up last Monday, I'm sure somebody in
Treasury woul d have had the penny drop. They'd watch what's
going on In Parliament, I daresay some of them listen, but they
certainly would have read Hansard the next day. In those circumstances,
they should have come clean and told me what there was.
Whan it was used on t-he Wednesday, then I inquired and, as it
turned out, there w,, as nothing that they should have told me at all.
I think th.&amp; y should have -told me, after the question on Monday
when the w, o rd Scotland Yard As used, they should have told me
' well in fact tL-here was an oral inquiry and it turned up negative'.
Creighton Burns: In other areas, do you feel that you received
the co-operation and support from the Public Service which you
areenitled to?
Mr. Whitlam: Yes. The Federal Public Service is an extraordinarily
capable body. It's true that I think the Treasury, and
the Reserve Bank for that matter, have erred-in economic advice, but
after all, the Government might have made mistakes there too. Maybe
you say that the Treasury and the Reserve Bank should be more expert,
they have had longer experience and they shouldn't have erred.
Alan Ramsay: That's the first time I've ever heard you admit
that the Government might have made some mistakes, on the economy.
Mr. Whitlam: Well we haven't spoken enough. Of course we
have made mistakes, but everybody's working, these days in
developed countries, in an extraordinarily difficult economic
climate. Everywhere in Western Europe and in North America,
Japan and Australasia, you have this extraordinary economic
situation. Each of us suffers it and it's the worst 
economic situation that any of us has suffered for 45 years.
I don't want the viewers to get any impression that I'm making
any general criticism of the advice. But quite clearly, the
advice that we received from the Reserve Bank and the Treasury
in September 1973 about the credit squeeze, was belated and the,
advice continued and the credit squeeze was allowed to continue
too long. It ought to have been brought on three months or more
earlier and should have been ended three months or more earlier.
Secondly, it was quite clear that the advice we received from
Treasury last August about the deflationary measures, was.
misconceived. But those were two cases where I think, one must
admit, the advice was wrong. I've made the general criticism and
we have taken steps, to correct the situation, there are more
. lcvant and prompt statistics made available to -the gov. ernment.
Bob Moore: What are the mistakes that you have made, you sAd
that the government had made some mistakes?
Mr Whitlam: You don't expect me to go into that.
Creighton Burns: Do you think one of the reasons for your
present economic problems and some of the Government's present
difficulties is your insistence on maintaining your promise not to
increase tax-es in your first year, to try and finance reforms out
of national growth? That while this may have been an admirable
insistence in keeping your electoral word, that there may well
be occasions in the national interest when a Prime Minister or
a political leader at any level will have to break his word
simply to achieve a given objective. So with hindsight,
do you still stick by your decision not to increase...
Mir Whitlam: This is almost two years old. This goes back to
the Budget of August 19.73. You may be right, but at that time
the advice was both ways. It's quite wrong to say that all the
advice was to increase taxes. That was not the advice from
everybody it was from some people. I don't like going against
things that I've promised at elections and I'm very intent, if
it's at all possible, doing things that I have promised at
elections. AfIter all, this was the one instance really, where
there was discussion in the Party before the 1972 election
and there was discussion-whether, in the policy speech, I should
make a reference that we would not put up taxes or not. I
assembled the opinion and the opinion was that we should say
they would not go up. Now, having sampled the opinion and
having expressed that undertaking, I would have been very
reluctant to go back on it. We have gone back on some things to
the extent we had to defer the timetable. Our present deficit
is due to the fact that we have reduced taxes so much, and everybody
said that to reduce taxes, personal and company, as we did last'.
November, was necessary to refiate the economy.
Creighton Burns: Do you think that with hindsight that the
across the boara tariff cut might have been ilijudged That
it might have been better to have been selective about / 8A 
8A
Mr Whitlam: No I do not. I think that was correct and
I'm glad that I have some Ministers who are now talking
up staunchly for the fact that Australia's resources
are best used if we don't raise still further the tariff
wall around us. We are a trading country. It's true
you get people working in industries, employers / 9 
employees, owners, getting together to put pressure on Government
and we have to yield to some of that pressure in some areas where,
obviously, there was an unacceptable amount of unemployment, but
I welcome the opportunity to say that the interests of a great'
majority of Australians in this generation, as well as future
generations, will be best served by having a smaller tariff
barrier than Australia has had. We just are not serving ourselves
properly. We aren't using our resources and we are putting up
our prices
Bob Moore: Do you agree with what Senator Jim McClelland
. s saying
Mr. Whitlam: Utterly, completely he is a very effective
Minister, one of the most effective Ministers I have, publicly
and privately.
Alan Ramsay: You are satisfied that there are not some
sections of the Public Service who are actively trying to
undermine your Government by passing on information to the
Opposition? Mr. Whitlam: No, I don't think they do. There are obviously
Alan Ramsay; There have been some damaging disclosures of late
on this.
M Whitlam: That always goes on but it doesn't happen at that level
wich which I and my colleagues see the Public Service. Obviously
there must be a lot of people who see things and gabble around,
but, no, I don't want to support any allegation that you make
that the Public Service is not a loyal one. The Public Service,
true, at its upper levels most of them have got their positions
during 23 years of Liberal/ Country Party rule so it would be true
to say tha. they are conservative in general approach and secondly,
that they are not used to national initiatives. They grew up,
they got their positions in circumstances where the theory was
ch that's -1 -ratter best left to the States. Nobody ever thought of local
government, but that's a State matter. Of course, that's where
the deterioration in our society, to a certain extent, our economy,
came about. So, it's true they wouldn't be innovatory. Some of
them wouldn't show as many initiatives, but it's not true to say
that they would be disloyal. Any Australian Government would be
superbly served by the Federal Public Service.
Bob Moore: are talking with you in a climate of suggestions
or speculations about a possible spill of Cabinet. Would you like
to see that happen?
I-Ir. Wihitlam:. I don't think there will be one. 
Alan Ramsay: Would you support these soundings that were
made last week by some members of your...?
Mr. Whitlam: I don't initiate any
Alan Ramsay: No, I'm not saying you do. I'm just saying
do you support the soundings or did you support or do you support
now, the soundings that were made to see whether or not there
could be one?
Mr. Whitlam: Well I suppose I ought to give a candid answer
to you a general attitude. If a new Ministry were being elected
now, there would be some changes. quite obviously in the 2 years
since the present Ministry was elected -there have only been two
new Ministers in that time, Senator Wheeldon and Senator James
McClelland who you mentioned, Mr. Moore, both magnificent additions
to the Ministry but in the 2 years since the rest of us were
elected, clearly the people would have come to realise that there
would be some people on the backbenches who would be more effective
than some who are on the frontbench. After the next election, when
there has to be an election, I would expect there to be a few
changes in the Ministry.
Alan Ramsay: And you wouldn't expect something to happen
before the next election...
Mr. Whitlam: I don't think so, but mind you, I'm relaxed
about these sort of things. For instance, if a move were made
for a spill, I would support it because I think it is clear that
once the ice is broken, once the people have tempted fate the
first tine, they would do it a second time. You remember all the
to-do last November or December, whenever it was, when there was
a move for a spill in the Liberal Party and all the effort was
put into beating the move for a spill. If Mr. Snedden at that
time had said right, let's have it, I'll support it he would
have been re-elected then, he might still be there now, but it
happened the first time and it failed. The next time someone
imoed it, it was carried although he opposed it, then he stood
and was beaten. So, my general philosophy is, if there's any
move for a spill, it's best to get it over with. I put my own
job on the line too, I think I would survive.
Alan Ramsay: But you are not initiating one?
Mr. Whitlam: Certainly not. I am happy to work, and I want
everybody else to realise, that I'm happy to work loyally with
whoever is elected by the Party and I want all of them to realise
that.
Alan Ramsay: If there was a move by somebody else that you
would support? 
Mr Whitlam; I think in those circumstances, onc would have to.
I woulir! It say it would be carried but: 1 wouldn't want-anyhofdy
to be in any doubt as to my atti-tuueethat if anybocly Felt so'
stronglyt a bou L tEhLe matter, that they thought th., ere ought to hea
an election for the Ministry as a whole, again, I vnuldn't
want to give any impression that I was frightened of the outcome
or that any Minislers should be frighten! e d of the outcome~.
Al~ an R-am:; ay: Why does Mr Barnard want to retire from politics?
Mr Tlhittam: lie has stated, and this has been knowledge for -come
time , that he will not be standing at the next election.
Alan Ramsay: Why does he want to go now?
Mr WhitlaM: Well does he? I'm not going to feed this
sneculaticn. I don't respond to speculation like this. Hie
r~ an'tbeen offered anything.
Alan IRars_, y: W'ell nobo~ dy had. denied it and least of all
Darnard.
1-r Vvnitla: r.: 1' don't respond...
A lan Ramsay: Do you think Mr Barnard has been happy or unhappy
i~ n the Government since he lost the Deputy Lead-ership a year ago?
Mr-1 Whit lam: Yes, you wouldn't get a more loyal, industrious
serene character. I 1have known him for 21 years, last Thursday,
when he was elected to Parliament but if you look at the
l1egislation and the ad ministrative arrangements lie has made since he
was supers~ e as Deputy Laader, 10 or 11 months ago. It's
hb: en a -na-rnificert record -all th-e new procurem-ient programs,
Lh~ new legislation and prospecti1ve legislat-on. Lance Barnard
has been the most effective ad,' ministrator that ouir defence force
ha s had in anyone's memory.
Alan R~ amsay: Ha-ving said you won't feed' speculation, would
you like to kill it by saying he doesn't want to go now?
11r Whitlam: No. I won't. I said he hasn't been offered ainything.
I should know.
Alan Ramsay: Certainly, Prime Minister, All I'm asking you is
ha hie asked you for something? / 11A 
11A
Mr Whitlam: No certainly not, I'll answer that forthwith.
If I respond to this one of the papers today said that
another Minister was expecting an appointment if I
answer questions like this, we'll go right through the
Ministry. Alan Ramsay: Do you regret that he lost the Deputy Leadership
a year ago? 
12
Mr Whitlam: I'm not going to answer questions like that.
You know I supported him. I accepted the decision, he
accepted the decision.
Alan Ramsay: I would'suggest, Prime Minister, that he has
been quite unhappy since.
MIr Whitlam: He hasn't been. You asked me that and I denied
it already.
Creighton Burns: You said a moment ago, that sometimes
circumstances force the deferment or even the default of
promises. Mr Whitlam: I don't think there's been a default in any,
but there have been a few deferments, there has to be.
Creighton Burns: You.' re surely now facing a situation which
might becc-me a very real problem because most economists seem to
think that we're looking at a very substantial budget deficit
ir. the next financial year and there have been strong representations
tlhit there will have to be some substantial reductions in
Government expenditure. Under these circumstances, do you think
it still makes go. od sense to go ahead with the abolition of the
nir. ns test? There is $ 230 million or so at stake in that,
. roney which will, in many cases, go to people who already have
satisfactory standards of living, as a subsidy maybe not for the
rich, but for the comfortable. In other areas of policy your
Government have rejected that as a principle, in education
for example, category schools, that the young. rich don't
get the benefit but the old rich do. What is the sense in
pushing ahead with a program which will perhaps force cuts in
other critical areas of social expenditure?
Mr Whitlaz: This may be deferred but it will not be
abandoned. I'm far too committed to this to tolerate an
abandonment of that. It's been spun out, as you know. For
instance, I said in the ' 72 elections, that everybody of
or over, would be getting the full pension, that is without means
test, by the end of that Parliament. That would bring us to the
Lnd of this year. Well, it won't be in force by the end of this
year, but let's look at this. In the middle . of last year, twelve
m: onths ago bar five days, I think it was, at the Premier's
conference then, I said that we would in fact, be deferring
some of the means test abolition, and there was a huge outcry
that I'd betraved promises. Let's face up to this. If we were
to abandon that, the people who would be criticising us would
be the Liberal and Country Party people in the Parliament
who are always asking us to cut expenditure. So it may be spun out,
but I would expect by the time that the next House of Representatives
election is cue, that is mid ' 77, that the means test will be
abolishedas I said it would be, by the end of ' 75. That is, it
will have been deferred by 50 per cent. 
Creighton Burns: Even if this in the meantime involves
imposition of some additional cuts in other expenditure which you...
M~ r Whitlam: Well, this is an undertaking on which quite a
number of poeple have now been banking. A lot of people have
now ordered their affairs in reliance on our undertakings and
we have honoured all our undertakings of this character and
I won't be in deferring it. Mind you, we know perfectly
well that it's not on politically to do it because our
opponents wouldn't say that they would defer it. So it' one
of those things that's all right for you chaps in a television
stcudio to suggest that this would be the responsible course.
But we have to live in the kitchen, we have to live with
these things and we couldn't survive with it. And of course
I suppose politically nothing would suit us better than for
our opponents to say that they would abandon it or defer it.
They won't, we won't. It will come about.
Creighton Burns: That last year, the 65 to 70 group, would be
deferred or possibly spread over another two years?
Mr Whitlan: That would be right, yes.
Bob Moore: Why do you think it is that the private sector
or large parts of it, feel that your Government is so unsympathetic
to themtiat after all they feel that Dr Cairns, particularly
in recent months,.....
M~ r Whitlam: I don't think it is true to say that the private
sector is aginst us. It is true that some sectors of the
private sector are against us and are vocal. I notice Mr Fraser
was stirring them up to protest against the Government, to abuse
the Government, to denounce the Government. The fact is
that you just don't get any top people in business in the
private sector, you don't get Managing Directors or Chairmen
of Directorcs of big companies or responsible institutions
attacking my Government. You don'tjand the relations we have between~
us are quite civil, quite respectful~ and we acknowledge,
gratefully, the fact that there are a very great number of people,
top people in business, who have been willing to give up their
time to head or to serve on, committees or commissions which
advise us. And they know that if they advise my Government
their advice will be made publ~ ic and it will certainly be
seriously considered. We couldn't have done many of the things
which we have initiated, but for the advice of leading people
in the private sector. They had expertise; it wd. s not available
to Governments; my Government sought it, and is making use of it.
Bob Moore: BIo ba1m-brseu: rprised to hear you say that. there aren't 
some top people, Managing Directors, who aren't critical of the
Government. I can't swap names with you?
Mr Whitlam: 1ell, I suppose the insurance people are doing
it at the moment.
Bob Moore: Isn't a fairly common complaint among business
people that they are worried about the lack of certainty of the
Government's plans...?
Mr Whitlam: You mentioned the 25% tariff cut. It's true,
I suppose that we have been roundly abused, betrayed one
might say, by some of the American motorcar companies in
Australia. That's true. And I suppose some of the textile
people have abused us a bit although they're not abusing us
that much now.
Alan Ramsay: Betrayed, did you say betrayed?
Mr Whitlam: Yes, well we very fully consulted them and they
ap.. ded. hat we did and a month later they abused us. This
is getting a few months back now, this is November and
December you will remember.
Creighton Durns: One of the criticisms that is made, it may
not be made to you or face to face with members of your
Government, one of the criticisms is that curiously that
while there is much talk of planning in the Labor Government
there is not nearly enough planning to satisfy the problems
the businessmen have in doing their own planning. They say that
this criticism comes sometimes from within the ranks of your own
Government. One of your newly appointed Ministers recently
said that he thought there was as much ad hocry in this Government
as there hd been in previous Governments. Do you think there is a
problem about planning?
Mr Whitlam: I can't remember which Minister this was. This
might have been in, say, some of the protection field. It might
have been Jim McClelland. We have had to yield a bit to some
ad hoc pressure, that's true. I've gone along with it. Jim
McClelland has said, quite rightly, that this assistance that we
have given through the Tasmanian Government to APPM at Burnie
now that's the principal employer at Burnie he has said that
if they close down, it's just the same as if Burnie was struck
by cyclone Tracy. That's true. You can't by any normal standards,
justify what we did there, but it's perfectly open and the
Opposition is not going to defeat it. They can. They ./ ouldn't
bring down the Government, if they did it, but there's no chance
of them defeating it. There's a lot of nonsense spoken on it. ./ 14A 
1 4A
I didn't lile doing it but i L ws an open thing and it is
somet-t., jj bnaped on what was done by our predecessors, you
refllCimbe 1, for the canning indu-try in Shepparton. The act is'
exactiy th same. People aren't used to it being done so
overtly for secondary industrias. 
Creighton Burns: The point that is made though is not simply
relating to issues like APPM. The criticism is a general one
that the Government's general priorities are not as clear as
they might be and that industries and firms cannot plan ahead,
particularly in this present economic climate with the confidence
which they feel that could in the past.
Mr. Whitlam: Well, let's take the Industries Assistance
Commission which replaced the Tariff Board a much more expert
body than the old Tariff Board and their's is a much more efficient
body; I think it will be. When it comes to the private sector
there's a limit to what the Federal Government can do, but if
look at our submissions to the Arbitration Commission, to
the Prices Justification Tribunal, the establishment of the
Industries Assistance Commission, the way we are going about
those matters which concern the private sector, we are much
more efficient and open and making it possible to have overall
planning than was the case before. There are other things which
will take longer to come into play, such as the Trade Practices
Commission, because this can be very complicated. All the other
countries we mentioned, North America and Western Europe have
long had this and we haven't yet had it in Australia. This is the
sort of planning they have in mixed economies and it's the sort we
will have too. What the Government ought to be doing mostly in a
mixed economy is planning the public sector and we have done that
better, more thoroughly, More forthrightly, than any previous
national Government.
Craighton Burns: A third of the public sector affects the States,
about a third of the public expenditure goes to the States.
Mr. ihitlam: That would be about right.
Creighton Burns: And, of course, this problem is going to come
Up again in two weeks for the Premiers' Conference.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes.
Crcighton Burns: The growth in Government expenditure has been,
I think, faster in the States than in the national area.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes, right. It's been at least 50 per cent more
in the States than it has in the Federal. You get a terrific
amount stated about the growth in the Public Service. The Federal
Public Service in the last 12 months has grown by 3 per cent. The
State Public Services have grown in that 12 months by about twice
that.
Creighton Burns: What I want to raise about this, Prime Minister,
is that if there are going to be constraints on spending there
will have to be constrains on the State spending as well as
Mr. Whitlam: As well as Federal, yes. 
Creighton Burns: Do you feel th e mTachinery for agreeing on
these constr-ain Cs, is adeciuate
MTrh. i tarn: No, ift's niot.
Creighton Burns: Do you believe that Section 96 which I think
Sir Robert menzies really pioneered but which your Government
has used very rigorously, some would say brutally, in so-me cases
Mr.-Whitlami: We used it deliberately.
Creighton Burns: Is -this an adeqiuate instrument of Commonwealth/ State
or Centrzil/ State?
Mr. Whitlan: It is the only instrument that has been, so far,
available. I would Very much like to have bet-ter coordination.
Let's take something which everybody acknowledges is principally
a public responsibility, a responsibility of the State and Federal
Governments transnort. I would he very happy to discuss with
the States, say, what amount, %, hat pro-portion of total public
funds ought to be spent on transport. Previous Governments have
al;;,-av\ s saida n~ ow look we'll look after civil aviation, don't you
States oworrv about tEhat. And Che St-ates have always said now
look the railways are: ours, don't yoau Federal people come into this.
~ a result. you've got a very gre. dislocation there. Take the
roads. Sopmewhere a!--cut 40 per cent of the total money spent on
rad s Australia CcTmes i h form of an: outright grant, not a
lc-n n teres, no repayments, an ol: tright grant by the Federal
Govcramn-, nt. A---nd yet our roads are atrocious. The fact that you
can' u go under economic conditions between Sydney and Melbourne
is a scandal. I w.. ould be very happy if we could have a five year
plan, Federal and State, saying . whiat proportion of the national
product should be spent on transpor-t and what proportions on each
form of transport.
Creighton Biirns: 1. Woulid you be happy also to let S3tate admninistrat ions
haca bigger say in the deItail of expenditure and not be
s uhbj rc t to0 Su _ h1
Mr. W., hitlam: Yes, I think we ought to pool our knowledge
hare. This is a field where, I sup-pose, everybodywoul acknowledge.
th-at Governments have pr-me responsibility and we ought to have
~ o~ consultatlion on It's no skin off my nose if the Sae
ci:' press views as to airports and aircraift. By the Salle token,
it's reasiona; ble enough -that w e should have something -to say, about
SCA1y, interstate2 roads or the principal railways or in facrt urban
transport. I give you that inst-ance and I don-' t mnind extending
that -to the delivery of health servi. ces and so on.
Alan Ramnsay: Why do you think it is that Prime Minister Lee
1\ uan Yew of Singapore i~ s so antagonistic to yo~ urself and * Co 
17.
your Cove. rnen?
mr. W'hitiati: T don't knlow. llvx'-1: now,, n Mr. Lee Y~ uan Ycew,
I -; pose., for 12 years. I SU ) pOs' I would have. seen 1, i4 at
last a dozen refor hours at a time in thaict peric'_'. I can't
hclievEñ it's the same--miau th .1 dliscussed things fc oface,
asz. the man w, h o is reporhed from overiseas or gives press conferences
overseas. It just baffles rm-e, why th&amp; ers should be this di-ffferepce.
I assum~ te that he doesF give press conferences overseas, as
ren-. orteO. You hav., e:' e ov: E! r in Singjapore and you x: ldkno',-I
ia. high Govarn-01enLn source says it to some of your impressionable
successors in fl.' ingapor-M, that it-i--ould be wit'-h his ao; proval.
I as; suwe. either hie is not prepared tco have things out: with
: mc, race to J-rac;: or he's a differont sort of man. But Your
colleagues overseas se,-him on these occasions and I don't.
Tar! 3onal. 1y, there is no aifficu-ltyo there never has been, in
cocussing any sulbject.
. e in Rlamsay: Why don't you ask him why does hie keep dropping
bucokets on you in puiblic?
Mr. hitlanr: it's not so public.
R amzav; in Jamaica~ it -was fairly public then. le
hn-d, some rat ha r caustiz -Linqs to say
p.. Whitlam: Aniyour colleaquEs who were in Jamaica had
-rMe uery, caw'stic t'nirics -o say a-Dut-himr. They thought he
aIround t he bend ' n ' t they?
11C-: nay Do you acg. ree with L1-hat?
r. Whit1am: zev correctl,., report him, yes. All I can
0 a is thaiEzt 4. n is cuite lucid when he speaks falce to face.
bob Moore: Do' see any problem of principle of the threat
1. r. Whit~: I o' verlook the fact that he is in a
daifficult sort of situation, in poliLical and economic -terms
3I n suppiose hne has to look after the interests of hi~ s na~ ion
a s hoe is tlryilng to create i., the ] beOsL ways., and T suppose if T
coein his s-ight~ s on some occasions that way, wel I-11us
CTOt to cop th-a.
Dob Moore: X~ o you see any prohlom of principle in the
Ltire-4t y copipmonweath utblic Service uniLons to organise against
tiv-. Oope ition, because of th Opposition's stand on thle Super-
: anua tion Bill? 
Mr. Whitlam: No, I think it's counter-productive if any
particular interest group looks as if it is bringing too heavy
a pressure to bear on a political party. I don't seek that
sort of pressure and I think it can be counter-productive.
I don't mind if the Public Servants vote against the Liberal
Party, but I don't want them to organise campaigns like that
I know, for instance, the way the Labor Party suffers from
many gratuitous campaigns in the trade unions.
Bob Moore: I don't know whether you've read the piece now' celebrated,
I suppose in the last couple of weeks by Paul Johnson
in the New Statesman on Unionism and Socialism.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes.
Bob Moore: Do you accept all or any part of his thesis?
Mr. Whitlam: The trade unions, after all, are part of the
capitalist system, aren't they?
Bob Moore: He certainly argues that.
Mr. Whitlam: Of course they are.
Bob Mo! ore: In practical terms, as a Labor Prime Minister
Mr. ' hitlam: A Labor Government does much more to bring about
social democracy than the trade unions can. Trade unions just
interact with employers. That is a transitional stage of society
when the people who want to bring about social democracy do so
through having a Labor Government.
Moore: But he says more than that, he says unionists
are inimical to socialism.
Mr. Whitlam: You don't expect me to go that far do you?
Bob Moore: Well I'd like to hear you
Mr. Whitlam: Why don't you put that sort of view yourself. That's
what always intrigues me about you interviewers in Australia.
People in the B. B. C. always put, with all the confidence and
aggression of which they are capable, and that is a lot, they put
their own viws. In Australia, you always like to hide behind
sormebody else's Do you agree with what Mr. Snedden says?-that's
what it used to be. Do you agree with what Mr. Fraser says?
that's what it is presumably this month and the next few months. 
19.
Do you agreei '. 74tjj what Lee xuan Yew says? Do you agree with
what Paul Joh -son says? Haven't you views of your own?
Bob M oore Wou. ld you be happy with interviewers who
consistently took a line that was opposite to yours?
1-r. Whitla: I'd be just as happy as those w,, ho then quote
some colleague or some opponent or some correspondent, an~ d * then
uDut that forward as a view7 which they want me to conlend
It ' s not much use me arguing with Paul Johnson or Lee Kuan Yew.
,. en tChey are F. few ' thousand miles away.
Creighton Burns: One of your collaagues thinks the press has
been unfair to your Government. Another one of your colleagues
th. inks it. has been as fair to your Government as to any other
G c) v e r e n I thinvk it has been remarkably fair to your GovernmentC..
V-1hat do You thin!<!--<?<-->
Mr. Whitlam: I think where it's been critical of us, it's
been half our responsibility. I think the Melbourne ' Age' has
gcone frar tzoo far In some ways. I'll admit, as I did. earlier,
Ltweve made-m istak-is but you w -ould never get a newspaper
to ac-mit. thrat it has riade a mistake.
Creightcrn Durns: We publishac' it in " We W., ere Wrong" and we
sipecifc-11 You achtthe princi. I. e of that you mnight make
M! Stake S but YOU dfOn't s' 02CifV thE-m.
Mr. Winitlain: Yes, th1-at I think is one little mote in your eye
every day and the beamns of course
Creighton Burns: Symbolic of our mTod esty, Prime Minister.
That hadn't occurred as the explanation tome.
.1an Rmsay: There was the debate in Parliament in February,
initiatedL1 by M~ r. Wentworth, about Dr. Cairns' staff. Dr. Cairns
in defending his right1C to appoint to his staff,
made a statement in which he said ' I have road a long statement
by the Co-mion-wealth Police and an offence which points to the
iiivolieent of a numvber of members of this House in thlat conspiracy
to e , L 11s morosi Is home illegally.' I
H-as any police action been taken about this conspiracy by mer1nl-) errs
of-the Parliament i11 an illegal act?
tMr. Whitlam: T ' fbrgdt all. t he details here. My memory is
that there was a case in -the courts in Sydney, where the people
who had, burgled 11iss Morosi's flat pleaded guilty and they were
associated with the Liberal Party.
llhitlza: i: 
But your Treasurer ( inaudible)
Mr. Whitlam: As you say, it's a few months ago and not
even Mr. Wentworth has come back with these allegations. You
don't seriously expect me to argue with Mr. Wentworth on a
programme of this quality.
Alan Ramsay: I'm not arguing, I'm just asking you, what has
been done about thi., when a senior member of your Cabinet says
a police report says that there has been conspiracy by mem. ers
of Parliament?
. Mr. Whitlam: My memory is that the people involved pleaded
guilty. I'm right aren't I'
Bob Moore: I think you are.
Alan Ramsay: That's got nothing to do with this particular
-oint.
Mr. Whitlam: I think it did.
Alan Ramsay: NO Members of Parliament appeared in court. If
there's a conspiracy by members of the Parliament to carry out an
illegal....? Mr. Whitlam: Look, i really don't remember the details.
You must take Mr. Uentworth more seriously than I do.
Alan Ramsay: No, I'm not quoting Mr Wentworth, I'm quoting
Dr Cairns, your Treasurer. He says this.
Mr. Whitlam: I don't remember the details. I must confess
I r. ever thought that this would be raised on this programme. If
I had I suppose I would have gone to the labour of pursuing the
matter. Bob Moore: It seems, in the past few days anyway, that
Mr. Somare is having rather more trouble than one would have
thought in organising independence day and independence and all
that. Are you happy with the way things are going in Papua New
Guinea now? And, secondly, is there anything which would cause
the Australian Government to insist on, and would it be able to,
a particular day for independence?
Mr. Whitlam: Obviously we can give Papua New Guinea independence
in the juristic sense when we want to. After all, we have in
practice, in fact, given Papua New Guinea, complete independence.
Alan Ramsv: 
21.
Pa-pua ewCiainsr now visit other countries Indonesia,
China, Jl pcu:, in their o-. un ri ht. 11--obviously, 1h lve to malke
the aaneu-sbut Oco nt accompany them on thut Thay just
ro. oceed 3. n their ow,. n -way. Secondly, they now have control of
their own armed -forces. The only situation that is left is for
thcr. to have international recognition as an indep:! naert country
and tha-t wo, uld. be given whenever we ask the United Nations to
do so. I would be optimistic -that, in fact, Papua New., Guinea will,
itself, seekc independence this year. I think 1H-r. Somare's setbaclks
in -the Conistitue. nt Assembly as the House of Asserublv is n1ow
called, have: been on procedural matters, not on matters of substance.
He is a superb parliJamentarian, he is a superb politician and I
think that his leadership in the country will bevindicated yet
again. it's only about four years ago, at the beginning of 1970,
-that he and I were being tagged by the Australian and Papua New
Guinea Security services throughout Papua New Guinea. And now
wfn are leaders of our respective countries.
Bob ' Iloore: I don't quite know w hat the moral of that is
Prime Minister; That things do move much quicker than people
think. Bob Moore: Thz-ink Yo11 very much . Prime M~ inister for talking to
us on Monday, Conference and for accepting qyues Lions hypothetiaEll
andI spirituoal alike.
Prime Minister: And soire quite archaic. 



, S ,~ 4SoEMBARGO: 5 P. M. SUNDAY
QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 11
REDISTRIBUTION I JUNE 1975
THIS WEEK WE HAVE SEEN A CLEAR EXAMPLE OF THE
COUNTRY PARTY'S CONTEMPT FOR THE DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM
AND THEIR ABILITY TO STAND OVER THEIR COALITION
PARTNERS, THE LIBERALS. Two WEEKS AGO, WE INTRODUCED
IN' THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT PROPOSALS TO ALTER THE
BOUNDARIES OF FEDERAL ELECTORATES. THESE
REDISTRIBUTIONS ARE NECESSARY FROM TIME TO TIME
BECAUSE OF INEVITABLE CHANGiES IN THE PATTERN OF
' POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT. EXCEPT FOR SOME
CHANGES IN W! ESTERN AUSTRALIA, THERE HASN'T BEEN A
REDISTRIBUTION IN THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT SINCE
1968, THE LAST THREE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ELECTIONS WERE ALL HELD ON BOUN~ DARIES DETERMINED
SEVEN YEARS AGO. YET GREAT POPULATION MOVEMENTS
HAVE OCCURRED SINCE THEN. ANOTHER REDISTRIBUTION
IS OVERDUE AND URGENT. IT WOULD BE ABSURD TO PUT
IT OFF ANY LONGER, 
-2-
W'HEN WE FIRST BROUGHT THE REDISTRIBUTION
PPOPCSALS BEFORE PARLIAMENT TWO WEEKS AGO, THE
OPPOSITION IN THE SENIATE, UNDER PRESSURE FROM THE
COUNTRY PARTY, REJECTED THEM; THEY REJECTED THEM
IN EVERY ONE OF THE FIVE STATES CONCERNED. THEY
DIDN'fT ARGUE THEIR MERITS; THEY JUST BLINDLY
TURNED THEM DOWN. THEY EVEN REJECTED THEM IN THOSE
STATES SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA WHERE THE
COUNTRY PARTY HAS NO MEMBERS AT ALL IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.. THERE WAS NO POINT IN OUR GETTING
THE PROPOSALS REDRAWN, BECAUSE THE COUNTRY PARTY
HAD MADE IT CLEAR THAT THEY WOULD OPPOSE ANY
REDISTRIBUTION AT ALL. THAT WAS THEIR ATTITUDE.
SO WE DECIDED TO BRING THE PROPOSALS FORWARD AGAIN
IN THE MORE SUBSTANTIAL FORM OF LEGISLATION IN
THIS WAY, SHOULD THE SENATE PERSIST IN ITS OBSTRUCTION.-
WE CAN ADD THESE PROPOSALS TO THE GROWING LIST OF
MEASURES WHICH THE SENATE HAS BLOCKED AND PUT THEM
BEFORE THE PEOPLE AT THE NEXT ELECTION. THE PEOPLE
THEMSELVES WILL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO PASS JUDGMENT
ON THE NEW BOUNDARIES, WHATEVER THE SENATE MAY DO. 11/ 7 
OF COURSE IT'S N-ATURAL. FOR POLITICANS-TO BE
WIARY OF CHANGES IN FLECTORAL EOUNDA-RIES THEY GO
TO0 THE IliART OF THE DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM, BuT LET's
BE CLEAR ABOUT TIS: THIS IS NOTl OUR REDISTRBUTI ON,
TIHESE ' HT LABOR PARTY PROPOSAL. S. THEY Iv. IFRI
DRAW ! N UP BY INDEPENDENT AND EXPERT COMN1ISSION 1: 1) S WJHOSE
INTEGRITY AND EXPERIENCE ARE BEYOND QUESTION.
THE R: YSULTS ARE SCRUPULOUSLY FAIR AND NO ONE
HAS SUGGESTED OTHER'W'ISE. YOU DON'T HAVE TO TAKE
MY WORD FOR IT, FlR MALCOLM rIACKERRAS, AN ACKNOWLEDGED
ELECTORAL ANALYSTI SAID THIS OF THE COMMilISSIONER S
PROPOSALS: " IN OVERALL POLITICAL TERMS, THE 1975
REDIS'TiRIBUTION IS THE FAIREST sET OF PROPOSED
BOUND4ARIES EVER TO BE PRESENED TO ANY AUSTRALIN
PARLAINIEN1 IN MY LIFETIM. T* i-HE COMM ISSI ONERS IAVE
BEH1iT OVER BACKWARDS TO AVOID ANY SUGGESTION OF
GERRYMANDERING. THEY HAVE SET OIT TO DRAW
BOUDArI: ES SO PATENTLY FAIR THAT REJECTION BY T HE
SENATLE 10, OULD REFLECT DISCREDIT ON THE SENATEI N'OT
ON THE COM ISSIONERS." / 11 
-ITrwvr's
WHAT ONE EXPERT HAD TO SAY, SO VIP
MAY WELL A,' 3K\ WHY THE OPPOSITION IS REJECTING THiE
NLEWV BOUNJDARI ES OUT OF HAND. IT I S NOT AS THOUGH r [ j
LJDj-: NAL PARTY IS LIKELY TO SUFFER UNDULY. IN sA
R[ rSPErCTS THEIR POSITION WILL ' BE STRENGTHENED AND THE
LAB-OR V'-APTY POSITION WILL BE W'EAI( LNED THAT WILL
CEIRTAINLY BE THE CASE IN QUEENSLAND. SO WHY THE FUSS,
WHY THE BLIND OBSTRUCTION? WE DON'T HAVE TO LOOK
VERY FAR FOR THE ANSW'ER, THE COUNTl-lRY PARTY THE
N~ ATIOINAL COUNTRY PARTY AS THEY NOW CALL THEMSELVESWANT
TO PRE-SERVE THE-PRIVIL. EGEUD POSITION THEY HOLD
BEiCAUSET-OF HUGE VARIATIONS BETWN TE IE F IY N
RURAL SEATS, THEY WIANT TO KEEP THE SYSTEM RIGGED
IN THEIR FAVOUR.
I OUGHT TO ' EXPLAIN THAT U" NTIL LAST YEAR, THIE
LAW A'LLOWED TllE ELECTORAL COMMI 35S1O NERS, WHEN
DRW~ IGUP tlEtt r-0UNDA'RIES, TO WAESOME SEATS VERY
MUCH LA42" GFR THAN OTHERS, THE NEROF VOTrERS IN ANY
ONE SEAT COUL-D 2nU2A0B% OV E OR DELOW THE AVERAGE
NIJMPE) R OF VOTERS IN ALL THE SEATS OF THE STATE CONCERINED.
THAT TOLERANCE, TOGETHER WITH NATURAL MOVEMENTS OF
PO PU0LAT 10N1. HAS MEANT THAT IH NOST STATES THERFE ARE NOW
SfEATS V I TH UP To 70. NORE \' IL: RS THANITES
U E N SLA'IlD rHE LA" RGEST SEAT HAS NORE THAN TWvICE AS MANY
V'OTERS TAil THE SMALLEST. IN OTHER WORDS, SGOME PEOPLE'Is
VOT'ES'' AIRE WORTH MIORE THAN'-TWICE AS fMUCjH AS, OTHER PE-oP!. E'S,
SO W-' E BROUGHT IN LEGISLATION To REDUCE THE P ERM ITT ED
VAI" IATION FRoli 20Z TO THERE'LL STILL BE A
DI F2ER'NCE; AN" D IT WI LL GROW A POPULAT IONS CHAjNG; 7E
BUT A 10" M-1ARC IN WVOULD 13 E A MUCH FAIRER START ING P0 [ NT
11I1JCH CLOSER TO THE IALOF' LU-A! . TY, 
OUR LEGISLATION FOR THAT 10% DIFFERENCE WAS FOUGHT
TOOTHi AND NAIL BY THE COUNTRY PARTY;
IT WAS ONE OF THE BILLS THAT FORMED THE BASIS OF
THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION GRANTED LAST YEAR; IT WAS
SPECIFICALLY PUT BEFORE THE PEOPLE AT THE ELECTION
LAST MAY. THE PEOPI. E ENDORSED I-F THE PRINCIPLE
OF EQUAL REPRESENTATION, THE BILL WAS PASSED BY
THE PARLIAMENT AT ITS JOINT SITTING IN AUGUST,
THE NEW MARGIN OF 10o IS NOW THE LAW OF THE LAND.
BY REJECTING THE NEW REDISTRIBUTION, BASED ON THAT
LAW, THE COUNTRY PARTY IS REJECTING A PRINCIPLE
SPECIFICALLY APPROVED BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE.
PUT SIMPLY, WE BELIEVE IN THE SIMPLE, ANCIENT
RULE OF ONE VOTE ONE VALUE, OUR LEGISLATION, AND
THE REDISTRIBUTION BASED UPON IT, A REDISTRIBUTION
DRAWN UP BY INDEPENDENT COMMISSIONERS, BROUGHT US CLOSER
TO THAT IDEAL. THERE'S NO MYSTERY ABOUT IT, W. E THINK
EVERYONE'S VOTE SHOULD BE WORTH MORE OR LESS THE
SAME AS EVERY OTHER PERSON'S. ALL THE PHONY ARGUMENTS
IN THE WORLD CAN'T EVADE THE BASIC PRINCIPLE THAT EVERY
MAN S VOTE, AS FAR AS POSSIBLE, SHOULD BE OF EQUAL VALUE-,
IN QUEENSLAND, UNDER THE EXISTING DISTRIBUTION OF FEDERAL
SEATS, THE SIZE OF ELECTORATES DOESN'T JUST FLAUNT THE
NEW LIMIT OF 10%; FOUR OF THE ELECTORATES ARE WELL
OVER THE OLD LIMIT OF 20%. THE ENROLMENT OF THE
LARGEST AND SMALLEST ELECTORATES VARIES BY 43,000 VOTERS.
IT IS THE LARGEST VARIATION OF ANY STATE IN AUSTRALIA,
TiIS IS A DENIAL OF THE VERY ESSENCE OF DEMOCRACY, 
-6-
YOU CONSTANTLY HEAR THE ARGUMENT FROM COUN'TRY
PARTY POLITICIANS THAT COUNTRY SEATS MUST HAVE
FEWER VOTERS THAN CITY SEATS BECAUSE OF THE
DIFFICULTIES OF REPRESENTING SPRAWLING RURAL
ELECTORATES COVERING THOUSANDS OF SQUARE MILES.
THis IS A SPECIOUS ARGUMENT. WE ALREADY ALLOW
A DIFFERENCE OF 10%. EVEN IF WE ALLOWED A
DIFFERENCE OF 50% OR 100%, RURAL SEATS WOULD
STILL BE VAST IN AREA BY COMPARISON WITH CROWDED'
CITY SEATS, SIMPLY BECAUSE OF THE DISTRIBUTION
OF POPULATION, THIS IS NOT, AND CAN NEVER BE, AN
ARGUMENT FOR DENYING DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS TO THE
MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS, THE BEST WAY TO LOOK AFTER
THE NEEDS OF RURAL ELECTORATES 1S TO GIVE BETTER
FACILITIES TO MEMBERS REPRESENTING REMOTE AREAS,
TO 0! PROVE COMMUNICATIONS AND TRANSPORT IN THESE
AREAS. NE WON ' T DO IT BY RIGGING THE ELECTORAL
SYSTEM IN FAVOUR OF ONE PARTICULAR PARTY. , i A/ 
-7-
FOR YEARS IN QUEENSLAND YOU HAVE HAD
ABUiNDANT EVIDENCE OF THE RESULTS OF COUNTRY PARTY
GERRYMANDERING, FOR YEARS THEY REMAINED IN POWER
WITH 20% OF THE POPULAR VOTE, THE ELECTORAL LAWS
ARE RIGGED AS MUCH AGAINST THE LIBERAL PARTY
AS THEY ARE AGAINST LABOR. IN MARCH 1971 EIGHT
LIBERAL MEMBERS CROSSED THE FLOOR OF THE
QUEENSLAND PARLIAMENT TO VOTE WITH THE A, L. P.
AGAINST ONE OF THE MOST DISGRACEFUL GERRYMANDERS
EVER PROPOSED, THE COUNTRY PARTY ARE PAST MASTERS
OF THIS DIRTY GAME. THEY SEE THEIR FUTURE THREATENED,
THEIR SUPPORT WANING IN RURAL AREAS, AND THEY ARE
DESPERATE TO MAINTAIN IT. THEY BLOCKED A FEDERAL
REDISTRIBUTION IN 1962 FOR THE VERY SAME REASON.
THEYI' SIMPLY WON'T PLAY BY THE RULES, I HOLD PO BRIEF
WITH THE LIBERALS, BUT I SOMETIMES WISH THEY HAD THE
GUTS TO RESIST THE PRESSURE OF THEIR COALITION PARTNERS.
AT LEAST SIR CHARLES COURT IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
HAS SEEN THE FOLLY OF KNUCKLING UNDER TO COUNTRY
PARTY BLACKMAIL. I'M AFRAID THAT IN THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT THE COUNTRY PARTY TAIL STILL WAGS THE
LIBERAL PARTY DOG. THE REJECTION OF THESE PROPOSALS
THIS OVERDUE AND EMINENTLY FAIR REDISTRIBUTION
WILL BENEFIT NO ONE BUT THE COUNTRY PARTY. IT WILL
BE AN UTTER REPUDIATION OF THE PEOPLE'S WILL EXPRESSED
AT THE LAST ELECTION, A SETBACK TO EVERY PRINCIPLE
OF DEMOCRACY AND TO AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION AS A
DFMOCRATIC NATION. 3It 1?
I 



USWL14
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement
3 June 1975
NEW URBAN ROAD PROJECTS
The Werriwa electorate will benefit from new urban road
projects which were recently approved by the Federal Transport
Minister, Mr Jones.
The Prime Minister and member for Werriwa, Mr Gough
Whitlai said today that the 7 projects in the Werriwa area
would cost an estimated $ 1,032,000 in 1974/ 75.
He said that $ 158,000 would be spent on Elizabeth Drive,
involving construction and widening to six lanes from Copeland
Street to Maxwell Avenue, Liverpool. In Copeland Street
$ 342,000 would go towards widening to six lanes the divided
carriageway from Hinkler Avenue to Hoxton Park Road, Liverpool.
A project in Cabramatta will improve Cabramatta Road West,
with construction work to widen it to four lanes from Church
Street to Gladstone Street, Cabramatta.
Mr Whitlam said that the damaged bitumen pavement
in Terminus Street from Scott Street to the Hume Highway
in Liverpool would be reconstructed for $ 40,000.
More than $ 450,000 will be spent on three projects
improving sections of the Humne Highway in the area. Construction
work will be carried out at the intersection with Cowpastures Road,
Leppington. This will cost $ 90,000. Another $ 102,000 will
go towards widening the Highway from Cross Roads to South Western
Freeway. Mr Whitlam said that $ 250,000 would be spent on the
construction of kerbside lanes and reconstruction of damaged
pavement from Atkinson Street Liverpool to Cross Roads.
He said that the urban roads program showed how determined
the Australian Government was to help with improving the standard
of Australia's roads wherever they happened to be. In this case
the program had been worked out between the appropriate sections
of the Australian and N. S. W. State Government. This showed just
how practically useful such sensible co-operation could be.
He said that the overall contribution by the Australian Government
towards improved and updated transport in urban areas of N. S. W.
woiald be over $ 59 million this financial year alone.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement
a June 1975
LOCAL ROAD PROJECTS
Residential streets have been included in urban
local roads assistance for the first time. This means that
Australian Government money can go towards helping local
authorities improve streets in their areas.
The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa, Mr Whitlam
said today he was delighted to be able to confirm the
Australian Government's policy of providing financial help
to local government so as to help improve the urban
environment. Three projects had been approved in the Werriwa
electorate, he said. The total cost would be $ 191,000 in
1974/ 75. Mr Whitlam said $ 60,000 would be provided for
improving St John's Road through reconstruction between
Sackville Street and Gladstone Street.
One side of Gordon Road will be reconstructed and
kerbed and guttered for $ 113,500. This will be in Gordon
Road from Newbridge Road to Barry Road. Another $ 17,500
will help close some Ingleburn roads for pedestrian use,
namely, various roads bounded by Chester Road, Brenda Street,
Sackville Street and Ingleburn Road.
Mr Whitlam said that the improvements to residential
streets made possible by these grants would have a significant
impact on the environment and on people's lives on the
immediate area of the local road improvement programs.
He said that a total of $ 10.08 million would be
allocated to N. S. W. for local road improvements during the 1974/ 75
to 1976/ 77 period. In all N. S. W. would get $ 2.18 million this
financial year 1974/ 75, rising to $ 3.3 million in 1975/ 76 and
$ 4.6 million in 1976/ 77. Mr Whitlam said the level of these
grants could be expected to increase in subsequent legislation.
He said approved programs in worked out in
co-operatidfbithuLthei. N. i. NSt. W. Govetiment, timicJ6dedi'a subs teiniiiM
amount of" road and -treet" sealing in fringe areas, as well as
strengthening of streets to carry buses. There were also a
number of projects which were designed to improve the safety,
visual quality and the environment of residential areas,
he added. 



SUPERI OR COURT OF AUSTRALIA BILL
ESPLU ILULPEMfrLEJUIlSER
JJUNE 1975
THIS BILL TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT OF
AUSTRALIA AFFORDS AN OUTSTANDING EXAMPLE OF LIBERAL INEPTITUDE
IN GOVERNMENT AND OBSTRUCTION IN OPPOSITION.
A PAPER ENTITLED " THE NECESSITY FOR A NEW
FEDERAL COURT" WAS DELIVERED AT THE 13TH LEGAL CONVENTION
IN HOBART IN JANUARY 1963 BY MR MAURICE BYERS, Q. C. AND
MR PAUL TOOSE, Q. C, NOW^ THE SOLICITOR-GENERAL OF AUSTRALIA
AND A JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES. IN
THE DISCUSSIONS ON THE PAPER THE SOLICITOR-GENERAL, SIR
KENNETH BAILEY, ANNOUNCED ON BEHALF OF THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL
THAT THE CABINET HAD AUTHORISED HIM TO DESIGN A NEW FEDERAL
SUPERIOR COURT. SIR KENNETH WENT ON TO SAY THAT THE PAPER
WOULD BE OF MATERIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
SIR GARFIELD BARWICK, WHOSE CONGRATULATIONS HE GAVE TO THE
LEARNED AUTHORS. IN 1964, JUST BEFORE HE BECAME CHIEF JUSTICE,
SIR GARFIELD WROTE A 21-PAGE ARTICLE ON THE PROPOSED NEW
FEDERAL SUPERIOR COURT FOR THE INITIAL ISSUE OF THE
FEDERAL LAW REVIEW, THE JOURNAL OF THE LAW SCHOOL OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY. 
1)
ON 15 MARCH -167, IN ANSWER TO A QUESTION
' BY THE HIONOURHABLE MEMBER FOR MORETON, ATTORNEY GEN ERAL BOWEN,
NOW CH-IEF JUDGE IN EQUITY IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH
WALES, SAID AN ANORMOUS AMOUNT OF WORK HAD BEEN DONE ON
THE PROPOSAL FOR THE NEW COURT BY SIR GARFIELD BARWICK AND
BY HIS OWN IMMEDIATE PREDECESSOR, MR SNEDDEN. HE PROMISED'
A MINISTERIAL STATEMENT. HE MADE THE STATEMENT ON 18 MAY.
HE DELIVERED A PAPER ON THE PROPOSAL TO THE 15TH LEGAL
CONVENTION ON 17 JULY.
IN MARCH 1968, OPENING A NEW SESSION, THE
GOVERNOR-GENERAL STATED:
" INY GOVERNMENT WILL PREPARE LEGISLATION FOR
CREATION OF A COMMONWEALTH SUPERIOR COURT TO
RELIEVE PRESSURE ON4 THE HIGH COURT."
ON 29 OCTOBER 1968, ATTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN
ASKED A COMMITTEE UNDER MR JUSTICE KERR, LATER CHIEF JUSTICE
OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND NOW THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, TO CONSIDER
THE JURISDICTION TO BE GIVEN TO THE PROPOSED COMMONWEALTH
SUPERIOR COURT TO REVIEW ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS. THE
OTHER MEMBERS WERE SOLICITOR-GENERAL MASON, LATER A JUDGE OF
APPEAL OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND NOW A
JUSTICE OF THE HIGH COURT, AND PROFESSOR WHITMORE AND
LATER SOLICITOR-GENERAL ELLICOTT, NOW THE IIONOURA13LE MEMBER
FOR WENTWORTHI. THE COMMITTEE'S REPORT WAS TABLED ON
_ ILI OCTOBELR 1971. 
-3-
I'EANTIME, /\ TTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN AND IN THE
1969 PARLIAMENT THE NEW ATTORNEY-GENERAL HUGHES, AND UNDER
THE MCI" HAHON GOVERNMENT THE RESTORED ATTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN,
WERE ENGAGED IN PREPARING SOME 66 COMPLEMENTARY BILLS WHICH
IT WAS DESIRED TO INTRODUCE BEFORE DEBATING THE COMMONWEALTH
SUPERIOR COURT BILL.
THUS WORK ON THIS BILL PROCEEDED THROUGH THE
PARLIAMENTS ELECTED IN 1961, 1963, 1966 AND 1969, UNDER
LIBERAL PRIME MINISTERS MENZIES, HOLT, GORTON AND MCMAHON,
LIBERAL ATTORNEYS-GENERAL BARWICK, SNEDDEN, BOWEN, HUGHES
AND BOWEN AGAIN AND, IN ONE CAPACITY OR ANOTHER, SOLICITORSGENERAL
BAILEY, MASON, ELLICOTT AND BYERS. AND AT LAST ON
27 OCTOBER 1972, THE DAY AFTER THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ROSE FOR THE ELECTIONS, THE LAST LIBERAL ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
SENATOR GREENWOOD, ANNOUNCED THAT THE MCMAHON GOVERNMENT
HAD REACHED THE CONCLUSION THAT THE PROPOSAL TO ESTABLISH A
COMMONWEALTH SUPERIOR COURT SHOULD NOT BE PROCEEDED WITH.
ON THE LABOR SIDE THE PROPOSAL HADBEEN SUPPORTED
AND PROMOTED CONSISTENTLY. I URGED IT AT THE ALEGAL CONVENTION
IN PERTH IN 1957 AND IN THE DEBATE ON THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S
ESTIMATES IN 1958 AND IN DOZENS OF SPEECHES AND QUESTIONS
IN THE HOUSE THROUGHOUT THE 1960' s. I INCLUDED THE PROPOSAL
IN THE POLICY SPEECHES I DELIVERED ON BEHALF OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY AT THE ELECTIONS IN 1972 AND 1974. 
THERE CAN SCARCELY HAVE BEEN A PROPOSAL WHICH
BOTH SIDES OF POLITICS HAVE WORKED ON SO LONG, BUT WHAT
HIAS BEEN THE HISTORY OF THE BILL UNDER MY GOVERNMENT?
A BILL TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT OF
AUSTRALIA WAS INTRODUCED INTO THE SENATE IN DECEMBER 1973 B~ Y
ATTORNEY-GENERAL MURPHY. THAT BILL LAPSED WHEN PARLIAMENT
WAS PROROGUED TO ENABLE THE QUEEN TO OPEN THE PARLIAMENT* ON
THE OCCASION OF HER VISIT To AUSTRALIA IN FEBRUARY 1974.
THE BILL WAS AGAIN INTRODUCED INTO THE SENATE ON 14 MARCH
LAST YEAR, BUT THE MOTION FOR THE SECOND READING OF THE
BILL WAS DEFEATED IN THE SENATE ON 2 APRIL 1974.
THE BILL WAS REINTRODUCED INTO THIS HOUSE AFTER
THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION OF MAY LAST YEAR AND WAS PASSED ON
24 JULY. THiE OPPOSITION AGAIN OPPOSED THE BILL IN THE
SENATE AND THE MOTION FOR THE SECOND READING OF THE BILL
RESULTED IN A TIED VOTE ON 26 FEBRUARY THIS YEAR. SO NOW
THE BILL HAS BEEN INTRODUCED FOR A SECOND TIME IN THIS HOUSE.
THE PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE.
SUPERIOR COURT WERE WELCOMED FROM THE OUTSET BY LEADERS OF
THE LEGAL PROFESSION IN AUSTRALIA. A COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY
THE LAW COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA REPORTED IN FAVOUR IN AUGUST 1963.
SO DID THE NEW SOUTH WALES BAR ASSOCIATION. ATTORNEY-GENERAL
BOWEN TOLD THE LEGAL CONVENTION IN JULY 11967 THAT THERE WAS A
BROAD CONSENSUS THAT SUCH A COURT SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED. HE
STATED CATEGORICALLY THAT " fA DECISION HAS BEEN TAi( EN TO
ESTABLISH THE COURT" 1 AND THAT ARGUMENTS ADVANCED AGAINST THE
' itI
IDEA ARE NOW ACADEMIC", BUT A MORE CONSERVATIVE VIEW WAS / q
11 
TAKEN IN THE TWILIGHT YEARS OF THE LIBERAL GOVERNMENT AND
THE CONCEPT CAME TO BE OPPOSED WHEN IT WAS APPRECIATED THAT
THE BILL DESCRIBED BY ATTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN 8 YEARS AGO
WOULD ENABLE THE SUPERIOR COURT TO ENTER UPON JURISDICTION
NOW EXERCISED BY THE SUPREME COURTS OF THE STATES,
SUCH ARGUMENTS, HOWEVER, LOSE SIGHT OF THE FACT
THAT THERE IS ALREADY A LARGE BODY OF FEDERAL LEGISLATION
WHICH WOULD FALL TO BE INTERPRETED AND ADMINISTERED BY A
FEDERAL SUPERIOR COURT IN WHICH THE LEGAL PROBLEMS OF A
JURISDICTIONAL NATURE THAT HAVE BEEN URGED AS OBJECTIONS
AGAINST THE SUPERIOR COURT WOULD HAVE NO PLACE. FOR MORE
THAN SEVENTY YEARS, INDUSTRIAL. MATTERS ARISING UNDER THE
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT HAVE BEEN DEALT WITH BY
A FEDERAL COURT WITHOUT GIVING RISE TO SUBSTANTIAL
JURISDICTIONAL PROBLEMS. 
FOR ALMOST FIFTY YEARS, THERE HAS BEEN A
FEDERAL COURT OF BANKRUPTCY, WHICH HAS SAT IN SYDNEY AND
MAELBOURNE. THESE ARE TWO EXAMPLES OF LONG-STANDING
JURISDICTIONSEXERCISED BY FEDERAL COURTS,
TO THESE HAVE BEEN ADDED IN RECENT YEARSP
SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONAL AREAS OF FEDERAL LAW, FROM THE
VERY FIRST TRADE PRACTICES ACT IN 1965 EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION
IN FEDERAL TRADE PRACTICES LAW HAS BEEN VESTED IN
THE INDUSTRIAL COURT, THAT WAS A MATTER INITIATED BY OUR
PREDECESSORS. THE TRADE PRACTICES ACT 1974, ADOPTED BY
THIS PARLIAMENT, CONTINUES TO RECOGNISE THE PRINCIPLE THAT
THE PROPER COURT TO iNTERPRET AND APPLY THE FEDERAL LAW ON
TRADE PRACTICES IS A FEDERAL COURT. THE TRADE PRACTICES ACT
1974 VESTS JURISDICTION IN THE SUPERIOR COURT AND, UNTIL
THAT COURT IS ESTABLISHED, IN THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL COURT.
THERE IS BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT A NATIONAL COMPENSATION
BILL AND THE CORPORATIONS AND SECURITIES INDUSTRY
BILL. THE DRAFTING OF-A NATIONAL COMPANIES BILL IS WELL
ADVANCED. THIS HIOUSE HAS PASSED THE ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL BILL, THE FIRST OF A SERIES OF MEASURES INTENDED TO
BRING ABOUT A SUBSTANTIAL REFORM OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AT
THE FEDERAL LEVEL. 1 
THiis GOVERNMENT HAS ESTABLISHED THE LAW REFORM
COMMISSION TO APPROACH THE TASK OF REFORMING THE LAW IN
AUSTRALIA ON A NATIONAL SCALE, THE LAW REFORM
COMMISSION IS CHARGED WITH THE DUTY OF CONSIDERING NOT
ONLY MATTERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT
BUT ALSO PROPOSALS FOR UNIFORMITY BETWEEN THE LAWS OF
THE STATES AND OF THE TERRITORIES, THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE LAW REFORM COMMISSION IS A RECOGNITION OF THE ABSURDITY
OF HAVING SO MANY DIFFERENCES IN LAW ACROSS STATE AND
TERRITORY BOUNDARIES, IT HIGHLIGHTS. THE NEED TO HAVE A
COURT THAT HAS JURISDICTION T-HROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA AND
THAT CAN INTERPRET AND APPLY THE LAWS ENACTED BY THIS
PARLIAMENT ON A UNIFORM BASIS THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE OF
AUSTRALIA. THE GREAT DEVELOPMENT IN FEDERAL LAW TO WHICH
HAVE REFERRED MAKES THE NEED TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT
MUCH MORE PRESSING, WHILE THE INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW
REMAINS WITH THE SUPREME COURTS OF THE STATES NO MATTER CAN
BE REGARDED AS BEING SETTLED THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA UNTIL
A DECISION HAS BEEN GIVEN ON IT BY THE HIGH COURT. IT
IS TRUE THAT A DECISION OF, SAY, THE FULL COURT OF THE
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA IS TREATED WITH THE GREATEST
RESPECT BY THE COURT OF ) PEAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 11 
BUT THE VICTORIAN DIECISION HAS NO BINDING FORCE ON
THE NEW SOUTH WALES COURT, EVEN THOUGH THE TWO COURTS
MAY B3E DEALING WITH , SAME SECTION OF AN ACT OF THIS
PARLIAMENT, A DECISION OF THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPERIOR
COURT WOULD BE BINDING ON THE JUDGES OF THAT COURT THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA, SO THAT IN THOSE IMPORTANT AREAS OF FEDERAL
LAW IN WHICH THE SUPERIOR COURT WOULD BE EXERCISING
EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COURT
WOULD SUBSTANTIALLY CONTRIBUTE TOWARDS CERTAINTY IN THE
LAW, THE* CASE FOR THE SUPERIOR COURT IS NOW EVEN FURTHER
STRENGTHENED BY THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA UNDER THE FAMILY LAW BILL$ THIS DECISION BY
THE PARLIAMENT IS CLEAR RECOGNITION THAT IN THIS MOST
IMPORTANT AREA OF LAW, WITH ITS OWN SPECIAL PROBLEMS AND
A NEED FOR SPECIAL PROCEDURES, THERE IS GREAT MERIT IN
HAVING A COURT THAT HAS JURISDICTION THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA,
AND THAT CAN INTERPRET AND APPLY THAT LAW ON A UNIFORM BASIS.
THE SUPERIOR COURT WILL ENABLE A CONSOLIDATION OF
JURISDICTION THAT IS NOW EXERCISED BY FEDERAL AND TERRITORY
COURTS. IT WILL BRING TOGETHER IN THE ONE COURT THE
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL COUR-r, THE FEDERAL COURT OF BANKRUPTCY
AND THE SUPREME COURTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPTIAL TERRITORY
AND THU NORTHERN TERRITORY, IT WILL ENABLE THE JURISDICTION
OF THESE COURTS TO BE EXERCISED ON A MORE RATIONAL AND
COMPREHENSIVE BASIS, I I ! e 
IT IS ALMOST SEVEN YEARS SINCE THE FIRST BILL
TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT WAS INTRODUCED INTO THIS
HOUSE, CAN ANYONE DOUBT THAT IT IS TIME THAT WE MOVED
ON THIS MATTER? IS IT NOT TIME THE OPPOSITION STOPPED
PREVARICATING? SHOULD WE NOT NOW PUT THE INTERESTS OF ALL
AUSTRALIANS AHEAD OF STATE RIGHTS AND PARTY CONSIDERATIONS?
-0-0-0-0-0-0-



Press Statement No. 508
4 June 1975
NEWCASTLE WOMEN'S CENTRE
The Australian Government is negotiating the purchase
of Lysaght's Recreation Centre in Newcastle for use as a community
centre for the women of the Newcastle area.
The Prime Minister said the project had been submitted
by the Hunter Region Working Women's Group. It would be
funded through grants from the Hospital and Health Services
Commission_($ 25,000) the interim committee of the Children's
Commission ($ 42,000) and ' the.* International Women's Year
Committee 41, 2 20). These grants would cover the cost of
the building and essential renovations.
The new centre will enable the Hunter Region Wo-cking
Women's Group to expand. its activities on behalf of women living
and working in Newcastle and surrounding districts. The area
includes many migrant women.
At present the group is using temporary premises in
Newcastle to conduct a women's health centre, through a grant
from the Hospitals and Health Services Commission. The
Attorney-General has agreed to second an officer through the.
Australian Legal Aid Office-to provide legal advice for women
using the centre. It is planned to develop more general
couns-elling and information services for women in the work force,
so as to involve them more in helping to improve their own working
conditions. Since migrant women tend to be exploited in the
work situation, it is hoped to appoint multi-lingual staff to
the centre who can provide both English classes and special
counselling for women unsure of their rights in their jobs and
in the community at large.
Special child care facilities will be provided by the
centre and an officer appointed to help initiate other childhood
services in the Newcastle community. At the same time,
recreational programs will cater for a wide variety of known
interests, and further research will be undertaken to establish
the educational and recreational needs of women in the area.
It is hoped that centres similar to the Newcastle
working women's centre will be established throughout Australia.
CADIBERRL. A. C. T. 



TRANSCRIPT FROM " NATIONAL FARMING NEWS" THURSDAY 5 JUNE 1975
QUESTION: Prime Minister, will the Government definitely
stand behind the reserve price of 25O in the wool market?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly it will do so and it will do so
throughout the 1975/ 76 wool selling season. I am aware of
statements which have been made particularly by the leader of
the National Country Party which are obviously designed to
undermine woolgrowers confidence in the market support
scheme of the Australian Government. I repeat, the decision
by the Government is a firm one, it will apply throughout
the 1975/ 76 wool selling season. I can't imagine what
motivates the Opposition in their efforts to create
uncertainty, presumably an attempt to embarrass the Gove'rnment
and win a few votes is more important to them than
stabilizing Australia's greatest rural industry. They do
neither a service to the wool industry nor a service to
Australia. QUESTION: Sir, at present you are planning some moves
within Cabinet. Could these moves lead to an additional
move to relower the floor price to 2OO
PRIME MINISTER: Not a chanc This decision was made by
the members of the present Minister and whatever changes may
be made in portfolios they will remain the Ministry and in
any case I can beat the gun to this extent by saying that
Senator Wriedt, the Leader of the Government in the Senate
will certainly remain the minister for Agriculture. He has
my confidence. I believe he is entitled to have the
confidence of woolgrowers, woolbuyers and the whole country.,
QUESTION: Cables into our office this morning from overseas
indicated that if Mr Hayden was appointed Treasurer, that as
he supported 2OO before he may make a new move in this
direction. Could you kill that rumour?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no chance of Mr Hayden making this
but you are asking me to comment on newspaper reports on
speculation in part. NOW I have told you the position, there
is no change in that position.
QUESTION: 25O for the full season?
PRIME MINISTER: For the third time, for the full season,
throughout the 1975/ 76 wool selling season. Make no
mistake about it. 



Press Statement No. 509
June 1975
NEW MINISTRY
The Prime Minister tonight announced that he had
recommended to His Excellency the Governor-General, Sir John
Kerr, changes in his ministry consequent upon the resignation
of Mr Lance Barnard from the House of Representatives and the
appointment of Mr J. M. Riordan to the Executive Council.
The Governor-General has agreed to the proposed
changes and to an announcement. Sir John has indicated that
he proposes to swear Ministers in their new portfolios tomorrow
morning at 10.00 a. m.
The Ministry changes will be:-
Dr Cairns, Deputy Prime Minister, becomes Minister for
Environment instead of Treasurer.
Mr Hayden becomes Treasurer instead of Minister for
Social Security.
Senator Douglas McClelland becomes Special Minister of
State instead of Minister for the Media.
Dr Patterson becomes Minister for Northern Australia
instead of Minister for Northern Development an~ d
Minister for the Northern Territory.
Mr Cameron becomes Minister for Science and Consumer
Affairs instead of Minister for Labor and Immigration.
Mr Bowen becomes Minister for Manufacturing Industry
instead of Special Minister of State.
Senator Wheeldon becomes Minister for Social Security
as well as Minister for Repatriation and Compensation.
Mr Johnson becomes Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
instead of Minister for Housing and Construction.
Senator J. R. McClelland becomes Minister for Labor
and Immigration instead of Minister for Manufacturing
Industry. / 2 
' S -2-
Dr Cass becomes Minister for the Media instead of
Minister for Environment.
Senator Cavanagh becomes Minister for Police and Customs
instead of Minister for Aboriginal Affairs.
Mr Morrison becomes Minister for Defence instead of
Minister for Science.
Mr Riordan will be appointed minister for Housing and
Construction. The social welfare and rehabilitation activities of
the Government are to be more closely co-ordinated and
managed under the new arrangements. One Minister, Senator
Wheeldon, will now be responsible for both the Departments
of Social Security and Re. ha-ilitatinn and Compensation.
In addition to this significant change, the Social
Welfare Commission will, under later legislation, be
abolished and the work of the Commission will be carried
out by a bureau within the Department of Social Security.
Senator Wheeldon will also take over from the
Special Minister of State the co-ordination of the
rehabilitation functions and the National Advisory Council
for the Handicapped. For the present, Mr Hayden will have responsibility
for the continuing negotiations with the States over Medibank
and will have access to the Department of Social Security
about policy matters affecting Medibank.
In other moves to rationalise and co-ordinate
administrative functions, Mr Whitlam said the Department
of Northern Development and the Department of the Northe-rn
Territory would become the Department of Northern Australia
under Dr Patterson. The Government's industrial relations policies in
the private and public sectors will be more closely linked.
by giving responsibility in both areas to one Minister.
Senator J. McClelland as well as being Minister for Labor
and Immigration will also assist the Prime Minister on
Public Service matters.
The acquisition, leasing and disposal of land and
buildings in'Australia on behalf of the Australian Government
are important activities in the pursuit of the Government's
urban and regional development policies. It therefore has
been decided to transfer these functions to the Department
of Urban and Regional Development. The Department of
Services and Property continues to retain the control and
management functions of the property. / 3 
-3
The Minister for Urban and Regional Development
will become responsible for the Australian Housing Corporation
Act 1975 passed recently by the Parliament. Under later
legislation, the Cities Commission will be abolished, its
functions to be carried out by the Department of Urban and
Regional Development. The Australian Industry Development Corporation
Act now administered by the Treasury will be transferred
to the administration of the Minister for Manufacturing
Industry. The Department of Science will now be the
Department of Science and Consumer Affairs.
The Australian Universities Commission and the
Commission on Advanced Education will be merged under
legislation to be introduced.
In other changes the Department of Services and
Property will take over the Government purchasing function
now exercised by the Department of Special Minister of
State. The Postmaster-General will be responsible for
the administration of the Telecommunications Commission
and the Postal Commission. The Australian Film Commission
to be established under legislation recently passed by the
Parliament will come under the Prime Minister's own administration.
The Department of Minerals and Energy will take over responsibility
for the Minerals Research Laboratories and the Solar Energy
Studies Unit. 



STATEM'ENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
THURSDAY, 5 JUNE 1975
W'HEN I LAST REPORTED TO THE PARLIAMENT ON THE
GOVERNMENT'S ACHIEVEMENTS AT THE END OF THE SITTINGS
IN DECEMBER 1974, I STRESSED THE CONTINUING IMPORTANCE
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS. I EMPHASISED THAT WE
WOULD PRESS AHEAD WITH * OUR PROGRAMS IN FULFILMENT OF
THE UNDERTAKINGS WE HAD ' GIVEN TO THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE. THE PEOPLE HAD TWICE ENDORSED THOSE PROGRAMS
AT THE ELECTIONS OF 1972 AND 1974. THEY HAD TWICE
CONFIRMED THE TRUST PLACED IN us, THE LAST SIX MONTHSTHIS
FIRST SESSIONAL PERIOD OF 1975 -HAVE BROUGHT US
CLOSER TO THE GREAT GOALS WE PROCLAIMED. FOR ALL OUR
DIFFICULTIES, FOR ALL THE DISTRACTIONS AND DIVERSIONS
WE HAVE FACED IN THIS PLACE AND OUTSIDE, FOR ALL THE
PROPAGANDA OF OUR OPPONENTSFOR ALL THE OBSTRUCTION
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT AND VESTED INTERESTS, FOR ALL
THE DENIGRATION OF THE PRESS, THIS HAS BEEN A PERIOD
OF GREAT AND POSITIVE ACHIEVEMENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. THIS IS VERY MUCH A TIME TO KEEP THOSE
ACHIEVEMENTS IN MIND, TO PUT THE RECORD IN PERSPECTIVEP
TO REFLECT ON THE BASIC STRENGTH AND PROSPERITY OF THE
NATION, THE UNDERLYING STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY, THE REAL
GAINS WE HAVE MADE IN SOCIAL REFORM AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
AND IN THE LIVING STANDARDS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. o/ 2 
THE LAST SIX MO NTHS HAV E CE RTA INLY NOT BEEN
EASY, WHEN HAS THERE BEEN A TIME WHEN THE TASK OF
G OVERNMENT WAS EASY? WHERE * IS THERE A COUNTRY WHERE
GOVERNMENT IS EASY? WE BEGAN THE YEAR IN THE
AFTERMATH OF THE DARWIN CYCLONE THE GREATEST
NATURAL DISASTER AUSTRALIA HAS KNOWN, IT WAS
FOLLOWED BY A SECOND CALAMIlTY * IN HOBART INVOLV* ING
APPALLING SOCIAL DISRUPTION AND LOSS OF LIFE. THE
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONS* E TO THESE CALAMITIES WAS PROMPT
AND GENEROUS. IKNOW THAT ALL HONOURABLE MEMBERS
WILL JOIN ME IN A TRIBUTE TO THE NATURAL DISASTER
ORGANISATION FOR ITS HANDLING OF THE DARWIN CRISIS.-
AND TO THE DARWIN PEOPLE THEMSELVES FOR THEIR FORTITUDE
AND UNDAUNTED SPIRIT. WE IMMEDIATELY ESTABLISHED A
DARWIN RECONSTRUCTION COMMISSION AND ENTRUSTED IT
WITH THE MASSIVE TASK OF REBUILDING THE CITY. WE AGREED
TO ESTABLISH A JOINT TASMAN BRIDGE RESTORATION COMMISSION.
WE HAVE COMMITTED MORE THAN $ 58 MILLION TO THE DARWIN
RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM AND AN INITIAL GRANT OF $ 6 MILLION
FOR HOBART. I NEED HARDLY STRESS THAT IN TIMES OF
ECONOMIC DIFFICULTY, DISASTERS OF THIS MAGNITUDE PLACE
NEW AND UNPRECEDENTED DEMANDS ON THE NATION'I S MATERIAL
AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES. UNSTINTING AND UNQUESTIONING
THOUGH OUR RESPONSE HAS BEEN,. THE DARWIN AND HOBART
DISASTERS HAVE CERTAINLY NOT MADE IT EASIER TO CONTEND
WITH THE ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES FACING AUSTRALIADIFFICULTIES
WE SHARE WITH ALL OTHER COMPARABLE COUNTRIES. 
I' 4Ei CAN, HOWEVER, TAKE HEART FROM SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT
ALREADY AP1PARENT IN THE ECONOMY. OF COURSE IT'S NOT A
TIME FOR COMPLACENCY; THERE IS STILL A NEED FOR STEADY
JUDGMENT AND A CALM, RATIONAL APPROACH TO OUR DIFFICULTIES.
BUT THERE IS GOOD REASON TO BELIEVE THAT A RECOVERY IS
UNDERWAY. CONSUMER CONFIDENCE, REFLECTED IN RISING RETAIL
SALES AND HIGHER DISPOSABLE INCOMES, HAS SHOWN SIGNIFICANT
GAINS. PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN THE BASIC AREAS OF THE ECONOMY
IS RISING. THE IMPORTANT THING TO REMEMBER IS THAT THE
GOVERNMENT' S POLICIES HAVE PUT MONEY IN THE POCKETS OF
AUSTRALIANS. PEOPLE ARE MORE PROSPEROUS TODAY THAN THEY
HAVE EVER BEEN, li-0HENEVER WE HEAR CRITICISM OF THIS GOVERNMENT'S
POLICIES REMEMBER THIS SIMPLE FACT: THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
HAVE NEVER BEEN BETTER OFF BETTER OFF IN THE MONEY THEY
HAVE TO SPEND,, BETTER OFF IN THEIR REAL INCOMES, BETTER OFF
IN THE RANGE OF SERVICES AND OPPORTU11ITIES AVAILABLE TO. THEM
FROM THIS GOVERNMENT'S AGENCIES AND PROGRAMS. SINCE
DECEMBER 1972 INCOMES OF WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS HAVE GROWN
MUCH FASTER THAN THE COST OF LIVING. AVERAGE MINIMUM WEEKLY
AWARD RATES FOR MEN HAVE INCREASED BY 53. PE: R CENT; FOR WOMEN
BY NO LESS THAN 755 PER CENT. REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS
AFTER TAX FOR ALL WAGE AND SALARY( EARNERS HAVE INCREASED
By 7.3 PER CENT SINCE THIS GOVERNMENT CAME TO OFFICE. IN
ADDITION, WE HAVE TACKLED THE GREAT AND DIFFICULT PROBLEM
OF WAGE INDEXATION. IN ITS HISTORIC JUDGMENT OF 30 APRIL
THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION ACCEPTED THE
GOVERNMENT'S CA'SE FOR A RESTORATIO14 OF QUARTERLY COST OF
LIVING ADJUSTMENTS, WIITH REASON AND GOODWILL WE CAN MAKE
THIS REFORM WORK. -Jf 
-4JPROPERLY
APPLIED, IT CAi4 BRING GREATER BENEFITS AND GREATER
MATERIAL SECURITY TO ALL WAGE EARNERS AND CONTRIBUTE TO THE
SOLUTION OF OUR LONG-TERM ECONOMIC PROBLEMS,
FOR ALL THAT, WE DO NOT SEE REAL LIVING STANDARDS
SOLELY IN MONiEY TERMS, WE HAVE NEVER DONE SO, THE REAL
PROSPERITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE LIES INCREASINGLY IN THE
QUALITY OF THE SERVICES GOVERNMENTS PROVIDE FOR THE WHOLE
COMMUNITY, THAT HIGHER ORDER OF PROSPERITY THAT WIDER AND
DEEPER COMMITMENT TO THE PEOPLE S GOOD DEPENDS ON THE
SUCCESS OF OUR SOCIAL PROGRAMS, flY GOVERNMENT HAS GIVEN
PRIMACY TO THIS PARLIAMENT AS THE CHIEF INSTRUMENT OF SOCIAL
REFORM. OUR PROGRAMS ARE ESSENTIALLY LEGISLATIVE PROGRAMS;
THE MEASURE OF THEIR SCOPE AND IMPORTANCE CAN BE SEEN IN THE
NUMBER OF BILLS PASSED THROUGH THIS PARLIAMENT. OUR
LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM il OUR FIRST TWO YEARS SURPASSED ALL
RECORDS SINCE FEDERATION 254 BILLS INTRODUCED IN 1973,
229 IN 1974. SO FAR THIS YEAR, TO THE CLOSE OF BUSINESS
LAST NIGHT, PARLIAMENT HAS SAT FOR 1ZI HOURS AND A TOTAL
OF 126 BILLS HAS BEEN INTRODUCED. IT IS A FORMIDABLE
ACHIEVEMENT, I THINK IT PROPER TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE
OPPOSITION, UNDER ITS NEW LEADERSHIP, HAS BEHAVED WITH
GREATER DECORUM IN THIS PARLIAMENT THAN PREVIOISLY, THIS HAS
CERTAINLY MEANT A MORE RATIONAL AND MORE ORDERLY DESPATCH
OF BUSINESS, IT DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE OPPOSITION HAS
ABANDONED ITS TACTICS OF OBSTRUCTION. IT DOES MEAN THAT
THE PROCEEDINGS OF THIS HOUSE HAVE BEEN LESS DEMEANING TO
THE REPUTATION OF PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY, 
WE HAVE SEEN THIS YEAR A NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT
GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS BROUGHT TO FRUITION. OTHERS HAVE
BEEN BROUGHT TO THE POINT OF IMPLEMENTATION. THEIR
BENEFITS WILL SOON BE FLOWING TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE'
AND THE PARTICULAR GROUPS WHO NEED THEM THE Low-
INCOME EARNERS, THE CHILDREN.-THE SICK, THE* HANDICAPPED.
RADICAL AND ENDURING SOCIAL REFORM IS NOT ACHIEVED
OVERNIGHT; IT IS NOT ACHIEVED BY SPENDING MORE
MONEY, THOUGH MONEY IS CERTAINL Y NEEDED. IT REQUIRES
NEW INSTITUTIONS, NEW SCALES AND PRIORITIES, NEW
SOCIAL ATTITUDES.-NEW POLITICAL. GUIDELINES, NEW EFFORTS
AT CO-OPERATION, NEW MEN AND WOMEN IN POSITIONS OF
AUTHORITY. THIS PROCESS CAN BE DIFFICULT AND PAINFULLY
PROTRACTED, BUT EVENTUALLY THE RESULTS WILL SHOW$
WE HAVE SEEN IT IN THE CREATION OF MEDIBANK, NOW THE
LAW OF THE LAND, A GREAT PIONEERING REFORM WHICH THE
RELUCTANT STATES HAVE BEEN DRIVEN INEXORABLY TO ACCEPT,
BECAUSE THEY KNOW THAT THEY THEMSELVES WILL BENEFIT
AND ABOVE ALL THAT THE PEOPLE WILL BENEFIT. WHAT A LESSON
OUR OPPONENTS HAVE LEARNED1 AFTER ALL THE-OBSTRUCTION
IN THIS PARLIAMENT, AFTER ALL THE ATTEMPTS TO DELAY
THE MEDIBANK BILLS NOT JUST THE BASIC LEGISLATION WHICH
THE PEOPLE SPECIFICALLY ENDORSED, BUT THE ANCILLARY BILLS
TO ESTABLISH AND FINANCE THE PROGRAM THE ANTI-LABOR
STATES ARE NOW SEEKING TO JOIN THE MEDIBANK SCHEME$
AND IF THEIR ADVERTISEMENTS CAN BE BELIEVED, EVEN
TAKING SOME OF THE CREDIT FOR IT, Bs .1/ 6 
-6-
ONE OF THE THEMES OF ALL OUR REFORMS HAS BEEN TO
ASSERT THE PRINCIPLE OF COMPETITION FREE AND FAIR COMPETITION
IN A MIXED ECONOMY, PRODUCTIVE COMPETITION BETWEEN PRIVATE
AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISE. WE HAVE SEEN THE BENEFITS OF SUCH
COMPETITION IN THE AIRLINES AND THE BANKS, WE SHALL EXTEND IT
TO OTHER FIELDS. IN THE FACE OF AN UNSCRUPULOUS AND
CONTINUING CAMPAIGN OF MISREPRESENTATIONj WE HAVE PASSED
'. EGISLATION IN THIS HOUSE TO ESTABLISH AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INSURANCE CORPORATION. IT WILL PROVIDE THE WIDEST POSSIBLt
COVER FOR HOMES AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE PREMIUMS AND OFFER
A WIDE RANGE OF INSURANCE SERVICES. WHAT PUBLIC INITIATIVE
CAN ACHIEVE IN HEALTH INSURANCE IT CAN ACHIEVE IN FAIR
COMPETITION IN GENERAL INSURANCE.
WE HAVE DEVELOPED AND EXTENDED OUR LEGAL AID SERVICE.
SIX REGIONAL OFFICES OF THE AUSTRALIAN LEGAL AID OFFICE HAVE
BEEN OPENED THIS YEAR AND MORE THAN 60,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
ASSISTED. WE HAVE SET UP AN AUSTRALIAN HOUSING CORPORATION
TO TAKE ACTION IN AREAS WHERE THE EXISTING HOUSING SY( STEM
IS UNABLE TO MEET EXISTING HOUSING NEEDS; ALREADY THIS YEAR
WE HAVE FUNDED THE CONSTRUCTION BY STATE HOUSING AUTHORITIES
OF 13,580 HOMES FOR LOW-INCOME EARNERS 5,000 MORE THAN THE
NUMBER BUILT IN 1973-741, WE HAVE ESTABLISHED THE AUSTRALIAN
FILM COMMISSION TO PROMOTE LOCAL FILM PRODUCTION, THESE ARE
ALL AREAS HOUSING, MEDIBANK, GENERAL INSURANCE, LEGAL AID,
FILM PRODUCTION W1HERE EXISTING SERVICES HAVE FAILED TO MEET
DEMONSTRABLE HUMAN OR SOCIAL NEEDS, OR WHERE COMPETITION IS
LIKELY TO BRING NEW BENEFITS TO THE CONSUMER, 17 
-7-
LET ME GIVE A FURTHER EXAMPLE IN A FIELD
WHERE PROGRESS THIS YEAR HAS BEEN REMARKABLE. I REFER TO
TRANSPORT. IN MY LAST STATEMENT OF THIS KIND I MENTIONED
OUR MASSIVE CONTRIBUTION TO NATIONAL AND URBAN ROADS
PROGRAMS. THOSE PROGRAMS ARE WELL IN HAND. THE OUTSTANDINGAREA
OF PROGRESS THIS YEAR, HOWEVER, HAS BEEN THE
RAILWAYS, SUBURBAN COMMUTERS, IN SYDNEY ESPECIALLY, MAY
WONDER AT THAT STATEMENT. THEIR OVERCROWDED AND
INCREASINGLY INADEQUATE RAIL SERVICES CONTINUE TO DECLINE
IN FREQUENCY AND QUALITY WHILE THE STATES REFUSE OUR
OFFERS, REPEATEDLY MADE, TO ASSUME FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
FOR RAIL SYSTEMS AND RAISE THEIR PRESENT ATROCIOUS STANDARDS.
BUT IN THE AREA OF NATIONAL RAILWAYS WE HAVE SEEN
GREAT AND PERMANENT DEVELOPMENT. 
-8-
MORE THAN ANY OF ITS PREDECESSORS, THE GOVERNMENT
HAS RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR A NATIONAL APPROACH TO
RAILWAYS;' ' E HAVE RECOGNISED THAT THE RAILWAYS CANNOT
EFFECTIVELY SOLVE THEIR PROBLEMS WITHIN THE PRESENT
FRAGMENTED SYSTEM, IT WAS THIS RECOGNITION THAT PROMPTED
MY OFFER IN MY 1972 POLICY SPEECH TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE RAILWAYS OF ANY STATES PREPARED TO TRANSFER THEM.
DURING THIS SESSION THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS
COMMISSION BILL, THE RAILWAYS ( SOUTH AUSTRALIA) BILL AND THE
RAILWAYS ( TASMANIA) BILL HAVE BEEN PASSED, FOLLOWING
APPROPRIATE LEGISLATION IN THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN AND
TASMANIAN PARLIAMENTS THEY WILL ALLOW THE TRANSFER OF
THE NON-METROPOLITAN SOUTH AUSTRALIAN AND THE TASMANIAN
RAILWAYS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THIS IS THE
FIRST MAJOR STEP TOWARD THE CREATION OF A TRULY NATIONAL
RAILWAY. THE ANR WILL HAVE THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE
AND OPERATIONAL POWERS NECESSARY TO CONSOLIDATE INTO A
SINGLE SYSTEM THE COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS AND THE
TRANSFERRED STATE RAILWAYS, ,, 1/ 9 
-9-
WE HAVE DONE MUCH TO RELIEVE THE SHORT-TERM
PROBLEMS OF RAILWAYS, THERE IS A DESPERATE LACK OF
MODERN INTERSYSTEM ROLLING STOCK, WE HAVE INSTITUTED
A PROGRAM TO PURCHASE MODERN HIGH-SPEED WAGONS WHICH
WILL BE AVAILABLE FOR LEASE TO THE STATES, THIS PROGRAM
PROVIDES FOR THE PURCHASE OF 1,300 WAGONS OVER THE
NEXT TWO YEARS, CONTRACTS HAVE ALREADY BEEN LET FOR
THE FIRST ORDER FOR 500 WAGONS; TENDER DOCUMENTS
ARE BEING PREPARED. FOR AN ADDITIONAL 800 VEHICLES,
AND FINALLY, TO MEET THE CHALLENGE OF MOULDING A TRULY
NATIONAL TRANSPORT SYSTEM INCLUDING THE RAILWAYS AND
OTHER FORMS OF TRANSPORT WE.: HAVE SOUGHT TO RESTORE
THE INTER-STATE COMMISSION SPECIFIED IN SECTION 101 OF
THE CONSTITUTION, 
Two OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE PRESENT SESSION
REFLECT SOMETHING OF THE GOVERNMENT'S FUNDAMENTAL
SOCIAL AND HUMAN PRIORITIES. THE FAMILY LAW BILL
A MONUMENT TO THE FORMER ATTORNEY-GENERAL, NOW
MR JUSTICE MURPHY HAS COMPLETELY REFURBISHED THE
MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE LAWS OF AUSTRALIA AND DONE
AWAY WITH THE MEDIEVAL CONCEPTS OF GUILT AND FAULT.
THE BILL HAS ESTABLISHED A FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
WHICH WILL EXPLORE METHODS OF RECONCILIATION AND PROTECT
THE RIGHTS OF ALL PARTIES IN DIVORCE PROCEEDINGS IN AN
ATMOSPHERE OF DIGNITY AND HUMANITY. THIS WAS A
MAJOR SOCIAL REFORM, I AM PROUD THAT IT WAS BROUGHT
FORWARD UNDER THIS GOVERNMENT. IN THE SAME SPIRIT WE
INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO ESTABLISH A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION.
THAT LEGISLATION HAS NOW PASSED BOTH HOUSES. THE
COMMISSION WILL ADMINISTER A COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF
SERVICES FOR CHILDREN PRE-SCHOOL, DAY CARE, PART-TIME
AND EMERGENCY CARE SERVICES, AFTER SCHOOL AND HOLIDAY
PROJECTS. APPROXIMATELY 165,000 CHILDREN HAVE BEEN
CATERED FOR UNDER THIS NEW PROGRAM. I dil 
-11-
THE DOCUMENTS I SHALL PRESENTLY TABLE AND
SEEK LEAVE TO INCORPORATE IN HANSARD SET OUT THE FULL
SCOPE AND DETAIL OF THE GOVERNMENT' S ACHIEVEMENTS
DURING THE PAST SIX MONTHS. THAT RECORD SPEAKS FOR
ITSELF. W4HAT IT DOES NOT CONVEY IS THE TRUE NATURE
OF THE OPPOSITION'S BEHAVIOUR IN THIS PERIOD. IT
WOULD BE PLEASING TO BE ABLE TO REPORT THAT THE
OPPOSITION'S NEW DECORUM IN THIS PLACE HAS BEEN MATCHED
BY SANER AND MORE CONCILIATORY ATTITUDES TO THE
GOVERNMENT'S LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM. WE HAVE HAD NOTHING
OF THE SORT. BEHIND THE FACADE OF REASON AND
RESPONSIBILITY THE FAMILIAR CAMPAIGN OF OBSTRUCTION
HAS CONTINUED. OUR OVERDUE REDISTRIBUTION PROPOSALS,
OUR BILL TO MODERNISE AND SIMPLIFY THE ELECTORAL LAWS,
OUR BILLS TO ABOLISH APPEALS TO THE PRIVY COUNCIL,
TO ESTABLISH A SUPERIOR COURT OF AUSTRALIA, TO DEAL
WITH LURKS AND MALPRACTICE IN THE SECURITIES INDUSTRY,
TO ESTABLISH A GOVERNMENT PURCHASING COMMISSION, TO PROVIDE
SIMULTANEOUS ELECTIONS FOR THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ALL THESE HAVE BEEN REJECTED OR
DELAYED OR UNACCEPTABLY AMENDED IN THE SENATE. AND OF
COURSE THE CAMPAIGN OF OBSTRUCTION HAS BEEN PURSUED
BEYOND THIS PARLIAMENT IN THE COURTS AND IN THE STATES.
ONCE AGAIN WE SAW THE FLAUNTING OF AN ESTABLISHED
CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION WHEN THE N. S. W. GOVERNMENT
REFUSED TO APPOINT A SENATOR OF THE GOVERNMENT PARTY TO
FILL THE VACANCY CAUSED BY SENATOR MURPHY'S RESIGNATION. 
-12-
WE HAVE SEEN THE SAME STATE GOVERNMENT PURSUE ITS
PELLIFOGGING TACTICS IN BLOCKING APPOINTMENTS* TO
FEDERAL BODIES AND REFUSING TO CO-OPERATE IN SUCH
THINGS AS A SOIL CONSERVATION PROGRAM, WE HAVE
SEEN OUR LEGISLATION PERSISTENTLY CHALLENGED IN THE
COURTS ESPECIALLY THOSE PARTS OF IT MOST LIKELY
TO BENEFIT THE WEAK, THE UNORGANISED, THE
UNREPRESENTED SECTIONS OF SOCIETY,
I LEAVE THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE TO JUDGE THESE
TACTICS FOR THEMSELVES, THEY WILL NOT DETER US FROM
OUR GOALS. THE PAST SIX MONTHS HAVE SHOWN WHAT A
DETERMINED GOVERNMENT CAN ACHIEVE IN THE FACE OF
SENSELESS AND SUSTAINED OBSTRUCTION. DESPITE OUR
DIFFICULTIES IN THE SENATE, DESPITE THE BLIND UNREASON
OF THE ANTI-LABOR STATES, DESPITE THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
WITH WHICH EVERY NATION HAS TO CONTEND, WE HAVE BROUGHT
NEW AND PERMANENT REFORMS TO THE STATUTE BOOKS OF
THE NATION; WE HAVE CONTINUED TO ENHANCE AUSTRALIA'S
STANDING IN THE WORLD; WE HAVE PRODUCED A SOCIETY
WHICH HAS NEVER ENJOYED GREATER INDIVIDUAL
PROSPERITY, GREATER OPPORTUNITIES OR GREATER PROSPECTS
FOR THE FUTURE, 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 510
6 June 1975 3
' I
International Women's Year Grants
The Prime Minister, . Mr Whitlam, announced today
further funds and assistance for special activities during
International. Women's Year. This is the third in a series
of grants approved over the last six months and represents
a total commitment so far of over one million dollars ($ 1,080,582).
Mr Whitlam said that he had approved the grants on
the advice of the Australian National Advisory Committee for
International Women's Year which has the responsibility for
developing themes and programs for the year which are of
benefit to all the women in Australia.
The grants are part of the overall program for
International Women's Year and reflect the Government's
intention to make the Year one of substantial progress for
women in Australia.
HEALTH WELFARE
National Youth Council of Australia
booklet for schoolgirls about to enter
the workforce
Ione Fett publication concerning
research into medical graduates
National Council for the Single Mother
and Her Child Conference
W. A. A. C. ( NSW VIC.) Conference and
booklet
Federation of Italian Emigrant Workers
and their Families. VIC special
issue of " NUOVA PAESE" on women workers 10,500.00 2,000.00 3,150.00
10,000.00 1,790.00
Women's Community Aid Association, Q'land..
grant to assist with furnishing and
providing facilities for women's'centre 2,000.00
I
Jj,&gt; A U STIAIA. L
PRIME MINISTER
I
7-
7-11 
Victoria Blechynden John Beaton
film on Cystitis
Council for the Single Mother and her
Child film about accommodation
available to the single mother
Dorothy Buckland, N. S. W. projects
with groups of migrant women in
Sydney
Nardine Women's Refuge, W. A.
interim grant to cover running costs.
Women and Madness Conference Committee
Conference
WEL,( Qld) grant to send delegate
to an international conference on
disabled women
Darwin Women's Centre establishment
of crisis counselling and women's
centre Union of Australian Women, N. S. W.
booklet for women workers
Women's Theatre Group ( Vic) to
extend their activities and perform
in such cities as Wollongong and
Newcastle Australian Council of Salaried and
Professional Associationis Trade
Union Women's Resources Centre 16,164 .00
350.00
1,000.00 4,000.00 6,100.00 1,742.00
16,563.00 3,800.00
10,000.00 40,000.00
CREATIVITY Irene Greenwood Western Australia
research assistance for book about
history of women in Australia
Anwyl Burfein, Qld to establish
women's printing workshop 5,000.00 4,000.00
EDUCATION Australian Library Promotion Council,
National to print and distribute
pamphlet containing information about
feminist literature1,500.00
Women's Resources Group, Wattle Park
establishment of a women's
resources centre at Wattle Park
Teachers'Cle
WORK 
Workshops to develop non-sexist school
material Women ' s Studies Group, Flinders University
of S. A. to provide resources
for women involved in women's studies
courses National Research Program to collect
all available information about women
in Australia using traditional and
innovative methods
Wren Publishing Pty Ltd., Melbourne
printing of non-sexist children's
books-
Melbourne State College Committee on
International Women's Year weeklong
seminar-to be held at the College
Lorraine Rogers, Adult Education Board,
Tasmania program designed to reach
isolated women
Women's Movement Children's Literature
Co-operative Ltd. printing posters for
distribution through schools 20000. 00
13,350.00 08,000.00 20,000.00 7,000.00 2,782.00
12,580.00
COMMUNITY ATTITUDES
Women Active Politically, N. S. W.
media workshop weekend
Australian Local Government Women's
Association, Victoria Conference/
visit of Shulamit Aloni
Postmaster General's Department
special supplement on women in Post
Office News and posters for display
throughout Australian post offices
Salisbury College of Advanced Education
series of conferences
involving local women
International Women's Year Committee,
Qld celebrations held on International
Women's Day
National Council of Women, A. C. T.
celebrations held on International
Women's Day
Country Women's Association, S
series of seminars to be held in rural
areas throughout S. A. Designed to
provide information and increase 604.00
4,500.00 6,015.00 2,000.00 69.00
196.00
awareness, awareness 4 1409# 00 
-4-
COM: kMUNITY ATTITUDES ( cont)
Portia Club, Qld series of conferences
and workshops500.00
T. V. series on human reproduction
( investment) 100.000.00
ESA Women International, Qid.
weekend seminar 350.00
WEL ( Tas). North West Branch weekend
conference involving local women
designed to form working groups 450.0,0
Kate Moore Australian Council for
Overseas Aid research into the role
of women in development and aid organisations 974.40
Australian Church Women, Tasmania
grant to send delegate to National
Conference on Women 150.00
Y. W. C. A. ( Melbourne) national photography
exhibition .43,400.00
Castley ( 47 6489) or John Gavin ( 47 0839). 



NQ DATE
M34 8 June 1975
FRENCH ffUCLEAR TUiSTING
The Prime M1inister and Acting Minister for Foreign
,. ffairs, rlr Whitlam, said today that the Government had reason
to believe that France had carried out an underground nuclear
test on Fangataufa atoll in the Pacific Ocean on 6 June.
1" Ir Whitlam said that the Australian Government wished
t; o reiterate its opposition to all forms of nuclear weapons
testing by any state. The Australian Government continued to
urge the nuclear powers to reach agreement on a comprehensive
test ban. At the same time the Australian Government noted that
the French Government was refraining from conducting nuclear
weapons tests in the atmoshpere in the Pacific region. The
Australian Government hoped that the French Government would
continue to refrain from further atmoshperic nuclear tests which
in the past years have given rise to considerable concern in
ikustralia and other countries. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT OPENING OF
OZANAM VILLA HOSTEL, LISMORE
8 JUNE, 1975 ^ I.
YOUR LORDSHIP, ON, DOUG ANTHONY, MR. MAYOR,
REVEREND CLERGY AND SISTERS, MEMBERS AND FRIENDS OF THE
SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
IT GIVES ME GREAT PLEASURE TO BE BACK IN
LISMORE AGAIN AND TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH ANOTHER
ST. VINCENT DE PAUL INITIATIVE. IN FEBRUARY LAST YEAR
I WAS ASKED TO OPEN THE OZAmAM HOME IN CANBERRA AND
JUST TWO WEEKS AGO, MY WIFE AND I ATTENDED THE OPENING
OF ST. BEDE'S IN HURSTVILLE,
IN CANBERRA, THE BLESSING WAS GIVEN BY
BISHOP CAHILL AN EASY NAME TO REMEMBER IN NEW SOUTH ' ALES.
AT ST. BEDE'S THE BLESSING CAME FROM BISHOP CREMIN
ANOTHER GOOD, EASY IRISH NAME. AND BEING A CHARITABLE
MAN, BISHOP CREMIN FELT HE SHOULD WARN ME ABOUT LISMORE.
HE TOLD ME THAT BISHOP FARRELLY HAD BEEN SUCCEEDED BY
HIS LORDSHIP BISHOP SATTERTHWAITE, WHO MUST HAVE ONE OF
THE MOST DIFFICULT ECCLESIASTICAL NAMES IN THE COUNTRY
IF NOT THE WORLD. ,/ 2 
2.
I MUST SAY I WAS SO INTRIGUED ' Y THE NAME
THAT I LOOKED IT UP INi A BOOK CALLED SI, R NAt OFl UT i E
UNITED KIGDDOM., THAT WAS AFTER I COULDN'T FIND IT IN
THE BOOK OF SAINS., ANYWAY, I LEARNED THAT IT'S OF
SCANDINAVIAN ORIGIN AND MEANS " THE HILL PASTURE CLEARING".
WHICH IS A QUITE PROPER NAME FOR SOMEONE WITH A FLOCK
TO TEND, -BISHOP CREMIN WAS SAYING TO ME THAT WHEN
HE WAS DOING POSTGRADUATE STUDIES IN ROME,
BISHOP SATTERTHWAITE LED A CHARMED LIFE, HE WAS
NEVER CALLED ON TO SAY ANYTHING BECAUSE NOBODY COULD
PRONOUNCE HIS NAME. I DON'T KNOW WHETHER HE MIGHT
LIKE TO CHANGE PLACES WITH ME.
TWO WEEKS AGO AT ST. BEDE'S IN HURSTVILLE
I WAS STRUCK BY THE GENEROSITY OF THE STATE PRESIDENT
OF THE ST. VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY, BILL FITZGERALD.
NOT ONLY DID HE PRESENT ME WITH A BOOK ILLUSTRATING
THE PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN BY CATHOLIC CARE FOR THE AGED,
BUT HE REMARKED ON THE SENSE OF PARTNERSHIP WHICH HAS
GROWN UP BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND CHARITABLE
ORGANISATIONS IN TOGETHER IDENTIFYING AND SERVING THOSE
IN THE COMMUNITY WHO NEED OUR ATTENTION AND OUR CARE,
1 / 3 
3.
IT IS A VITAL PARTNERSHIP AND) I APPRECIATE THAT
COOPERATION, 11TS TANGIBLE RESUJLTS, SUCH AS HOMES
LIKE THIS ONE, W/ ILL STAND AND SERVE THE NEEDS OF
GENERATIONS OF AUSTRALIANS WHO DESERVE TO DE LOOKED AFTER.
PEOPLE ARE ALW'AYS ASKING WHEIRE THEIR TAXES
GO, WHERE ALL THE MONEY IS BEING SPENT. IT IS EASY
TO JUSTIFY EXPENDITURE ON OBVIOUS THINGS LIK( E EDUCATION
AND HEALTH FACILITIES. ON PURELY ECONOMIC GROUNDS THE
INVESTMENT BRINGS EXCELLENT DIVIDENDS FOR OUR SOCIETY
AS A WHOLE. BUT THE REAL HUMANITY OF ANY SOCIETY [ S SEEN
TrHROUGH THE WAY IT BOTHERS TO TREAT ITS OL-DER PEOPLE,
PEOPLE W. 1HO HAVE RETIRED, HAVING( 5 GIVEN THEIR WORKING
LIVES AND QUITE FREQUENTLY THEIR HEALTH, NOT TO0 MENTION
THEIR SONS AND DAUGHTERS,, TO THE SERVICE OF THEIR
COMMUNITY AND THEIR COUNTRY, EXPENDITURE ON THE NEEDS
OF THESE PEOPLE CAN NEVER BE EXPECTED TO SHOW RETURNS
IN MATERIAL TERMS. i v A 
IT'S PRECISELY THAT SORT OF EXPENDITURE
WHERE THE COMMUNITY SHOWS HOW I-HUMANE IT REALLY IS.
WHERE GOVERNMENTS SHOW HOW MUCH THEY CARE. THESE
ARE THE AREAS WHERE TIME AND AGAIN THE ST, VINCENT
DE PAUL SOCIETY HELPS BRIDGE THE VERY REAL GAP
BETWEEN THE HAVES AND THE HAVE-NOTS IN OUR SOCIETY,
THESE ARE THE AREAS THAT CONCERN MY GOVERNMENT,
THESE ARE THE VERY AREAS AT PRESENT UNDER CHALLENGE
IN OUR COURTS, SOME TWENTY YEARS AGO, SIR ROBERT MENZIES
INTRODUCED DIRECT FEDERAL SUBSIDIES FOR AGED PERSONS
HOMES, IT BEGAN AS A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR SUBSIDY.
WHEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED IN DECEMBER 1972
THE LEVEL OF SUBSIDY WAS 1'! E HAVE
INCREASED IT SUBSTANTIALLY SINCE THEN, MOST RECENTLY
LATE LAST YEAR, WHEN WE RAISED IT TO A $ 4 DIRECT
FEDERAL SUBSIDY FOR EVERY ONE DOLLAR SPENT. THIS
OZANAM VILLA HOSTEL, AMONG MANY OTHERS, BENEFITED
FROM THAT DECISION, IT HAS BEEN ABLE TO ATTRACT A
MAXIMUM SUBSIDY OF $ 470,538 FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
IN ALL, THIS LISMORE HOME HAS HAD $ 601,267 IN FEDERAL
GRANTS, DIRECT GRANTS. IT IS ONE OF 16 ST. VINCENT
DE PAUL HOMES IN NEW SOUTH WALES ACCOMMODATING 565 PEOPLE
AND ATTRACTING DIRECT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GRANTS OF
$ 2,998,142, 
BUT WE'-C AINNOT AFFORD TO TAKE-SUCHI THINGS
FOR GRANTED, BECAUSE RIGHT NOW THERE ARE HIGH COURT
CHALLENGES WHICH CAST DOUBT ON THE RIGHT OF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO PAY MONEY DIRECTLY TO CHARITABLE
ORGANISATIONS FOR AGED PERSONS HOMES AND HOSTELS,
IT ALSO AFFECTS OTHER VITAL COMMUNITY-ORIENTED SERVICES
WHICH ARE SUBSIDISED, RANGING FROM MEALS ON WHEELS TO
THE BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE, SO MANY THINGS WE TAKE
FOR GRANT. ED AND WHICH SUCCESSIVE FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS
HAVE EITHER INITIATED OR HELPED SUSTAIN,
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT SCHEMES INVOLVING
QUITE COLOSSAL AMOUNTS OF MONEY, SCHEMES DESIGNED
TO STREAMLINE THE PROVISION OF VITAL COMMUNITY SERVICES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, SCHEMES IN WHICH ALL THE CHURCHES
HAVE A REAL INVOLVEMENT, THE ST, VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY
IN PARTICULAR IS CONCERNED WITH THE PROVISION OF SERVICES
RANGING FROM CARE OF THE HANDICAPPED TO SHELTER FOR
THE HOMELESS, ALL OF WHICH DESERVE AND GET DIRECT
FEDERAL SUBSIDIES. 1 6/ 6 
THE CONTENTrI ON ADVANC: ED BY TH OSE CHALLENGINC;
US IN THE COURTS IS THAT THIS MONEY OUGHT TO D; E DOLED
OUT TO THE INDIVIDUAL STATES WHICH CAN IN TURN DOLE
IT OUT TO RECIPIENT COMMUJNITY ORGANISATIONS, AND PROJECTS,
WE ARE TALIKING ABOUT $ 31 MILLION UNDER THE ACED PERSONS
HOMES ACT, $ 19 MILLION UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOSTELS ACT,
ALL. THAT COULD BE ACHIEVED BY CHANNELLING SUCH
MONEY THROUGH STATE BUREAUCRACIES WOULD-BE THE HOPELESS
SLOWING UP OF FUNDING FOR AREAS OF CARE WHICH SHOULD NOT
HAVE TO WAIT UPON THE RESOLUTION OF PETTY MANUJFACTURED
RIVALRIES. PEOPLE NEEDING CAP~ E INVARIABLY NEED IT
SOONER RATHER THAN LATER,-1 DON ' T NEED TO TE'LL THAT
TO THIS AUDIENCE WdHICH HAS ALREADY DEMONSTRATED HOW
MUCH IT CARES. THEL HOLY SPIRIT CONFERENCE OF THE ST. VINCENT
DE PAUL SOCIETY HERE IN LISMORE REALISED THE PRESSING
NEED FOR ADDITIONAL ACCOMMODATION FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE
IN THIS AREA, AND IN BUILDING THIS NEW HOSTEL, THEY
CARRIED ON THE WORK BEGUN sY FATHER JOHN ROGER ArD
MiR. ARTHUR MONAGHAN IN 19691 THIS NEW HOSTEL IS A
CAREFULLY PLANNED AND EXECUTED PROJECT, INCORPORATING
THE LATEST DESIGN IDEAS AND CATERING FOR 149 ELDERLY
RESIDENTS AND 2 LIVE-IN STAFF, 1 ,17 
7,
THE SOLE CRITERION FOR ADMISSION AS ALWAYS WITH
1HOMIES RUN BY THE ST, VINCENT IDE PAUL SOCIETY IS NEED,
I UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS ALREADY A WAITING LIST FOR
ADMISSION TO THIS NEW HOSTEL AND THAT THERE ARE 50 PEOPLE
WAITING FOR ADMISSION TO THE ORIGINAL WING,
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE TIME WILL COME
WHEN THE MEMBERS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT CONFERENCE WILL
SIT DOWN AND CONSIDER THE WAITING LISTS AND WONDER
WHETHER THEY SHOULDN'T ADD TO THIS OZANAM VILLA COMPLEX
TO MEET THE CONTINUING COMMUNITY NEED FOR THIS KIND OF
ACCOMMODATION AND THE CARE THAT GOES WITH IT,
WHEN THAT HAPPENS, MY GOVERNMENT WILL BE
HAPPY TO COOPERATE WITH THEM IN THE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS
AND ADVICE ON THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS KIND OF
BUILDING, AND PROVIDING THE HIGH COURT CHALLENGE TO
OUR FUNDING OF SUCH COMMUNITY PROJECTS DOES NOT SUCCEED,
MY GOVERNMENT WILL BE DELIGHTED TO ASSIST ONCE MORE
WITH THE PROVISION OF THE MAXIMUM POSSIBLE SUBSIDY,
THERE IS A VERY PEAL SENSE IN WHICH WE'RE ALL IN THIS
TOGETHER, I HAVE VERY MUCH PLEASURE INDEED IN DECLARING
OPEN THIS LATEST ST, VINCENT DE PAUL PROJECT, THE OZANAM
VILLA HOSTEL, A FITTING REMINDER OF THE VISION OF YOUR
FOUNDER, FREDERIC OZANAM, 



QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 12
ACHIEVEMENTS
SUNDAY 8 JUNE 1975
THIS WEEK WE CONCLUDED A BUSY AND PRODUCTIVE
SESSION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, WE'VE SAT
FOR 432 HOURS SO FAR THIS YEAR THAT'S JUST THREE
TIMES THE SITTING HOURS OF THE QUEENSLAND LEGISLATIVE
ASSEMBLY THIS YEAR. So I THOUGHT TONIGHT I'D TELL YOU
SOMETHING OF WHAT WE ACHIEVED IN THAT PERIOD. YOU
HEAR AND READ SO MUCH IN THE MEDIA_. f4E. SE DAYS ABOUT..
CRISES AND SPLITS '. ANDI PROBLEMS-IN CANBERRA -MOST
C. I
OF IT PRETTY FANCIFUL-AND HIGHLY COLOURED STUFF
THAT IT'S EASY TO LOSE SIGHT OF THE SURE, STEADY
PROGRESS YCUR GO'VERN! MENT IS MAKING TOWARDS A BETTER
AND FAIRER AUSTRALIA. FOR ALL THE DISTRACTIONS AND.
DiVERSIONS WE HAVE FACED IN PARLIAMENT AND OUTSIDE,
FOR ALL THE PROPAGANDA OF OUR OPPONENTS FOR ALL
THE OBSTRUCTION OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS, AND
VESTED INTERESTS, FOR ALL THE DENIGRATION OF THE PRESS,
THIS HAS BEEN A PERIOD OF GREAT AND POSITIVE ACHIEVEMENT
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. I ASK YOU TO KEEP THOSE
ACHIEVEMENTS IN MIND, TO KEEP THE RECORD IN PERSPECTIVE,
-TO REFLECT ON THE BASIC STRENGTH AND PROSPERITY OF
THE NATION, THE UNDERLYING STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY,
THE REAL GAINS WE ARE MAKING IN SOCIAL REFORM AND
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND IN THE LIVING STANDARDS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. ./ 2
S I Itr 
-2-
WE BEGAN THE YEAR IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE
DARWIN CYCLONE THE GREATEST NATURAL DISASTER
AUSTRALIA HAS KNOWN, IT WAS FOLLOWED BY A SECOND
CALAMITY IN HOBART INVOLVING APPALLING SOCIAL
DISRUPTION AND LOSS OF LIFE. THE GOVERNMENT'S
RESPONSE TO THESE CALAMITIES WAS PROMPT AND
-GENEROUS. IN PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY I PAID
TRIBUTE TO THE NATURAL DISASTERS ORGANISATION
FOR ITS HANDLING OF THE DARWIN CRISIS, AND TO THE
DARWIN PEOPLE THEMSELVES FOR THEIR FORTITUDE AND
UNDAUNTED SPIRIT, YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT THE
GOVERNMENT IMMEDIATELY ESTABLISHED A DARWIN
RECONSTRUCTION COMMISSION AND ENTRUSTED IT WITH
THE MASSIVE TASK OF REBUILDING THE CITY. WE AGREED
TO ESTABLISH A JOINT TASMAN BRIDGE RESTORATION
COMMISSION, WE HAVE COMMITTED MORE THAN $ 58 MILLION
TO THE DARWIN RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM AND AN INITIAL
GRANT OF $ 6 MILLION FOR HOBART. 
-3-
IDON'T NEED TO TELL YOU THAT IN TIMES OF
ECONOMIC DIFFICULTY, DISASTERS OF THIS KIND PLACE
UNPRECEDENTED DEMANDS ON THE NATION'S MATERIAL
AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES. As IN ALL OTHER
COMPARABLE COUNTRIES, OUR ECONOMIC PROBLEMS ARE
STILL WITH US, STILL IWE CAN TAKE HEART FROM THE
SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT ALREADY APPARENT IN THE
ECONOMY.-OF COURSE IT.' S NO TIME FOR COMPLACENCY;
THERE IS STILL A NEED FOR STEADY JUDGMENT AND A
CALM, RATIONAL-APPROACH TO OUR DIFFICULTIES.
BUT THERE IS GOOD REASON TO BELIEVE THAT ECONOMIC
RECOVERY IS UNDERWAY. CONSUMER CONFIDENCE,
REFLECTED IN RISING RETAIL SALES AND HIGHER
DISPOSABLE INCOMES, HAS SHOWN SIGNIFICANT GAINS.
PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN THE BASIC AREAS OF THE
ECONOMY* IS RISING, UNEMPLOYMENT. CONTINUES TO FALL.
THE IMPORTANT THING TO REMEMBER IS THAT THE
GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES HAVE P UT MO NEY IN THE POCKETS
OF AUSTRALIAZ&amp; ORDINARY PEOPLE ARE MORE PROSPEROUS
TODAY THAN THEY HAVE EVER BEEN. WHENEVER YOU HEAR
CRITICISM OF THE GOVERNMENT' S POLICIES REMEMBER
THIS: THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE NEVER BEEN
BETTER OFF -BETTER OFF IN THE MONEY THEY HAVE TO
SPEND, BETTER OFF IN THEIR REAL INCOMES, BETTER OFF
IN THE RANGE OF SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE
TO THEM FROM THIS GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS. SINCE
DECEMBER 1972 INCOMES OF WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS
HAVE GORWN MUCH FASTER THAN THE COST OF LIVING, / 14 
-14-
AVERAGE MINIMUM WEEKLY AWARD RATES FOR MEN HAV/ E
INCREASED BY' 53 PERCENT; FOR WOMEN BY NO L ESS
THAN 75 PERCENT. REAL AVERAGE W4EEKLY EARNINGS
AFTER TAX FOR ALL WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS HAVE
INCREASED By 7.3 PERCENT SINCE THIS GOVERNMENT
CAME TO OFFICE*. IN ADDITIO'N*, WE HAVE TACKLED
THE GREAT AND DIFFICULT PROBLEM OF WAGE
INDEXATION. IN ITS HISTORIC JUDGMENT FIVE WEEKS
AGO THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION
ACCEPTED THE GOVERNMENT'S CASE FOR A RESTORATION
OF QUARTERLY COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS. WITH
REASON AND GOODWILL WE CAN MADE INDEXATION
WORK WORK TO SAFEGUARD REAL INCOMES, WORK TO
CURB INFLATION. WE HAVE SEEN THIS YEAR A NUMBER OF SIGNIFICANT
GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS BROUGHT TO FRUITION. WE HAVE
SEEN THE CREATION OF MEDIBANK, A GREAT PIONEERING
REFORM WHICH THE RELUCTANT STATES HAVE BEEN DRIVEN
TO ACCEPT, BECAUSE THEY KNOW THEY WILL BENEFIT FROM
IT, AND ABOVE ALL THAT THE PEOPLE WILL BENEFIT.
WHAT A LESSON OUR OPPONENTS HAVE LEARNED FROM
MEDIBANK AFTER ALL THE OBSTRUCTION IN THE PARLIAMENT.*
AFTER ALL THE ATTEMPTS TO DELAY THE MEDIBANK BILLS.-
THE ANTI-LABOR STATES ARE NOW SEE'KING TO JOIN THE
SCHEME, AND IF THEIR ADVERTISEMENTS CAN BE
BELIEVED, EVEN TAKING SOME OF THE CREDIT FOR IT. o 
ONE OF THE THEMES OF ALL OUR REFORMS HAS
BEEN TO ASSERT THE PRINCIPLE OF COMPETITIONFREE
AND FAIR COMPETITION IN A MIXED ECONOMY,
PRODUCTIVE COMPETITION BETWEEN PRIVATE AND
PUBLIC ENTERPRISE. I WE HAVE SEEN THE BENEFITS
OF SUCH COMPETITION IN THE AIRLINES AND THE
BANKS, WE SHALL EXTEND IT TO OTHER FIELDS.
WE HAVE PASSED LEGISLATION IN THE HOU SE OF
REPRESENTATIVES TO ESTABLISH AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION. IT WILL PROVIDE
THE WIDEST POSSIBLE COVER FOR HOMES AT THE LOWEST
POSSIBLE PREMIUMS AND OFFER A WIDE RANGE OF
INSURANCE SERVICES. WE HAVE DEVELOPED AND EXTENDED OUR
LEGAL AID SERVICE AND THIS WEEK WE INTRODUCED
LEGISLATION TO ESTABLISH THE SERVICE IN PERMANENT
FORM, SIX REGIONAL OFFICES OF TH E AUSTRALIAN LEGAL
AID OFFICE HAVE BEEN OPENED THIS YEAR AND MORE THAN
60,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN HELPED. WE HAVE SET UP
AN AUSTRALIAN HOUSING CORPORATION TO TAKE ACTION
IN AREAS WHERE THE EXISTING HOUSING SYSTEM IS UNABLE
TO MEET EXISTING HOUSING NEEDS; ALREADY THIS YEAR WE
HAVE FUNDED THE CONSTRUCTION BY STATE HOUSING
AUTHORITIES OF 13,580 HOMES FOR LOW-INCOME EARNERS
5,000 MORE THAN WERE BUILT LAST FINANCIAL YEAR. THEN
AGAIN/ WE ' yVE PASSED LEGISLATION IT WENT THROUGH
PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY, BUT I DOUBT IF IT GOT
MUCH PROMINENCE IN THE MEDIA -WE'IVE PASSED LEGISLATION
TO ESTABLISH A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION, A BODY TO
ADMINISTER A WHOLE RANGE OF SPECIAL SERVICES FOR CHILDREN,
INCLUDING PRE-SCHOOLDAY CARE AND HOLIDAY SERVICES. 
SOME 165,000 CHILDREN HAVE ALREADY BEEN CATERED FOR UNDER
THIS PROGRAM. So THESE AREN'T JUST PIPEDREAMS
THEY ARE LIVING, WORKING PROJECTS, ALREADY
HELPING AUSTRALIANS AND THEIR FAMILIES,
ANOTHER AREA OF OUTSTANDING PROGRESS THIS
YEAR HAS BEEN RAILWAYS, MORE THAN ANY OF ITS
PREDECESSORS, MY GOVERNMENT HAS RECOGNISED
THE NEED FOR A NATIONAL APPROACH TO RAILWAYS. WE
ARE BUILDING THE NEW LINES NEEDED TO LINK EVERY
MAINLAND CAPITAL, AS WELL AS ALICE SPRINGS, TO THE
STANDARD GAUGE, WE HAVE REACHED AGREEMENT WITH
SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA TO TAKE OVER
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEIR RAILWAYS, WE HAVE CREATED
THEAUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS TO BRING THESE
TRANSFERRED STATE RAILWAYS AND THE OLD
COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS TOGETHER INTO A SINGLE SYSTEM,
EQUIPPED WITH THE VERY LATEST ROLLING STOCK, AND
TO HELP THE STATES IMPROVE THEIR OWN RAILWAYS, WE
ARE LEASIN6 TO THEM BRAND-NEW WAGONS AND OTHER
VEHICLES. ALL THIS WILL HELP DEVELOP A TRULY MODERN,
EFFICIENT, NATIONAL RAIL SYSTEM. ,1,/ 7 
-7-
THE OPPOSITION LIKE TO TELL YOU THAT THEY ARE
BEHAVING MORE RESPONSIBLY THESE DAYS THAN WHEN
MR SNEDDEN WAS THEIR LEADER., CERTAINLY THEY
HAVE BEEN LESS ROWDY AND DISORDERLY IN THE
CHAMBER, BUT BEHIND THEIR FACADE OF RESPONSIBILITY THE
OLD CAMAPIGN OF OBSTRUCTION HAS CONTINUED,
LISTEN TO ALL THE THINGS THEY'VE CONTINUED TO BLOCK
IN THE SENATE OUR BILL TO MODERNISE AND SIMPLIFY
THE ELECTORAL LAWS, OUR BILLS TO ABOLISH APPEALS
TO THE PRIVY COUNCIL, TO ESTABLISH A SUPERIOR
COURT OF AUSTRALIA, TO DEAL WITH LURKS AND
MALPRACTICE IN THE SECURITIES INDUSTRY, TO ESTABLISH
A GOVERNMENT PURCHASING COMMISSION, TO PROVIDE
SIMULTANEOUS ELECTIONS FOR THE SENATE AND
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, AND OF COURSE, THE
CAMPAIGN OF OBSTRUCTION HAS BEEN PURSUED BEYOND
THIS PARLIAMENT, IN THE COURTS AND IN THE STATES, 
-8-
I LEAVE YOU TO JUDGE THE OPPOSITION TACTICS
FOR YOURSELVES. THEY WON'T DETER US FROM OUR
GOALS, THE PAST SIX MONTHS HAVE SHOWN WHAT A
DETERMINED GOVERNMENT CAN ACHIEVE IN THE FACE
OF CONTINUING OBSTRUCTION, THIS WEEK, WITH THE
CHANGES I HAVE MADE IN OUR MINISTERIAL TEAM, I
BELIEVE WE HAVE AN EVEN STRONGER GOVERNMENT
A GOVERNMENT THAT WILL GET ON WITH THE JOB THE
PEOPLE ELECTED US TO DO, DESPITE OUR DIFFICULTIES
IN THE SENATE, DESPITE THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS WITH
WHICH EVERY NATION HAS TO CONTEND, WE HAVE
BROUGHT NEW AND PERMANENT REFORMS TO THE
STATUTE BOOKS; WE HAVE ENHANCED AUSTRALIA'S
STANDING IN THE WORLD,; WE HAVE PRODUCED A
SOCIETY WHICH HAS NEVER ENJOYED GREAT INDIVIDUAL
PROSPERITY, GREATER OPPORTUNITIES, GREATER
PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 511
9 June 1975
MESSAGE OF SYMPATHY TO BURMA
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, said today
that the Government has expressed its sympathy to the
people of Burma for the loss of life and damage caused
by the recent cyclone in the Irrawaddy Division of
Burma. He said that in the light of Australia's
recent Darwin experiences the Government appreciated
the difficulties and challenges the Burmese Government
faced in the task of reconstruction.
The Australian Government has decided to make
an allocation of $ A10,000 to the Burmese Government for
relief purposes. Mr Whitlam said that he hoped that
this would go some way to assist Burma with the
purchase of essential itmes for cyclone relief.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



A11 1 1 01
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT No. 512
JUNE 1975
VISIT OF SOVIET EARTH SCIENCES DELEGATION
The Prime Minister and Acting Foreign Minister,
Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced today that a party of four Soviet
earth scientists arrived in Sydney this morning, Tuesday 10 June.
The group is visiting Australia for two weeks under the auspices
of the Australian/ Soviet Science Agreement. Another Soviet
earth scientist, who is already in Australia, will join the
delegation in Adelaide. During their Australian visit the Soviet earth
scientists will have discussions-with Australian scientists on
possible collaborative research projects, and they will visit
Australian laboratories and installations. At the end of the
visit the Soviet earth scientists and their Australian
counterparts will recommend to the two Government a program of
co-operation in earth sciences under the science agreement.
The Soviet earth scientists will visit Macquarie
University, the CSIRO Minerals Research Laboratories and the
University of New South Wales in Sydney and the Australian
National University and the Bureau of mineral Resources, Geology
and Geophysics in Canberra. In Victoria they will visit a BHP/
Esso off-shore production platform in Bass Strait. The
South Australian Department of Mines and the University of Adelaide
have arranged geological excursions near Adelaide for the Soviet
visitors. During the Soviet group's visit to the Northern Territory
its members will inspect geoloqiial formations near Katherinle
and the Australian National University's geophysical station at
Tennant Creek. Mr Whitlam said that the visit to Australia by the
Soviet group returned a visit to the USSR in December 1974 by
a group of Australian earth scientists led by Mr I. E. Newnhan of
C SI RO. The members of the visit Soviet earth sciences
group are: Academician B. S. Sokolov, Institute of Geology
and Geophysics, Siberian Branch, USSR Academy
of Sciences.
Professor A. A. Geodekyan, Earth Sciences Section,
USSR Academy of Sciences. I
Professor Yu. D. Boulanger, Institute of Earth
Physics, USSR Academy of Sciences. / 2 
4 -2-
Dr N. M. Kiselyov, Department of Foreign Relations,
USSR Academy of Sciences.
Dr A. Yu. Rosanov, a Soviet earth scientist,
at present working on leave at the University
of Adelaide.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, 10 JUNE, 1975
Mr. Whitlan: Ladies and gentlemen, when I announced the
ministerial changes last Thursday night, I didn't include details
of the Ministers assisting. As you will notice, there are now
several departments which have been given additional responsibilities,
so there is a need to have additional Assistant Ministers.
Senator Bishop, the Postmaster-General, will also be Minister
assisting the Minister for Defence. You remember that he did
act as Assistant Minister earlier, before Mr. Morrison became
Assistant Minister.
Senator James McClelland, the Minister for Labor and Immigration,
will also be the Minister assisting me in-matters relating to the
Public Service.
Mr. Morrison, the Minister for Defence, will also be Minister
assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs in matters relating
to the islands of the Pacific.
Mr. Stewart, the Minister for Tourism and Recreation, who has
been Minister assisting the Treasurer, will now also be Minister
assisting the Minister for Social Security and Minister for
Repatriation and Compensation.
Mr. Riordan, the Minister for Housing and Construction, will
also be Minister assisting the Minister for Urban and Regional
Development. The Government has decided to establish a National College of
Navigation and Communication to provide education and training
for officers in the Australian maritime industry and to site it
at Launceston. The decision results from the report on ' Training
Requirements for Sea-going Personnel' by Mr. Malcolm Summers, who
is the Royal Commissioner inquiring into various acqDects of the
maritime industry. His report was tabled on the 11 JulY last,
and has since betn discussed with all the States.
Launceston was chosen because the College needs to have practical
training fadilities at a seamanship centre, including a jetty,
boat repair sheds, boats, liferafts and periodic access to a
small training ship. It needs to be situated close to sheltered
water with good access to the sea. 
Those were the requirements set out by the Royal Commissioner,
Mr. Summers, and Launceston has all these requirements and
its proximity to Bass Strait is a decisive consideration.
As you know, the RAAF has always centred its navigation training
in Bass Strait.
The! Government accepts the recommendation of the Royal
Commissioner, that the College should be based on a requirement
of 300 student places, with provision for future growth. The
Government accepts the recommendations of the Commissioner that
the College should be situated close to a tertiary institution
which may need to be developed further than the existing advanced
education facilities in Launceston. Library, hall of residence
and some other facilities could, by arrangement with the Tasmanian
Government, be available for joint use with Tasmanian tertiary
students.
The Committee which has been investigating post secondary education
in Northern Tasmania will be asked to recommend the manner of
this association between the National College of Navigation and
Communication and the new tertiary educational facilities which
are being developed in Launceston.
The College will educate deck officers, engineer officers, radio
officers and it will provide for higher studies including nautical
science degree qualifications for which at present Australian
seafarers are forced to go overseas.
The College will be comprehensive, with predominantly tertiary
level studies with associated courses at a level appropriate for
seamen and fishermen and including practical training in safety,
fire fighting and life saving.
Prime Minister: Are there any questions?
Question: How do you equate your Brisbane statement that
ordinary people are more prosperous than they've ever been with
tLhe highest unemployment since the depression and the present
high inflation rate? What immediate steps do you expect the new
Treasurer to take to rectify this anomaly?
Mr. Whitlam: The steps which have been made to alleviate
unemployment are well-known to you all and they are working.
The fact is, as I stated in my weekly broadcast in Queensland
on Sunday, the standard of living for most people has certainly
risen. That is the average income, taking into account taxation,
is higher than it was in real terms, and in many cases, such as
those who are on pensions, it is conspicuously higher. I think 
3.
to give one instance there, the cost of living in our two and
a half years, has risen by about 36%. The age pension for single
paensioners has risen by 80%, for pensioner couples by 74% and
one can go through all those fields where incomes depend on
payments by the Australian Government to demonstrate that in
ever-y case the incomes, in real terms, are conspicuously higher
than they were when we camne into office two and a half years ago.
As regards incomes fixed in the general sphere by Arbitration
proceedings and so on, after taxation incomes are worth more
than they were when we camne in, significantly more.
Question: When do you expect to have the report of the
inquiry into the allegations by Dr. Cairns?
Mr. Whitlam: I wrote on Friday afternoon to Dr. Cairns, to
Mr. Hayden, since some of Dr. Cairns' former office staff may
now be in Mr. Hayden's off ice, and to Sir Frederick Wheeler, the
Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Harders the Secretary of the
Attorney-General's Department and Mr. Menadue the Secretary of
my own Department in these terms:
" rYou will be aware of the statement made in the House of
Representatives yesterday by Dr. Cairns concerning the
handling of papers in his office in the Treasury and in
the Attorney-General's Department dealing with loan raisings.
Naturally I take a serious view of what Dr. Cairns has said
and I, therefore, require from you a full report insofar as
your Department is concerned, including signed statements
from any individual members of the staff who have dealt with
this matter in any material way. The report and accompanying
statements should be produced to me early next week."
Those letters were delivered to Sir Frederick Wheeler and
Mr. Menadue at 4.30 on Friday afternoon and delivered, I believe,
to the others at the same time, within a few minutes thereafter.
I've had no written statements or reports yet. If there is any
disparity in the statement, any discrepancies in the reports,
the statements I receive, then I will have an inquiry of a quasi
judicial nature instituted.
Question: Last week at his press conference, Dr. Cairns
said that he was removed as Treasurer because, in your view,
he had acted unwisely in his dealings with Mr. George Harris.
Was that the only reason he was removed?
Mr. rdhitlam: The sole reason.
Question: Would you say what prompted you to remove
Mr. Cayiewrn. as Minister for Labor and Immigration? 
Mr. Whitlam: The general changes were due to my belief of
where men can best serve; which Ministers can best discharge
perticular portfolios at the present time or from now on.
Question: Can you tell us then what special qualifications
Mr. Cameron has as minister for Science?
Mr. Whitlam: The Department is Minister for Science and
Consumer Affairs. The Department was changed last Friday to
emphasise that consumer affairs are primarily in that Department.
Mr. Cameron's qualities to investigate and pursue issues are well
known to you and such qualities are conspicuously suitable for
consumer affairs.
Question: If the sole reason for Dr. Cairns~ dismissal
as Treasurer was the question of the letters on overseas loan
raising and since you have already asked for an inquiry to be
instituted, would it not have been fairer to wait for the result
of the inquiry before dismissing Dr. Cairns?
Mr. Whitlam: I believe not. Dr. Cairns doesn't dispute, he
never did disputeothe letters which he had given Mr. George Harris
as he has already reported to the Parliament. I believe that it
was unwise for him to give such letters. There's no dispute
concerning the passage of letters between Dr. Cairns and Mr. Harris.
There is the question of how the letters came to be transmitted
by Treasury officials to the Attorney-General's Department. It
is obviously a matter of interest that the Head of a Department,
the Departmental Head, should seek a legal opinion about his
Minister without telling the Minister, without telling the Prime
Minister. Quest ion: Your judgement there, is that based on the
original letters or on the version that you received via the
Attorney-General' s Department?
Mr. Whitlam: I didn't receive a version directly from the
Attorney-General's Department. I received the Attorney-General's
Department's opinion from the Secretary of the Treasury.
Question: What is the distinction between the loan
raisings of Mr. Connor and Dr. Cairns? Did Mr. Connor provide
full details of all his intermediaries to Cabinet and why is it
that he has escaped scot-free in this matter?
Mr. Whitlam: it's well-known that the transaction iLn which
Mr. Connor had authority, was known and discussed by all relevant
Departmnts; his own Department, Treasury, Attorney-General's
Department and myself. 
Question: Why did you decide to incorporate the Social
Welfare Commission into the Department of Social Security?
Mr. Whitlam: What I've done is given the same man,
Senator Wheeldon, both portfolios. The Departments are separate,
but one Minister holds both of them. There has been concern
about the proliferation or duplication of the delivery of
welfare services. Senator Wheeldon, the Minister for both
Social Security and Repatriation and Compensation, has shown
his outstanding effectiveness as Minister for Repatriation and
Compensation and I thought he would be an ideal man to see that
research and policy and equipment, new computers and that sort
of thing, were all properly coordinated between these two
principal welfare departments.
Question: The question I think was about the Social
Welfare Commission which has been abolished or is to be abolished.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes. Legislation will be introduced to abolish
the Social Welfare Commission. I announced that last Thursday
night, about 10 o'clock last Thursday night. I did state then,
that the Social Welfare Commission would now become a bureau
within the Department of Social Security. It may become a bureau
within the Department of Repatriation and Compensation. As you
know, the National Advisory Council for the Handicapped, under
Mr. Justice Meares, will be responsible to the Minister for
Repatriation and Compensation and it may be that the Social
Welfare Commission will become a bureau in that Department. But
in all events in either case, it will be under the same Minister,
Senator John Wheeldon.
Question: Why have you decided to make the Social Welfare
Commission a bureau, to take away its former status?
Mr. Whitlam: So that the policy functions which it has been
discharging, will, in fact, be fed in directly to the Department
most concerned.
Question: * Are you satisfied that no legal agency existed
between Dr. Cairns and Mr. Harris on the basis of his letters?
If so, can you tell us why you think his action was unwise
Was it because he failed to consult properly?
Mr. Whitlam.: I don't believe it was a responsible thing
for a Treasurer to give that sort of letter. I'm not going to
give a legal opinion on it. You have a legal opinion from the
Secretary of the Attorney-General's Department. 
Question: Have you had a legal opinion on the letter
Mr. Connor gave to Mr. Khemlani. How does it differ from the
letter Dr. Cairns gave to Mr. Harris? And why is Dr. Cairns'
action less responsible than that of Mr. Connor?
Mr. Whitlam: I've already stated that what Mr. Connor did
was in consultation with the Departments I've named. There
have been many statements by the Opposition and by the media
in recent weeks regarding the borrowing overseas of petrodollars.
I want it clearly understood that the Government has not negotiated
any such borrowing. I want it clearly understood that no-one
has authority to make any such borrowing on the Government's
behalf. In answer to a question in the House of Representatives
on the 21st May, I informed the House that the authority given
to the Minister for Minerals and Energy in connection with a
proposed $ 2 billion loan, had been revoked. The authority has
not been renewed. The week before last, I became aware that the
former Treasurer had given certain letters relating to the possible
borrowing of Itnies overseas. This was done without my knowledge
and without consultation with the Minister's Department. Henceforth,
no person has authority to do anything in relation to borrowings
by the Australian Government unless it is done with Mr. Hayden's
authority. That includes the AIDC which, as you know, has statutory
authority to borrow overseas. It is, ministerially, the responsibility
of Senator James McClelland.
Question What other intermediaries did Mr. Connor use
besides Mr. Khemlani if any, and why is there this reluctance
to make Mr. Connor's letters public?.
Mr. Whitlam: Mr. Khemlani was not an intermediary. Mr. Connor
had authority under the Executive Council minute, to borrow as
Minister for Minerals and Energy . That authority has been revoked.
Question: Dr. Cairns said he had authority under ExCo.
as well.
Mr. Whitlam: I don't believe he did say that.
Question: If you believe that Dr. Cairns
Mr. Whitlam: You're referring to the Saudi Arabian Monetary
Authority and AIDC. Well those are authorities given to the
Treasurer under Executive Council minute.
Question: If you believe that Dr. Cairns has acted
unwisely, what do . you feel about the role played by Sir Frederick
Wheeler in not telling anybody that he'd sought this legal advice? 
24r. Whitlam: I've already made the only commeat I'm going
to make on that subject at this stage.
Question: Would you agree that a Permanent Head's first
obligation is loyalty to his Minister?
Mr. Whitlam: There are several duties which a Permanent Head
has, several duties. I believe that if there is a difference of
opinion between a Permanent Head and his Minister, then the
Permanent Head, according to custom, according to precedent,
according to right practice in my view, should bring the matter
to the attention of the Prime Minister.
Question: Can you explain why the Federal Government has
brought the North West Shelf Gas project to a standstill for
more than twelve months?
Mr. Whitlam: Because the States have challenged the Federal
legislation in the High Court. I say the Federal Government's
legislation. The legislation which is being challenged by
Western Australia and by all States in the High Court, certainly
was introduced by my Government and it was passed by Parliament
under my Government. But it is the same legislation as was
introduced in April, 1970, under the Gorton Government, in the
name of Mr. McMahon, who was then Foreign Minister.
Question: The company just want details of the optake of
gas, the price and when it will be available so they could continue
to plan even while this
Mr. Whitlam: You can put their case if you wish. You can
be their advocate. I'm not going to be an advocate. What I
want to do is to assert the Australian Government's responsibility
in this matter. When I was in Opposition, I made it quite plain
that the opposition would support the Gorton Government's legislation.
When Mr. McMahon became Prime Minister, I still made it plain that
we would support that legislation. It was still on the noticepaper
throughout the . term of office of the McMahon Government.. After
Mr. McMahon became Prime Minister, it was on the noticepaper,
under him, in the name of his Foreign Minister, Mr. Bowen. When
we came in, we brought the legislation in.. At last, on the second
attempt, we secured its passage. Now we've done all we can. We
did so in Opposition, when it was introduced in April, 1970. We
at last got it through in our first Parliament. We've done all
we can. I sympathise with the position of the company for
which you are speaking. The fact is, however, that the Australian
Government has done all it can. It introduced the law, it is
justifying the law before the High Court which has reserved its
decision. 
Question: Have you asked Mr. Connor if he has sent
any further letters to other people involving overseas borrowings?
Mr. Whitlan: Yes.
Question: Has he sent any?
Mr. Whitlai: No.
Question: The letter to Mr.-Khemlani is the only one
is it?
Mr. Whitlam: There is no letter. There was a cable, there
have been cables. There have been no communications to anybody
else. As I mentioned, the whole of that transaction is ended.
I thought I'd made that plain.
Question: Next week the annual meeting of the Premiers
is being held in Canberra. I understand that officers, federally
and state, have been having discussions. Is there any sign of
a better accord being reached or are we to expect the usual
wrangle at the end of next week? And do you propose that the
new formula which is to be worked out should run for the usual
five years which has been the practice, or for a lesser period?
Mr. Whitlam: There have been discussions between me and
my colleagues and by us with our officials on this matter for
some weeks past. The Premiers sent us proposals on the
of last month. I received a telephone call from Mr. Lewis on
their behalf last week and I told him what our program was.
The principal Ministers concerned discussed this yesterday. I
am sending a cable to Mr. Lewis and maybe the other Premiers too
today. our officials are meeting theirs on Thursday. The
Cabinet will be discussing the whole matter on Monday, and I
expect then to give a fuller reply to the Premiers on Tuesday.
We meet on Thursday and maybe Friday of next week. You'll see
from this timetable that there has been much more preliminary
discussion than there has been before previous Premier's Conferences.
on previous occasions, the Premiers had not made their officials
available and had not themselves forwarded any commuunications
to the Federal Government, certainly not to the extent that has
happened on thi-s occasion. on previous occasions, the Federal
response was made on the day of the meeting itself. As you see,
there will be a preliminary response by me today. It will be
pursued by officials on Thursday and there will be a definitive
response next Tuesday. This means that the Premiers will be able
to confer further on Tuesday or Wednesday and on Thursday there
will still be some matters, I expect, for us to discuss directly. 
9.
Question: Have you asked Sir Frederick Wheeler to take
the governorship of the Reserve Bank when it becomes vacant, Sir?
Mr. Whitlan: We made an offer a couple of months ago.
Question: Beyond paying his fare, will your Government
give Mr. Phillip Lynch any assistance in his offshore operations
overseas? Mr. Whitlam: He's going into the sleuthing business over
there apparently. Well I frankly haven't considered this matter
and it hasn't been put to me up till now, so therefore I haven't
given very much consideration to it. As I think I made pretty
plain on ' Monday Conference' last week, Mr. Lynch may get some
scraps of informat~ ion. They are either misleading to him or
he has embroidered them in a misleading fashion. The only things
that Mr. Lynch has ever said precisely on this matter, have been
quite wrong.
Question: the offer? Did
Reserve Bank?
Mr. Whitlam:
Question: Mr. Whitlam:
Question: Mr. Whitlam: What was Sir Frederick Wheeler's reaction to
he accept the offer of the governorship of the
Not at that time.
Has he accepted it since?
It's only been made once.
Do you plan to offer it again?
I've got no answer for that.
Question: As the Government claims a strong record on
civil liberties questions, have you got any comment to make on
the Opposition's. endorsement of a march in Melbourne recently,
in which the leader of that march said that she'd be naming the
private political beliefs of members of the Victorian Education
Department? Mr. Whitlam: I hadn't heard of this. I read your paper
quite closely, Mr. Clark, and I didn't see it, but I haven't
seen it elsewhere. I'm not aware of the matter at all. Igm
not sure whether-this is a breach of civil liberties. I don't
suppose that there should be any particular mystery as to what
people's beliefs are if they're in a position where those beliefs
might be relevant. I think it's sufficient to say that if they 
II are relevant then a person is entitled to hold them but it's
nothing unreasonable in them being disclosed. There's nothing
particularly mysterious about this. Some people in the media
have even had the gall to ask me what my beliefs were on certain
matters. I don't let the Australian media get away with such
an impertinence but I must confess I yielded once or twice to
a couple of B. B. C. people. 



PROME MINISTEk Press-Statement
llPJune 1975
The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa,
Mr Whitlam today confirmed another RED scheme project
for the Camden area. It is a University of Sydney
undertaking involving roadworks, sewage treatment
and two dams at Camden Bringelly. The estimated
total cost is $ 47,610 and the Australian Government
will provide assistance of $ 43,324 which will employ
eight unemployed workers for 24 weeks.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



FOARA IG
V NO DATE
M 35 12 June 1975
APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN AMBASSADOR TO ISRAEL
The Prime Minister and Acting Foreign Minister,
Mr Whitlam, today announced the appointment of Mr Richard
9 J. Smith, a senior officer of the Department of Foreign
Affairs, as Australian Ambassador to Israel.
Mr Smith, aged 40, will take up his duties in
Tel Aviv in August, succeeding Mr F. R. Dalrymple who has
been Ambassador since September 1972.
Mr Whitlam said that a continuing Australian
diplomatic presence in Tel Aviv at a suitably senior level
was an important indication of Australia's desire to maintain
friendly, active and constructive relations with Israel.
S. Australia had been one of the original supporters of the
creation of Israel in 1948 and had a. firm commitment to
the right of Israel to continue to exist within secure and
~ rreconnisedbondaries. Mr Smith was born in Tamworth, and graduated
in Arts and Law from the University of Sydney. He joined
the foreign service in 1961 and has served in New Delhi,
Washington and latterly Geneva where he was Deputy Permanent
Representative from 1972 to 1974. He is at present
Assistant Secretary in charge of the Departmentos International
Legal Branch0Mr Smith is married and has four children. 



I?
NOTES ORY
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY NEW SOUTH 14ALES BRANCH
* STATE CONFERECE
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
flR E, G. W! IHITLAM, C PA.. 1 41-4, JUP1 E 1975 SYD[ IEY-N; S'; 1J',
i r . II'
r r i 
I THE HISTORY OF THIS PARTY IS THE RECORD OF THE EFFORTS
OF OUR OPPONENTS TO DIVIDE US, OUR SUCCESSES ARE
MEASURED BY OUR SUCCESS IN RESISTING THOSE EFFORTS,
OUR FAILURES AND DISASTERS ARE THE STORY OF HOW
WE HAVE SUCCUMBED TO THOSE ATTEMPTS. THOSE EFFORTS
TO DIVIDE . THIS PARTY HAVE ONLY SUCCEEDED WHEN
THE PARTY ITSELF CHOSE TO DIVIDE WHEN ONE GROUP OR
SECTION OR FACTION WITHIN THE PARTY BELIEVED THAT
IT COULD PROMOTE ITS IMMEDIATE, ITS SHORT TERM INTEREST,
THROUGH A DIVIDED, A. WEAKENED PARTY.
SINCE WE WERE ELECTED TO OFFICE TWO AND A HALF YEARS AGO,
SSINCE WE WERE RE-ELECTED TO OFFICE JUST OVER ONE
YEAR AGO,. THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS HELD
STEADFASTLY TO ONE OBJECTIVE,
WHAT IS THAT OBJECTIVE? THE OBJECTIVE HAS BEEN TO
FULFIL THE POLICY OF THIS PARTY, THE POLICY GIVEN
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AND ACCEPTED BY THEM IN 1972,
THE POLICY GIVEN TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AND
REAFFIRMED BY THEM IN 1974,
-I r-I I I T l-lj C
I 
-2-
WHEN THE PEOPLE ELECTED US IN 1972, WHEN THE
PEOPLE REAFFIRMED US IN OFFICE IN 1974, THEY VOTED
FOR OUR PROGRAM, THE PROGRAM AS THEY KNEW IT TO BE,
AS IT WAS PRESENTEDIN 1972 AND AGAIN IN 1974.
THERE ARE MANY COMPLAINTS ABOUT THE PROGRAM.
. MOUNTED AGAINST THIS PROGRAM IS A CAMPAIGN OF HOSTILITY
UNPARALLELED IN AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. THE HOSTILITY
SIS UNPARALLELED BECAUSE NEVER BEFORE IN AUSTRALIAN
HISTORY HAVE SO MANY VESTED INTERESTS BEEN TAKEN ON
AT ONE TIME, FOR THE FIRST TIME, THE ENTRENCHED,
. THE POWERFUL, THE HIGHLY PRIVILEGED HAVE FOUND THAT
THEIR DEMANDS ARE NOT ACCORDED THE NUMBER ONE
PRIORITY WHICH THEY BELIEVE IS THEIR INHERENT RIGHT.
.4. f
L.
' 77-
I CAN ACCEPT ALL THE GROUCHES AND THE GRIPES
AND'THE COMPLAINTS'OF ALL THOSE OLD ESTABLISHED
INTERESTS WHO BELIEVE THEY ARE NOT DOING
PARTICULARLY WELL OUT OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT. IN
CANBERRAI* IIT ' S ADIFFERENT MATTER WIHEN IT COMES TO
RESISTANCE TO THE PROGRAM WITHIN THE LABOR
4 MOVEMENT, -THIS IS A TIME WHEN THE LABOR
MOVEMENT HAS TO THINK VERY CLEARLY ABOUT
THE DIRECTION IT IS GOING TO TAKE,
IT IS A MISTAKE FOR ANY UNION TO BELIEVE THAT
-ITS OWN MUSCLE POWER IS AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE .4
FOR CONCERTED GOVERNMENT ACTION TO PROMOTE
REAL EQUALITY AND RAISE REAL STANDARDS&amp;
; IT IS A MISTAKE'FOR ANY'STATE MEMBER TO BELIEVE
THAT THE WAY . TO POPULARITY OR POWER IS TO
JOIN IN THE CHORUS AGAINST THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
IN CABERR S. .4
IT IS OUR BOAST THAT WE ARE THE ONLY TRUE
NATIONAL PARTY IN AUSTRALIA. -WE CANNOT BLAME THE
PEOPLE IF THEY TAKE US AT OUR WORD AND AT OUR OWN
VALUATION. .4 .4%
4.4 .4 .4.4 4 4.4. .4~ rl-.4.4 4 
-THE STRENGTH OF THE NATIONAL PARTY IS THE
. STRENGTH OF EACH SECTION OF THE ENTIRE PARTY.
THERE IS A MYTH THAT STATE PARTIES COULD PROSPER
IF THENATIONAL GOVERNMENT WERE DEFEATED,
THERE IS-A MYTH THAT IF YOU KNOCK THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA YOU WILL GET KUDOS
SFOR LABOR IN BRISBANE, OR SYDNEY OR MELBOURNE.
YOU WILL NOT,
. OUR OPPONENTS WILL ALWAYS DO THAT SORT OF THING
-SO MUCH BETTER. IT IS ONE OF THE GREAT MYTHS
THAT A STATE LABOR POLITICIAN, WHOEVER HE BE,
WILL GET GOOD MARKS BY KNOCKING A FEDERAL LABOR
GOVERNMENT, IF LABOR IS NOT NATIONALLY CREDIBLE, IS IT
TO BE THOUGHT FOR A MOMENT THAT IT CAN BE.
S CREDIBLE ON A STATE BASIS?
THERE IS NO POINT,
LIBERAL GAME THE NO DIVIDEND, IN PLAYING THE
OLD GAME OF DIVIDE AND RULE... r 
S*
i -4-
LET ME SAY VERY CLEARLY WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
GOVERNMENT IS ABOUT, IT IS ABOUT THE FULFILLMENT
OF THE POLICY OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY
. AS PROMISED TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA,
i WE HEAR A GREAT DEAL ABOUT THE UNPREDICTABILITY
OF THE GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA. THE REAL OBJECTION
IS THAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS ALL TOO PREDICTABLE,
-EVERYTHING. THAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO, OR ARE DOING,
WAS IN THOSE POLICY SPEECHES.
IT MAY BE TRUE THAT IN 1972 SOME SUPPORTED US
ON THE GROUNDS THAT WE WERE NOT SERIOUS OR SINCERE
SOR INTENT UPON APPLYING OUR POLICIES, IT MAY BE
THAT SOME MISTOOK THE PROGRAM FOR MERE WINDOW-DRESSING,
IT MAY BE THAT SOME THOUGHT THAT ONCE WE GOT INTO
GOVERNMENT WE WOULD TAKE UP THE NORMAL POSITION
OF PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENT OF CYNICISM, OF BETRAYAL.
WHAT HAS HORRIFIED SO MANY OF THE WELL-ESTABLISHED,
SO MANY OF THE POWERFUL, SO MANY OF THE PRIVILEGED
IN AUSTRALIA IS THAT WE HAVE ACTUALLY SET ABOUT DOING
THOSE THINGS WHICH WE SAID WE WOULD DO AND WHICH
WE PROMISED TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA THAT WE
WOULD DO, 
* L ^ l
I) n
I
I r r
ADHER IUTOT HSE PLEDGES, AGAIN I KEPEA
IT IS NOT THE UNPREDICTABILITY OF THIS GOVERNMENT
AND OF THIS PARTY-TO WHICH OUR OPPONENTS OBJECT,
BUT OUR PREDICTABILITY THE FACT THAT WE HAVE TRIED
TO ABIDE BY OUR UNDERTAKINGS. IT IS OUR
SERIOUSNESS, OUR SINCERITY TO WHICH THEY OBJECT. TA.
WE INHERITEi-A GOVERNMENT WHICH WAS A JOKE;
TESE GREAT AND POWERFUL PEOPLE THOUGHT THAT ALL
GOVERNMENT WAS A JOKE; SO THEY TOOK OUR POLICY
FCR JUST ANOTHER SORT OF JOKE.
THEY FORGOT THAT THERE WERE MEN AND WOMEN IN:
' AUSTRALIA, THE MEN AND WOMEN OF THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY) WHO MIGHT BE SERIOUS SERIOUS
Ifl THEIR TASK, SER-IOUS IN THEIR PROMISES AND
PLEDGES TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA AT AN ELECTION.
So WHAT WE HAVE DONE-FROM DECEMBER 1972
UNTIL THIS DAY IS TO TRY TO KEEP THOSE PROMISES, 
-6-
AND LET IT BE VERY CLEAR THAT THE PRINCIPLE
SOBJECTIVE REMAINS AS I STATED IT IN NOVEMBER 1972
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY. IF YOU LOOK AT EVERYTHING
I
t' DEMOCRATIC WORLD, SOUGHT TO PROMOTE EQUALITY, t..
t:
THIS GOVERNMENT HAS DONE, YOU WILL SEE THAT THAT
HAS BEEN ITS ABIDING AIM TO PROMOTE EQUALITY,
I EMPHASISE " TO PROMOTE EQUALITY" NOT TO
IMPOSE EQUALITY,:' WE HAVE IN A QUITE UNIQUE WAY'
IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA AND PERHAPS IN THE
ii \ r : e
1~. r
i 1~
i
i
c r 
-7-A
IN A SOCIETY SUCH AS OURS, EQUALITY, BOTH EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITY AND EQUALITY-OF RESULTS IS NOT GOING TO
BE DETERMINED SOLELY OR EVEN MAINLY BY EQUALITY OF
INCOME. THE FIRST AIM MUST BE GREATER EQUALITY OF
BASIC SERVICES,. THE SERVICES WHICH THE COMMUNITY ALONE
CAN PROVIDE IN A MODERN SOCIETY AND THROUGH GREATER
EQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS. THE GREAT INEQUALITIES
IN AUSTRALIA ARE NOW NOT AS BETWEEN STATES, BUT AS
BETWEEN REGIONS WITHIN STATES. INCREASINGLY, A
FAMILY'S STANDARD OF LIVING, THEIR OPPORTUNITIES FOR
DECENT HEALTH, DECENT SCHOOLS, DECENT TRANSPORT,
DECENT ENVIRONMENT, ARE DETERMINED NOT SO MUCH BY THEIR
INCOME, BUT BY WHERE THEY LIVE,
EXT WEEK, AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, WE WILL HEAR
A GREAT DEAL ABOUT A BETTER DEAL FOR THE STATES,
WE ARE PERFECTLY PREPARED TO PROVIDE A FAIR DEAL
NOT ON THE BASIS OF DIVIDING AUSTRALIA INTO SIX
COMPETING, CONFLICTING COMPARTMENTS OR SEVEN COMPETING
CONFLICTING GOVERNMENTS, BUT ON THE BASIS THAT ALL
THE GOVERNMENTS SHARE THE SAME PROBLEMS AND SHARE THE
SAME RESPONSIBILITY. 1
i 
* 1
11 -8-
1/
r
j
1
Trs 2
THOSE PROBLEMS CANNOT BE SOLVED JUST BY HANDING OUT
A FEW MORE MILLIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN TAXPAYERS'
MONEY, WE HAVE TO FIND PERMANENT SOLUTIONS WHICH
MAKE FOR BETTER SERVICES AND A MORE EFFICIENT ALLOCATION
OF THE NATION'S RESOURCES, THE APPROACH IE HAVE
ADOPTED EVER SINCE WE CAME INTO GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
TO TRY TO RELIEVE THE STATES OF SOME OF THE CHRONIC
BURDENS ON THEIR BUDGETS AND FREE THEM TO USE
THEIR RESOURCES MORE CONSTRUCTIVELY AND EFFECTIVELY.
IN THOSE AREAS WHERE STATE GOVERNMENTS ARE PROPERLY
PARAMOUNT,
THE LIBERAL APPROACH OFFERS NO LASTING SOLUTION,
THAT APPROACH IS TO LEAVE THE BASIC STRUCTURES
UNCHANGED,/ TO KEEP THE ARRANGEMENTS ABOUT FUNCTIONS
AS THEY ARE AND TO HOPE THAT THE EXISTING SYSTEM
CAN CONTINUE TO CREAK ALONG BY THE APPLICATION OF
A BIT MORE OF THE TAXPAYERS' MONEY, IN EFFECT
* THE LIBERALS ASK THE TAXPAYERS TO SUBSIDISE THE
INEFFICIENCIES AND INEQUALITIES OF EXISTING ARRANGEMENTS
AND TO MAKE GOOD THE LOSSES WHICH THOSE ARRANGEMENTS
MAKE INEVITABLE, THAT IS THE APPROACH OF THE LIBERAL
PREMIERS. IT ISN'T OUR APPROACH AND IT SHOULD NOT
BE THE APPROACH OF ANY SECTION OF THE PARTY. ii I
I I
. e 
8
-8ATHE
TWO GREAT DRAINS ON THE STATE BUDGETS ARE RAILWAYS
SAND HOSPITALS.,
IN NEW SOUTH WALES WE HAVE THE SITUATION IN BOTH
THOSE AREAS OF MOUNTING LOSSES AND DECLINING SERVICES.
' YET OUR EFFORTS TO HELP THE STATE GOVERNMENT
AND MORE IMPORTANTLY, TO HELP THE AUSTRALIANS
WHO LIVE IN NEW SOUTH WALES GET BETTER SERVICES,
:' MORE FAIRLY FINANCED, HAVE BEEN REJECTED OR
. OBSTRUCTED.
TOMORROW I SHALL BE ADDRESSSING THE SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN CONVENTION OF THE PARTY.
I SHALL BE ABLE TO DRAW A GREAT CONTRAST BETWEEN
"-' THE CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE TWO LABOR GOVERNMENTS
IN CANBERRA AND ADELAIDE AS AGAINST THE
OBSTRUCTIONISM OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT, I
. r i i
r : r
I:
1-j-
; r . F-
N.. -9-
S/ -t IN TERMS OF SHEER POLITICS, DON'T FORGET THAT THE
NIEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT IS SHOWN BY THE POLLS TO
BE THE MOST UNPOPULAR OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS,
S" AND THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT IS FAR AND
AWAY THE MOST POPULAR..
' KNOCKING CANBERRA HAS NOT PAID OFF FOR MR LEWIS.
IF IT WON'T WORK FOR AN ANTI-LABOR GOVERNMENT, IT'S
NOT GOING TO WORK FOR ANY SECTION OF OUR OWN PARTY,
THE OBSTRUCTION FROM NEW SOUTH WALES RANGES FROM PETTY
CUSSEDNESS ON LITTLE MATTERS, TO GROSS IRRESPONSIBILITY
. ON GREAT MATTERS, THERE ARE THINGS LIKE THE REFUSAL
TO LET A NEW SOUTH WALES OFFICIAL TRAVEL ON A CULTURAL
MISSION TO CHINA, OR THE REFUSAL TO LET AN OFFICIAL
: ATTEND A MEETING OF A SUB-COMMITTEE OF THE INTERIM
COMMITTEE FOR THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION.
BUT THE TWO GREAT MATTERS, IN TERMS OF THEIR EFFECT
ON THE PEOPLE AND THEIR POTENTIAL EFFECT ON THE STATE'S
FINANCIAL POSITION ARE HOSPITALS AND RAILWAYS. THERE
AGAIN, MARK THE CONTRAST WITH SOUTH AUSTRALIA, _. 1
i 1
I 
-; 7 LET ME TELL YOU A LITTLE OF THE STORY OF OUR PROPOSAL
TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RAILWAYS. IT WAS AN OFFER MADE IN THE POLICY SPEECH
OF 1972, IN FEBRUARY 1973 I WROTE TO SIR ROBERT
ASKIN CONFIRMING THAT PROMISE, IN MARCH HE
AGREED TO OFFICIAL DISCUSSIONS, WITHOUT PRIOR
COMMITMENT, TO CLARIFY THE ISSUES INVOLVED IN SUCH
A TRANSFER. ' WHEN MR LEWIS BECAME PREMIER, HE
BROKE OFF THOSE DISCUSSIONS. THEY HAD BEEN
FRUITFUL AND CONGENIAL BUT HE BROKE THEM OFF.
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WE REACHED AGREEMENT FOR THE
TRANSFER LAST YEAR. THE CONTRASTING RESULT
IS THAT SOUTH AUSTRALIA SAVES $ 10 MILLION
A YEAR AND NEW SOUTH WALES CONTINUES TO HAVE TO
BEAR AN $ 80 . MILLION ANNUAL LOSS ON ITS RAILWAYS, o. 
JUST BEAR THAT IN MIND NEXT WEEK WHEN MR LEWIS
SQUAWKS ABOUT SO-CALLED CENTRALISM IN CANBERRA
AND CANBERRA'S ALLEGED NEGLECT OF THE STATES.
THERE'S NOTHING PARTICULARLY " CENTRALIST" ABOUT
NATIONALLY-OPERATED RAILWAYS IT'S HARDLY
A MATTER OF PHILOSOPHY ITS JUST COMMONSENSE.
IN EVERY OTHER FEDERAL SYSTEM IN THE WORLD,
RAILWAYS ARE RUN NATIONALLY,
OUR RATIONAL APPROACH IS SHARED BY OUR PARTNERS
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, THE SAME OPPORTUNITY
FOR BETTER SERVICES, FOR FAIRER AND SOUNDER
FINANCES, IS THERE FOR NEW SOUTH WALES. THE
PARTY HERE SHOULD SEIZE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
SUPPORT OUR INITIATIVES, IT OFFERS A POSITIVE
APPROACH TO THE QUESTION OF FEDERAL-STATE
FINANCIAL RELATIONS, A WAY THROUGH THE CARPING
AND CONFRONTATION WHICH IS THE ESSENCE OF
OUR OPPONENT'S APPROACH.
L u i. t 
-11-
THE NEW SOUTH W'ALES GOVERNMENT'S RECORD ON HOSPITALS
SIS EQUALLY OBSTRUCTIVE, A LITTLE MORE THAN A MONTH
BEFORE MEDIBANK WAS SCHEDULED TO COME INTO OPERATION
!. ON THE 1ST JULY, AFTER MONTHS OF NEGOTIATIONS,
MR LEWIS CAME UP WITH A NEW SET OF PROPOSALS THAT
WOULD STRIKE AT THE FOUNDATION OF OUR HOSPITAL PROGRAM.
IN PARTICULAR, THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT IS TRYING
TO SABOTAGE THE BASIC PRINCIPLE. THAT ANY PERSON IN
NEED OF HOSPITAL TREATMENT SHOULD BE ABLE TO RECEIVE THE
BEST AVAILABLE TREATMENT FREE OF COST AND FREE OF
CONTRIBUTION TO A MEDICAL FUND, THE NEW SOUTH WALES
GOVERNMENT HAS RESORTED TO A VERY EXTENSIVE PROPAGANDA
CAMPAIGN TO JUSTIFY THIS SABOTAGE.
" THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY ASPECT OF THIS CAMPAIGN AND
MOST OF THE CAMPAIGNS WAGED BY OPPONENTS OF OUR
PROGRAM IS THAT THEY ALL RELY ON THE IDEA THAT THE
SAUSTRALIAN PUBLIC KNOWS NOTHING AND REMEMBERS NOTHING.
NEW TERRORS ARE DRUMMED UP TO CONDEMN PROPOSALS WHfCH
ARE IN FACT VERY FAMILIAR TO THE PEOPLE. i
a ' T 
-12-
FOR INSTANCE, WHY SHOULD A PUBLIC LONG ACCUSTOMED
TO STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICES BE TERRIFIED AT
THE PROSPECT OF AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
CORPORATION? FOR ALL THE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS SPENT ON THAT CAMPAIGN, IDON'T BELIEVE THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WERE A BIT IMPRESSED.
THE CAMPAIGN DIDN'T GET OFF THE GR OUND,
NCW THERE 13 THIS LAST MINUTE ATTEMPT TO SABOTAGE
fIEDIBANK, THE PLAIN FACT IS THAT AS FAR AS
HOSPITAL BEDS A"-RE CONCERNED, OUR PROGRAM WILL SIMPLY
RE-ESTABLISH WHAT EXISTED AND WORKED VERY SATISFACTORILY
UNDER THE CHIFLEY GOVERNMENT -THE PROVISION OF FREE
HOSPITAL TREATMENT IN PUBLIC WARDS,, FUNDED ON A
50-50 BASIS BETWEEN THE FEDERAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS. 
I 7-77-
I SAID BEFORE THAT THE GREAT THRUST OF OUR PROGRAM IS
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY IN MATTERS LIKE SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS
AND PUBLIC TRANSPORT, WE ARE STRIVING FOR SOCIAL
EQUALITY. EQUALLY FUNDAMENTAL IS THE STRUGGLE FOR POLITICAL EQUALITY.
IT IS EXTRAORDINARY HOW WE STILL ACCEPT THE DENIAL OF
THIS BASIC RIGHT, A RIGHT WHICH HAS BEEN PART OF THE
DEMOCRATIC RHETORIC FOR A CENTURY OR MORE YET
-NEVER TRANSLATED INTO REALITY IN AUSTRALIA. IT IS
EXTRAORDINARY HOW EVEN PEOPLE IN OUR OWN PARTY FAIL
TO BE INCENSED BY THIS DENIAL, I
TWO WEEKS AGO THE SENATE AGAIN REJECTED THE NEW
REDISTRIBUTION A REDISTRIBUTION WHICH ON ANY GROUND
IS THE FAIREST EVERY PRESENTED TO ANY AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT.
WE HAD TWO DEBATES ON THE REDISTRIBUTIONn FIRST WE
SUBMITTED THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONERS' PROPOSALS TO
THE PARLIAMENT. WHEN THEY WERE REJECTED WE SUBMITTED
THEM IN THE FORM OF BILLS. BOTH THE PROPOSALS AND THE
BILLS ARE DESIGNED TO EFFECTUATE THE LAW OF THE LAND
A LAW ESTABLISHED AT THE JOINT SITTING OF BOTH HOUSES
OF THE PARLIAMENT LAST AUGUST. THE LAW-SAYS THE NUMBERS
OF VOTERS IN EACH ELECTORATE WITHIN A STATE SHALL NOT
VARY BY MORE THAN 10% ABOVE OR BELOW THE QUOTA IN THAT
STATE,'
~ rt r 
S14-
IN BOTH THE DEBATES, NO SENIOR LIBERAL INTERVENED.
THE LEAqERS LEFT IT UP TO THE MEMBER FOR BENNELONG
NO A HOUSEHOLD WORD TO ARGUE THEIR CASE, SUCH
S-AS .: IT WAS, AND NO WONDER. HOW COULD MR FRASER
JUSTIFY TO HIS OWN SUPPORTERS THAT THEIR VOTE IN
MITCHELL IS TO BE WORTH HALF THAT OF A PERSON VOTING
SIN DARLING? . THAT ILLUSTRATES THE REAL POINT ABOUT
ANY ELECTION HELD ON THE EXISTING BOUNDARIES.
. THERE IS NO PENALTY FOR LABOR VOTERS AS AGAINST LIBERAL
VOTERS; . THE PENALTY IS SPREAD INDISCRIMINATELY. ON
SLABOR AND LIBERAL VOTERS ALIKE IF THEY HAVE. THE-.
SMISFORTUNE TO LIVE IN THE PLACES WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS,
LIBERAL OR LABOR, LIVE.
THROUGHOUT THE DEBATES THERE WAS NEVER ANY SUGGESTION
THAT THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONERS HAD NOT DONE A
SCRUPULCUSLY FAIR JOB, IN EACH STATE THE COMMISSIONERS
BENT OVER BACKWARDS TO BE FAIR, THE OBJECTION TO THEIR
WORK WAS THAT THEY ADHERED TO THE LAW OF THE LAND, AS
THEY WERE DUTY BOUND TO DO, THE OBJECTION TO THE
REDISTRIBUTION WAS NOT ON ANY GROUNDS OF FAIRNESS . IT
WAS AN OBJECTION TO ANY REDISTRIBUTION AT ALL. i I 
THE FATE OF THE REDISTRIBUTION PROPOSALS IS THE CLASSIC
EXAMPLE OF HOW A VERY SMALL BUT VERY VOCAL PRESSURE GROUP
CAN SET ASIDE THE CLEAR WILL AND INTERESTS OF THE MAJORITY,
IN THIS CASE ALREADY'EMBODIED IN THE LAW OF THE LAND.
THE COUNTRY PARTY MADE ALL THE RUNNING AND WAS. ABLE TO
GET ITS WAY EVEN THOUGH THE LIBERAL PARTY IS EVERY BIT
AS MUCH A VICTIM OF THE PRESENT MALAPPORTIONMENT AS THE
LABOR PARTY.
WE HAVE TO REMEMBER HOWEVER THAT A GREAT DEAL OF OUR
PROGRAM IS THREATENED IN THE SAME WAY THE OPPONENTS ARE
POWERFUL, WELL-ORGANISED ENTRENCHED; THE BENEFICIARIES
ARE IN GENERAL NOT SO WELL ORGANISED, SO ARTICULATE,
THEREFORE WE HAVE TO BE THE SPOKESMEN, NOT JUST IN
OUR OWN CAUSE, BUT IN THEIR CAUSE,
TAKE THE CASE OF THE HIGH COURT CHALLENGE SPONSORED BY
THE NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIAN GOVERNMENTS AGAINST
THE CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLAN AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME.
SOME 60 SPECIFIC PROGRAMS ARE IMPERILLED BY THE CHALLENGE.
WHAT EACH HAS IN COMMON IS THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED TO
BENEFIT THE WEAK AND UNDERPRIVILEGED IN THE COMMUNITY
THE OLD, THE HANDICAPPED, ABORIGINES, MIGRANTS. 
-16-
STATE PERMIERS HAVE A READY MADE FORUM IN THE CAPITAL
CITY-BASED NEWSPAPERS. THE PEOPLE ON WHOSE BEHALF
WE ACT, DO NOT HAVE ANY SUCH VOICE. IF WE DON'T SPEAK
UP FOR THEM, NO ONE ELSE WILL, IF WE DON'T SUPPORT
AND DEFEND OUR OWN PROGRAM, NO-ONE ELSE WILL.
THE INSURANCE OFFICES ARE WELL-ORGANISED, POLICY HOLDERS
ARE NOT. THE AMA, IS ARTICULATE. THE MILLION
AUSTRALIANS WHO CANNOT AFFORD HEALTH INSURANCE ARE NOT,
WE HAVE IN OUR'RANKS MANY OF THE MOST ARTICULATE PEOPLE
IN AUSTRALIA. IT IS OUR DUTY TO MOBILISE OUR
OWN RESOURCES AND TALENTS IN DEFENCE OF THE PROGRAM. I 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E, G. lIWHITLAM, P, P,,
TO THE 1975 ANNUAL STATE CONVENTION,
OF THE A, L. P, SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH,
ADELAIDE, SUNDAY 15 JUNE 1975
FOR MANY YEARS I HAVE HAD THE PLEASURE OF ADDRESSING
YOUR ANNUAL STATE CONVENTION, IT IS NOT A PLEASURE
I WOULD READILY FORGO, SOUTH AUSTRALIA IS THE STATE:.
THAT BEST EXEMPLIFIES THE SUCCESS OF LABOR'S POLICIES.
IT'S HERE IN THIS PROGRESSIVE AND ENLIGHTENED STATE....
THAT WE SEE THE REAL FRUITS OF A GREAT LABOR PARTNERSHIP.
IT's A PARTNERSHIP THAT INVOLVES ALL OF US.-OUR PARTY,
YOUR BRANCH, SON DUNSTAN'S GOVERNMENT, MY GOVERNMENT,
OUR OFFICIALS, OUR RESPECTIVE DEPARTMENTS. YESTERDAY
IN SYDNEY I FAD SOMETHING TO SAY TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES
BRANCH ABOUT THE STATE GOVERNMENT'S OBSTRUCTION AND
THE COST OF THAT OBSTRUCTION TO THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH
WALES A COST MEASURED IN POOR SOCIAL PLANNING AND
DETERIORATING PUBLIC SERVICES, HERE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
WE CAN SEE THE OTHER SIDE OF THE COIN, IE CAN SEE
WHAT CAN BE ACHIEVED BY READY COOPERATION BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES, i r 
SINCE I LAST SPOKE TO YOU THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS MADE GREAT PROGRESS WITH ITS PLANS FOR
A BETTER AND FAIRER SOCIETY, I DON'T WANT TO GLOSS
OVER OUR DIFFICULTIES, BUT EQUALLY THERE IS NO POINT
IN UNDERRATING OUR SUCCESSES. I WAS TAKEN TO TASK
IN THE PRESS THE OTHER DAY FOR POINTING TO THE REAL
GAINS IN INCOMES MADE BY EMPLOYEES UNDER A LABOR
GOVERNMENT, NO ONE SUPPOSES THAT MONEY INCOMES ARE ALL
THAT MATTER IN DETERMINING LIVING STANDARDS LEAST
S OF ALL WOULD A LABOR GOVERNMENT SUBSCRIBE TO THAT
VIEW, BUT THE FACT REMAINS THAT UNDER LABOR THE
REAL GAINS IN PERSONAL INCOME HAVE BEEN SUBSTANTIAL
M; ORE THAN 7 PERCENT SINCE WE CAME TO OFFICE.
PENSIONERS AND THOSE MOST IN NEED HAVE HAD BIGGER GAINS
IN THEIR REAL INCOMES THAN EVER BEFORE. A LABOR
GOVERNMENT A TRUE LABOR GOVERNMENT NATURALLY TAKES
PRIDE IN ANY REAL SHIFT IN WEALTH TOWARDS THOSE SECTORS
OF THE COMMUNITY WHO ARE MOST IN NEED, AND OF COURSE
ALONG WITH THIS IMPROVEMENT IN MONEY INCOMES THERE HAS
BEEN A VAST AND PERMANENT EXTENSION OF THE RANGE OF
SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO ALL
AUSTRALIANS THE SORT OF OPPORTUNITIES THAT MAKE
FOR A GENUINELY FAIR SOCIETY, FOR TRUE SOCIAL EQUITY, 
WE WOULDN'T BE HUMAN IF WE WEREN'T WORRIED BY
THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS WE SHARE WITH ALL OTHER
COMPARABLE COUNTRIES, IT IS NO EASY TASK TO FRAME
A NATIONAL BUDGET WHILE THESE PROBLEMS CONTINUE,
RECENTLY I HAVE DRAWN ATTENTION TO THE SIGNS OF
IMPROVEMENT ALREADY APPARENT IN THE ECONOMY
THE UPTURN IN THE DEMAND FOR HOUSING, THE CONTINUING
FALL IN UNEMPLOYMENT, THE GROWTH IN CONSUMER DEMAND,
WHAT WE ARE DETERMINED TO DO IN OUR EFFORTS TO
BEAT INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT-IS PROTECT THOSE WHO
. MOST NEED PROTECTION. A LABOR GOVERNMENT IS ESSENTIALLY
: A GOVERNMENT THAT CARES FOR PEOPLE ESPECIALLY
. THOSE WHO STAND IN GREATEST NEED. THIS HAS BEEN
.: THE THEME OF ALL OUR EFFORTS, ALL OUR MEASURES, ALL OUR
PRIORITIES, WE'LL STAND BY THAT, IT'S-ALL TOO EASY TO
BE DISHEARTENED BY THE PROBLEMS WE FACE, THIS IS. NOT
THE FIRST TIME LABOR HAS BEEN IN POWER IN A TIME OF
INTERNATIONAL CRISIS, THIRTEEN MONTHS AGO WE
FOUGHT AN ELECTION IN A TIME OF IMMENSE ECONOMIC
DIFFICULTY; WE WON THAT ELECTION; WE CAN WIN AGAIN,
I CANNOT STRESS TOO OFTEN THE BASIC STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY,
THE STRENGTH AND ABUNDANCE OF OUR NATURAL RESOURCES,
THE IMMENSE GCODWILL WE ENJOY AROUND THE WORLD,
L 
4
IN PUSHING AHEAD WITH OUT PROGRAMS W\ E NEED THE
COOPERATION OF THE STATES, THIS WEEK, AS YOU KNOW',
I SHALL BE MEETING DON DUNSTAN AND THE OTHER PREMIERS
IN CANBERRA AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE. I DON'T WANT
TO PREJUDGE THE OUTCOME OF OUR TALKS,
BUT THE POINT TO REMEMBER IN.
-THIS CONTEXT IS'JUST HOW MUCH THE? CAN SAVE, HOW
.:: MUCH THEY CAN EASE THEIR FINANCIAL BURDENS, BY
: COOPERATING WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN ITS
' SOCIAL PROGRAMS AND INITIATIVES, -THAT IS WHAT THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS DONE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
IT'S NOT A QUESTION OF KNUCKLIMG UNDER OR GIVING WAY
TO CANBERRA, IT'S A MATTER OF GETTING TOGETHER OF
HEALTHY NEGOTIATION, OF READY COOPERATION IN A
SPIRIT OF TRUST AND GOODWILL. . r. s
fl': r
t
j: -lIc: T
r 1: 
THERE ARE TWO PRINCIPAL BURDENS ON ALL STATE
BUDGETS RAILWAYS AND HOSPITALS. OUR POLICIES ARE
DESIGNED TO RELIEVE THOSE BURDENS. IT'S WORTH
REMEMBERING THAT MEDIBANK, FOR EXAMPLE, INVOLVES
MUCH MORE THAN FREE MEDICAL INSURANCE. IT MEANS
A NEW DEAL FOR STATE HOSPITAL FINANCES, OFFICIALS
OF BOTH GOVERNMENTS HAVE BEEN WORKING STEADILY
. TOWARDS THIS AGREEMENT SINCE NEGOTIATIONS STARTED IN
OCTOBER. LAST YEAR. THE AGREEMENT IS NOW READY FOR
: SIGNINGA IT MEANS THAT THE NET COST OF OPERATING
::: iSOUTH AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC HOSPITALS WILL BE SHARED
. ON A 50-50 BASIS BETWEEN THE TWO GOVERNMENTS, I DON
HAVE TO REMIND YOU OF THE BENEFITS TO THE PUBLIC
OF THE HOSPITAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK FREE STANDARD
WARD TREATMENT, FREE OUTPATIENT SERVICES, LOWER
HOSPITAL CHARGES FOR INTERMEDIATE AND PRIVATE WARDS,
AN ADDITIONAL $ 16 A DAY IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
PAYMENTS TO PRIVATE HOSPITALS FOR THEIR PATIENTS, x J ' rc . r-
1 -r-
:~ I2 F~-iL; ; iS; I
r
TT 
THOSE ARE BENEFITS FOR PATIENTS, FOR THE PEOPLE. THE
IMPORTANT THING FOR THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS A
SAVING OF $ 28 MILLION A YEAR UNDER THE MEDIBANK HOSPITAL
ARRANGEMENTS, MONEY WHICH THE STATE GOVERNMENT WILL BE
ABLE TO SPEND IN ANY AREA OF ITS RESPONSIBILITY, ONLY
ONE OTHER STATE TASMANIA WILL BE INTRODUCING THE
MEDIBANK HOSPITAL ARRANGEMENTS FROM 1 JULY, ALL THE
ANTI-LABOR STATES HAVE DITHERED AND DELAYED AT GREAT
COST TO THEIR STATE BUDGETS AND AT GREAT COST TO THE
WELFARE OF THEIR CITIZENS,
THE OTHER AREA WHERE WE ARE EASING SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S
FINANCIAL BURDENS IS RAILWAYS, THIS HAS BEEN A GREAT YEAR
OF ACHIEVEMENT AND INNOVATION FOR THE RAILWAYS IN AUSTRALIA,
BUT IT HAS BEEN A TIME OF SPECIAL ACHIEVEMENT FOR SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, ONE OF MY FIRST ACTS AS PRIME MINISTER WAS
TO WRITE TO D'C DUNSTAN SEEKING DISCUSSIONS ON OUR OFFER
TO ACCEPT A TRANSFER OF THE STATE RAILWAYS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THAT OFFER WAS MADE IN MY 1972
POLICY SPEECH, ' iE MADE RAPID PROGRESS IN NEGOTIATIONS,
THE PREMIER AND I SIGNED AN AGREEMENT ON 21 MAY TO TRANSFER
THE NON-METROPOLITAN RAILWAYS OF THIS STATE, AND THE
NECESSARY LEGI LATION HAS PASSED THE. t-HOUSEE -OF REP. RESENTATL'VES,
"' I
THERE WILL EE A NET FINANCIAL BENEFIT TO THE STATE'S
REVENUE OF $ 10 MILLION TO BE PAID BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ON OR BEFORE 1 JULY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA WILL BE RELIEVED OF
CAPITAL DEBTS ON HER TRANSFERRED RAILWAYS, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
WILL HAVE A SETTER RAILWAY SYSTEM. THE RIGHTS AND EMPLOYMENT
OF EVERY RAILWAY EMPLOYEE WILL BE PRESERVED,
I 
THERE IS MORE TO TELL YOU ABOUT RAILWAYS IN
SouTH AUSTRALIA, AND I SHALL RETURN TO IT IN A MOMENT,
BUT THE POINT I MAKE IS THIS: IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
WE HAVE HELPED TO RELIEVE THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF TWO
OF ITS TRADITIONAL BURDENS, AND REMEBER THAT WHAT
IE HAVE DONE FOR RAILWAYS AND HOSPITALS THIS YEAR WE
HAVE ALREADY DONE FOR WELFARE HOUSING AND UNIVERSITIES,
AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE A YEAR AGO WE GAVE THE
STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE FOR THEIR WELFARE HOUSING..
NEEDS, THIS RESPONSIBILITY IS NOW SHOULDERED ENTIRELY
.: BY. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, AT THE JUNE 1974 PREMIERS'..
'. CONFERENCE,' SOUTH AUSTRALIA WAS ADVANCED $ 20 MILLION
FOR THE SOUTH. AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST IN 1974-75
AND $ 18 MILLION FOR LENDING TO MEANS TESTED APPLICANTS
FOR HOUSING LOANS THROUGH THE HOME BUILDERS' ACCOUNT
UNDER THE 1973, HOUSING AGREEMENT, IN ADDITION, UNIVERSITIES,
TEACHERS COLLEGES AND ADVANCED EDUCATION UNDER MY
GOVERNMENT ARE N'OW ALMOST ENTIRELY COMMONWEALTH
RESPONSIBILITIES. HAVE BEEN OVERWHELMINGLY GENEROUS
IN FUNDING THEM, AS WE HAVE WITH EDUCATION OF EVERY KIND,
I NOTICED IN THE " ADVERTISER" THIS WEEK THE PLAN FOR A
NEW TERTIARY EDUCATION CENTRE ON THE SITE OF THE EAST
END MARKET, IT'S A SUPERB SCHEME INCORPORATING THE
COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND THE INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY, IT WAS ONLY WELL DOWN IN THE REPORT THAT I
READ THAT THIS WAS-BEINLG FINANCED THROUGH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES THE UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION AND
THE COMMISSION ON ADVANCED EDUCATION IN COOPERATION
WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENT, 
LET ME DEAL WITH ANOTHER AREA WHERE SOITH
AUSTRALIA HAS SHOWN HOW THE STATES CAN WORK IN COOPERATION
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHERE REAL PROGRESS
IS POSSIBLE AND REAL BENEFITS CAN ACCRUE TO THE PEOPLE.
TWO MONTHS AGO I HAD THE PLEASURE OF OPENING THE FIRST
HOME SITES PROVIDED BY THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND
COMMISSION AT HAPPY VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA WAS THE
FIRST STATE TO RESPOND TO THE PROPOSALS MY GOVERNMENT
MADE FOR LAND COMMISSIONS. OTHER STATES HAVE FOLLOWED
SUIT WITH VARYING DEGREES OF ENTHUSIASM BUT IT WAS
SOUTH AUSTRALIA THAT SHOWED THE WAY. IT'S VERY OBVIOUS
WHY THIS COOPERATION ' AS NEEDED IN TACKLING THE
PROBLEM OF LAND PRICES THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
THE NECESSARY FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
HAVE A JURISDICTION IN LAND MATTERS WHICH MY GOVERNMENT
DOES NOT. ' VE HAVE SOUGHT TO BRING TOGETHER FEDERAL
FINANCES AND S-ATE POWERS TO REMOVE THE EVIL
OF SPIRALLING LAND PRICES AND IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA-WE HAVE
SUCCEEDED IN DITNG SO, THE PRICE OF LAND IS THE SINGLE
LARGEST COMPCNENT N THE COST OF A HOME, OUR LAND
COMMISSION PROGRAM OPERATES ON A VERY SIMPLE AND
FUNDAMENTAL PLANNING PRINCIPLE ADEQUATE LAND SUPPLY
IS NECESSARY T3 PREVENT LAND PRICE INCREASES AT TIMES OF
HIGH DEMAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS COOPERATED IN OUR SCHEME
FROM THE START, BLOCKS OF LAND ARE AVAILABLE FROM THE LAND
COMMISSION FOR ABOUT $ 1,000 LESS THAN COMPARABLE
BLOCKS IN OTHER PARTS OF ADELAIDE, ,1. i' 1 
I DON'T THINK ANYONE WOULD ARGUE THAT RAPID
URBANISATION HAS BROUGHT MANY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ILLS
TO OUR CITIES. IT'S BEEN ONE OF THE GREAT POSTWAR
PROBLEMS IN EVERY DEVELOPED COUNTRY BUT ESPECIALLY IN
AUSTRALIA, TRANSPORT, SEWERAGE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT
SERVICES HAVE BEEN MADE MORE COSTLY AND DIFFICULT.
INDUSTRIES HAVE MET WITH HIGHER COSTS, THE ENVIRONMENT
HAS SUFFERED, AND PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTS IN AUSTRALIA
JUST HAVEN'T COPED WITH THIS PROBLEM. THEY HAVEN'T
STRIED, TTr, DON DUNSTAN'S GOVERNMENT AND MY GOVERNMENT HAVE
INITIATED A SERIES OF POLICIES RELATING TO LAND USE AND
LAND PRICES, THE OBJECTIVE HAS BEEN TO REDUCE THE
CONSEQUENCES OF TOO RAPID URBANISATION. THIS YEAR THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALLOCATED APPROXIMATELY
$ 26 MILLION TO THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION,
BETWEEN ITS EST. ABLISHMENT IN NOVEMBER 1973 AND JUNE 1974, ' 2
IT HAS PURCHASED 1226 HECTARES OF LAND WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES
OF THE ADELAIDE METROPOLITAN AREA. THIS YEAR. IT IS
IMPLEMENTING A FURTHER PROGRAM TO ACQUIRE LAND FOR URBAN
DEVELOPMENT AND OPEN SPACES, THE COMMISSION HAS ENGAGED
THE SERVICES OF PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS IN THE FIELDS OF
PLANNING, ENGINEERiNG, SURVEYING AND VALUING, IT'S ALL
PART OF A SCHEMEi TO BRING TOGETHER THE THREE TIERS OF
GOVERNMENT AND INVOLVE LOCAL COMMUNITIES THEMSELVES
IN SOLVING THIS PROBLEM, IT'S A MODEL OF WHAT CAN BE DONE
TO IMPROVE OUR SURROUNDINGS AND MAKE LIFE BETTER FOR
AUSTRALIANS AND THEIR FAMILIES, 
DON'T IMAGINE THAT LAND COMMISSIONS ARE ALL
THAT CONCERN US IN THIS FIELD, IN MAKING AUSTRALIA A
BETTER PLACE TO LIVE IN WE ARE JUST AS CONCERNED WITH
RURAL AREAS. THE DEPARTMENT OFr URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT DEALS AS IMUCH WITH THE WELFARE OF REGIONS
AS IT DOES WITH CITIES, LAST YEAR WE APPROVED THE FIRST
DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE BY AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
TO LOCAL COUNCILS GRANTS TOTALLING $ 56 MILLION
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, $ 4,7 MILLION IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
ALL BUT SEVEN OF THE 136 LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES IN THIS
STATE RECEIVED A GRANT,
WE HAVE SAFEGUARDED THE NATIONAL ESTATE, THE UNIQUE
AND BEAUTIFUL THINGS, NATURAL AND MAN-MADE, WORTH KEEPING
IN OUR COUNTRY, IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA WORKS UNDER THE
NATIONAL ESTATE PROGRAM AMOUNTING TO $ 886,000 WERE
APPROVED EARL:' THIS YEAR, I'E ARE PROVIDING ASSISTANCE
FOR ADELAIDE' ;-ATER TREATMENT SCHEME, WE ARE CATCHING
UP FURTHER ! WITH THE SEWERAGE BACKLOG IN ADELAIDE, IN THE
LAST FINANCIAL YEAR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
PROVIDED $ 5.7 ! ILLION TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA FOR THIS PURPOSE..
WE HAVE GIVEN $ 1 MILLION TO SOUTH AUSTRLIA TO DEVELOP
LEISURE AND RECREATION FACILITIES, WE HAVE UNIQUE PLANS
TO DEVELOP LE PARK IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS A MODEL
COMMUNITY, IN; WHICH SCHOOLS, RECREATION AND HEALTH
FACILITIES WILL BE COORDINATED AND PLANNED IN CONSULTATION
WITH THE PEOPLE. WE HAVE ALLOCATED OVER $ 3 MILLION FOR THE
ANGLE PARK PROJECT. I' li ci
.1 L' 1 
OUR URBAN LOCAL ROADS PROGRAM IS DESIGNED TO
IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF RESIDENTIAL STREETS AND WILL
INCLUDE A NUMBER OF INNOVATIONS TO LIFT THE STANDARDS
OF ROADS IN URBAN AND PROVINCIAL CENTRES, THIS
YEAR AND IN THE NEXT TWO YEARS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL GRANT SOUTH AUSTRALIA A TOTAL OF $ 102.71 MILLION
FOR ROADS OF ALL KINDS. WE ARE GETTING ON WITH OUR
PLANS FOR A NATIONAL HIGHWAYS SYSTEM LINKING ADELAIDE
WITH PERTH, MELBOURNE AND THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
NO-SERIOUS-EFFORT. WAS MADE BY PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS TO DEVELOP A PROPER NATIONAL ROADS
. NETWORK. lWE ARE THE FIRST GOVERNMENT TO GET ON WITH
THE JOB AND WE'RE DOING IT BY COOPERATION WITH A LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN THIS STATE, IT IS ONE MORE EXAMPLE OF
WHAT WE CAN DO TOGETHER ONE MORE EXAMPLE OF A LABOR
STATE, A LABOR ' SGVERNMENT SHOWING THE WAY. SOUTH
AUSTRALIA HAS COOPERATED IN ALL OUR DISCUSSIONS ON
URBAN ARTERIAL ROADS. IN ADDITION, SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS
READILY ENTERED INTO AGREEMENT WITH MY GOVERNMENT ON
THE UPGRADING OF ADELAIDE'S PUBLIC TRANSPORT. HERE IN
ADELAIDE YOU HAVE BETTER PUBLIC TRANSPORT THAN MOST STATES,
BUT IT OUGHT TO BE BETTER STILL, IT WILL BE BETTER,
TO DATE, URBAN TRANSPORT PROJECTS IN THIS STATE HAVE
ATTRACTED MORE THAN $ 15 MILLION IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE, 
IN THIS CONTEXT I TURN AGAIN TO THE RAILWAYS,
MORE THAN ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT, THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
HAS RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR A NATIONAL APPROACH TO THE
RAILWAYS THE NEED FOR A MODERN, EFFICIENT, NATIONAL
RAILWAY SYSTEM, NO STATE WILL BENEFIT MORE FROM SUCH
A SYSTEM THAN SOUTH AUSTRALIA ITS TRADE, BOTH EAST AND
WEST, WILL BE INVIGORATED AND STREAMLINED, I HAVE
MENTIONED THE TRANSFER OF THE NON-METROPOLITAN SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IT
WAS THE FIRST STEP IN THE CREATION OF A NATIONAL
RAIL SYSTEM WORTHY OF A GREAT CONTINENT. THE
AUSTRALIAN ' ATIONAL RAILWAYS, WHICH. WE ARE SETTING UP
UNDER NEW LEGISLATION, WILL HAVE THE ORGANISATIONAL
STRUCTURE AND OPERATIONAL POWERS TO CONSOLIDATE THE
OLD COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS AND THE STATE RAILWAYS,
INTO A SINGLE SYSTEM, EQUIPPED WITH THE LATEST AND
BEST ROLLING SETCK. E HAVE ALREADY BEGUN WORK ON TWO
IMPORTANT NEW . AIL LINKS IN THIS STATE. Two MONTHS AGO
I ATTENDED THE INUGURATION OF THE TARCOOLA TO ALICE
SPRINGS RAILWAY, THE LARGEST RAILWAY PROJECT IN
AUSTRALIA FCO OVER HALF A CENTURY. THIS YEAR, TOO,
WE HAVE BEGUN 3UILDING THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY
BETWEEN ADELAIDE AND CRYSTAL BROOK, WHICH WILL REMOVE THE
LAST BREAK CF GAUGE BETWEEN THE MAINLAND CAPITALS, r
I. 
IN NO OTHER STATES HAS THERE BEEN SUCH A
MAGNIFICENT AND SUSTAINED RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT, I
COULD EXTEND THIS LIST WITHOUT DIFFICULTY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HOUSING CORPORATION, THE LEGAL AID OFFICE, THE
CHILDREN'S COMMISSION. WE CAN BE PROUD OF OUR RECORD.
IT'S ALL BEEN ACHIEVED UNDER LABOR, IT COULD ONLY BE
ACHIEVED UNDER LABOR, UNDER ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT THESE
THINGS WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE AND UNDER ANY
OTHER GOVERNMENT THEY WOULD BE CUT BACK OR DISMANTLED,
WE HAVE ALL SEEN THE EVIDENCE OF OPPOSITION
OBSTRUCTION IN THE PARLIAMENT, IN THE NON-LABOR STATES,
IN THE COURTS, IT WAS MADE VERY OBVIOUS I N THEIR
APPROACH TO THE RECENT REDISTRIBUTION AND I KNOW
ELECTORAL REFORM IS A MATTER OF VERY SPECIAL
IMPORTANCE TO T. E PARTY IN THIS STATE. DON DUNSTAN
HAS HAD A L. NGER BATTLE THAN MOST OF US TO GET FAIR
REPRESENTATICO FOR THE PEOPLE, IN THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT WE ARE STILL FIGHTING THAT BATTLE. OUR
REDISTRIBUTiON '; AS ACKNOWLEDGED TO BE THE FAIREST EVER
PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT, IT WAS BASED ON OUR LEGISLATION
TO ESTABLISH ELECTORAL EQUALITY FOR EVERY AUSTRALIAN
WHEREVER HE LIVED, THAT LEGISLATION IWAS PASSED
BY THE JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT LAST YEAR; IT WAS ONE
OF THE PROPOSALS ON WHICH THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION WAS
GRANTED; IT W: AS SPECIFICALLY ENDORSED BY THE PEOPLE,
YET THE LIBERALS, UNDER PRESSURE FROM THE COUNTRY PARTY,
REJECTED THIS OVERDUE AND NECESSARY REDISTRIBUTION,
THEY REJECTED IT EVEN IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA A STATE WHERE
THE COUNTRY PARTY HAS NO REPRESENTATION IN THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT, .. L1.
II -r l! i
II 
IASK Y(. U TO REP T ' E Cz4VAIGN OF
OBSTR'JCTION GOEI, ON 8-
i4' E FOUGHT AND DLFEATED
OVER A YEAR AGO, WE CA
THAT OUR MEAURES CAN
TRUE A. ND LAl BENEF
WE CAN POIN-MC' &gt; Ot
SHOW THE Au,--RA'? AN PIF
OTHER STATESE CAN-DOB
BETTER HOSPI-ALS CVEf
TRANSPORT, B,* UTTER PLAV.
OTH~ ER STATES CAP 4AVETiOGETHER,
TFJ GRZT
XCR ; mPORTA,: k7 AND)
7HNit hE-DIFF-IZU63IES VF ~~ K~ AC-C OT . TRJCTION
"! AT 2L . JCTION JUS-t
illS2PFLE blY PROVING
RMS WILl-BRING
0 Vp j-y
iXV e 74K_. " AN
' STV% " A K
FXT ~ iLR. ENT
T7ME TO -It'. NL
i'll ' 1L BE -REtiE. 3' zE . D ANI" Yi. ~ GEN ERA -, O~ ls
jF WE STICK TCI OUR GUV, 51 $ VW5,. AS~ i-l" S
'~'~ INHAND,. AND TAKE ifXP ' F Q PRCGRECS
IAVE ALREADY MADE -TV STAin.
7 NAT7 t4
-11. 



PRIME MRAINISTE PRESS STATMENT NO. 513
16 June 1975
APPOINTMENTS
Mr J. H. M. Oswin, Secretary of the Department of the
Media, has been appointed Australian Ambassador to UNESCO.
Mr Oswin, who is 52, has been head of the Department
of the Media since its creation in 1973. He was educated in Sydney
and, following service in the RAAF, held a number of senior
appointments in broadcasting and television. Prior to
his appointment as Secretary of the Department of the Media,
Mr Oswin was Managing Director of Seven Network Pty Ltd.
Mr Oswin is also at present a member of the Australia Council
and a member of the Board of the Film and Television School.
Mr J. J. Spigelman, has been appointed Secretary of
the Department of the Media, effective from 30 June 1975.
Mr Spigelman, who is 29, has been on the staff of
Mr Whitlam since September 1972. Before then he practised
as a solicitor in Sydney.
He is a graduate in Arts and Law from Sydney
University and won the University Medal in Law in 1970.
Mr J. H. Mant will become Principal Private Secretary
to the Prime Minister. He is at present Assistant Secretary
in the Department of Urban and Regional Development.
He is 38, obtained a BA and LlB at Sydney University.
He practised as a solictor in Sydney and since 1971 has worked
as a Town Planner in Canberra.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



IffSL AFFAIRS
MENAT NQ DATE
M37 17 June 1975
WOTDC014FERL-CE FOR INTE RN TIONAJ1 WQOMEN'S YEAR
Prime Minister and Acting faLr:' iitrfrFoog
Kr . G. Ltlmannouncedto day that Australia wnuJld l. e represenied
at 1, cI' Conference for lntern-ttionai Women's~ Year to be held
. Cio fr Y-19 une to 2 July 1971).
[ K'r W/ hitlam said that the Conference was the ma ' jor United
ations ! 2 M-etinp * for International Women's Year and would ' have ts it
thr-s: Er--ality, Development an6 Peace, the themos choootn by tli-:
L. ied r~ in fcr the Year.
he Australian delegation would be led by Ms E'. lizabeth
itei" 4. AdN-;., er to the P-rimne Minister on Women's Affairs -ind Convener
-f ie X';,-tralian National Advisory Committee for InterritionaL!
'* he following is the Australian Delegation to the
.) eletrates: i1Es lizabeth Reid ( Leader of Delegation).
9 r Ashwin, Australian Ambassador to the Ar-tb Reiepuh) Ii,
o~ f Eg. ypt
i* rs r'argaret Whitlam, Member oil the Australian ational
r', dvisory Committee for International Women's Yeoijr
Alternates and-Advisers:
r P. J. Gialvin, Co-ordinator, International Women's Ya
e cret an at
s S. Dowse, Senior Adviser, Department of the PIr ime kinister
and Cabinet
S. Castley, N~ ember of the Australian National Advisory
21; ommittee for International Women's Year. 
2
Ms M. Pozos, Member of the Australian National Advisory
Committee for International Women's Year
Mr A. Wilson, First Secretary, Australian Embassy, Lima
Mr J. Campbell, First Secretary, Australian Mission to
United Nations, New York
Ms P. Wensley, First Secretary, Australian Embassy, i : ic'
Ms S. Ryan, Executive Officer, International Women's Y', ar
Secretariat, ( Member of the A. C. T. Legislative Assemt:..,,
Ms L. Manderson, Executive Officer, International Womn
Year Secretariat
Ms h. Robertson, Consultant, International Women's Year
Secretariat
Ms L. Lake, Prime Minister's Office
Concurrently with the World Conference a Tribune a
conference for representatives of non-governmental organisation: : and
-ndiv: duals will also be held at Mexico. The Australian Govern i
' s providing financial support for the following group of Austr.
. onen to attend the Tribune:
Catherine Allen VIC. Young Women's Chric, i: in
Eva BaconQLD.
Laurie Bebbington
Pat Eatock
Pat Giles
Leonora Howlett
Joyce McConnell
Edna Roper
Edna Ryan
Vi Stanton ACT NSW
NSW
NSW DARWIN Association
Union of Australian
Women Women's Officer,
Australian Union o19
Students Fighter for Abori: rinal
and Women's Rights
Western Australia': st.
Woman Trade Union iffici.
Chairman of WA Anti-
Discrimination Conirittee
Artist National President,
National Council of Wonoof
Australia
M. L. C.
Lifetime-Worker for ' ome'
Aboriginal Welfare work'. 



JAUSTRALIA L
PRIME PRESS STATEMENT NO. 514
17 June 1975
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR GRANTS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced
further funds and assistance for special projects during
International Women's Year. This is the fourth in a
series of grants announced over the last six months and
represents a total commitment so far of $ 1,139,302.
The grants were approved on the advice of the
Australian National Advisory Committee for International
Women's-Year. They are in line with the general responsibility
of the Committee to develop themes and encourage programs
to benefit women throughout Australia.
The largest amount,.$ 38,000 goes to the Australian
Department of Health for further funding of the Conference
on Women's Health in a Changing Society to be held in
Brisbane in August. This is in addition to an earlier
grant of $ 22,500 from International Women's Year funds,
and a special grant from the Family Planning Vote of the
Health Department. The $ 38,000 will go towards additional printing
costs, fares and accommodation for persons presenting
papers, and fares and accommodation for 50 people to
attend from special interest groups.
The Association of Queensland Women's Forum Clubs
will hold a seminar in Brisbane on September 14 with the
theme " Women at Work". This has attracted a grant of $ 4,220.
The recently established Women's Centre in Launceston
will receive $ 2,000 to cover the cost of some essential
furnishings and office equipment. Like other Women's Centres
the Launceston one will function as a referral and information
service as well as a meeting place available to all women in
the district. The International Women's Year Committee of the
Bland Shire Council will get $ 500 for a one-day seminar
on July 5 intended to raise some of the issues affecting
women in this large country area. 
Ms Diana Wilson will receive a grant of $ 6,000 to
write a book on the achievements of Australian Sportswomen.
The book will include a general history of sportswomen,
specific biographies and a photographic section.
Ms Zelda d'Aprano will get $ 8,000 to write a book
drawing on her:, experiences in many political movements.
For further information contact John Gavin 470839
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
Priority \ Amount
Area Applicant and Descrip. tion of Project
Community INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR COMMITTEE
Attitudes BLAND SHIRE COUNCIL
This Committee proposes to hold a one clay
seminar on July the fifth. Subjects such
as " women on the land", " community aid",
" child care" will be discussed in order
to raise some of the issues affecting the
women of this large country area.
COST: 500.()
TIlE ASSOCIATION OF QUEENSLAND) WOMEN'S
FORUM CLUBS
The -Association would like to bring together
for one day representatives of
all their clubs throughout Queensland,
plus invited people from other clubs
and will also advertise the seminar
extensively so that all other women
will be given an opportunity to attend.
The theme of the seminar is to be
" Women at Work" and about 10o00 women are
expected to contribute. It will be held
in Brisbane on 14th September. COST: 4,220.0'
ZELDA D'APRANO
Grant to write a book. Zelda D'Aprano
has had wide experiences in many political
movements for the past 40 years. She
feels strongly that the women's movement
has failed to learn from the experiences
of the past and that she is in a position
to be able to bring the past and the
present together in a way that will be
meaningful for those who seek changes in
our society. COST: 8,000.00) 
Priority
Area Community Attitudes Health and
Welf are Applicant and Description of Project
DIANA WILSON
Grant to write book celebrating the
achievements of Australian sportswomen.
It will include a general history of
sportswomen, specific biographies and
a photographi~ c section. A book such
as this will help) restore our sportswomen
to the position of prominence
they deserve and will provide a
valuable non-sexist reference source..
COST:
vvt -
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Conference on Women's Health in a
Changing Society.
This conference, to be held in August,
has already attracted a grant of
$ 22,500.00 from International Women ' s
Year funds. It has also received
funding from the Department of Health
Family Planning Vote.
It has become apparent that the
con erence will be very successful.
However, in order to maximize the
impact, further funding is requested
to cover additional printing costs
Fares and accommodation for persons
presenting papers Fares and
accommodation for S0 people from special
interest groups
Total requested
WOMEN IS CENTRE L AUNCESTON
Tfhis centre was recently acqIuired by a
group of women in Launceston. It is
similar to othcr such centres in that
it functions, as a meeting place, provides 1~ Amount 6,000.00
38 ,00 0 .00 
Priority AreaApplicant and D) escription of Project -t
Health and
Welf are WOM. EN'S CENTRE LAUNCESTON ( Cont'd)
a central point for organising other
activities, acts as a refTerral and
information centre and is available
for all activities relating to women
in the area. Funds are requested to
cover the cost of some essential
items such as furnishings, office
equipment etc. COST:
A1* Amouni
2, n0n. 0
4 



Press Statement No: 515
18 June 1975
REGIONAL POLICY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, released today a
statement on the Australian Government's policy on regionalism.
The Prime Minister said:
" On 5 February I announced the establishment of a small
committee of Ministers concerned primarily with the Australian
Government's relations with the States. I said the committee
would also examine programs of direct assistance to regional,
local government and local communities; that the Australian
Government has laid considerable stress on the adoption of
a regional approach to planning and decision-making; and that
it was time to consolidate the Australian Government's
initiatives. " Regionalism in Australia is not new. It has been
developed since World War II in a number of States in various
forms and for various purposes.
" The Australian Government has adopted a regional policy
in implementing some of its major new initiatives; the
Australian Assistance Plan and the Area Improvement Program
are notable examples. Agreement has been reached with all
States on the regional boundaries used for Grants Commission
purposes, and which are used for other Australian Government
programs; in most cases these boundaries have been defined
by the States themselves. These boundaries would be open to
review in the light of changing circumstances.
" A regional policy is based on the concept that some
programs and services of government are most efficiently and
effectively planned, co-ordinated, and delivered at a level
intermediate to those of State and Local government. There
are many examples, electricity reticulation, water and sewerage,
hospital facilities, libraries, some welfare-services, and so on.
" Regionalism as it is developing in Australia, and
as envisaged by the Australian Government, is based on the
continued existence of Federal, State, and Local structures.
A wide range of government services would continue to be best
planned and delivered at each of these levels. Clearly,
not all government programs could or should be based on regions. / 2 
-2-
" General acceptance of a regional policy, coupled
with uniform regional boundaries, would enable co-ordination
and harmonisation of those Australian, State and Local programs
delivered at the regional level. The effectiveness of this
co-ordination and harmonisation will be enhanced to the extent
that regional administrative arrangements and organisations
are acceptable to each level of government.
" Integral with the concept of regionalism are the
concepts of devolution of responsibility for, and public
participation in, planning and decision-making. Regionalism.
also opens up the possibilities of decentralisation and
regionalisation of Australian Government administration
to give the community better access to government services and
to improve the effectiveness of the delivery of those
services. The Royal Commission into Australian Government
Administration is examining these possibilities. The Government
has asked the Royal Commission for an early indication of
its views.
Obj ectives " The Australian Government has adopted, as a basis for
its regional policy, the objectives that:
services and programs of the Australian Government
should be provided on a regional basis unless
it is inappropriate to do so, with regard to
efficiency, economy, and effectiveness.
regional bodies or organisations should be
given a responsibility for those services
wherever possible, noting that this responsibility
may range from direct involvement in decisionmaking
through to consultation.
public participation in planning and decisionmaking
for, and implementation of, programs
should be encouraged and assisted.
State and Local Government should be encouraged
to delegate to regional bodies more responsibility
for those States and Local Government programs
which are most appropriately delivered at the
regional level and to foster public participation.
Proposed Action
" A great deal of progress has already been made by
the Australian and State Governments in establishing co-operative
arrangements for the exchange and analysis of information on, and
the planning and delivering of, programs and services at a
regional level. Ministers and officials have been, and are
continuing to be, actively involved. The implementation of
the Australian Government's policy on regionalism will require
consolidation and extension of these co-operative arrangements,
involving the Australian and State Governments and as
appropriate regional bodies, Local Government, and community
groups. 
4 S -3-
" Developments will need to be flexible and evolutionary.
State Governments have established regional bodies and regional
programs. Implementation of the Australian Government's
regional policy will take these into account. Precise
arrangements may vary from State to State, and region to region,
to take account of particular circumstances e. g. geographic,
demographic, economic and political. It will take time to
develop fully the skills needed for regional bodies and local
organisations to contribute to, participate in, and make,
major decisions. The Australian Government is already
providing assistance for the development of these skills and
will continue to do so, but is of the view that the skills
will best be developed by experience.
" There will be a need to establish, where they do
not already exist, regional bodies mutually-acceptable to
each level of government and to regional communities. There
will be a need to identify and define the programs most
efficiently and effectively delivered at regional and local
scales and to establish a process of exchange of information
between the levels of government so that programs and services
can be harmonised. " The Committee of Ministers concerned with Australian/
State and Regional relations will have a continuing role in
the development of the Australian Government's regional policy."
CANBERPRA. A. C. T. 



I 43"
Press Statement No. 516
18 June 1975
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, tonight released the
S ext of a telegram he had sent to the Chief Minister of Papua
New Guinea, Mr Michael Somare:
" PLEASE ACCEPT MY HEARTIEST CONGRATULATIONS ON THE
HISTORIC DECISION TAKEN BY THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
TODAY. I LOOK FORWARD TO CONTINUING CLOSE
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN OUR TWO GOVERNMENTS AND OUR
TWO NATIONS. MAY I EXPRESS MY PROFOUND ADMIRATION
FOR YOUR SUCCESS IN STEERING PAPUA NEW GUINEA TO
FULL NATIONHOOD.
WARMEST WISHES.
GOUGH WHITLAM." 



Ld\
PRaME MINSTEA Press Statement
] 8 June ] 975
TASMANIA MEDIBANK AGREEMENT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam and the Premier of
Tasmania, Mr Neilson today signed the Medibank Agreement between
the Australian and Tasmanian Governments. The ceremonial
signing took place at the Launceston General Hospital before
Mr Whitlam met patients and staff there.
Mrs Nellie Ellis, a patient at Launceston General Hospital
witnessed the Prime Minister's signature on the two copies of
the Agreement. Legislation on Medibank has passed both Houses of
the Tasmanian Parliament and the Agreement will come into force
as scheduled on July. This means that from that date,
Tasmanians will be able to take full advantage of the benefits
offered by Medibank.
The onyv other State to have entered a Medibank
Agreement is South Australia. The Prime Minister signed a
Medibank Hospital Agreement with the South Australian Premier,
Mr Dunstan, in Adelaide last Sunday.
Mr Whitlam said he was especially pleased that the
two State Labor G-overnments had shown the obvious advantages
of co-operating with the Australian Government in the best
interests of their citizens.
In his Bass by-election campaign speech in Launceston
last night, Mr Whitlam drew attention to the lameness of the claim
of the non-Labor States for additional finance from the Australian
Government, when they have shown such reluctance to join Medibank
despite the obvious financial advantage it would be to them
especially in the hospital field.
Under the Medibank Agreement, the Australian Government
will meet 50 zer cent of the net operating costs of all the
recognised hospitals in Tasmania for the ten year period of the
Agreement. ( A list of recognised hospitals is attavhed).
The Agreement states that " it is the policy of
Australia to ensure that every person has access to comprehensive
hospital care, including medical treatment, provided without
charge and without means test in standard beds of public hospitals." / 2 
U,
-2-
The Agreement provides for variation from time to
time to ensure that Tasmania continues to draw maximum
advantage from the scheme and may renegotiate should any other
State negoti= re an Agreement in any more favourable terms.
LAUNCESTON. TAS. 41
.2 Pt
1 1 
ATTACHMENT Schedule B The recognised hospitals for the purpose of this
Agreement are:
Royal Hobart EHosital ( including the following annexes)
Lady Clark Hospital
Vaucluse Hospital Annexe
Wingfield House
* Alennah District Nursing Centre
Cygnet District Nursing Hospital
Nubeena District Nursing Hospital
Oatlands District Nursing Hospital
Tridbunna District Nursing Hospital
Swansea District Nursing Hospital
Gore Street, Obstetries Division
Launceston General Hospital ( including the following annexes)-
Evandale Division of Launceston General Hospital
Deloraine Division of Launceston General Hospital
George Town Division of Launceston General Hospital
Westbury Division of Launceston General Hospital
Lilydale District Nursing Centre
Mersey General Hospital ( including the following annexes)-
Women's Division
Outpatients' Division
North Western General Hospital, Burnie Division
North Western C-eneral Hospital, Spencer Division, Wynyard
( including the following annexes)
Savage River Division
Waratah District Nursing Centre
Luinna Dist-_ i Nursing Centre
Queen Alexandra Maternity Hospital, Hobart
Queen Victoria Hcspital, Launceston
Beaconsfield District Hospital
Campbell Town District Hospital, including
Avoca District Nursing Centre
Rossarden District Nursing Centre
Flinders District Hospital
Huon District Hospital, including Dover District Nursing Hospital
King Island District Hospital including Grassy District Nursing Centre
New Norfolk District Hospital
North Eastern Soldiers Memorial Hospital at Scottsdale, including
Gladstone District Nursing Centre
Ringarooma District Nursing Centre
Ouse District Hospital
Peacock Convalescent Hospital, Hobart
Roseberry District Hospital / 2 
S
-2-
Smithton District Hospital, including Redpa Nursing Centre
St Mary's District Hospital including St Helen's District
Nursing Hospital
Toosey Memorial Hospital, Longford
Ulverstone District Hospital'
West'Coast District Hospital, including Strahan District
Nursing Centre
Mothercraft Home, New Town, Hobart...... a
4.. 8
4.
1r* r.
1 . L
i
i
ir. 



PRIME MINISTOR Press Statement No. 517
19 June 1975
VIETNAM4ESE REFUGEES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today that
a total of 201 Vietnamese refugees will arrive in Sydney
from Hong Kong tomorrow. Mr Whitlam said this would be the
largest single group of Vietnamese refugees to leave Hong Kong
for any country to'date. The Prime Minister said that.
almost all those coming to Australia were unlikely to have
been offered resettlement in other countries and for this
reason their cases had received special consideration.
Mr Whitlam said that 126 of the refugees, were
adults, 65 were children and 10 were infants under two years
of age. There were 35 family groups and 6 single persons.
One-third of the family units were incomplete and almost
all were without close relatives here or in any other
refugee-receiving country to help them. Most were semi-skilled
or unskilled workers. Others were students without vocational
training.. The medical condition of most of the refugees was
quite good. They had been given the usual migrant medical
examinations and x-rays. After their arrival in Sydney, all
the refugees will go directly to East Hills Migrant Hostel,
where special arrangements had been made to receive them.
Mr Whitlam said that selection and approval for
entry of this group of refugees had been made because of
Australia's commitment to take her fair share of refugees
from Vietnam. Mr Whitlam said the Government continued to be
in contact with the office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and would keep the position of refugees under
review. CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE 19 JUNE 1975
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
THERE HAS BEEN MORE PREPARATION FOR THIS THAN FOR
OTHER MEETINGS OF AUSTRALIAN HEADS OF GOVERNMENT. THE
PREPARATION MUST BE HELPFULJ. OUR OFFICIALS HAVE MET. YOU
HAVE PROVIDED US WITH BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND) WITH A JOINT
STATEMENT OF YOUR PROPOSALS. WE HAVE RESPONDED TO THOSE
PROPOSALS AND HAVE INDICATED MATTERS WHICH WE SEE AS OPEN FOR
DISCUSSION TODAY. THIS MEETING WILL NOT REMOVE ALL THE
MISUNDERSTANDINGS OR THE DISAGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE GOVERNMENTS, BUT THE PREPARATION MEANS THAT WE MEET
WITH A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THE PROBLEMS BEFORE US. THIS
DEVELOPMENT IS ONE WHICH I HAVE ENCOURAGED AND IN WHICH YOU
HAVE ALL CO-OPERATED, AND I THANK YOU FOR THAT CO-OPERATION.
A CRUCIAL ITEM OF OUR AGENDA IS, OF COURSE, THE
REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS. HOWEVER,
BEFORE TURNING TO THAT, I WANT TO REFER BRIEFLY TO CO-OPERATIVE
K~ jANNING AND REGIONALISM WHICH I HAVE PROPOSED FOR LATER
DISCUSSION. I MUST MAKE IT CLEAR THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
DOES NOT REGARD THE PRESENT APPROACH TO DETERMINING REVENUE
ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS AS SATISFACTORY. STATE EXPENDITURES
ARE LARGELY TAKEN AS GIVEN. THERE IS NO EXPLICIT CONSIDERATION o o / 2 
2,
OF PROPER BALANCE BETWEEN STATE PROGRAMS AM) RELATED AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS. INSTEAD, AND BY TRADITION, FINANCIAL
FACTORS ARE CONSIDERED LARGELY IN TERMS OF THE YEAR
IMMEDIATELY AHEAD.
CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE SEEKING IN THE
LONGER TERN A MORE RATIONAL AND CO-ORDINATED SYSTEM OF ASSESSING
NEEDS, SETTING PRIORITIES AM) ALLOCATING RESOURCES IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR ONE BASED ON CO-OPERATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS. IT MAY
TAKE YEARS TO DEVELOP A NEW APPROACH OF THE KIM) W4E HAVE IN
MIND, OF THE KIM) DISCUSSED AMONG OUR OFFICIALS. BUT WE
BELIEVE A START SHOULD BE MADE NOW.
THE VIEW OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS THAT IN
SEEKING BETTER CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING ARRANGEMENTS IT WOULD BE
BEST TO BEGIN WITH PARTICULAR IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS WHERE THERE
IS A CLEAR NEED FOR CO-ORDINATION AM) WHERE EARLY PROGRESS SEEMS
POSSIBLE. THREE SUCH FUNCTIONS HAVE BEEN SUGGESTED IN THE
DISCUSSIONS AMONG OUR OFFICERS TRANSPORT, HEALTH AM) URBAN
DEVELOPMENT. LET ME ILLUSTRATE WHAT WE HAVE IN MIN) BY REFERRING
TO URBAN AM) REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT WHERE IMPORTANT FACTORS
DETERMINING DEVELOPMENT ARE PLANNED AM) FUNDED AT DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE RETICULATION OF TELECOMMNICATIONS. THE STATE SEMIGOVERNMENTAL
AM) LOCAL AUTHORITIES ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE / 3 
3.
RETICULATION OF WATER AND) SEWERAGE. THE NEED FOR OVERALL
CO-ORDINATION IS OBVIOUS.
MORE THAN $ 4,500 MILLION IS CURRENTLY BEING SPENT ON
TRANSPORT EACH YEAR AND THAT IS MORE THAN 12 PER CENT OF
GROSS NATIONAL EXPENDITURE. THE DECISIONS BY EACH LEVEL OF
GOVERNMENT ON THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO THE MODES OF
TRANSPORT FOR WHICH IT IS RESPONSIBLE SHOULD BE CONSISTENT
S WITH THE DECISIONS BY OTHER LEVELS IF THIS MONEY IS TO BE
WELL SPENT. WE BELIEVE THAT OUR DECISIONS ON THE ALLOCATION OF
RESOURCES TO AIRPORTS AND AIRWAYS FACILITIES SHOULD BE MADE
WITH KNOWLEDGE OF THE STATES? VIEWS ON THEIR PRIORITY RELATIVE
TO OTHER MODES OF TRANSPORT. SIMILARLY WE WOULD EXPECT THE
STATES' DECISIONS ON THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO PORTS TO
S BE MADE WITH KNOWLEDGE OF OUR VIEWS.
THERE HAVE BEEN IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENTS IN RECENT YEARS.
SINCE 1969 ROADS ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN BASED ON A SURVEY UNDERTAKEN
JOINTLY BY AUSTRALIAN AND STATE AUTHORITIES. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS NOW REPRESENTED ON STATE URBAN TRANSPORT PLANNING
BODIES. REGIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEES HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE PLANNING OF MAJOR AIRPORTS.
APART FROM PARTICULAR DEVELOPMENTS, THE AUSTRALIAN
TRANSPORT ADVISORY COUNCIL HAS BECOME THE MAJOR FORUM ON THE 4 
PROBLEMS OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT SERVICES, MAIN RAILWAY LINES AND)
ROADS. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS RECENTLY TAKEN THE
INITIATIVE IN INTRODUCING AVIATION MATTERS INTO ATAC, AND IN
SEEKING CONSIDERATION THERE OF THE QUESTION OF RESOURCE
ALLOCATION TO TRANSPORT GENERALLY. IT IS THIS LATTER
DEVELOPMENT WHICH WE BELIEVE SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED AND
ACCELERATED. I UNDERSTAND THAT ATAC WILL BE REVIEWING ITS
MACHINERY AT ITS MEETING NEXT MONTH. I SUGGEST WE SHOULD ASK
BOTH ATAC AND THE PORTS AND MARINE COUNCIL TO REPORT BACK TO
US ON HOW BEST TO PROCEED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF WIDER
CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING ARRANGEMENTS OF THE KIND DESCRIBED.
A SUJMMARY OF POINTS OF POSSIBLE AGREEMENT ON
CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING HAS BEEN CIRCULATED TO YOU. I ASK YOU
TO NOTE TEAT THEY ARE SIMPLY INTENDED TO FORM A FRAME OF
REFERENCE AGAINST WHICH OFFICIALS AND MINISTERS CAN PROCEED
WITH FURTHER EXAMINATION IN THE MONTHS AHEAD SO THAT MORE
CONSIDERED REPORTS CAN BE PUT BEFORE US AT A FUTURE TIME.
THERE IS NO COMMITMENT INVOLVED IN AGREEING TO THIS
SET OF POINTS, OTHER THAN THAT FURTHER STUDY BE UNDERTAKEN
CO-OPERATIVELY BETWEEN OUR OFFICIALS. ON THAT BASIS I WILL BE
ASKING THAT PREMIERS INDICATE THEIR AGREEMENT WHEN WE CONE TO
DISCUSSION OF THAT ITEM. 
REGIONAL POLICY THE AUSTRALIAN GOV'ERNMENT HAS LAID CONSIDERABLE STRESS
ON THE ADOPTION OF A REGIONAL APPROACH TO PLANNING AND DECISIONMAKING.
THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN AND THE AREA IMPROVEMENT
PROGRAM ARE EXAMPLES OF PROGRAMS DELIVERED ON A REGIONAL BASIS.
A STATEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S REGIONAL POLICY WAS
MADE BY ME ON 18 JUNE.
IN BRIEF, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ADOPTED, AS A
BASIS FOR ITS REGIONAL POLICY, THESE OBJECTIVES:
SERVICES AND PROGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SHOULD BE PROVIDED ON A REGIONAL BASIS UYNLESS IT IS
INAPPROPRIATE TO DO SO, WITH REGARD TO EFFICIENCY,
ECONOMY AND EFFECTIVENESS.
REGIONAL BODIES OR ORGANISATIONS SHOULD BE GIVEN A
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THOSE SERVICES WHEREVER POSSIBLE,
NOTING THAT THIS RESPONSIBILITY MAY RANGE FROM DIRECT
INVOLVEMENT IN DECISION-MAKING THROUGH TO CONSULTATION..
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN PLANNING AND DECISION-MAKING
FOR, AND IMPLEMENTATION OF, PROGRAMS SHOULD BE
ENCOURAGED AND ASSISTED.
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED TO
DELEGATE TO REGIONAL BODIES MORE RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THOSE STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS WHICH ARE
MOST APPROPRIATELY DELIVERED AT THE REGIONAL LEVEL AND
TO FOSTER PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S REGIONAL POLICY WILL NEED TO BE FLEXIBLE. THERE MAY 
BE DIFFERENCES FROM STATE TO STATE, AND REGION TO REGION,
BECAUSE OF PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES.
REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS
I NOW SHOULD LIKE TO MAKE SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE
ECONOMIC CONTEXT IN WHICH THE REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE
ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS IS TO BE MADE. I SHALL THEN
DEAL MORE SPECIFICALLY WITH OUR VIEWS ON WHAT THE NEW
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS SHOULD BE.
IN THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS THE MAJOR ECONOMIES OF THE
WORLD SEVERELY AFFECTED BY THE OIL PRICE RISE AND THE
DESTABILISING EFFECTS OF THAT ON WORLD TRADE AND INVESTOR
CONFIDENCE HAVE BEEN STRUGGLING WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF
RISING UNEMPLOYMENT AND RISING INFLATION. AUSTRALIA HAS NOT
BEEN ABLE TO INSULATE ITSELF FROM THAT WORLD SITUATION.
BUT IN AUSTRALIA AS IN OTHER COUNTRIES THE BATTLE IS
NOW ON TO RESTORE A MORE BALANCED ECONOMIC ORDER, WE ARE SEEING
ECONOMIC GROWTH BEGINNING AGAIN. THE RISE IN UNEMPLOYMENT SEEMS
TO HAVE COME TO AN END AND 1975/ 76 PROMISES TO SEE EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES ON THE INCREASE AGAIN. BUT INFLATION REMAINS DEEPSEATED.
FIRM AND RESPONSIBLE POLICIES WILL HAVE TO BE FOLLOWED
IF IT IS TO BE BROUGHT UNDER CONTROL. INFLATION AT A RATE
APPROACHING 20 PER CENT A YEAR IS INTOLERABLE. IT WRECKS
CONFIDENCE, DISCOURAGES PRIVATE INVESTMENT, ROBS ORDINARY PEOPLE
OF THE VALUE OF THEIR SAVINGS AND PREVENTS GOVERNMENTS FROM
PURSUING CONSISTENTLY AND IN A PROPERLY PLANNED WAY THE IMPORTANT
SOCIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMS WE WERE ELECTED TO PURSUE. 7 
SOME OF THE UNCERTAINTIES THAT SURROUNDED THE OUTLOOK FOR
INFLATION EARLIER THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN CLEARED BY THE DECISIONS OF
THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION IN'THE NATIONAL WAGE
AND METAL INDUSTRIES CASES. THOSE WERE RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS.
GOVERMENTS MUST ALSO DO ALL THEY CAN TO CREATE AN ECONOMIC CLIMATE
IN WHICH THE SUGGESTED WAGE DETERMINATION GUIDELINES HAVE THE
PROSPECT OF BEING ADHERED TO. A BIG RESPONSIBILITY ALSO FALLS ON
THE COMMUNITY ITSELF HERE AND, IN PARTICULAR, ON UNION LEADERSHIP.
THIS CONFERENCE COULD PLAY ITS PART BY EXPRESSING A FIRM
COMMITMENT BY GOVERNMENTS TO ACTION TO ENSURE OBSERVANCE OF THE
PRINCIPLES SET OUT IN THE NATIONAL WAGE CASE DECISION IN PARTICULAR
IN RESPECT OF PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT WITHIN GOVERNMENT CONTROL. WE WILL
BE DISCUSSING THIS UNDER THE AGENDA ITEM ON WORKING PARTIES ON
INFLATION BUT I MENTION HERE THAT I HAVE ASKED ALL MY MINISTERIAL
COLLEAGUES TO ACT CONSISTENTLY IN HANDLING WAGE CLAIMS WHICH ARISE
IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE LIGHT OF THE
NATIONAL WAGE CASE DECISION.
FOR OUR PART, WE AIM TO ENSURE THAT THE RECOVERY IN THE
ECONOMY STRENGTHENS AND CONTINUES BUT DOES NOT REACH A PACE THAT
ONCE AGAIN LEADS TO A SCRAMBLE FOR RESOURCES. AN ORDERLY RECOVERY
WILL HELP ACHIEVE A CLIMATE CONDUCIVE TO THE EXPANSION OF
INVESTMENT THAT IS NECESSARY TO ENSURE CONTINUED PROSPERITY AND
GROWTH OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
LET ME NOW TURN BRIEFLY TO SOME OF THE FEATURES OF THE
CURRENT ECONOMIC SCENE.
THE OPENING MONTHS OF 1975 HAVE SEEN A STRONG RECOVERY
OF CONSUMER DEMAND. COUPLED WITH CONTINUED GROWTH OF GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURE AND EXPORTS THIS HAS RESULTED IN A SIZABLE INCREASE IN
TOTAL DEMAND IN SPITE OF DECLINING PRIVATE INVESTMENT.
HOWEVER, DEMAND GROWTH HAS BEEN MORE THAN MET BY SUPPLY FROM .18 
SWOLLEN STOCKS. AS A RESULT THERE HAS BEEN LITTLE INCENTIVE TO
INCREASE PRODUCTION AND EMPLOYMENT, BUT THIS IS EXPECTED TO
STRENGTHEN FROM NOW ON AS STOCKS RETURN TO MORE NORMAL LEVELS.
GROWTH IN THE VOLUME OF MONEY HAS BEEN EXCEPTIONALLY
STRONG. THE PERIOD OF SEASONAL TIGHTENING OF LIQUIDITY AT
THE END OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR IS PASSING WITH ONLY MINOR
STRAINS ON FINANCIAL MARKETS; BANKS WILL ENTER THE SEASONAL
UPSWING WITH EXTREMELY HIGH LIQUIDITY RATIOS.
UNEMPLOYMENT SHOWED SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT IN MAY AND
A CONTINUED GRADUAL DECLINE IS CURRENTLY IN PROSPECT. THIS
IMPROVEMENT OWES MUCH TO EXPANDED GOVERNMENT SPENDING BUT
INDICATIONS ARE THAT THE TREND IN PRIVATE SECTOR EMPLOYMENT
WILL SOON TURN UPWARDS ONCE AGAIN.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS POSES NO IMMEDIATE PROBLEMS
BUT HERE AGAIN THE OUTLOOK FOR TWELVE MONTHS HENCE IS
DEPENDENT ON THE COURSE OF DEMAND AND INFLATION.
IT IS PLEASING TO NOTE THAT THE RATES OF INCREASE OF
BOTH PRICES AND WAGES SLOWED SOMEWHAT DURING THE MARCH QUARTER.
HOWEVER, EVEN THOUGH INFLATION RATES HAVE RECENTLY FALLEN
SOMEWHAT THEY REMAIN HIGH; THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX INCREASED
BY 3.6 PER CENT IN THE MARCH QUARTER AND 17.6 PER CENT IN THE
YEAR TO MARCH. SUCH RATES ARE MUCH TOO HIGH AT THE OUTSET OF
A RECOVERY PHASE AND FOLLOWING, AS THEY DO, SIMILAR RATES OF
INCREASE FOR THE PAST TWELVE MONTHS. ONE THING IS CLEAR
THERE HAS TO BE SOME ABATEMENT IN THE RATE OF INCREASE IN
GOVERNMENT SPENDING IF WE ARE TO GET OUT OF OUR PRESENT TROUBLES.
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON FINAL GOODS AND SERVICES
( AN APPROXIMATE MEASURE OF THE NATION'S PRODUCTION DIRECTLY 
CONSUMED BY THE GOVERNMENT SECTOR) HAS RISEN FROM 20 PER CENT
OF TOTAL NATIONAL EXPENDITURE TO 23 PER CENT IN THE COURSE OF
A YEAR. AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TOTAL BUDGET OUTLAYS INCLUDING
ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES HAVE RISEN FROM BETWEEN 24 AND
PER CENT OF GDP IN THE PRECEDING THREE YEARS TO OVER 30 PER
CENT THIS YEAR. IN 1974/ 75 IT WAS APPROPRIATE TO MAKE USE OF
RESOURCES THAT WOULD OTHERWISE HAVE REMAINED IDLE IN THE
PRIVATE SECTOR, BUT THE SHIFT OF RESOURCES TO THE PUBLIC
SECTOR CANNOT CONTINUE AT THAT RATE IF THE ECONOMY IS TO BE
GOT BACK ON ITS FEET. IN THE COMING FINANCIAL YEAR THERE WILL
NEED TO BE MODERATION IN PUBLIC SECTOR SPENDING.
I COME TO THE MAIN FINANCIAL QUESTIONS WHICH ARE OF
IMMEDIATE CONCERN TO THIS MEETING SPECIFICALLY THE MATTER OF
GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS IN 1975/ 76 AND SUBSEQUENT YEARS AND THE
MATTER OF THE LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS OF THE STATES AND THEIR
AUTHORITIES IN 1975/ 76.
THE PRESENT GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS
WERE ORIGINALLY SETTLED AT A PREMIERS' CONFERENCE [ N JUNE 1970.
AT THAT TIME THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT UNDERTOOK TO REVIEW
THE ARRANGEMENTS AFTER FIVE YEARS. ALTHOUGH THE LEGISLATION
UNDER WHICH THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS ARE PAID -THE
STATES GRANTS ACT 1973/ 74 HAS INDEFINITE APPLICATION INTO
THE FUTURE, WE ACCEPT THE OBLIGATION TO REVIEW THE ARRANGEMENTS.
THE SPECIFIC QUESTION BEFORE US IS WHETHER ANY CHANGES IN
THE LEGISLATION TO WHICH I REFERRED ARE DESIRABLE. YOU HAVE
PROPOSED RADICAL CHANGES IN THAT LEGISLATION. YOUR MAIN
PROPOSALS ARE THAT THE BASE ON WHICH THE FORMUJLA GRANTS IN
1975/ 76 ARE CALCULATED BE INCREASED BY $ 350 MILLION AND THAT
THE PRESENT AVERAGE WAGES ELEMENT IN THE FORMULA BE REPLACED
BY A NEW PROGRESSION FACTOR EQUAL TO 1.~ 5 TIMES THE INCREASE 
IN AVERAGE WAGES EACH YEAR. I HAVE ALREADY INFORMED YOU
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DOES NOT ACCEPT THESE
PROPOSALS. WE REJECT THEM FOR FOUR I14TER-RELATED REASONS.
FIRST, WE REJECT THE CONCEPT ON WHICH THE STATES'
PROPOSALS ARE BASED THAT IS, THAT THE GRANTS ARRANGEMENTS
SHOULD BE BASED, IN EFFECT. ON REIMBURSEMENT OR COMPENSATION
FOR INCOME TAX FORGONE. THAT CONCEPT HAS LONG BEEN
ABANDONED. SUCCESSIVE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS HAVE TAKEN
THE VIEW THAT IT IS MORE LOGICAL AND APPROPRIATE THAT THE
0 GRANTS BE BASED ON THE STATES' FINANCIAL NEEDS RATHER THAN
ON MOVEMENTS IN ONE OF THE REVENUE SOURCES FROM W# HICH THE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS ARE FINANCED.
SECONDLY, WE HAVE DOUBTS ABOUT THE WAY THE BASIC
CONCEPT HAS BEEN APPLIED. SPECIFICALLY, WE NOTE THAT THE
PROPOSALS ARE, AT LEAST IMPLICITLY, BASED ON THE ASSUMPTION
THAT PRESENT INCOME TAX RATES WILL REMAIN UNCHANGED
INDEFINITELY. GIVEN THE EFFECTS OF THE PROGRESSIVE RATE
STRUCTURE OF THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX AS WAGE AND SALARY RATES
RISE, THAT SEEMS TO US TO BE A QUITE UNJUSTIFIED ASSUMPTION.
WITHOUT DISCUSSING THIS ASPECT IN DETAIL, I CAN SUMMARISE
BY SAYING THAT IN OUR VIEW IT MEANS THAT THE STATES' PROPOSALS
ARE TOO GENEROUS EVEN BY THEIR OWN CRITERION.
THE THIRD REASON IS A MORE COMPLEX ONE AND I CAN
REFER TO IT ONLY BRIEFLY HERE. IT IS, IN ESSENCE. THAT
ACCEPTANCE OF THE STATES' PROPOSALS COULD INVOLVE, IN TIMES
OF RAPID INCREASES IN WAGE AND SALARY RATES, AN UNDUE TRANSFER
OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FROM THE STATES TO THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, PARTICULARLY IN RESPECT OF BUSINESS UNDERTAKINGS
AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES. 000/ 11 
THE BURDEN OF FINANCING THESE SERVICES COULD WELL
HE INCREASINGLY SHIFTEI) FROM Ti'll' USES OF THE SERVI(: ES. TO
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S BUIDGET AND THENCE TO TAXPAYIElRS
IN GENERAL, WITIH THE SERVI]( 1CES IN OUESTION BECOMING, I N THAT
SENSE, MORE AND MORE UNECONOMIC. THE PRINCIPLE THAT THE
USER PAYS SHOULD SURELY APPLY TO TIHESE SERVICES JUST AS TO
POSTAL AND OTHER SUCH SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. FINALLY, ALTHOUGH THE COSTS OF THE STATES'
PROPOSALS CANNOT BE PREDICTED ACCURATELY ( AS THEY WILL
DEPEND ON FUTURE MOVEMENTS IN POPULATION AND AVERAGE WAGES),
IT IS CLEAR THAT THEY WOULD BE FAR BEYOND WHAT COULD
REASONABLY BE EXPECTED TO BE BORNE BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S BUDGET. EVEN ON MODEST ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT
MOVEMENTS IN POPULATION AND AVERAGE WAGES, THE ADDITIONAL
GRANTS RESULTING FROM THE STATES' PROPOSALS WOULD RUN INTO
MANY THOUSANDS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS OVER A FIVE YEAR AGREEMENT.
ONE PARTICULAR POINT THAT WE HAVE NOTED IN THIS
GENERAL BUDGETARY CONTEXT IS THAT THE STATES' PROPOSALS APPEAR
TO INVOLVE ADDITIONAL AJSTRAIAN GOVERNMENT FUNDS IN 1975/ 76
SU'FFICIENT TO MEET, AND ON THE FIGURES GIVEN TO US, POSSIBLY
MORE THAN MEET, THE STATES' PROSPECTIVE BUDGETARY " GAPS" IN
THAT YEAR ( ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING RATES OF TAXES AND CHARGES
AND PROJECTEID EXPENDITURE 1, EVELS). PARTICULARLY IN THE LIGHT
TIE AUSTIRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S OWN SEVERE BUDGETARY P* ROB,: lMS
TIIAT ) lDO: NSO T SELEM TO US TO BE REASONABLE.
ALTHOUGH THE AUSTRAIIAN GOVERNMENT THUS DOES NOT
ACCEPT THE STATES' PROPOSALS, Wt BELIEVE NEVERTHELESS THAT / 12 
THERE IS A CASE FOR AN INCREASE IN THE LEVELS OF THE GRANTS
IN 1975/ 76 BEYOND THOSE WHICH WOULD BE YIELDED BY THE
EXISTING FORMULA AND THAT THERE IS A CASE FOR AN IMPROVEMENT
IN THE ANNUAL GROWTH PRODUCED BY THAT FORMULA.
IN COMING TO THAT JUDGEMENT WE HAVE HAD A NUMBER
OF CONSIDERATIONS IN MIND. NOTABLE AMONGST THEM HAS BEEN OUR
DESIRE TO ELIMINATE, OR AT THE VERY LEAST TO REDUCE AS FAR
AS POSSIBLE, WHAT HAS BECOME KNOWN AS THE ANNUAL " WRANGLE"
BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTS.
WE HAVE OBSERVED IN THIS CONNECTION THAT OVER THE
LAST FIVE YEARS ASSISTANCE TOTALLING OVER $ 800 MILLION HAS
BEEN PROVIDED TO THE STATES OVER AND ABOVE THAT WHICH WOULD
HAVE BEEN YIELDED HAD THE ORIGINAL ARRANGEMENTS BEEN ADHERED
TO THAT FIGURE, INCIDENTALLY, EXCLUDES ABOUT $ 600 MILLION
IN ADDITIONAL GRANTS RESULTING FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S AGREEMENT TO COMPENSATE THE STATES FOR LOSS OF
RECEIPTS DUTY. OUR PROPOSALS ON THESE AND OTHER FINANCIAL MATTERS
ARE SPELLED OUT IN DETAIL IN A DOCUMENT WHICH WILL BE
CIRCULATED AT THE CONCLUSION OF THIS SPEECH, IN BRIEF, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS OFFERING TO:-
INCREASE THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS ABOVE
WHAT THEY WOULD BE IN 1975/ 76 ON THE BASIS OF
EXISTING LEGISLATION BY A TOTAL OF $ 200 MILLION;
IMPROVE THE SUBSEQUENT RATE OF GROWTH OF THE
GRANTS BY INCREASING THE PRESENT BETTERMENT
FACTOR OF 1.8 PER CENT TO 3 PER CENT. / l 3 
13
THERE WILL BE CLAIMS THAT THE INCREASE IN THE
BETTERMENT FACTOR BY 1.2 PER CENT TO 3 PER CENT DOES
NOT REPRESENT A VERY SIGNIFICANT CHANGE. HOWEVER, GIVEN
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS, THE
EFFECTS, PARTI CULARLY GIVEN THAT THEY WOULD BE CUMULATIVE
OVER THE YEARS, WOULD IN FACT BE SUBSTANTIAL. THE PRECISE
EFFECTS OF OUR PROPOSALS CANNOT BE ESTIMATED. AS YOU WILL
APPRECIATE, THEY WILL DEPEND ON FUTURE MOVEMENTS IN AVERAGE
WAGES AND POPULATION. ON THE BASIS OF CERTAIN ASSUMPTIONS
ABOUT WAGES AND POPULATION GROWTH, HOWEVER, WE ESTIMATE
THAT THE EFFECT OF OUR PROPOSALS WILL BE TO INCREASE THE
GRANTS, OVER THE FIVE YEARS BEGINNING IN 1975/ 76, BY
SOMETHING IN THE ORDER OF $ 2,200 MILLION. OF THIS, THE
INCREMENT TO THE 1975/ 76 GRANTS WOULD ACCOUNT FOR AROUND
$ 1,500 MILLION AND THE IMPROVEMENT TO THE BETTERMENT FACTOR
FOR AROUND $ 700 MILLION.
I EMPHASISE THAT THIS LARGE GAIN WILL BE
ON TOP OF THE GROWTH IN ASSISTANCE FLOWING FROM THE
PRESENT ARRANGEMENT. AS AN INDICATION OF THE GROWTH
PRODUCED BY THE PRESENT FORMULA IT IS ESTIMATED THAT
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS IN 1975/ 76 WILL BE AROUND
$ 600 MILLION HIGHER THAN IN 1974/ 75 EVEN WITHOUT THE
IMPROVEMENTS WE HAVE PROPOSED.
THESE PROPOSALS, WHEN-ADDED TO OTHER INITIATIVES ./ 14 
14.
WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN IN THE FIELD
OF FEDERAL-STATE FINANCES, OR IN AREAS AFFECTING THOSE
FINANCES, REPRESENT VERY RADICAL CHANGES INDEED. IN
PARTICULAR I HAVE IN MIND THAT IN ASSESSING THE STATES'
OVERALL FINANCIAL POSITION ACCOUNT MUST BE TAKEN OF OUR
ASSUMPTION OF FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCING
TERTIARY EDUCATION, THE NEW OR EXPANDED PROGRAMS OF
SPECIFIC ASSISTANCE OVER A WIDE RANGE OF ACTIVITIES
FOR WHICH THE STATES PREVIOUSLY HAD SOLE OR MAIN
RESPONSIBILITY, OUR OFFERS TO TAKE OVER THE STATES'
RAILWAYS, AND THE " MEDIBANK" SCHEME FOR SHARING THE
RUNNING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS, AS WELL AS THE
PROPOSALS IN RELATION TO REVENUE GRANTS WHICH I HAVE
JUST OUTLINED. IN RESPECT OF TWO OF THESE MATTERS MEDIBANK
AND RAILWAYS NOT ALL OF THE STATES HAVE TAKEN ADVANTAGE
OF OUR OFFERS AND THEIR BUDGETS, RELATIVE TO THOSE STATES
WHICH HAVE, WILL SUFFER ACCORDINGLY.
THE PLAIN FACT IS THAT IF ALL STATES ACCEPTED
OUR OFFERS IN RELATION TO MEDIBANK AND THE TRANSFER
OF RAILWAYS THEIR BUDGETARY PROSPECTS, BOTH SHORT AND
LONG TERM, WOULD BE VERY MUCH BETTER INDEED THAN THEY
ARE NOW. 
WE HAD HOPED THAT ALL THE STATES WOULD HAVE ENTERED THE
HOSPITAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK FROM 1 JULY 1975, UNDER THE PROPOSED
HOSPITAL AGREEMENTS WE WOULD HAVE ASSISTED THE STATES TO THE
EXTENT OF 50 PER CENT OF THE NET OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS. TASMANIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA SAW THE VALUE OF WHAT
WE WERE OFFERING AND WE HAVE ENTERED INTO AGREEMENTS WITH THEM.
WE HOPE THAT QUEENSLAND WILL FOLLOW. NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA
AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA, INSTEAD OF HELPING US EXPEDITE THE
INTRODUCTION OF THE SCHEME IN THEIR STATES, AS LATE AS
MAY 1975 WERE WRITING TO ME PROPOSING NEW AGREEMENTS AGREEMENTS
THAT I INFORMED THEM ON 12 JUNE WERE COMPLETELY UNACCEPTABLE.
WITH GREATER CO-OPERATION THE HOSPITAL SYSTEMS 01" THOSE STATES
WOULD BE BENEFITING FROM MANY MILLIONS OF DOLLARS PROVIDED BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
NONE OF YOU NEED REMINDING OF THE MAJOR BUDGETARY BURDENS
THAT ARE CAUSED BY THE LOSSES OF YOUR RAILWAYS SYSTEMS, I AM TOLD
THAT THE ESTIMATED DEFICITS FOR THE RAIL SYSTEMS IN 1974-75 EXCEED
$ 400 MILLION THREE TIMES AS MUCH AS THREE YEARS AGO CLEAR
EVIDENCE OF THE HIGH PRICE AUSTRALIA AS A NATION, AND EACH STATE
GOVERNMENT, IS PAYING FOR THE UNPLANNED, UNCO-ORDINATED APPROACH
TO RAIL TRANSPORT AND INDEED TRANSPORT GENERALLY, UNLIKE AUSTRALIA,
OTHER FEDERAL SYSTEMS OPERATE THEIR RAILWAYS ON A NATIONAL BASIS,
TASMANIA IS NOW TO BE RELIEVED OF THIS WORRY, IT WILL
ALSO RECEIVE POSITIVE FINANCIAL BENEFITS BECAUSE THE OFFSET TO ITS
FORMULA GRANTS BASE WILL BE LESS THAN THE RAILWAYS DEFICIT
OF WHICH IT WILL BE RELIEVED, TASMANIA'S NET GAIN
WILL BE $ 303 MILLION. THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS SOUGHT
A SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT IN RESPECT OF ITS NON-METROPOLITAN RAILWAY
SYSTEM ITS NET GAIN TO THE " BASE" WOULD BE $ 25 MILLION. / 16 
I STATED IN MY 1972 POLICY SPEECH THAT MY GOVERNMENT
WOULD ACCEPT THE OFFERS OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIAN
PREMIERS FOR A TRANSFER OF THEIR STATE RAILWAY SYSTEMS. DESPITE
A FORMAL INVITATION THESE OFFERS HAVE NOT BEEN RENEWED. SIMILAR
INVITATIONS HAVE BEEN MADE TO OTHER PREMIERS. IT IS OPEN TO THEM
TO FOLLOW THE LEAD OF THEIR MORE PROGRESSIVE BRETHREN IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA. WE REMAIN PREPARED TO DISCUSS WITH EACH
STATE THE TRANSFER OF ITS RAILWAY SYSTEM TO THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. SURELY THIS IS ONLY GOOD SENSE GOOD SENSE FOR
THE STATES' FINANCIAL POSITION, AN) GOOD SENSE FOR AUSTRALIA IF
IT LEADS TOWARDS A TRULY NATIONAL RAILWAY SYSTEM.
IT MAY BE SUGGESTED THAT THE ADDITIONAL FUND) S NOW
OFFERED WILL DO TOO LITTLE TO DEAL SPECIFICALLY WITH THE MAIN
FACTOR CAUSING THE STATES' BUD3GETARY PROBLEMS NAMELY INFLATION.
IN CONSIDERING SUCH A VIEW, HOWEVER, IT HAS TO BE BORNE IN MIND
THAT, PARTICULARLY TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE STATES' PAY-ROLL TAX
REVENUES A HIGH PROPORTION OF THE ADDITIONAL COSTS TO THE STATES
AR[ SING FROM INFLATION IS ALREADY AUTOMATICALLY RECOVERED BY
INCREASED FORMULA GRANTS AN) TAX RECEIPTS. FURTHERMORE, IT SEEMS
IMP3LICIT IN THE APPROACH PUBLICLY TAKEN BY SOME PREMIERS AT LEAST
THAT FOR SOME REASON IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT INCREASES IN PUBLIC
EXPENDITURES ATTRIBUTABLE TO INCREASES IN COST LEVELS SHOULD BE
BORNE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S BUDGETS RATHER THAN BY THE
STATES'. THAT VIEW APPEARS, IN TURN, TO BE BASED ON A VIEW THAT
INCREASES IN INCOME TAX, UNLIKE INCREASES IN OTHER TAXES, ARE
SOMEHOW PAINLESS! IT IS SURELY NOW OBVIOUS TO US ALL THAT SUCH
A VIEW IS MISTAKEN. 0/ 17 
17.
THERE IS AN OUTDATED ATTITUDE THAT INCOME TAXES ARE LESS
INFLATIONARY THAN INDIRECT TAXES. WAGE EARNERS ARE CONSCIOUS
OF HIGH MARGINAL INCOME TAX RATES, WAGE CLAIMS ARE MADE ACCORDINGLY.
FURTHER, THE MATHEWS COMMITTEE'S THESIS ON THE NEED TO INDEX INCOME
TAX AND THE ASPREY COMMITTEE'S VIEWS ON THE SHIFT[ NG OF INCIDENCE
TO INDIRECT TAXES ARE BOTH OPPOSED TO THIS OUTDATED ATTITUDE.
THE VERY REAL BENEFITS WHICH WOULD ACCRUE TO THE STATES
UNDER THE PROPOSALS I HAVE MADE SHOULD NOT BE OBSCURED OR LOST
SIGHT OF IN THE COMPLEX OF MATTERS WHICH MIGHT BE RAISED TODAY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROPOSES THAT IF THE NEW SET OF
ARRANGEMENTS TO COMMENCE IN 1975-76 IS TO BE FOR FIVE YEARS, IT
OUGHT TO BE REVIEWED BEFORE THE END OF 1979-80. WE WOULD PROPOSE,
ALSO AGAIN FOLLOWING PAST PRACTICE, THAT THE ARRANGEMENTS WOULD BE
SUBJECT TO REVISION BEFORE THEN IF THERE OCCURRED SUBSTANTIAL
CHANGES IN AUSTRALIAN/ STATE FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS, OR IN MAJOR
FACTORS AFFECTING THOSE RELATIONSHIPS. IN PARTICULAR, THE
ARRANGEMENTS WILL BE SUBJECT TO THE STATES CONTINUING TO
REFRAIN FROM LEVYING TAXES ON INCOME,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S PROPOSALS ARE MADE ON THE
CLEAR UNDERSTANDING THAT SUBSEQUENT REQUESTS BY THE STATES FOR
ASSISTANCE SUPPLEMENTARY TO THAT YIELDED BY THE FORMULA WILL NOT
BE ENTERTAINED EXCEPT IN CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE TRULY ABNORMAL
AND UNPREDICTABLE, AND WITH WHICH THE STATES ARE CLEARLY UNABLE
TO COPE UNAIDED. 
THATIN TOTAL, IS OUR PROPOSAL ON REVENUE GRANTS FOR THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS. IT CLEARLY OFFERS CONSIDERABLE BENEFITS TO THE
STATES AND WE WOULD EXPECT IT TO BE ACCEPTED BY THE STATES. THE
ALTERNATIVE TO A NEW SET OF ARRANGEMENTS IS THOSE WHICH WOULD
CONTINUE UNDER EXISTING LEGISLATION AND THE STATES ARE, OF COURSE,
FREE TO CHOOSE THAT ALTERNATIVE.
I NOW TURN BRIEFLY TO THE MATTER OF GENERAL PURPOSE
CAPITAL FUNDS FOR THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES IN 1975-76.
IN A FORMAL SENSE, THESE ARE DECISIONS TO BE TAKEN IN AND BY THE
LOAN COUNCIL. BUT THESE FUNDS ARE, OF COURSE, A MOST IMPORTANT
ELEMENT IN THE STATES' FINANCES AND WE BELIEVE THAT IT IS
APPROPRIATE THAT THE STATES BE INFORMED RIGHT AT THE BEGINNING
OF THIS MEETING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT; S PROPOSALS IN
AGGREGATE. AGAIN, OUR PROPOSALS ARE SET OUT IN DETAIL IN THE
DOCUMENT TO BE CIRCULATED.
IN BRIEF AND ABSTRACTING FROM SPECIAL FACTORS WE HAVE
IN MIND INCREASES IN THE LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS OF BOTH THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS AND THEIR " LARGER" AUTHORITIES OF JUST OVER
17 PER CENT. WE PROPOSE THAT, FOLLOWING THE PRACTICE OF SOME
YEARS NOW NO OVERALL LIMIT BE SET ON BORROWINGS BY SMALLER
AUTHORITIES. WE ALSO PROPOSE THAT, AS A MEASURE OF ASSISTANCE
TO SUCH AUTHORITIES, THE BORROWING LIMIT FOR INDIVIDUAL
AUTHORITIES BEFORE THEY HAVE TO BE INCLUDED IN THE " LARGER"
CATEGORY BE INCREASED FROM $ 500,000 TO $ 600,000. / 19 
19.
WHILE SPEAKING OF THE CAPITAL FUNDS TO BE MADE
AVAILABLE TO THE STATES IN 1975-76 I MIGHT MENTION THE MATTER
OF ADVANCES TO THE STATES FOR WELFARE HOUSING IN THAT YEAR. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S DECISION ON THIS MATTER WILL BE MADE IN THE
BUDGET CONTEXT ANID THE STATES WILL THEN BE INFORMED. THE STATES
CAN, HOWEVER, COUNT ON GETTING NOT LESS THAN THE 1974-75 AMOUNTS.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT I SHOULD NOT PASS FROM THIS DISCUSSION OF REVENUE
ASSISTANCE WITHOUT ACKNOWLEDGING THE FINANCIAL PROBLEMS FACING
LOCAL GOVERNMENT. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN SIGNIFICANT STEPS
TO MAKE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A MORE EFFECTIVE MEMBER OF THE FEDERAL
SYSTEM. THE ROLE OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION HAS BEEN WIDENED TO
INCLUDE LOCAL GOVERNMENT. IN 1974-75 THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
MADE UNTIED GRANTS OF SOME $ 56 MILLION TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES. OTHER ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN GIVEN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THROUGH THE AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM, THE NATIONAL ESTATE,
THE NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM AND THROUGH OTHER PROGRAMS IN
SUCH FIELDS AS TOURISM AND RECREATION, TRANSPORT, EDUCATION,
AND SOCIAL WELFARE. ABOUT THREE QUARTERS OF THE FUNDS
ALLOCATED UNDER THE REDS PROGRAM HAS GONE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
THE CONDITIONS OF FINANCIAL STRINGENCY THAT ITE FACE
TODAY ALLOW LITTLE ROOM FOR FURTHER INCREASE IN THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT. CERTAINLY, THERE 
COULD BE NO MOVE FROM RELIANCE BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON LOCAL RATES
AS A PRIME SOURCE OF REVENUE AND AS A REGULATOR OF DEMAND FORSERVICES
CONCLUSION THE PLACE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF COURSE IS IMPORTANT
TO OUR CONCEPTS OF REGIONALISM AND CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING.
WE SEE REGIONALISM AND CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING, TOGETHER,
RATIONALISING THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE GOVERNMENTS. THEY WOULD OVERCOME MANY OF THE CONCERNS
THAT YOUR OFFICIALS HAVE EXPRESSED ABOUT CONDITIONS ATTACHING
TO SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS. THEY WOULD DECENTRALISE DECISIONMAKING
TO THE APPROPRIATE LEVEL.
S THE POSITION MY GOVERNM'ENT HAS ADOPTED IS NEITHER NOVEL
NOR UJNIQUE. PROFESSOR RUSSELL MATHEWS, THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRE
FOR RESEARCH ON FEDERAL FINANCIAL RELATIONS IN HIS 1974 REPORT
POINTED TO THE NEED FOR AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTS TO RECOGNISE
THEIR INTERDEPENDENCE AND TO DEVISE EFFECTIVE MEANS OF CO-ORDINATING
THEIR DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES.
WE SHOULD SEEK, FOR THE LONGER TERM, ARRANGEMENTS THAT WILL
COPE WITH CHANGING CIRCUMSTANCES AND CHANGING PRIORITIES AND WILL
ENABLE THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES RAISED FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
TAX-PAYER TO BE MADE ON THE BASIS OF THE NEEDS AND PRIORITIES OF
ALL AUSTRALIANS. 



JAUSTRtALIA L PRESS STATEMENT NO. 518
19 June 1975
PREMIERS 2CONFERENCE
Following discussions at today's Premiers' Conference/
Loan Council meeting the Australian Government has agreed
to introduce into the Australian Parliament legislation
amend the StatesGrants Act so as:-
to increase the financial assistance grants
otherwise payable in 1975-76 by $ 220 million
to be built into the base for calculating the
g7rants in subsequent years.
2 to add an amount of $ 5 million to the baso
awount on which Western Australia's financial
assistance grant for 1975-76 and subsequent
years will be calculated; and
to provide for an increase in the :' betterment"
factor from the present 1.8 percent to
percent to apply for purposes of
calculating the grants for 1976-77 and subsequent
years.
The Prime Minister made it. clear that subsequent
requests by the States for general revenue assistance
supplementary to that yielded by the formula arxangements
will not be entertained except in circumstances which are
truly abnormal and unpredictable, and with which the States
are clearly unable to cope unaided.
On the basis of best estimates of population and
average wages and given the additional assistance referred to
above it is expected that the financial assistance grants in
1975-. 76 will, in total, be about $ 846 million higher than in
1974-75. This is equivalent to an increase of 35.6 percent.
The Australian Government agreed to support increases
fn the " basic" Loan Council programs of both the States and
their larger authorities of 20 percent.. The total program
agreed to for the State Governments is $ 1,291 million and
that for larger State authorities is $ 809.7 mill. on.
The meeting agreed to an increase in the borrowing
limit for smaller authorities from the present $" 00,000 to
$ 700,000.
S ~ 0A 
2.
The Australiati Cov-rnment also agreed to continue
tChe spccial cmploymeit grlnts sche~ i,: in 1975-76 on a
phasing out basis. Spucifically, grants of $ 10 million in
july, reducing b $ 2 million per month down to $ 2 million
in Novembor will be provided a total of $ 30 million.
CANBERRA, AC. T.
I 
C rer: h~ i c" ~ rp~. ir~ nX~ kZLr~'~~ It 44*.* w
ESTE1MAI7S OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
million
On Basi-of
Arr a n-t-a~ n L s k a 1
923 9
69o. 7
525,8 353.3 347.6 152.2
2,993.5 RIacre-tse s
Agreed to
at
Conforenco 67.7 50.6 38.6 25.9 32.4( b)
11.2
226.4( b)
77ncorporaze adjustnents to accompany railway transfers in
South Australia and Tasmania. Made on basis of preliminary
estisates of increases in average wages and population.
Including additional amiount of approximately S6,. million
resulting from addition of $ 5 million to tha State's formula
grants base. LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS 1975-76
S1' 000
STATE GOVERNMENTS
GRANTS BOR{ ROWING; S TOTAL
137 ,057
108,871 579 459
569475 160,099 30,372
430,333 14,1 71 ( a)
326,615 172,378 169,425 120,296 91,115
1,29 1,000 1GAUEGR AUTIOIU TI ES
TOTAL 303,720( a)
256,693 1149 ,769
38,122 38,264 239107
809,675
T-cludes prmannt addition of $ 10 milijon for New South Wales~
in each program. 2
T3 S. i100
VQ -0
1YA A C. Total ) 91.6
' 7111 3
564. 16
379.2 1 6316
3,219.9
S -F
QLD S A.
TAS, TOTAL 274,114 217 ,744k
1 14,919
12,950
80,197 60,7143
860,667 1 y; R: i i?: I
ts. ~ t_ 6~ rl r
; ILUT L-~ 51; rY~ Y~ c~ rtrr 
GRANTS UNDER ISPECIAL EMPLOYMNT
GIMInTS SC EXF 1975-76 million 10.0
Augu 1;
Suptgrabor cc Oba r ,0r
* Stato bhy 0 d6 1vo xUbtion ( basod on nunber of
~ oiacy asn ic-plyod, excluding achool
lca'vo7 -Or ao t ond May 1975) wouldt~ lea bc as foloo:-
millionboa
Y. S. 10
Vic, S0110
U. A.
Qo 11.7 8.2 2., 4
0.7
' Total30.0
( i 
A'' 19 7-75 AGZ7n !
Adjuotments olatcd to Railway
Txan fcr and South Australias
' Withdrawal from Grants Commisnion
Systcm Proposd Addition to Western
Au3tralicis " Bascl' Grant
Total " Base" Grants
Additions Under ti-o Formula( d)
Total of Above ( f)
PrcportIonal Distribution of 8220
Million Additional Financial
Ttl P~ p~ s'z d 2inancial
' Grant ( j)
œ caticn Factors
Population ( h)
Avcraac Wages ( i)
Betterment 73? 522
737,522 136,344 5 48,
548,, 4o55
142,3 2 414,446 v, 261,73y7 2 5,000
i4,4L46 1281% 737 1 i 330
111,382 71,606 75,6
923,900 16i9700 52r 3300 353,3O0
67,700
99, 600
1 -o45
1.225 1.018 50,600
74i, 300
1.0100 1 .225
1.018 38,600
1564, 400
1 .0174
1 .018 25,900
379,200 1.0057 1 0223
1 0018 26 4-00 0
1380,000 a() f ( Jt
Io, 700 09,300 3,000
121,171 2,381,611
31,069 618, 289(' C
152,200 1,200
I 163,400
1.0198 1.0075
S. 225 1 .225
1.013 1. 018 2, r0,900
2PO, 000
3,219,900 1 00100714()
1 .223
1.019
Excludes S6.5 million additional f inancial aesistnc ce PQid in 1974-75.
Includes additional 815 million in connectioi with Tasmanla s withdra-0-al from the Grants Commrission aystef.
Approximate only; subject to -efinoment on further analysis of Stato's non-metropolitan railways deficit in
1974-75.
In accordance with the cscalation factors rset out below.
CALCULATION 0lF ES S-XNC1AL ASS _ S R . S : 1 1977
o". o
3~ o ' l O i kd 0C oa1fj; B j o
0i
( a)
( b)
( c) d) 3~ PE-~-~ PV Ir~ CDLI~ PU I;-S I -I
ii A 
Dc-rived bv calculattn-back from thc rounded%. toL; 1 for t* c Jix statzs0
d to the neiarest S! O0gOC0o
Ms-Dtx! r~ vpe by idding. thec rounded fi[-uror. for each State.
on !' ojrvardI-( f-ti mtt-; : m'upp I ( Iul hy Lll(-1 i 111 l1ur1 1c oIf St tL! t ~ C
v~; irinry AtMt'LiilT'L i'i~ lM) jh ye~ t' ( L ti) IL iax-Lc wn~~ cie rtainCy.
P SSjU bj ect to OffSCt9' ill rC. Pct o' tiaitsfers or' responibilitia3 in x' 031' Iect 01' assistance for da-serteñ d
wi~ vi ! s and Aboriginal affairs. Armuni not yet d2 ": erm-. dt. CcI 
S A.
' C ( 1)
$' 000
334,309 272,179 143, 6, S
141,188( a)
100,247 75,929( a) All. ocation ( 2)
' 000 9,919 9,919 ( 3)
S1000 334,109 272, 179
153,567 141,188( a)
100,247 75,929( a)
1,077,419( a)
19717-75 9000
4 01,171
326, 615
172,378 169,425 120,296 91,115
1,281,000 1000 10,000 10,000
7-
oo( Ab)-z i i i
( LI) 6)
$' 000
411, 171
326,615 172,378 169,42 120,296 91,115
1,291,000 20,0 ( 23.0'
20,0 20.0 20.0 20,0 200 20,0 ( 20.9
The amounts,/ shovm for South Australia and Tasmr. ania are in each case $ 5 million less that tho actual
programs in that year. These reductins are in pur suance of arrangements agreed with these States
in respect of " offsets" to mcompany railway transferds. Thus the total amounts shown for the six
States combined are $ 10 million less than the actual program,
Divided between the States in the same proportions as amounts in column that is 1974-75
basic program less railway transfer offsets,
The figure of 20,0 per cent represents the increase in the basic programs ( column compared with
column The figures in brackets represent the increase in the aggregcate 1975-76 pro,; ra: m over
the 1974-75 program excluding the special temporary allocation for Queensland. The aggrogate
increase, including the special temporary addition, is19,8 per cent. r-
N SW
VIC OLD SA WA
TAs ( 7)
TOTAL 1,067,300( a) I
I 1CII ~ scac~ ol--e~
~ a~-~ ooPr~ 3 -~-SP~ C~ IC~ IC.
r. I 
STATE. GOVERN,-NT LOAN COUNCIL P1ROGIR. M1S LN
1 975-76 DIVISION~ IJIYPW4fEN BOlZ!: OWl: N'.--S ANT) CAPITPAT, C! 1ANTJ
] 9oRrowing' Profriam
' 000O
27 4, i 1-4
2.17 7 0
,. tV4 91
1120950 80,197 Capital Grants
137 j03j7
.57, I5t 9
40, P099
30,372' I ,? 9l~ 00()
" V A
4 s T.;) ta
' l000
3 26 O6
17 2 378
16c), 1425
667 t. 20,2c96
91,115
430, 333 
LARGER AUTHORITIES' PROGRAMS 1974-75 AND 1975-76
1974-75 Program
Temporary Allocations ( 2)
$ 1000
NSV 19,584 6,000
25,584 Total ( 3)
$* 000 Basic Program( a)
( 4)
0' 000
244,767 293,720
213,911 256,693
138,495 12,694
31,768
37,887 19,256
686,084 38,122 38,264 23,107
79?, 600 Permanent Additions ( 5)
' 000 Temporary Allocations ( 6)
S8000
10,000 7,075 Total ( 7)
$ S000
303,720 256,693
149,769 38,122 38,264 23,107
17,075809,675 Percentage Increase( c)
( 8)
20.0( 24.1
20.0
20.0( 2.6.0
20o0 20.0 20.0 20.0( 22.6
The distribution of the basic program between the States is based on the distribution of the
1974-75. basic program ( column
Includes permanent addition of $ 10 million to New South Walos.
The figure of 20.0 per cent represents the increase in tho basic program ( column compared with
column The figures in brackets reprooont the incrooses in the aggregate 1975-76 program over
the 1974-75 program excluding the temporary additions. Tha aggregate increase, including temporary
additions, is 18.0 per cent.
Basic Program $' 000 975-76
244,767( b)
QLD SA ! VA
I TAS TOTAL 213,911 118,911 31,768 31,887 19,256
660,500 



ljj&gt; A U S TRA L IA
PRIME MMI4STER Press Statement No. 521
June 1975
TRANSFER OF TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS
TO AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
( Joint statement by the Prime Minister the Honourable
E. G. Whitlam., Q. C. and the Pr~ mier of Tasmania,
the Honourable W. A. Neilson, M. H. A.)
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam. and the Tasmanian
Premier Mr Neilson announced today that they had signed a.
certificate required to bring into force the transfer of
the Tasmanian Railways to the Australian Government on
1 July 1975. " The transfer of the Tasmanian Railways represents
the first step in the achievement of a truly national
railway system", the Prime Minister and Premier said.
" In 1972 the Australian Government offered to accept
responsibility for State Railway systems which represent
a major problem to all State budgets. The agreement reached
on the transfer of the Tasmanian Railways will confer major
benefits to Tasmania", the Prime Minister and Premier said.
" Apart from the obvious benefits to the Tasmanian
budgetary situation the arrangements entered into also provide
for the Railway system to be rehabilitated. A program of
railway upgrading will be undertaken to ensure that the railways
play their proper role in providing efficient transport in
Tasmania." " The arrangements provide for Tasmania to receive
million this financial year as a first contribution in
consideration for land, minerals and other assets. An amount
of # 3.3 million is to be added to the " base" level of financial
assistance for future years. In addition, the State will be
relieved of capital debts standing against the railways, as
agreed between the Australian and Tasmanian Governments."
" The transfer of the Tasmanian railways will not only
benefit Tasmanians but Australia as a whole for it will enable
greater co-ordination of transport particularly sea and rail
and make more-economic use of Australia's transport resources." / 2 
-2-
The Prime Minister and Premier concluded by saying
that it was intended that the Regional office of ANR
in Tasmania will be located in Launceston, the major centre
of the State's railway operations.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
( Photograph available)
L 



31
ZbTKLA Press Statement No. 519
June 1975
JOINT PRESS STATEM4ENT ON WAGE FIXATION
The Premiers' Conference discussed future approaches
to wage fixation in Australia in the light of the existing high
levels of inflation. In a statement issued after the
Conference, the Prime Minister and Premiers said that,
following the historic National Wage Case decision of April
when the Australian-Conciliation and Arbitration Commission
conditionally accepted the principle of wage indexation,
there is a definite opportunity for the recent explosion in
wages and prices to be brought under control. The Governments
unanimously supported the guidelines handed down in the
decision for future wage claims. They said that it was
encouraging that the gu'delinet had received such widespread
acceptance and endorsemnent by other tribunals and by a wide
cross section of the Australian community, including the
executive of the ACTU and other influential spokesmen
from the union movement.
They appealed to all sections of the industrial
community to play their part by co-operating to achieve an
orderly and just system of wage fixing based on economic
realism and industrial sanity. They warned that unless this
co-operation is forthcoming Australia faced a situation in
which accelerating inflation would reach crippling heights,
imperilling our economic future and causing hardship to
ever increasing numbers and groups throughout the community.
In this situation the Prime Minister and the Premiers
were in common accord on the need to take action to uphold the
guidelines set down in the National Wage Case decision.
This would include:.
* Working toward a uniform approach in the hearings
on indexation before the Australian Conciliation
and Arbitration Commission in July/ August;
* Support by Governments for the guidelines in
appropriate industry cases;
Action to ensure compliance with the guidelines
in public employment within the control of Governments;
A meeting of bodies responsible for wage-fixing
in government employment;
Appropriate measures so that tribunals, however
constituted, act in accordancd. with the guidelines;
A meeting of Australian and State Ministers for Labor
will be convened as soon as possible to discuss action.
CANBERRA. A. C. T 



j.. p, 0 7
. t t. C
NO DATE
D 38 20 June 1975
PAPUA NEW GUINEA INDEPENDENCE:
EXCHANGE OF IMESSAGES
The following are the texts of messages exchanged.
yesterday by the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the Chief
iinister of Papua New Guinea, Mr Somare, agreeing that arrangements
be made for Papua New Guinea to become independent on
16 September 1975:
CHIEF MINISTER'S MESSAGE TO THE PRIME MINISTER
" Ily Dear Prime Minister,
On 18th June 1975 the House of Assembly passed the
following motions: " That the following Resolution passed by the House of
Assembly on 9th July 1974 be recinded ' That this House resolve
that Papua Eew Guinea do move to independent nation status as
soon as practicable after a Constitution has been enacted by this
House and that any proposed date for independence is to be endorsed
by this House' and " That this House now nominates the 16th day
of September 1975 as the date upon which Papua New Guinea is to
achieve independence". I gather steps will be taken to pass the Independence
Act in the Australian Parliament citing the above date.
Yours sincerely,
M. T. Sonare
( Chief Minister)
19 June, 1975
PRIME MINIISTER'S MESSAGE TO THE CHIEF MINISTER
" Mr Michael T. Somare,
Chief MiniSter of Papua New Guinea
Port Moresby ./ 2 
2-
1iy Dear Chief Minister,
Thank you for your message of 19 June 1975 informing
me that on 18 June 1975 the House of Assembly nominated
16 September 1975 as the date upon which Papua New Guinea is to
achieve independence. The date nominated by the House of Assembly is acceptable
to the Australian Government. I confirm that steps will be
taken to pass the Independence Act in the Australian Parliament
citing the date of 16 September.
. May I offer you my congratulations on the historic
decision which the House of Assembly has taken and express to you
my profound admiration for your success in steering Papua New
Guinea to full nationhood.. I look forward to continuing close
co-operation between our two Governments and our two nations.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm to you that the
Australian Government's policy is that Papua New Guinea should come
to independence on-16 September as one-country,--in accordance
with tne wishes of the overwhelming majority of Papua New Guinea's
elected representatives. The Australian Government will give no
sympathy, aid or support in any form to any group in Papua New
Guinea working to undermine their country's unity. In accordance
ith our obligations to the United Nations, the Australian
Government has a responsibility to the people of Papua New Guinea
to help them ensure thnat on independence day they are citizens of
a strong and united country..
I' am arranging for the Secretary-General of the United
. a. tions and the President of the Trusteeship Council to be
advised of your decision and the Australian Government's agreement
that Papua New Guinea is to achieve independence on 16
September 1975. Yours sincerely., Whitlam)
19 June 1975" 



J ) A US THA1
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 520
June 1975
EMBARGO: 6 p. m.
JOINT PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE
PREMIER OF TASMANIA
The Prime Minister' ( Mr Whitlan) and the Premier of
Tasmania ( Mr Neilson) announced their general agreement
with the recommendations of the Joint Expert Advisory
Committee on the second Derwent River crossing at Hobart.
They also announced that an immediate start would
be made on detailed investigation and design for a second
bridge and road approaches at Dowsings Point. The bridge,
to be of concrete box construction, would be designed to be
compatible with the attractive natural environment in
the vicinity of Dowsing Point. It would carry four
traffic lanes and, with approaches, is estimated to cost
$ 21 million. Detailed investigation and design of the second
bridge would be carried out under the auspices of a new
Joint Committee to be constituted by the two Goverments.
When firm information becomes available as a result of these
studies, an environmental impact statement will be prepared.
The statement will incorporate details of the studies
already undertaken on alternative locations and give due
regard to the location and design of the proposed bridge,
the changes to the metropolitan road systems and consequential
effects of land use on both banks of the Derwent.
Mr Whitlam, and Mr Neilson said that the-. two Governments
would have discussions on the timing for construction of the
new bridge, procedures for the further studies and their
assessment and the financial arrangements involved.
It was expected that investigations and design and
preparation of contract documents would take about 18 months.
The timing of actual construction would need to be keyed to
completion of reconstruction of the Tasman Bridge. / 2 
Mr Whitlam gave an undertaking that the Bridge and
associated roadwords would be funded by the Australian
Government up to the cost applicable to a bridge of
metres vertical clearance.
Mr Neilson said that he and Mr Whitlam had discussed
the question of land use involved in areas made more
accessible by the second crossing. He had given the
Prime Minister an undertaking that appropriate
measures would be exercised by the State Government to
control land sub-division and development pending the
completion and adoption of the planning study currently
being undertaken by the Southern Metropolitan Master
Planning Authority. This could probably be achieved
within existing powers, but, if necessary, special
legislation would be introduced.
The Prime Minister and the Premier said that
construction of the second bridge should aid the future
economic and integrated development of the Hobart
metropolitan area and, therefore, it was essential to
warn the public that appropriate control measures, operative
as from today, would be taken to achieve this end. Land
speculators should beware.
The Prime Minister and the Premier said that the
future role of the Tasman Bridge after its restoration to
trafficable conditions was discussed by the Advisory
Committee. It has reported that it was feasible to
widen the bridge to accommodate five ( instead of four)
traffic lanes, and that this work could be completed while
the restoration work was being carried out. The estimated
cost was put at about $ 3 million, and the Prime Minister
had agreed that the Australian Government would meet this
cost. Accordingly, they would ask the Joint Tasman
Bridge Restoration Committee to make arrangements for the
carrying out of this work concurrently with its major task
of bridging the gap. This, they said, would greatly enhance
the carrying capacity of the bridge, particularly during
peak hour. Mr Neilson said that he would be meeting
representatives of affected metropolitan councils in
Hobart within a few days to discuss the report and the
implications for the environment and people of Hobart
arising from the Joint Committee's recommendations.
The Prime Minister and the Premier paid tribute
to the work of the Joint Committee. They said that its task
had been formidable, but, through close co-operation its
members had produced a clear, concise report in a short time.
CANBERRA-' A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: 7 mlSL 1
QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 1/ 4
MEDIBANK ( 2)
SUNDAY 22 JUNE 1975
I SPOKE TO YOU ABOUT MEDIBANK IN THE VERY
FIRST OF THESE BROADCASTS I GAVE THREE MONTHS AGO.
I WANT TO RETURN TO THE SUBJECT THIS WEEK BECAUSE OF
THE INCREDIBLE MUDDLE IN WHICH THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
NOW FINDS ITSELF THROUGH ITS EFFORTS TO SABOTAGE THE
SCHEME. IT'S NOW LIKELY THAT QUEENSLAND WILL BE THE ONLY
STATE PREPARED TO DENY ITS CITIZENS THE BENEFITS OF THE
HOSPITAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK -THE ONLY STATE TO HOLD OUT.
YOU SHOULD BE QUITE CLEAR IN YOUR MINDS
THAT WHATEVER THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT MAY OR MAY NOT
DO AND THEY'IVE HAD MANY MONTHS TO MAKE UP THEIR MINDS-
* THE MEDICAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK WILL START AS PLANNED ON
TUESDAY WEEK, FROM THAT DAY ON, EVERY AUSTRALIAN, EVERY
QUEENSLANDER, WILL BE AUTOMATICALLY INSURED FREE OF CHARGE,
FOR ALL MEDICAL TREATMENT. ALL OF US NOW HAVE OUR
MEDIBANK CARDS. PEOPLE WILL PAY NOTHING FOR THEIR
MEDICAL INSURANCE TO COVER DOCTORS'I BILLS,, IF THE DOCTOR
SENDS HIS BILL TO MEDIBANK, PATIENTS WILL PAY NOTHING FOR
THE DOCTOR'IS SERVICES. THAT'S GOING AHEAD AS PLANNED.
IT IS ONE OF THE VERY GREAT SOCIAL REFORMS UNDER THIS
LABOR GOVERNMENT. s/@ 2 
WHAT IS AT STAKE IN QUEENSLAND IS THE HOSPITAL
SIDE OF MEDIBANK, Now I KNOW THAT QUEENSLAND ALREADY
HAS FREE PUBLIC HOSPITALS, THANKS TO A PREVIOUS STATE
LABOR GOVERNMENTS BUT THAT'S NO REASON WHY QUEENSLANDERS
SHOULD BE DENIED THE EXTRA MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN REVENUE,
THE EXTRA RANGE OF SERVICES AND OTHER BENEFITS THAT WOULD
COME FROM FULL PARTICIPATION IN THE MEDIBANK ARRANGEMENTS.
ONLY THIS WEEK, IN ADELAIDE, I SIGNED WITH THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN PREMIER. MR DUNSTAN, THE AGREEMENT
MAKING-SOUTH AUSTRALIA THE FIRST FULL PARTICIPANT IN THE
MEDIBANK SCHEME. I SIGNED A SIMILAR AGREEMENT WITH0
TASMANIA. THESE AGREEMENTS MEAN THAT NOT ONLY WILL
SOUTH AUSTRALIANS AND TASMANIANS BE ENTITLED TO FREE
TREATMENT IN '&amp; TA1 HOSPITAL WARDS; THEY'LL BE GETTING
FREE OUTPATIENT SERVICES AND LOWER HOSPITAL CHARGES FOR
INTERMEDIATE AND PRIVATE WARDS. ON TOP OF THAT, PRIVATE
HOSPITALS NOT JUST PUBLIC HOSPITALS WILL BE GETTING
A BETTER DEAL; ANOTHER $ 16 A DAY FOR EVERY PATIENT IN
THEIR CARE, FOR THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THERE'LL0
BE A SAVING OF $ 28 MILLION A YEAR MONEY WHICH THE STATE
CAN SPEND IN ANY AREA OF ITS RESPONSIBILITY ON BETTER
HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT OR MORE HOSPITAL STAFF, OR ON OTHER
THINGS THE PEOPLE NEED, LIKE SCHOOLS, RAILWAYS, ROADS, HOUSING. 
3.
THERE'LL BE SIMILAR BENEFITS FOR EVERY
OTHER STATE THAT JOINS. THERE'LL BE SIMILAR BENEFITS
FOR QUEENSLAND IF QUEENSLAND JOINS. YOU'LL HAVE NOTICED
THAT SOME OF THE STATES THAT WERE HOLDING OUT
PUTTING UP ALL SORTS OF UNACCEPTABLELAST-MINUTE.
CONDITIONS, CONDITIONS INTENDED TO DESTROY THE WHOLE
CONCEPT OF A FREE HOSPITAL SERVICE -ARE NOW ANXIOUS TO
COME IN. WELL, GOOD-LUCK TO THEM -BETTER LATE
THAN NEVER. BUT REMEMBER: FOR EVERY DAY THAT QUEENSLAND
STAYS OUT, FOR EVERY DAY THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
DITHERS AND ARGUES, THE QUEENSLAND PEOPLE WILL PAY
HEAVILY. IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT FAILS TO JOIN MEDIBANK
THEY'ILL BE SACRIFICING AN EXTRA $ 50 MILLION A YEAR IN
REVENUE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. i1/ 4 
YOU'D WONDER HOW ANY STATE COULD JUSTIFY SUCH AN
ATTITUDE, IN THE PAST FEW DAYS WE HAVE HEARD THE PREMIERS
CRYING FOR MORE MONEY. WHY DON'T THEY USE THE MONEY WE
OFFER THEM? WHY LET THIS OBSESSION WITH STATE RIGHTS
STAND IN THE WAY OF THE PEOPLE'IS NEEDS? THE FACT IS THAT
WE GAVE THE STATES A VERY FAIR FINANCIAL DEAL AT THE
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE THIS WEEK. UNDER TLEGISATIO THA EILTO
PASSED FIVE YEARS AGO, THE STATES WOULD HAVE BEEN ENTITLED
TO $ 2997 MILLION NEXT FINANCIAL YEAR; THEY WILL IN FACT BE
GETTING $ 3220 MILLION. THEY WILL HAVE 36 PERCENT MORE
MONEY TO SPEND IN REVENUES IN THE COMING YEAR THAN IN THE
YEAR JUST ENDING. QUEENSLAND' S GRANTS HAVE INCREASED
FROM $ 414 MILLION THIS YEAR TO $ 564 MILLION NEXT YEAR.
AND IF QUEENSLAND JOINED THE HOSPITAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK,
THE STATE WOULD GET AN EVEN BETTER DEAL WITH
HOSPITAL PATIENTS THE FIRST TO BENEFIT. DON DUNSTAN IS
A BONNY FIGHTER FOR HIS STATE, BUT HE DOESN'T GO ALONG0
WITH THIS STATE RIGHTS NONSENSE. HE'S JUST CALLED AN
ELECTION IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA OVER ANOTHER ISSUE INVOLVING
FINANCIAL AID FOR HIS STATE THE ISSUE OF RAILWAYS. HE'S
NOT PREPARED TO ALLOW A HANDFUL OF CONSERVATIVES IN THE UPPER
HOUSE TO BLOCK WHAT HE CALLS THE BEST FINANCIAL DEAL IN
THE STATE'S HISTORY." NOR IS HE PREPARED TO REJECT THE
BENEFITS OF MEDIBANK, 
I THROUGHOUT THIS MEDIBANK ARGUMENT YOU
HEAR A GREAT DEAL OF NONSENSE ABOUT MY GOVERNMENT WANTING
TO TAKE OVER THE RUNNING OF STATE HOSPITALS, WE DON'T.
WHAT WE ARE TRYING TO DO IS RESTORE IN EVERY STATE THE
FREE HOSPITALS THAT EXISTED YEARS AGO, THERE WAS A TIME
WHEN EVERY STATE HAD FREE HOSPITALS BECAUSE THE
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS WERE SHARING THE
COST, THAT WAS THE RESULT OF AGREEMENTS WITH THE STATES
MADE BY THE CHIFLEY LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 1947, THOSE
AGREEMENTS WERE BROKEN OFF IN THE 1950' s BY THE MENZIES
GOVERNMENT, WHEN THERE WAS A COUNTRY PARTY MINISTER
FOR HEALTH. THE TRAGEDY IS THAT SOME LIBERAL AND
COUNTRY PARTY POLITICIANS ARE STILL TRYING TO BLOCK
THIS SIMPLE, NECESSARY MEASURE, THEY'VE DESTROYED
ONE FREE HOSPITAL SCHEME. WE MUSTN'T LET THEM
DESTROY THIS ONE. 
IT'S PLAIN TO SEE THAT MR BJELKE-PETERSEN
IS COMPLETELY AT ODDS WITH HIS TREASURER, HIS
JUSTICE MINISTER AND HIS HEALTH MINISTER OVER MEDIBANK.
HIS MINISTERS CAN SEE QUITE CLEARLY WHAT MEDIBANK WILL
MEAN , IN TERMS OF REAL BENEFITS FOR QUEENSLAND. THEY SEE
NOTHING SINISTER IN THE DEAL, NO HIDDEN STRINGS. THEY'RE
BEING MUCH MORE REALISTIC ABOUT THIS THAN THE PREMIER,
IT'S NOT SO LONG SINCE MR BJELKE-PETERSEN WAS FLYING TO
PERTH TO PATCH UP A SQUABBLE BETWEEN THE COALITION
PARTNERS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, BEFORE THAT HE WAS
TRYING TO ESTABLISH THE COALITION IN TASMANIA. IT'S 0
ABOUT TIME HE SET HIS OWN HOUSE IN ORDER. IT'S A
GREAT PITY HE CAN'T SETTLE THE SQUABBLE IN HIS OWN
COALITION A DISPUTE WHICH WILL PROVE VERY COSTLY AND
DAMAGING TO QUEENSLAND IF THE COUNTRY PARTY GETS ITS
WAY IN CABINET AND THE BENEFITS OF MEDIBANK ARE
DENIED TO THE QUEENSLAND PEOPLE, 0 



il L
PIESS SiTA', E'T BY TI} PR~ I IIWISTER
Mi E. G. VIiITLiAM C, N. P.
. LAUT'C,' S1TON 23 JU,' N 1975
TiHE NATIONAL ISSUE Mii', FRASER IGNORIES
The Leader of the Opposition has asserted the national significance
of the Bass by-election but only in general, hypothetical terms.
I agree that the electors of Bass have an opportunity to express
a view on a range of national policies and national issues.
They are not general or hypothetical. They are specific issues
which directly affect the well-being of Tasmania, not least the
electorate of Bass and the welfare of all the people living here.
These issues were brought into sharp focus by last week's
Premiers' Conference and related events on the mainland. Those
events raise issues which Nr Fraser can no longer sidestep or
ignore. They are central to this by-election, because they are
central to the whole question of good government of Australia.
For the first time since Federation, arrangements between the
iederal and Tasmanian Governments have enabled Tasmania to
provide standards and services equal to those of the larger States.
The approach of the Australian Labor Government is that through new
co-operative arrangements between the Australian Government and the
State Governments, we shall be able to provide equality of standards,
equality of services, ecuality between States, and equality between
regions within the States.
In pursuit of this objective, there are now over fifty programs
for which the Aus-ralian Government makes specific purpose payments
to Tasmaniao For these, some $ 115 million is provided in the
current year. For specific purposes alone, the per capita payment
to Tasmania in 1974/ 75 was $ 284 compared with the national average
of 0220.
The biggest burden on all State budgets have been schools,
hospitals and railways.
As Miinister for Education and Science in the Mciliahon Government,
Mr Fraser was the foremost opponent of our proposal for a
Schools Commission, the establishment of which has transformed the
outlook and opportunities for education in this country.
He opposed it on the grounds of centralism precisely the same
ground on which the Liberals now oppose our proposals regarding
hospitals and railways. Yet would any Liberal, any State Premier,
or even Mr Fraser himself, now seek to dismantle our education program?
Right up to the deadline or beyond the Liberals stalled on
iMedibank, in the Senate and in their States. Now, the action of
the Legislative Council of South Australia, the most unrepresentative
and undemocratic legislative chamber in any parliamentary system in
the world, in rejecting the agreement between the Federal Government
and the South Australian government for the transfer of the South
Australian railway system, manifests in its grossest form the
obstructionism and negativism of the Liberal approach wherever
their numbers enable them to act. o../ 2 
-2-
We can only judge how the Liberals would act by their performance
in the Senate, the States where they hold power, and now,
so blatantly and destructively, in the Upper House in South
Australia. Co-operation between the Australian and Tasmanian Labor Governments;
on Federal-State financial relations, on Medibank, on the transfer
of railways, will place Tasmania's finances on a permanently sound
foundation.
All this is placed in jeopardy by Liberal obstruction
The contrast between Liberal obstructionism and Labor's efforts.
to find co-operative, constructive solutions is the real national
issue which Mr Fraser can no longer ignore.
L 



4AUS flL IA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 522
23 June 1975
APPOINTMENT OF AMBASSADOR TO SWEDEN, FINLAND AND NORWAY
The Prime Minister and Acting Foreign minister,
Mr Whitlam, today announced the appointment of the
Hon. Lance H. Barnard as Australian Ambassador to Sweden,
Finland and Norway.
Mr Barnard is to take up his appointment in Stockholm
in September. He will succeed Mr J. D. Petherbridge,
who has been Ambassador in Stockholm since 1972, and who
is to proceed to another. post. Mr Barnard will reside in
Stockholm and will made regular visits to Finland and Norway.
Mr Whitlam said that, in announcing the appointment,
he paid high tribute to Mr Barnard's former career as a
Parliamentarian and a Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
in the Labor Government.
" He will carry to his new appointment a distinction
that reflects the importance Australia attaches to its
relations with the Scandinavian countries," Mr Whitlam said.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



NOTES ITALIAN CLUB s S:
1. Delighted to be here at the Italian Australian Club in
Launceston one of the only Italian Clubs in Australia that.
I haven't visited before.
Only two weeks aco I was at the Apia Club in Sydney
where I always feel at home with President Jim Bayutti, a great
Italian Australian who has done so much for his new country by
continuing to care for his homeland. I mention in passing that
he is on the board of Qantas and is the head of the new ethnic
radio station in Sydney, which is serving the multi-linual
as well as multi-cultural needs of our migrant communities. He
holds these positions. because of his ability and because he
represents the contribution being made by the 25 per cent of
our Australian population who were born in another country
2. But of course here in Tasmania, there is the remarkable
contribution d-? e by Claude Alcorso not only a most successful
textile entrep-zer r, but also a patron of the arts and of
education n : be hoard of the Australian Opera, and last
year appointed to -he Universities Commission.
3. Then there's Sergio Guidicci from Tasmania who ten years
ago was the first migrant from this State and quite possibly
the first from the whole of Australia to win the celebrated
Rhodes Scholarship which had always been regarded as a fairly
Anglo Saxon institution.
4. But your know as well as I that these figureheads are only
the tip of the iceberg that there are Italian Australians,
Australian Italians throughout Australia who have done wonders
for this country, for this State, people who have made excellent
citizens, people who have brought up families in the best blend / 2 
-2-
of Old tradi-bions and loyalties with. new challen,-es and
opportunities.* My Grovernment understands your asipirations fandI applauds
your initiatives. Clubs like -this ane are living examples
of the interdependence of our cultures. ' Whether they are called
Italian Australian or Australian Itlian no longer matters,
although I realise that ther was a time -and not so many
years ag-o w1-en it was considteredl more respectable, safer by
far -to includle Australian somewhere in the title.'. I would 1 lke
to think that vhere it does now appear in relation to ethnic
cl. ubs it is out of a feeling of affection and not of fear.
6. For my part, I feel a great love of Italy, her culture and
her people. Thctl is shared by my wife lNargaret who is in
Mexico at presen-t, in the Auqstralian delegation to a United
Nations Confergenc e on vomen for International W-omen's Year.
Also in is an Italian Australian women from
Melboure, ? zos vlho is on the National Advisory Committee
for Internation_, * 7ozen's Year in Australia. I know my wife
will feel more ' zna tinoe of re(~ ret at missingt out on my visit
here. Cathy * auahter will be able to tell her all about it
on her return. You kno%!, its always struck me that politicians wiv es
and daughters are quite properly choosey about what activities
they will get involved in, and I don't blame them. Bunt there's
never a. n excuse produced when I mention there's a visit to an
Italian Club coming up. 1/ 3 
3-
7. Talking of excuses, I am reminded of criticism of my visit
to Europe last January. You will recall Liberal and Country
Party criticism of the fact that the Prime Minister of Australia
actually dared to take any time to visit those countries in
Europe that have given us more than a quarter of our entire
population. When I went to Italy for a very brief period,
unfortunately it was the first visit by an Australian Prime
Minister for over 15 years; 15 years during which thousands of
Italians had chosen to take the ' great gamble on building a new
life for themselves in a new Terra Australis. How wrong it
would have been, had I not visited your homeland to gain some
further insight into your birthplace. How wrong I would have
been to let such ill-considered, even prejudiced criticism,
cloud my judgment in that issue.
8. Of course it is proper, of course it is desirable, of course
it matters that the Prime Minister of this country should visit
those European =-untries who have given us so much for so long
their sons aan Their daughters, their labours and fortunately,
their loves.
9. And that brings me to the fact that my Government the
Australian Labor Government cares about what happens to
migrants when they come here, and doesn't just see people like
yourselves as another proposition in the workforce.
Ve realise the communications problems experienced by
newcomers; we recognise how lonely many migrant women feel;
we are aware that many migrants have been exploited because
of language problems in their work situations. We know that
while many migrant children are rightly described as " excellent
achievers", and are highly motivated to do well as school, / 4 
because they ar so encouraged by their parents, others are
not so fortunate, and do iieed special attention.
11 This is one of the thnsI have been talking about
to John Macrostie about while I have been down he71e You kniow
he's a teacher himself, and by all accounts a vezy skiilled,
and imaginativ,; e one. He, li'ke Lance Barnard before him, wouldI
be able to help you with any difficulties your children mignht
experience Zat school. He has worked as a fitter and turner too,
and know,, s what its like to work in a factory, and as a skilled
tradesman he woulId listen -to any problems or idleas you had about
how to imporove -working situations for migrant men and women.
He has already . zai&amp; l that he will listen to and. represent the
9r~~ S o ee: 777one in this electorate as L.-ance Barnard. ( lid
before him. I you all to vote f" or him on " InAurday. 



1. I
Statement by the Leader of the Australian
Friday, 20 June 1975.
President, The Australian Delegation wishes
opportunity of congratulating imDortant
World
like othec
the Mexican which
be General
WaldheiLm, There are some amongst us here today
believe, pessimistically, that this conference
In
NO DATE
M42 24 June 1975
WORLD CONFERENCE OF INTER NATIONAL
Statement by the TLeader of the Australian
Delegation, Ms Elizabeth Rei at Mexico City on
Mr President,. to take this
opportunity of congratulating you on your unanimous
election to the important role of President of
the first V. orld Conference of International
Women's Year. We are convinced that your
perspicacity and insight, your unfailing tact
and infectious good humour, will all help to
ensure that our discussions are to the point,
business-like and fruitful.
I would also like to extend the Australian
Delegation's congratulations to the other members
of the bureau and express to the: Mexican
Government our thanks for their generous
gesture in hosting this conference, we
hope will bS one of historical significance.
We listened with great interest to the
addresses in the first plenary session of this
conference yesterday morning. That delivered
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Dr. Waldhein, was indeed thought-provoking.
The comprehensive address which followed, given
by His Excellency the President of Mexico,
contained a number of concepts which attracted
the attention of my delegation: Perhaps the
most interesting was the President's exposition
of the-marginality of women in society.
There are some amnongst us here today who
will achieve very little, others who are
concerned that this conference will be
unnecessarily politicised, yet others who query
our ability to produce a concise and sensitive
world plan of action. Australia is not amongst
the pessimists. recent years we have worked
hard to bring about change in our own country
and have learnt much from our successes as well
/ 2 
as from our fai2u. res.. We are morei than li,-ppy to
share ou~ r exeancs and1 to benefit from the
exp--eri ence of others buit we do not want this
con: rve.. ncs to degenerate into a needless and
ti1It-, 5ti rig se-ries of corroarison of
a ch ie(--v e i i t'-s-, Vi do not deny-the value of
learning fro, i each other's effort%-s and
strategies but tliere is simply not the tirte
to listen to le--ngthy enumerations of national
progr,--mTa thi-s iz3 an interational confc-rence,
our takhere is to focus on fundamental issues
a. nd ior importantly, to develop strategies
which will provide a framewto rk f1or t%-h e
achiovement of7 our universal] ly known goals.
If this ' 2o-Ference is to be' serious in
m aiit-aining +. hat there is oetigwrong aith
the position. of women in soitthen we have
two art'xedia-te and imortant tak. Firstly
we have to analyse the si-tua-tion, and see why
it is wrong and secondly we MUst work out
strategies fcr changing that situation. The
clearest analysis Which has been developed and
one which cuts ac.-coss cultural and social
differences within and between countries is
that whnich describes thE! inferior position
of wonten as arising from sexism.*
We must cease being afraid to use these
words. Sexism is the artificial ascription
of roles, belhaviour and even personalities
to pec-, le on -the basis of their sex alone.
This do) es not simply create difference-S
but inequ a 1 t -Le. s. We none ie -fin u and
it is imoo33s'ble to imagine liv1ig in, a
non-sexist society.
The fact that women as a group are
supposed to have and indeed are forced to
have, in nmanv subtle and not so subtle ways,
a different kind of personalityi a different
pattern of behaviour as aaroup. has
consequences for their -position in society.
It is evident to all of us that we live
in societies w~ hich are ruled by men in other
words, our socie-ites are patriarchal. This
must also mean that our " womanly ' virtues"
are not those virtues which are rewarded by
society, that our enforced differences are
not as hallowed or valued as they are said
to be. But ofc course it is such a subtle
process a colonization by mute consentthat
although we-have in the past accepted
these patriarchal values it is still
difficult for us to see the way out.
/ 3 
3
To attempt to work out strategies for
changing this situation must therefore, be
our primary task at this conference. It will
be slow and sometimes painful to come to te. rns
with the reality of our problem, which reqc. es
as much a revolution in the heads of people
as it does the rmodification of the structures
which reinforce these destructive values.
The themes of this conference are
equality, peace and development. The Australian
Delegation does not believe, however, that
these are separate issues to be dealt with
in isolation from each other.
For many years, the emphasis in
developed countries has been on political
rights, but it has been the experience of the
women in the industrialised countries that
economic rights are as important if not more
so than political ones. We consider that
a demand for a new international economic
order is far from a peripheral issue to the
debates at this conference.
What concerns us is that in the
discussion of the need for a new international
economic order and of the charter of economic
rights and duties of states, little attention
has been given to the role women are to play
in formulatiny and implementing this demand nor
to the fact that women as well as men must
benefit from this revolution. There must be
a recognition that economic and social justice
for women must go hand in hand with overall
economic progress.
When practical, constructive and
realistic proposals emerge from the on-going
debates on the new international economic order,
women must not only not be forgotten, but
their present oppression and subjugation
must be recognised and steps taken to correct
them. Measures must be discovered which
help women to help themselves towards
participation in and.. benefit from the development
process. Women's involvement in establishing the
new international economic order must be more
than mere vague exhortations, insincere
rhetoric and token gestures. The specific
problems and experiences of women, including
the poorest and least articulate, must be
understood. If this is to be done with
honesty it means asking and involving women
themselves. Sensitivity must be shown
towards those wromen the vast majority of
/ 4 
4
uwomen t _ rotighou'.. til worl. d v; 1iooe voices are
not beL! g heard by Che d: ecision makers.
i. iv-rportiant that th,,=. se pr-obltems not
be seenI trc-. clh thne eyes of deove3oped countries
alone. At the s. siV. timFn! . each of us are
sesiive to the ilc~. th-wae are be;-t-qualifited
to soeak about ou: r own experionces and to the
need to~ fas that the z!' onmic development.
which h Fs occurreci i~ n our country has not
broughIbt whit lxzcalifid aidvantages for
A ust r a 14ani wc'inen.
-The trarisf-errr g of t westecrn economic
growth-moc: i-_ to orrcc. nti csn longer
seems dealrable. Its hzaomn'I effects on the
live--womeni are only n w being recognisedl.
:*: ocerr econorntic gro"-rIh too often requires
the introduct-ion of ma-ss tehiology, capital
intensive techniques arid organisation and,
genaerally, Lhe away from women of
their t_-radi t inia2. and eco,-omiucally productive
place In the society, rel&gt;_, ating them to a
marginal 1: nd deoend-n t exis3t ence. ' Vocmen
therebv los-e th~ at economic independence they
tradizionall1v had,.
:--caoit-ai intenai'V* e development,
7ent-and unde rmp I oym( ent, hits women
har r 3: he Economic Coiwmui. Lsion for Latin
Amer_-c-as ecl ar3at-ion, amor: ist others, point-s
out and-z the prevai. g cconitions of
lax-:-r~~ s legislatrwie attempts to
guar:=-a e'. al opportuniti 4-s f1or women have
' om-zzs c nsec'uences at best: consequenc? 3
whi: h~ n~ rcethe part played by tr-adiltion,
custc Cliltures, convention and law4s in
consp::: n o deetdeve,&amp; Lopm:, ent. The
t_ : romn ' hsfrcain,~ and Latin
Amer~ cz--n region?! I confer ences all stress this.
Th ose wiomertwn reject the western
pattern of dav -2oor-, D'erit increasingly
large-instit. uItins, distanot workrlaces,
inflex2. ble hour5, a dehumani. Fed environ~ ment
which suppresses the sociasl, spiritual and
culturIA. lives of i. ts workexrs must work
towartds pat-terns of development w4hich do. not
demand productivity and efficiency at any costL.
Efficiency in its comizon and harsh
meaning i. o inimi. cal to divirsity, innovation,
creativity and 4iiurovisat -icn %-hich are
pre-requ~ sites oz' true economic growth and
develcoment. 
Development must no-, -is has happened
i n 5-70 ope-d Countries, malle thz personal a
fft~ ale Province and tDan dejprive women of the
ec , TOnnI2.. and p.. lnitical power necessary to
destroy. the di-' chotomy he ',% ween the * personal
and the political0 the home-and the workplace,
the breadwinner and the horrtemaker.
in our view a new -world economic order
must lead to new and culturally appropriate
concepts of de:-velopment boased upon an
interrelationshiip betweea ; ci-and economic
f actor-S.
Having sa. id this, however0 we believe
that improvem-ents in tChe lives of women
canno-t and must not await the outcome of
deliber---ations on the new economic order.
it seems clear to us that womaen tharoughout
the world -wai. 3t action now and that this can
be achie-ved within Dresent resource limitations
and boundaries by a resetting of priorities
as well as a realisatiorn of the importance of
women in themselves as well * as to development.
Women share wit'-h man the responsibility
for establishing a jiust international order
wit-~ urwhich true peace cannot be achieved.
We not f--o:-cet tb--L womnen who have fought,
t-e nd ti-ne again, for such an order and
th,-ho are fighting still. nlut such is
the r-= cedv that even wMhen women and men f ight
a3 brother and sister to free themse~
e~ and their psople ' too often the new
soc~~ v ene~ zits women no more than the old.
Th efr brothers in the struggle carry within
the;-i~ j rthe roots of treason: the myths and
P "~ dces which kleep womien in their place.
-However we mnight struggle for a new order,
the res ponsibility which we as women bear will
be ex-ercised in a different way, for we bring
to the negotiating tabhle different experiences.
WM~ en like the peoples of the third world,
know the effects of opprassion: oppression is
the bitter bread of our daily lives. This
insatjht, born of excper. ience, m . ust not continue
to be considered ir relevant to the attainment
of Doeace: It is this ' isight alone, gained
through the anguish of violence and oppression,
which justifie3 the li,-ki-ng of -women with peace.
Peace settlements. as well as peace
negotiations, have consistently disregarded the
needs and wishes of w,; omen who are as affected
as men by policies for the reconstruction of 
societLios and thCCe~. Jean c. f peoples whose
live3 hava bi srupt-., d by ~ s
The 2hsis of rain. r~ a-: ia ( iscriiflation,
cocnraisia e-o. na~~, aiU en. d zionaj; t on
is similar to tho, tais of th violcnce against
womt-en w. hich we call I~; ir. i--tn busEid on the
nleed, -hiLch ifli7 2. b alurt need, for
power overcta~ r humn beings_. Pa t r i ) rch y
is yet azrotl i1o0r1m: 1,: 1 * wC ja3OPJ. C 11.
uwozen add chA.! v10c s ' to the_-rro-1. ing c3 . nnd
for oace. and C these voi! ceIs are ' heard, thenl
the victory w~ J eLbht of rs tiathat
Wny formi of a. o crf~ or domination
i: 3 an immoral. way oflfe
iany ~ i. a~ oil t -need Lo a-ttaiin and
to con~ sider t'he Prev:_% 1-' nC', OK JJZcewihin
so c: et iS The ar~ c'~ t ntre~ mn oval Of
such *: iolen. cae is setiltow: ard s the recognition
and removal ofvi.~ c int. i,_ rnationally.
in this context, * violenca against women
cannot iagn ored. Such -vio) ence iic). ucie3
rape, Jxnola tion: forct---d sterislation, indecenat
assauIt, infibulation, unwvartted pregniancy,
Cxi~ reto~. ' nnaeces. oary sijrgerv and wife
beat:. g and shackl~ ing as well. 1 as er. lviolence.
p-r z~ eo: skstra.-icers. \ Vio'lenrce agiainst
o zten c-n-fltC. d by me n known to
izr: ns. ofti~ fatrhers and hus~ oinds,
Dter--dise re_, p-2ctable and accaptable
ri-ri5 yf Physical assault on
wc~ n~ e:ñ c. ~ the lou.; stat. us of women in
soc-e:.-z. e -eriial to th-em o the right to
r e c and dignity. This low~ status is
ref-. cac noz cnly in the ; DtnrIFtration of
suco-of: v~ c~ rc but by the frequent
sancz7-ning, condoinirng, even admiration of
suen ts
! The con-rinued oppressi~ on of iomen implies
th.-rMia t enalce o-f o.: rov r woman by nien
through their imposition of sexis~ t valuea.
The -n-Forcerent of such val'.. es by labelling and
trea~ ing a3 c~ v n any woman. in any way
does niot act out acrcepted role,;, and the lack
of recogni% ion of -the. worth, cont-ributi ons
and talents of %. jives and wohreis w.. e-ntal
violence. Th-subjugation of women within
and outside the home, th~ e ack of recognition
of women's work., the extrer. E-anuses of
psiychiatrists who resort to -: h1ock treatment
and brain surgery to " rI3ie'womlen who
are unhappy in their so called " p roper role", ae'
7 
7
as violent as any physical assault on
women. Violence by women to children, to
the. mselves and to others, is a reaction and
a cry for help against such mental and social
crimes. Until such time as violence against
women is recognised and understood, and
ceases, peace will remain unattainable.
Equality is a limited and possible
harmful goal. Associated with the struggle
for equality have been some needed and just
reforms: equal pay, equal access to formal
education and vocational training, equality
under the law and equal rights to vote and
to run for public office. T'he importance of
these reforms is as necessary pre-requisites
both for the full participation we are seeking
in the economic, social and political life of
our countries and for the dignity and
independence which are our rights as human
beings. But we can no longer delude ourselves with
the hope that formal equality, once achieved,
will eradicate sexist oppression it could
well merely legitimise it. For there is a real
danger, a very real danger, that satisfaction
with the achievement of formal equality will
encourage the belief that all problems are
thereby solved. However even if formal
equai--v were to be achieved, all else still
rezma_-s to be done.
cur deliberations in these coming
weeks-. te temptation to resort to pious
plaziz-des and hollow but resounding rhetoric
will overwhelming. For the breadth of the
task ='-ead of us, the difficulty in realising
its prac-ical ramifications, the unperturbable
ignorance of so many people, the power of the
structures we must combat, all militate against
us. Even if we, each of us here, were dedicated,
sensitive and understanding, we could only hope
to touch the outermost limits of the experience
of most women. This realisation commits us to
enabling women to determine the shape of their
own lives, not because it-is our favourite
political theory but because it is the only way
the decisions made will be the right ones.
We women will-no longer be excluded from
the sphere of decisions,-though we should
reject the concommitant domination and power,
for we have experienced the consequences. / 8 
8
We women will no longer be relegated,
either here or in our own countries, to a
secondary oplice when " hard" politics are
being discussed as distinct from " soft"
women's issues. ; e reject this distinction:
it is the distinction between the personal
and the political. It is a part of our
oppression. We women will no longer be manipulated
for political ends, either in the international
or in the national forum, for this deprives us
of our dignity.
We women will no longer tolerate
paternalism, benign or otherwise, for
it deprives us of our self-hood.
This is our conference."
4 



Press Statement No. 523
June 1975
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME COLLEGE
The Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, has
confirmed the Government's decision, announced on 10 June 1975,
to establish an Australian M aritime College to provide
education and training for officers in the Australian
maritime industry and to site it at Launceston.
The decision results from a report on " Training
Requirements for Sea-going Personnel" from Mr Malcolm Summers,
who is the Royal Commissioner inquiring into various aspects
of the maritime industry. The report was tabled on 11 July 1974.
Launceston was chosen because the College needs to have
practical training facilities at a seamanship centre-including
a jetty, boat repair sheds, boats, liferafts and periodic access
to a small training ship. It needs to be situated close to
sheltered water with good access to the sea.
Launceston has these requirements and its proximity to
Bass Strait is a decisive consideration.
The Government accepts the recommendation of Mr Summers
that the College should be based on a requirement of 300 student
places, with provision for future growth. The Government accepts
the recommendations that the College should be situated close to
a tertiary institution, which may need to be developed further
than the existing advanced education facilities in Launceston.
Library, hall of residence and some other facilities could, by
arrangement with the-Tasmanian Government, be available for joint
use with Tasmanian tertiary students. The Committee investigating
post secondary education in Tasmania will be asked to recommend
the manner of this association.
The College will educate deck officers, engineer officers,
radio officers, and provide for higher studies including nautical
science degree qualifications, for which at present Australian
seafarers are forced to go overseas.
The College will be comprehensive. It-will be a college
with predominantly tertiary level studies with associated courses
at a level appropriate for seamen and fishermen and including
practical training in safety, fire fighting, and life saving.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. Jj)&gt;) AUS ALI( 



ø JjL^ A l XAIIA Canberra, 26 June 1975
The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa, Mr Whitlam,
has announced approval of a grant to the Methodist Church
of New South Wales Property Trust for the Ingleburn Pre-school
Kindergarten and Child Care Centre.
Mr Whitlam said that $ 6,422 had been allocated for the
purchase of equipment for the Pre-school Kindergarten and Child
Care Centre. The level of grant was based on an approved list supplied
by the Methodist Church of New South Wales Property Trust.
Mr Whitlam said that this grant was further evidence of
the commitment the Australian Government has towards the
provision of child care facilities in areas where they are
needed and also of the Government's willingness to assist
voluntary organisations in providing much needed services
in the community. m im 1 a3 S~ M 



SUGGESTED LINE FOR LAUNCESTON flATRICULATION COLLEGE
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION INTRODUCED A VERY ORIGINAL
NOTE INTO THE CAMPAIGN WHEN HE SPOKE TO THE TASMANIAN
PRESS CLUB HERE IN LAUNCESTON ON TUESDAY. HE RAISED
THE ISSUE OF CIVIL LIBERTIES AND INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.
NOW THIS IS A VERY IMPORTANT ISSUE. IT IS AN ISSUE
THAT WILL BE CENTRAL TO THE POLITICAL DEBATE IN
AUSTRALIA AND THROUGHOUT THE WORLD FOR THE REST
OF YOUR LIVES, THE NOVEL THING ON TUESDAY WAS THAT
IT SHOULD BE RAISED BY MR FRASER IN THE WAY HE DID
IN THE FORM OF AN ATTACK UPON THE LABOR GOVERNMENT.
YOU ARE EO:_' G TO HEAR A GREAT DEAL ALONG THIS LINE
BEFORE Th-E I-EXT GENERAL ELECTION WHEN MOST OF YOU
WILL BE A-B31-TO EXERCISE THE MOST BASIC OF ALL
DEMOCRATIC R: GHTS THE RIGHT TO VOTE.
THAT RIGHT TO VOTE AT 18 W'J WAS GIVEN BY THE VERY
FIRST PIECE. OF LEGISLATION INTRODUCED IN THE FIRST
SESSION OF PARLIAMENT AFTER WE FIRST BECAME THE GOVERNMENT.
ANY OF YOU WHO ARE VOTING ON SATURDAY HAVE THAT RIGHT
BECAUSE A LABOR GOVERNMENT GAVE IT TO YOU AFTER 23 YEARS
OF REFUSAL TO ALLOW IT BY THE LIBERALS., NDIVIDUAL
RIGHTS AND HUMAN FREEDOMS ARE THE MOST PRECIOUS THINGS
WE HAVE. 
-2-
BUT WOULDN'T YOU SAY. THAT PERHAPS THE MOST SACRED
OF THEM ALL, WOULDN T YOU PUT AT THE TOP OF THE LIST
YOUR RIGHT NOT TO BE DRAFTED INTO MILITARY SERVICE
THAT IS, YOUR RIGHT OVER THE USE OF YOUR OWN BODY?
MR FRASER WAS MINISTER FOR THE ARMY AND THEN MINISTER
FOR DEFENCE UNTIL HE FELL OUT WITH JOHN GORTON AND
DESTROYED HIM IN A GOVERNMENT WHICH INTRODUCED THE
FIRST PEACE TIME CONSCRIPTION IN AUSTRALIA'S
HISTORY, IF l'\ R FRASER WAS SrILL IN GOVERNMENT,
EVERY BOY IN THIS ROOM WOULD BE LIABLE FOR TWO YEARS
COMPULSORY MILITARY SERVICE. IT IS ALL TOO EASILY
FORGOTTEN, IT IS ALL TOO EASILY FORGOTTEN THAT
MORE THAN HALF OF THOSE WHO WERE KILLED IN VIETNAM
THE FORGOTTEN FIVE HUNDRED WERE CONSCRIPTS AND
THAT TWO-THIRDS OF THOSE WHO SERVED IN VIETNAM
THE FORGOTTEN , qAR WERE CONSCRIPTS. z
FOR ALL BUT 18 MONTHS OF OUR WRETCHED INVOLVEMENT IN
THAT WRETCHED WAR, MR FRASER PRESIDED AS ARMY MINISTER
AND DEFENCE MINISTER OVER THE CONSCRIPT SYSTEM,
THE FIRST ACTION LANCE BARNARD TOOK AS A MINISTER ON
THE DAY HE AND I FORMED THE GOVERNMENT WAS TO END
CONSCRIPTION, WE DIDN'T WAIT FOR THE PARLIAMENT TO
MEET, IT WAS DONE BY THE STROKE OF A PEN. 
7
ON THE SAME DAY WE ENDED THE LAST VESTIGES OF
AUSTRALIA' S MILITARY COM" MITMENT IN INDO-CHINA AND
WE FREED FROM PRISON ANY HEN WHO WERE SERVING TERMS
FOR REFUSING MILITARY SERVICEoWE WIPED FROM THE
RECORDS THEIR CONVICTIONS SO THAT THEY WOULD NOT
SPEND A LIFETIME OF CIVIL HANDICAP BECAUSE OF THEIR
CONVICTION THEIR CONVICTION IN BOTH SENSES OF THE WORDCONVICTION
AS CRIMINALS FOR STANDING UP FOR THEIR
CONVICTIONS. DON'T FORGET VIETNAM -IT WAS A WAR THE LIBERALS
FOISTED UPON AUSTRALIA AND AS THE RECORD OF HOW WE
GOT INVOLVED, WHICH I AS AN INDEPENDENT HISTORIAN
COMPILED AND PUBLISHED A FORTNIGHT AGO SHOWSA
WAR WE GOT INTO THROUGH LIBERAL LIES AND LIBERAL
DECEIT AND LIBERAL STUPIDITY. DON'T FORGET
CONSCRIPTION OR WHAT IT MEANS TO YOUR CIVIL
LIBERTIES, ESPECIALLY WHEN ONE OF ITS GREATEST
ADVOCATES, rFIR FRASER, TALKS ABOUT FREEDOM.
LET ME MENTION SOME OTHER BASIC RIGHTS. IS THERE
ANYTHING MORE FUNDAMENTAL THAN EQUALITY BEFORE THE
LAW? THERE CAN.'. BE NO EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW
UNLESS THERE IS EQUALITY OF ACCESS TO THE COURTS.
WITHOUT THAT EQUALITY THERE WILL ALWAYS BE ONE LAW
FOR THE RICH AND ANOTHER FOR THE POOR. WE HAVE
SET UP THE LEGAL AID SERVICE TO PROVIDE THAT EQUALITY. 
THERE IS THE BASIC QUESTION OF RIGHTS FPR ABORIGINES.
T. SMART ALECKa-4v. HAD c. E;
, Oi4t R JOKE AT TASMANIAN EXPENSE BY CHI-ACKING
THE VISIT HERE DURING THE CAMPAIGN BY MY MINISTER
FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS, LES JOHNSON, T THOUGHT
THAT THERE WERE NO ABORIGINES IN TASMANIA BECAUSE
OF THE DREADFUL THINGS WE DID OVER A HUNDRED YEARS AGO.
IN FACT THERE ARE IMPORTANT PROGRAMS OPERATING IN
THIS AREA FOR ABORIGINES. BUT THE POINT I WANT
TO MAKE IS, FOR THE FIRST TIME IN OUR HISTORY,
AUSTRALIA HAS A GOVERNMENT WHICH IS TRYING TO RESTORE
BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS TO ABORIGINES AND TO REPAIR
AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION,
ANOTHER -AS: C HUMAN RIGHT IS POLITICAL AND NATIONAL
INDEPENDEiCE,. ON 16 SEPTEMBER WE SHALL BE GIVING
INDEPENDENCE TO MORE THAN TWO MILLION HUMAN BEINGS,
THE TWO A: D A HALF MILLION PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN THE
WORLD'S LARGEST REMAINING COLONY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA.
FOR MOST OF THE YEARS THE LIBERALS WERE IN POWER,
UNTIL 1971 AT THE EARLIEST, THE MINISTER FOR WHAT
WAS THEN CALLED EXTERNAL TERRITORIES USED TO TALK ABOUT
INDEPENDENCE FOR PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN TERMS OF THE
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY IF THEN, TALK ABOUT ALL
POWER BEING VESTED IN CANBERRA' 
IT WILL BE ONE OF THE PROUDEST THINGS OF MY LIFE
TO HAVE ACHIEVED WHAT A MERE 5 YEARS AGO WAS DENOUNCED
AS WILDLY IRRESPONSIBLE TO DIVEST CANBERRA OF
AUTHORITY OVER THE LIVES OF TWO AND A HALF
MILLION PEOPLE.
IN THE MATTER OF MOST IMMEDIATE CONCERN TO YOU
AT THE MOMENT YOUR OWN EDUCATION, IS THERE ANY
RIGHT MORE IMPORTANT THAN EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY
FOR A DECENT EDUCATION? WHEN HE WASN'T MINISTER
FOR ARMY PRESIDING OVER CONSCRIPTION OR MINISTER
FOR DEFENCE PRESIDING OVER THE WAR IN VIETNAM,
MR FRASER WAS MINISTER FOR EDUCATION,
HE WAS V~_ FIN HIS OPPOSITION TO THE NEEDS CONCEPT
IN EDUCAT:,.., HICH HAS BEEN PUT INTO EFFECT BY THE
SCHOOLS CM SOI HE WAS OPPOSED TO THE SCHOOLS
COMMISSION LTSELF, THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WHICH HAS
TRANSFORMED -=--UCATION IN OUR NATION, HE WAS OPPOSED
TO FREE EDUCATION AT UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF
ADVANCED EDUCATION. THESE ARE THINGS WE HAVE
ESTABLISHED, THINGS WHICH HAVE GUARANTEED TO EVERY
AUSTRALIAN 30Y AND GIRL, A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT OF
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY. 
-6-
THIS IS INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR. ONI E OF THE
GREAT RIGHTS THAT WOMEN AROUND THE WORLD HAVE
BEEN FIGHTING FOR FOR GENERATIONS IS EQUAL PAY
FOR EQUAL WORK. ALMOST ALONE OF THE ADVANCED
WEALTHY COUNTRIES. AUSTRALIA UNDER THs LIBERALS/
REFUSED THIS RIGHT TO WOMEN. WE ESTABLISHED THAT
RIGHT.
YOU HAV! E TO JUDGE WHETHER THAT IS A RIGHT WORTH
HAVING, BECAUSE IT DOES BRING WITH IT SOME DIFFICULTIES,
YOU HAVE BEEN HEARING A GREAT DEAL ABOUT THE DAMAGE
OUR TARIFF CUT OF 25% DID TO THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY
HERE IN LAUNCESTON, THE FACT IS THAT THE REAL REASON
WHY THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY DEVELOPED IN PLACES LIKE
LAUNCESTON WAS THAT THEY WERE ABLE TO CALL UPON GROUPS
OF UNSKILLED'WOMEN WORKERS WHO. WOULD ACCEPT LOW WAGES
BECAUSE THERE WAS NO OTHER FORM OF EMPLOYMENT AVAILABLE.
ONCE THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL PAY WAS ESTABLISHED BY
my GOVERNMENT THIS NO LONGER APPLIED. THE TARIFF
CUTS HAVE BEEN A MARGINAL FACTOR IN FORCING THE
vyfp
RESTRUCTING OF THE AUSTRALIAN TEXTILE INDUSTRY.
THE TRUTH IS THAT IF ONE TRIED TO RESTORE THE AUSTRALIAN
TEXTILE INDUSTRY TO ITS EARLIER SITUATION, ONE WOULD HAVE
TO TAKE AWAY EQUAL PAY NOT JUST IN TEXTILE BUT IN
ALL INDUSTRY, FOR ALL WOMEN. 



I,
NIOTES FOR UOlliEIV'S H1ORNIhG TEA
1. COMMIITTED TO IMPROVING QUALITY OF LIFE FOR EVERYONE,
INCLUDING WOMEN, BUT GIVEN THAT WOMEN HAVE TENDED TO BE
NEGLECTED, NECESSARY TO MAKE SPECIAL EFFORT TO ENSURE AS
MUCH IMPROVEMENT AS POSSIBLE IN AS SHORT AS POSSIBLE TIME.
2a APPOINTED ADVISOR ON WOMEN'S AFFAIRS. WIFE OFTEN
COMMENTS THAT I SHOULD HAVE ONE ON MEN'S AFFAIRS, BUT POINT
IS MEN HAVE BEEN REPRESENTED EN MASSE FOR CENTURIES AND
WOMEN NEED SPECIAL VOICE. BACKING INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S
YEAR, NOT BECAUSE A GIMMICK BUT BECAUSE EXCELLENT WAY TO
FOCUS ATTENTION ON BROAD SPECTRUM OF WOMEN S CONCERNS.
3, HAVE PAID MORE rHAN LIPSERVICE TO I. WN, Y. $ 2 MILLION
SET ASIDE. CONFERENCES BEING PLANNED ON WOMEN'S HEALTH,
WOMEN IN GOVERNMENT AND WOMEN AND THE MEDIA PLUS MEXICO
CONFERENCE AND CHOGM WIVES MEETING. MAY NOT LIKE BADGE
BUT WILL HAVE SEEN IT ON STAMPS. MY SECRETARIAL STAFF
AND PRESS OFFICE HAVE LIBERALLY DECORATED WITH " WOMEN
ARE ON THE MOVE", " WOMEN ARE TRANSMOGRIFYING" AND " WOMEN'S
PLACE IS EVERYWHERE" STICKERS$
4. WOMEN'S PLACE IS CERTAINLY ON A NUMBER OF THE COMMISSIONS
AND ADVISORY BODIES MY GOVERNMENT HAS ESTABLISHED
ELIZABETH EVATT, ENID CAMPBELL, HILDA ROLFE, AND WOMEN IN
PUBLIC SERVICE MARIE COLEMAN AND JEAN BATTERSBY. WOMEN IN
THE HOUSE THE LOVELY JOAN CHILD, SENATORS MELZER AND COLEMAN
AS WELL AS LIBERAL SENATORS GUILFOYLE AND MARTIN. TREMENDOUS
CONTRIBUTION, o, . o/ 2 
-2-
STILL GREAT CHALLENGE TO MAKE THE MOST OF THE TALENTS
AVAILABLE. COMIMITTEE ON JOB DISCRIMINATION, FOR A START.
HOW TO BRING ABOUT EQUAL PAY W ITHOUT PUTTING WOMEN OUT OF
WORK. HOW TO MODERNISE WITHOUT MAKING PREVIOUSLY ESSENTIAL
PROCESS WORKERS REDUNDANT? AWARE OF THE PROBLEM: ITS WHY SO
MANY WAOMEN ANXIOUS TO GET A [ JEAT GRANT, WOMEN BEING
EMPLOYED ON SOME OF THE RED GRANTS AND QUITE PROPERLY.
THEN THERE ARE ALL THE VOLUNTARY WORKERS AND VOLUNTARY
ENTHUSIASTS WHO MAY NOT CHOOSE TO GO OUT TO WORK BUT ARE
NEVERTHELESS INVOLVED IN VITAL COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES DESIGNED
TO PROVIDE CARE FOR THOSE WHO NEED IT WHETHER THE OLD,
THE VERY YOUNG, THE HANDICAPPED, YOUNG PEOPLE WITH PROBLEMS1f
FAMILIES WqITH PROBLIEMS THE VERY GROUPS UNABLE TO SPEAK
FOR THEMSEL/ ES AND ABOUT WHOM my GOVERNMENT CARES, AND MY
GOVERNMENT Z3REALISES THAT IT IS IMPORTANT TO KEEP
VOLUNTARY ' ND ZHARITA3LE ORGANISATIONS INVOLVED IN THIS KIND
OF WORK B; UT ALSO TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WITHOUT
CONTROL SO Th. A-i THE WORK CAN GO ON MORE EFFICIENTLY BUT WITHOUT
LOSING THAT FERSONAL CONTACT WHICH IS VITAL.
7. JUST THIS WEEK I VISITED THE Low HEAD GERIATRIC HOSPITAL
AND SAW AT FIRST HAND THE EXCELLENCE OF THE ATTENTION GIVEN
TO THESE OLD PEOPLE. IN THE LAST FEW MONTHS I HAVE OPENED
THREE OLD PEOPLES HOMES BUILT SINCE my GOVERNMENT INCREASED
SUBSIDY PAYABLE TO ORGANISATIONS TO $ 4j FOR $ 1I FROM $ 2 FOR $ 1,
TASMANIA HAS RECEIVED NEARLY $ 3 MILLION FOR SUCH ACCOMMODATION.
WE REALISE THE NEED TO HOUSE OLD PEOPLE WITH AS MUCH
INDIVIDUAL INDEPENDENCE AND COMFORT AS NECESSARY AND WE
HAVE DONE SOMETHING ABOUT IT. 
-3-
8. THEN AT THE OTHER END OF THE SCALE THERE IS THE WHOLE
RANGEOF CHLDHOOD SERVICES WHICH BENEFIT BT OHR N
CHILDREN, i( ifi BEAZLEY POINTED OUT THAT 5,000 KINDERGARTEN
PLACES ARE BEING PROVIDED IN TASMANIA NOT BY THE SCHOOLS
COMMISSIONJ BUT BY THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION. AND I WANT
TO KNOCK THE RUMOUR THAT IT FORESHADOWS A FEDERAL TAKEOVER
OF PRESCHOOL EDUCATION. IT MEANS PURELY AND SIMPLY THAT
MORE PLACES ARE AVAILABLE FOR KINDERGARTEN AGE CHILDREN.
UNDER VARIOUS ACTS. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
PROVIDED 4) 298,000 FOR THE CITY OF LAUNCESTON TO PURCHASE LAND
ANID CONSTRUCT A CHILD CARE CENTRE FOR 55 CHILDREN FROM
YEARS, AND THE QUEEN VICTORIA HOSPITAL CRECHE HAS
RECEIVED A $ 21,718 FOR STAFF SUBSIDY AND $ 6,127 ON A NEEDS
BASIS. AT LILYDALE, A SINGLE UNIT PRESCHOOL WILL RECEIVE
A $ 47,850 GRANT, AND ANOTHER AT YOUNGTOWN WILL GET $ 48,950,
RAVENSWOOD PRIMARY WILL GET $ 111,000 FOR A DOUBLE UNIT
PRESCHOOL. AN ADDITIONAL $ 119,000 GOES TO SUMMERDALE FOR
SIMILAR UNITS. THEN THE TASMANIAN CHILD CARE ORGANISATION
IS TO GET $ 10, 500 FOR THE FIRST YEAR'S OPERATION FOR
LAUNCESTON FAMILY DAY CARE, PLUS A $ 13,000 RECURRENT
PER CAPITA GRANT AND $ 1,700 FOR EQUIPMENT.
AFTER THE PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON YESTERDAY, TWO WOMEN MADE
A POINT OF THANKING ME FOR WHAT my GOVERNMENT HAS DONE FOR
HANDICAPPED AND RETARDED CHILDREN. BUT OF COURSE WE DON' T GET
MUCH PUBLICITY FOR THE PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO HELP IN THESE
AREAS. k AS LONG AS PEOPLE LIKE YOURSELVES REALISE, THAT IS
WHAT MATTERS MOST, BECAUSE YOU CARE MOST. 
-4-
IN 1973/ 74 WE MADE $ 179,368 AVAILABLE TO
TASMANIA FOR SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT. THAT FIGURE ROSE LAST
YEAR ON THE BASIS OF A $ 4 FOR $ 1 SUBSIDY FOR CAPITAL COSTS
AND $ 1 FOR $ 1 FOR ELIGIBLE STAFF SERVICES TO NON-PROFIT
ORGANISATIONS INCLUDING LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES,
SIMILAR GRANTS COME UNDER ASSISTANCE FOR
HANDICAPPED PERSONS INCLUDING A $ 4 FOR $ 1 RENTAL SUBSIDY
TO ORGANISATIONS PROVIDING CENTRES, EQUIPMENT AND
RESIDENTIAL HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN
AND ADULTS, 



AUSTRALA Press Statement No. 524
27 June 1975
WOOLLOOMOOLOO PROJECT
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and the Premier
of New South Wales, Mr Lewis, today signed an agreement
approving expenditure of $ 17 million for the re-development
of Woolloomooloo. The project will be financed by the Australian
Government, and carried out jointly by the Australian and
New South Wales Governments and the Sydney City Council.
Most of the funds will be devoted to acquiring land.
The three Governments have agreed to pool the
land they own in Woolloomooloo to allow as much flexibility
as possible in the detailed planning of the area.
Mr Whitlam and Mr Lewis said the three levels
of Government had recognised the need for co-operative
action to ensure that the residential character of this
historic area of Sydney was preserved.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



. ASTPA LI AC 4 L Press Statement No. 525
27 June 1975
AUSTRALIAN ELECTED CHAIRMAN OF ILO
GOVEPJ0ING BODY
The Prime Minist * er, Mr Gough Whitlam, announced today
that Dr P. B. Cook, O-BE, Australian Ambassador and Special
Labour Adviser in Europe and head of Australia's delegation
to the recent Conference of the International Labour
Organisation in Geneva, had been elected as Chairman of the
* Governing Body of the ILO for 1975-76.
Mr Whitlam said " although Australia has been a
foundation member of the ILO since 19* 19 and has been represented
on the Governing Body for most of the past 30 years, this is
the first time that an Australian has been accorded the high
honour of the Chairmanship."
" Over the years Australia has taken an increasingly
active and responsible role in ILO affairs, particularly in
the Asian region", Mr Whitlam said. " My Government has moreover
taken vigorous steps to apply international labour standards
in Australia. It has ratified ILO Conventions dealing with
equal pay, trade union rights and elimination of discrimination
in employment, thereby ensuring Australian accord with all
ILO Conventions in the field of fundamental human rights,
Australia's record, some 42 ratifications in all, compares
favourably with that of other federal states."
The ILO is the senior specialised agency of the
United Nations. It see ' ks to improve the conditions of work
and the general welfare of workers in its 126 Menmber States
throughout the world, operating largely through consultation
and collaboration between governments, employers and workers.
The Governing Body of the ILO is instrumental in
determining the direction and priorities of the ILO's
activities. The Chairman's duties obviously call for considerable
understanding and expertise in regard to the labour and related
social problems that confront both developed and developing
countries. Dr Cook, a former permanent head of the Department
of Labour, has held various important offices in the ILO in
recent years, . serving with distinction as Chairman of a number
of ILO Committees. A biographical note is attached.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
BIOGRAPHI1CAL NOTE
DR P. D. COOK, O13E
Philip Balford Cook, GDE, is Ambassador and Special
Labour Adviser in Europe, attached to the Australian Permanent
Mission to the. United Nations in Geneva.
He was born in Bonalla, Victoria, and attended the
University of Mel. bourne, University College, London, Colombia
University, and the University of Kansas, where he was awarded
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in 1941.
Dr Cook joined the then Department of Labour and
National Service in F'ebruary, 1942 and combined his work in
that Department with lecturing at the University of M-1elbourne.
Hie also served as Honorary Psychologist at Prince Henry's
Hospital, Melbourne from 1944 to 1962. He was appointed Head
of the Department in 1968.
For his outstanding services to the Department, and
to industry, he was honoured by -the award of order of the
British Empire in 1965. He is a Fellow of both the British
Psychological Society and the Australian Psychological Society.
In December 1972, the Prime Minister ( 1-r Whitlam) announced
that Australia would strengthen its labour representation in
Europe and its relations with the International Labour
Organisation and other organisations concerned with labour and
social affairs in Europe, notably -the Organisation for Economic
Co-opera-tion and Development, by appointing in Europe a Special
Labour Adviser with the personal rank of Ambassador, to handle
all labour questions.
The appointee to this position was Dr Cook, who,
as the Prime Minister pointed out, had had great experience
and expertise in labour matters generally, and in the work of
the ILO, having participated on many occasions as Australia's
representative at ILO Conferences.
Besides his responsibilities in connection with the
ILO, Dr Cook is Australia's principal representative with the
OECD on issues relating to manpower and social affairs. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E, G. WHITLAM, Q. C, M. P.
AT THE OPENING OF THE MEETING OF THE CAPITAL CITY LORD MAYORS,
27 JUNE 1975, AT THE TOWN HALL, CITY OF SYDNEY
My LORD MAYORS,
WE LAST MET 18 MONTHS AGO IN CANBERRA. WE MEET
AGAIN TODAY IN THE TOWN HALL OF THE CITY WHICH GREW
FROM THE FIRST EUROPEAN SETTLEMENT IN AUSTRALIA, 187
YEARS AGO. IN 1842 IT BECAME THE FIRST MUNICIPALITY
IN NEW SOUTH WALES. IT IS INDEED AN APPROPRIATE VENUE
FOR A MEETING BETWEEN THE HEADS OF AUSTRALIA'S CENTRAL
CITIES AND ITS NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
TODAY, WE WILL BE DISCUSSING IDEAS OF MUTUAL
CONCERN. WE WILL BE IDENTIFYING AREAS WHERE OUR
OFFICERS CAN HAVE FURTHER DISCUSSIONS. THERE HAVE
ALREADY BEEN REGULAR MEETINGS BETWEEN OFFICIALS
OF THE CAPITAL CITIES SECRETARIAT AND THE DEPARTMENT
OF URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND IT IS MY
HOPE THAT THESE COOPERATIVE EFFORTS CAN BE FURTHER
EXTENDED. 
-2
THE CAPITAL CjTIES
YOU HAVE NOT COME TOGETHER TODAY TO REPRESENT
LOCAL GOVERNNENT GENERALLY, WLE SEEK DISCUSSIONS Oil
MATTERS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN TO THE CAPITAL CITIES.
YOU ARE SEP-KING RECOGNITION FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OF THE SPECIAL PROBLEMS WHICH THE CAPITAL
CITIES SUFFER AND THE NEED FOR SPECIAL MEASURES TO
SOLVE THOSE PROBLEMS.
WITH THE OBVIOUS EXCEPTION OF BRISBANE, THE
FUNCTIONS PERFORMED BY THE CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS
DIFFER FROM' THOSE SUBURBAN AUTHORITIES IN EACH
METROPOLIS IN SCALE AND LOCATION, RATHER THAN
FUNCTION. AT THE SAME TIME, WE ALL ACCEPT THAT IT
IS DIFFICULT TO GENERALISE ACROSS THE RANGE OF CAPITAL
CITIES AS THEY EACH DIFFER TO SOME DEGREE.
11E ACKNOWLEDGE THAT CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS DO
UNDERTAKE HIGHER LEVELS OF SPENDING DUE PARTLY TO
THE HIGHER COSTS IN PROVIDING SERVICES IN CENTRAL
CITY LOCATIONS. HIGHER STANDARDS OF SERVICES ARE
OFTEN DEMANDED AND THERE ARE, SPECIAL SERVICES WHICH
ARE NOT WHOLLY USED BY RATEPAYERS. / 3 
3
GENERALLY, YOU HAVE A DISPROPORTIONATE AMOUNT OF
PROPERTY EXEMPT FROM RATING AND THIS INCLUDES PROPERTY
OWNED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. YOU HAVE EXTENSIVE
PARKLANDS AND CULTURAL FACILITIES WHICH ARE USED BY
THE PEOPLE OF THE WHOLE METROPOLIS.
ON THE OTHER HAND THESE SPECIAL PROBLEMS ARE
NOT UNIQUE TO CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS. SEASIDE COUNCILS
ARE REQUIRED TO COPE WITH THE INFLUX OF VISITORS
USING THEIR BEACHES AND RECREATION FACILITIES, SOME
SUBURBAN OR COUNTRY TOWN COUNCILS HAVE VERY LARGE
AREAS OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY OR OTHER NON RATEABLE
PROPERTY WdHICH CAN SUBSTANTIALLY REDUCE THEIR
INCOME PROSPECTS. IN CERTAIN OF THE SMALLER CAPITAL.
CITIES THE ROBLEMS WHICH ARE FACED ARE NOT THAT
DIFFERENT FROM THE PROBLEMS OF CITIES SUCH AS
NEWCASTLE AND WOLLONGONG.
MDDITIONALLY; MUCH OF THE EXPENDITURE OF THE
CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS IS DEVOTED TO WORKS AND
SERVICES WHICH ENSURE THE CONTINUED VIABILITY OF
THE CITY AS A COMMERCIAL CENTRE OF THE METROPOLIS, m / I4 
THIS IS REFLECTED IN THE HIGH LEVEL OF RATEABLE
VALUES WHICH IN TURN RESULT IN ABOVE AVERAGE REVENUE
RAISING CAPACITIES WITH WHICH TO FINANCE THOSE
ACTIVITIES, IT IS IMPORTANT FOR US ALL TO RECOGNISE AT
THE OUTSET THAT THESE DIFFICULTIES AND PROBLEMS
COULD BE ALLEVIATED BY MEANS OTHER THAN GRANTS
FROM HIGHER LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT. INSTITUTIONAL
REARRANGEMENTS SHOULD BE EXAMINED. THE ADEQUACY
OF THE PRESENT STRUCTURE OF METROPOLITAN LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND SCHEMES FOR COST SHARING BETWEEN
THE CAPITAL CITIES AND OTHER AUTHORITIES IN THE
METROPOLITAN AREA ARE TWO POSSIBLE AREAS WORTHY
OF CONSiKDATION.
AuSTRALIAm GRANTS CoMISSION
I RECOGNISE THAT THE ROLE OF THE GRANTS
COMMISSION IS OF CONCERN TO YOU. I SHOULD EMPHASISE
AT THE OUTSET THAT THE COMMISSION IS AN INDEPENDENT
BODY HEADED BY A VERY INDEPENDENTLY MINDED CHAIRMAN. 11 
DECISIONS ON METHODOLOGY REST W JH THE COMMISSION
AND I, FOR ONE, CANNOT 4T4= ATE ITS
REPORT FOR 1975-76,
IN-ITS 1974 REPORT ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES, THE GRANTS COMMISSION
RECOMMENDED THE ALLOCATION OF $ 56,4M DURING THE
FOLLOWING FINANCIAL YEAR FOR GENERAL REVENUE FISCAL
EQUALISATION GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES, I
SHOULD STRESS THE WORD " EQUALISATION". WE CONSIDER
THAT THOSE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES WITH THE GREATEST
PROBLEMS AND LEAST MEANS OF HELPING THEMSELVES SHOULD
RECEIVE THE MOST ASSISTANCE, THIS IS REFLECTED IN THE
CHARTER OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION. C-T
HAVE SAID, THAT I CANNOT AaT.'-IP* TE WHAT
RECOMMENDATIONS THE COMMISSION WILL MAKE ON THE
QUESTION OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE CAPITAL
CITIES. I RECOGNISE THAT LAST YEAR THE COMMISSION
RECOMMENDED A $ 2M GRANT TO THEBRISBANE CITY
COUNCIL IN RECOGNITION OF THE SPECIAL SITUATION OF
BRISBANE COMPARED TO THE OTHER CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS, ,/ 6 
-6-
I UNDERSTAND THAT THE COMMISSION HAS HAD THE BENEFIT
OF THE VIEWS OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATIONS WHICH HAS MADE SUBMISSIONS
ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT GENERALLY, I WILL READ
THE SHORTLY TO BE DELIVERED GRANTS COMMISSION REPORT
WITH GREAT INTEREST,
SPECIFIC PURPOSE GRANTS
YOU WILL ALL BE AWARE OF THE SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE
IN THE LEVEL AND RANGE OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE GRANTS
WHICH HAVE BEEN MADE AVAILABLE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, WE ARE NOW INVOLVED
IN A COMPr-. ENSIVE SYSTEM OF GRANTS TO LOCAL BODIES.
IN 1973-74, GRANTS WERE MADE DIRECTLY TO
LOCAL AUTHCRITIES FOR AGED PERSONS HOMES, DELIVERED
MEALS, HOME NURSING, SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT, CHILD
CARE, ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT, AND COMMUNITY ARTS.
ASSISTANCE WAS ALSO GIVEN TO LOCAL AERODROMES
ALTHOUGH THIS CATEGORY IS UNLIKELY TO BE OF GREAT
CONCERN TO YOU TODAY, 
-7
PAYMENTS HAVE ALSO BEEN MADE THROUGH THE STATES
FOR SEWERAGE AND ROADS AND IN CERTAIN AREAS, FOR
URBAN DEVELOPMENT GENERALLY AND FOR AREA IMPROVEMENT.
IN 1974-75 my GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED NEW OR EXPANDED
PROGRAMS FOR CHILD CARE CENTRES, PRE-SCHOOLS,
REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT, AND ASSISTANCE TO
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONs, THE AUTAINASSISTANCE
PLAN HAS ALSO PROVIDED FUNDS FOR LOCAL PROJECTS.
IT IS NOT PRESENTLY POSSIBLE TO PRECISELY
CALCULATE IN FINANCIAL TERMS THE GROWTH IN SPECIFIC
PURPOSE ASSISTANCE. THE DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONS
CARRIED ON BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN EACH STATE
OR PARTS 3F STATES AND THE WAY IN WHICH FUNDING OF
PROGRAMS -7 SOMETIMES LINKED WITH STATE FUNDED
PROGRAMS, MAKES THE TASK DIFFICULT. SUFFICE TO
SAY THAT THE LEVEL OF ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN
CONSIDERA3LE, AND WHEN ADDED TO FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE
FROM OTHER SOURCES, WE BELIEVE THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT
HAS BEEN GIVEN SUBSTANTIAL HELP IN PROVIDING BOTH
BASIC LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES AS WELL AS
THOSE MORE-* PERSONAL SERVICES WHICH OUR COMMUNITY
HAS BEEN INCREASINGLY DEMANDING. 
-8-
IT IS OUR AIM TO KEEP UNDER REVIEW THE TERMS
AND CONDITIONS OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE GRANTS, WE NEED
TO GUARD AGAINST OVERLAP AND DEVISE PROCEDURES
WHEREBY THE DETAILED DECISION-MAKING CAN BE DEVOLVED
TO UNITS OF GOVERNMENT CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE.
ON 18 JUNE 1975 1 RELEASED A STATEMENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S POLICY ON REGIONALISM. AMONGST
OTHER THINGS I. SAID THAT A REGIONAL POLICY IS BASED
ON THE CONCEPT THAT SOME PROGRAMS AND SERVICES OF
GOVERNMENT ARE MOST EFFICIENTLY AND EFFECTIVELY
PLANNED, CO-ORDINATED AND DELIVERED AT A LEVEL
INTERMEDIATE TO THAT OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AND THAT ThE POLICY IS BASED ON THE CONTINUED EXISTENCE
OF FEDER. L. STATE AND LOCAL STRUCTURES.
AT THE CONFERENCE WITH PREMIERS ON -19 JUNE I
INVITED PREMIERS TO JOIN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE BETTER ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES
WITHIN FUNCTIONS. ,19/ 9 
9-
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE AGREED TO FURTHER
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN OFFICERS ON THE POSSIBILITIES
OF CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING. I WOULD HOPE THAT
AGREEMENT ON A GENERAL APPROACH CAN BE REACHED IN
THE NEXT FEW MONTHS, OBVIOUSLY FULL IMPLEMENTATION
MAY TAKE SOME YEARS, BUT YOU CAN HAVE MY ASSURANCES
THAT THE PLACE AND ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN
ANY CONSULTATION AND PLANNING ARRANGEMENTS WILL
BE OF PRIME CONCERN TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
WE ALSO RECOGNISE THE IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION
ABOUT THE VARIOUS PROGRAMS OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
WHICH ARE A" VAILABLE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
AT OUR 1L' 37S MEETING, YOU MADE COMMENTS ON THIS ISSUE
AND AS A DRECT RESULT THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND
REGIONAL 1E'--'/"= LOPMEN4T PRODUCED A BOOKLET IN MAY 1974.
WHICH GAVE DETAILS OF THE VARIOUS PROGRAMS. THAT
BOOKLET IS NOW BEING REVISED AND SHOULD BE AVAILABLE
SHORTLY. 
11
IT IS TO BE UNDERTAKEN IN LIAISON WITH THE NEW
ZEALAND DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND A
COMPREHENSIVE WORK PROGRAM HAS BEEN PREPARED
INVPLVING ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT, IT IS INTENDED
TO PRODUCE A REPORT BY THE END OF OCTOBER
ADVISING GOVERNMENTS ON POSSIBLE MEASURES TO TACKLE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES, AND
FURTHER RESEARCH.
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
I UNDERSTAND THAT MY COLLEAGUE, MR TOM UREN,
THE MINISTER FOR URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, HAS
MADE SCi REMARKS ABOUT THE ROLE OF THE CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICTS OF AUSTRALIAN CITIES IN THE
CONTEXT CF THE WHOLE CITY. IT IS CERTAINLY MY
EXPERIENCE, FOR ALL HIS TALK ABOUT GENTLENESS,
THAT TOm UREN CAN BE BLUNT WHEN HE IS TALKING
ABOUT SOMETHING WHICH GREATLY CONCERNS HIM.
MY GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS AND POLICIES
CANNOT BE VIEWED IN ISOLATION, ALONG WITH THE
MAJOR DECISIONS WHICH YOU TAKE, THEY SHOULD BE
DEVELOPED WITHIN A STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK IN WHICH
THEY AND OTHER INITIATIVES IN URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA ARE SEEN AS
PART OF A COORDINATED WHOLE. ,/ 12 
12
THE BREADTH OF RESOURCES WHICH NOW HAVE TO
BE CHANNELLED IN THE DIRECTION OF URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND THE NATIONAL PRIORITY NOW ACCORDED
TO THE PROBLEMS OF CITIES AND REGIONS PUTS A HEAVY
RESPONSIBILITY ON THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO SEE
THAT RESOURCES ARE USED EFFICIENTLY AND ARE
DISTRIBUTED EQUITABLY THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, WITHTHESE
CONCERNS, AS WELL AS ITS POLICIES ON THE
LOCATION OF PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYMENT, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS A RESPONSIBILITY TO ENSURE THAT ITS
DECISIONS ARE NOT TAKEN IN ISOLATION. IN THE SAME
MANNER, THE CAPITAL CITIES COUNCILS SHOULD RECOGNISE
THAT THE EFFECTS AND ACTIONS OF POLICIES OF ALL
CAPITAL.-CITIES DO HAVE FUNDAMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
FOR S! L-=' CUNDING AREAS OUTSIDE THEIR IMMEDIATE
RESPONS:-31LITIES. 0,' LCTHMIES OPPORTUNITY TO DISCUSS THESE
GENERAL ISSUES WITH You. THIS CONSULTATION AND'
DISCUSSION SHOULD CONTINUE AT OUR LEVEL AS WELL
AS BETWEEN OUR OFFICIALS. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT
AT SOME FUTURE DATE WE SHOULD INCLUDE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT GENERALLY IN OUR ROUND TABLE DISCUSSIONS. / 113 
13
IAM SURE THAT TODAY'S DISCUSSIONS WILL BE AN
IMPORTANT EVENT IN THE CONTINUED PROGRAM OF
CONSULTATION BETWEEN THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL LEVELS
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA.
Q~, 0ff~ o r
A LsA y C~:~ A 



EM. ARCO : 7 P. M. SUNDAY
QUEETSLAND BROADCAST NO.
PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY
SUNDAY 29 JUE 1975
One of the prcaises on which my Government was elected was our
undertaking to stop the overseas takeover of Australia's mineral and energy
resources. That process had been going on unchecked under successive Liberal-
Country Party Govern-rents. hben Labor came in, we had reached the stage where
62 per cent of Australia's energy resources that is, cur coal, oil, gas and
uranium were in foreign hands. We weren't prepared to tolerate that situation.
Australians weren't prepared to tolerate it. In 1972 and 1974 the people gave
us a clear mandate to halt the drift. I doubt if there is any aspect of Labor
policy which is better understood or irore widely accepted both here and overseas
than this comnitmrent to maximum Australian ownership of our resources.
As with everything else we undertook to do, we inmediately began to
implement our promises. We introduced a Bill to establish the Petroleum and Minerals
Authority the P. M. A. as the chief instrument for asserting Australian ownership
and control. We introduced the Bill in our first year in office. The Senate
stalled it. We introduced the legislation again. The Senate rejected it. It
therefore became one of six Bills on which the double dissolution was granted in
April last year. It was one of the specific grounds for the general election in
May last year. The legislation was endorsed by the Australian people. They gave
us the go-ahead to bring it in again. We did so at the Joint Sitting of
Parliament last August. The Bill was passed at the Joint Sitting. No single
piece of legislaticn with the exception of our health Bills has received a
clearer and firmer mandate from the people or been more thoroughly debated in
the Parliament. Yet as soon as the Bill was passed, the four Anti-Labor States imnediately
challenged it in the High Court.
I give this brief history of the Bill because there has been a certain
amount of Jubilation among Liberal and Country Party politicians this week over
the Court's decision declaring the Bill invalid. Mr Fraser and Mr Bjelke-Petersen,
in particular, have sought to give the impression that the court found our whole
proposal in some way sinister and illegal. Now I don't want to argue the rights
and wrongs of the Court's decision. Presumably because the judges have not yet
published their reasons a majority of the Court found that through a technicality
this particular Bill should not have been the basis of the double dissolution. But
I want you to be quite clear that no judge has questioned the Government's right
to legislate for the P. M. A. That is not in dispute. I emphasise that the Court's
decision didn't say or infer that the Parliament is not entitled to pass such a Bill.
So, we shall put it to the Parliament again. In the meantime we shall continue to
develop Australia's natural resources with the fullest Australian participation,
ownership and control. 
It is incredible, it is monstrous, that the Leader of the Opposition
is again threatening to block this legislation in the Senate. It is not so
long since he was telling us that under his leadership the Opposition wouldn't
hold up the Governrant's program; that the Government would be allowed to govern.
So much for that promise. Here we have one more example of Opposition obstruction
obstruction that can only encourage those people who want a sell-out of Australia's
assets, obstruction on a Bill that has received repeated and specific endorsement
by the Australian voters.
We have gone much too far with the P. M. A. to allow it to be frustrated
at this late stage by the States or anyone else. My colleague, Rex Connor,
has already announced the forr-ation of a Company in the Australian Capital Territory.
A major part of the $ 50 million provided for the Authority this financial year has
been cotiitted to assisting Australian mining ventures, including one in Queensland
The Mareeba Copper Mining Operation near Cairns. The Authority has also taken
an equity in coal mining in New South 1, ales and Natural Gas in South Aus. bralia,
thus helping to safeguard Australian ownership of these resources.
The other great task we have set for the Authority is mineral exploration
especially petroleum exploration. What was the Liberal contribution to the search
for minerals? It was to offer subsidies and tax concessions to private companies
and trust them to do the job. All that happened under the Liberals was that income
tax concessions for mining were exploited and abused to line the pockets of
speculators. Money that should have been going into exploration was diverted into
speculation in shares. One of our first acts as a Government was to close off those
loopholes and insist that the whole business of exploration should be tackled on a
national, businesslike basis through the Authority established for that purpose.
We are certainly not against the participation of overseas companies in the search
for oil and minerals, but we do insist that henceforth Australia will be the
primary partner in such ventures. That should be done it can only be done
through the Petroleum and Minerals Authority.
I'm quite certain that in the judgement of history the Government's
policies on Australian ownership of our minerals and energy will be seen to beright.
In an energy-hungry world we just can't afford to take chances with our
precious resources and trust to luck that foreign campanies will look after us.
That may be good enough for the Liberals but it's not good enough for us. If the
Anti-Labor States imagine that by obstruction in the Parliament, by litigation in
the Courts or by other nark tactics they are going to deflect us from our goals
they had better think again. The Australian people gave us a mandate to act in
these matters. The States will no more succeed in blocking our policies for
Australian ownership than they've succeeded in blocking Medibank. Mr Bjelke-Petersen
learnt that lesson this week; he has learnt it the hard way. Let it be a
lesson to the other anti-Labor States who are tempted to put foreign interests
before Australia's national interests. 



J\ USTRAI/ M GoI . N! EiET_ OFFICES
LAST FRIDA':, WITH THE PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH W1ALES AND THE
LORD MfAYOR OF SYDNEY, I SIGNED AN AGREEMENT BY WHICH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE $ 17 MILLION FOR
THE RESIDENTIAL REDEVELOPMENT OF OOLOOHOOLOO.
THERE IS A SIGNIFICANT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THAT
OCCASION TH1I S. BOTH BRING TO AT LEAST PARTIAL
FRUITION, CNERTAKINGS MADE IN 1972.
THOSE UNDERTAKINGS MEANT A REVERSAL OF EXISTING PLANS
UNDER THE PRE'IOUS GOVERNMENT. IT WAS PROPOSED,
YOU WILL RE'EM3ERI THAT NEW COMMONWEALTH OFFICES WERE
TO BE BUILT " i ' OOLOOPOOLOO A FULL TWO MILES FROM
SYDNEY iHAT WAS HARDLY A MODEL OF
DECENTRALI A' 1. IT TOOK NO ACCOUNT OF THE GROWING
PRESSURE CN r ACILTIES AND SERVICES OF THE
CENTRAL CiTY . EA AND OF ITS TRANSPORT SYSTEM.
IT TOOK NO OOF. :: TH2EN T SPECIAL CHARACTER OF WOOLOOMOOLOO
AS A RESIDE: T: LL AREA. IT TOOK NO ACCOUNT OF THE
CONVENIENCE : 3 AVAILABILITY OF STAFF. IT TOOK NO
ACCOUNT OF T E ' LACE AND PACE OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE
METROPOLIT.. i -AREA OR OF THE NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE IN
THE WESTEP' REGION. 
-2-
So FRIDAY'S OCCASION AND TODAY'S BOTH FULFIL SPECIFIC
UNDERTAKINGS GIVEN BY TOM UREN AND ME IN 1972,
THERE IS MORE TO IT THAN THAT HOWEVER. BOTH
THESE MATTERS REPRESENT A CRUCIAL PART OF OUR WHOLE
. PROGRAM OUR BELIEF THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
MUST BE DIRECTLY INVOLVED IN THE PLACES WHERE MOST
AUSTRALIANS LIVE, IN CITIES AND CENTRES.
IT'S FITTING ENOUGH THAT THIS FIRST PART OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN PARRAMATTA THE
TAXATION CENTRE SHOULD BE OPENED ON THE LAST DAY
OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR AND READY FOR BUSINESS ON THE
FIRST DAY OF THE NE FINANCIAL YEAR, THERE ARE
STAFF C.-F : A" TATION OFFICE ALREADY HERE.
IHIS OFFICE -EESEET3S THE FIRST MAJOR PRACTICAL STEP
TCWARDS IMPLE'_'-TI'CUR POLICY OF DISPERSING THE
? P'BLC SER'/ I-E -T SL-METROPOLITAN AND REGIONAL AREAS,
THIS OFFICE -E= E -' LL BE THE LARGEST BRANCH OF ANY
DEPARTMENT CF ThE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE OUTSIDE
CANBERRA. AS FAR AS THE TAXATION OFFICE ITSELF
IS CONCERNED, THIS MOVE IS THE FORERUNNER OF A PLANNED
DISPERSAL TO CENTRES IN CAMPBELLTOWN, ALBURY-WODONGA, AND
TO DANDENONG AND BROADMEADOWS IN IELBOURNE.
THIS CENTRE ITSELF IS EVENTUALLY PLANNED TO HOUSE
5,000 PUBLIC SERVANTS, 
-3-
ONE VERY I =-CTANT ASPECT OF THIS PROGRAM OF DISPERSAL
IS TO BRE.-. -, WN ANY FALSE BARRIERS BETWEEN THE
PUBLIC SEr,': CE AND THE COMMUNITY WHICH IT SERVES
AND OF WHICH IT IS AN INTEGRAL PART. THERE IS
NOTHING MORE UNREAL, IN SOCIAL TERMS, IN ECONOMIC TERMS,
IN POLITICAL TERMS, THAN TO DRAW DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN
PUBLIC EMPLDYEES AND PRIVATE EMPLOYEES.
IE HAVE A :. 1XED ECONOMY AND EACH SECTOR OF THE ECONOMY
IS INTERDE=_ EN. ENT, THIS BUILDING MAY BE A GOVERNMENT
BUILDING, SUT IT' S COMPLETION DEPENDS UPON SCORES
OF PRIVATE CONTRACTS THE BUILDING ITSELF, THE EQUIPMENT
IN IT, THE SERVICING OF IT AND THE PEOPLE EMPLOYED IN IT.
A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF WHAT IS CALLED ' GOVERNMENT SPENDING'
ENDS UP IN F. AC AS PRIVATE SPENDING.
T-: E DISTINTC-I: ETEEN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS
IS E. UALLY . L--EAL '-EN IT COMES TO EMPLOYMENT,
FOR EXAMPLE, E 3AN COMES IN TOMORROW OR AT LEAST
IN i1EW SOUT--ES, PART OF IT. HOW UNREAL IT IS
TO SUGGEST 7--T OFFICERS. IN THE PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS,
BECAUSE CL-ASsI-ED AS PRIVATE EMPLOYEES, ARE IN SOME
WAY DIFFER. E:? ;-ORE PRODUCTIVE THAN THEIR COLLEAGUES
IN MEDIBANK. INDEED LARGE NUMBERS OF EMPLOYEES HAVE
TRANSFERRED= =: CM ONE BUREAUCRACY, IF YOU LIKE, TO
ANOTHER; " EST. ERDAY'S PRIVATE FUND EMPLOYEE IS TOMORROWS
MEDIBANK'S EMPLOYEE. HIS VALUE TO THE COMMUNITY REMAINS
THE SAME; THE COMMUNITY. PAYS NOT ONE CENT MORE FOR
HIS WORK OR FOR THE SYSTEM IN WHICH HE WORKS. 
ANOTHER PLE THE EMPLOYEES IN THIS BUILDING ARE
NOT ONLY -3LIC SERVANTS, BUT TAXPAYERS LIKE THE REST
OF THE CC'. JNITYq EVEN THE TAX COLLECTOR PAYS INCOME
TAX, IN A COUNTRY LIKE AUSTRALIA, WHERE ONE
QUARTER OF US ARE ON THE PUBLIC PAYROLL FEDERAL.,
STATE OR LOCAL IT IS A VERY FALSE DIVISION INDEED
TO MAKE BETrEEN PRIVATE EMPLOYEES AND PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
I FIND IT :. OT ONLY UNREAL, BUT RATHER REPREHENSIBLE
AS AN ATTEY. T TO DIVIDE A COMMUNITY ON A VERY FALSE
AND FOOLISH DISTINCTION, I CANNOT SEE TO WHOSE
ADVANTAGE IT IS, POLITICALLY OR ANY OTHER WAY,
TO GENERATE THIS DIVISION, TO CREATE THIS DISTINCTION,
THE IDEA OF THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE BEING AN
ISOLATED ELTE IN CANBERRA IS A MYTH,
T-E PROGRA ? AA. T. ENTAL DISPERSAL IN AREAS LIKE
THIS SO THA~ S-L: VCA NTS ARE SEEN TO BE WHAT
THEY TRULY ? E A REAL AND INDISPENSABLE PART OF
THE REAL CCI' " TY AND OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY
WILL, I TRUST, -EL? DISPEL THAT MYTH. 
IHAVE THAT THIS BUILDING PUTS INTO PRACTrICE OUR
BELIEF lIN *. TIONAL INVOLVEMENT, NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
IN AUSTRALT: A'N CITIES AND CENTRES, THERE IS OF COURSE,*
ANOTHER SIDE TO THE COIN, W4HEN THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
BECOMES INVOLVED, IT MUST ALSO SHARE RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE LCC..-l _ CONS. EQUENCES OF ITS PLANS.
THE -: GROTh, AT COMES FROM THE ESTABL ISHMENT OF A
CENRE AND OUR OTHER ACTIVITIES IN THIS REGION
PLCETADUNAL PRESSURE ON LOCAL RESOURCES AND
LOCAL SERI/ ES.
THERE 1~ S TO B A FOLLOW THROUGH AND A FOLW-P
AC 0 G_ T7H, SI-AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
T_ S7 --zLITIES. THERE " WILL BE A NEED
CNO iT &gt;' IJ z E CO -OP ERATIO0N ' BE TWEEN THE
FERA ~ Y~~ ET rThESTATE GOYERNV1ENT AND LOCAL
: HT GIVE A NEGATIVE EXAMPLE,
A LCNr ' W'AY ARAm ~ T TA -TOWN SIV IL L E,.
THE GRE: AT lNI iOWNISVILLE IN THE LRST DECADE
HAS SPRUNG YELYFROM NATIONAL GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES'.
ACNDT I: T: 3 -THE ARMY BASE, THE AIR FOR'EBAE
THE UNNIVE=, S7_ m'/, THE MARINE INSTITUTE 0 WE UNDLERTOOK
IN 1972 :-~~ TOWNSVILLE, ALONG WITH ALBURY-WODONGA;
A NEW GCT-ZENTRE -THAT IS TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILJITY
FOR THE . ESON LOCAL SERVICES AND. AMENI-TIES RESUILTING
FROM NATICNAL ACTIVITY. v 
4 4" -6-
NON-CO-OPE?=. TJON BY THE GOVERNMENT IN THAT STATE
HAS SO FAR THWARTED THAT UNDERTAKING, IT IS CRUCIAL
FOR THE WELL-BEING OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS REGION
THAT WE HAVE CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE THREE LEVELS
OF GOVERNMEIT HERE.
IF THAT IS FORTHCOMING, THE PROGRAMS OF WHICH THIS
CENTRE IS '. SAT PART, ONE OF THE'FIRST FRUITS,
WILL WORK ' iUIJiNELY FOR THE WELL-BEING OF THIS
HISTORIC CITY, ITS--PEOPLE AND THE REGION ITSELF. 



Press Statemenft No. 526
June 1975
SENATOR BERT M4ILLINER
I was deeply grieved to hear of Senator milliner-' s--
death. As well as being a respected and admired member
of the Labor Party and the trade union movement, Bert
Milliner was a close family friend.
His long years of service to the party included a
quarter of a century as a member of the Queensland Central
Executive and 9 years as President of the Queensland Branch.
He served his union, his party and the Parliament
with great loyalty and distinction. I extend my deepest
sympathy to his widow and family.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. &gt; AAU 



JjAUST ALIA.
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 528
1 July 1975
DR CAIRNS
Yesterday I was shown a letter in the following
terms:-" SECRET ( CREST) TREASURER Parliament House,
Canberra 2600.
March 7, 1975.
Alco International Pty. Ltd.,
6 Southam Court,
BULLEEN, Vic. 3105
Attention: Mr George Harris
Dear Sir,
The Australidi Wvghmoui i itk d ih v hq
available loan funds from overseas. In the event of
a successful negotiation which may be introduced or
arranged by you, and provided the interest rate for
a term loan does not exceed 8% per annum in total,
we would be prepared to pay a once only brokerage fee
of 2 deducted at the source to you and/ or your nominees.
We would need to be satisfied about the sources of the
funds and the size of the loan would have to be appropriate
to our needs.
Yours sincerely,
( Signed) J. F. CAIRNS SECRET"
On the face of it this letter is inconsistent with a
reply which Dr Cairns gave in the House of Representatives on
4 June 1975 ( Hansard, p. 3294):-
2
-2-
" OVERSEAS LOAN
Mr LYNCH I ask the Treasurer: Did he, in a
letter dated on or about 5 March, offer a commission
of 2 per cent on any loan money
arranged by the recipient of the letter or his
company? Dr J. F. CAIRNS The answer is no. At no
stage did I offer a commission of 2 or any
other amount or give any authority whatever
to any person to do anything other than make
inquiries. Mr Malcolm Fraser No brokerage fee?
Dr J. F. CAIRNS No brokerage fee. Would
O the honoirable member like to ask more questions?"
O I have asked Dr Cairns to give me a written
explanation of the discrepancy tomorrow.
I have also told Dr Cairns that Mr Phillip Cairns'
reported activities concerning housing projects in the
Melbourne metropolitan area would make it possible for him
to make a profit from his position on Dr Cairns' staff.
A: = tted in evidence to the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on e Pecuniary Interests of Members of the
Parliament, Z rezard it as improper for ministerial staff to
put thems.. es Dr allow themselves to be put, in such a
position. nave therefore asked Dr Cairns to give me a
written exl-a-=: ion of this matter also tomorrow.
ft 



VICTORIAI FARIERS UNION I
Spepch ro~-tvc ( 7Y I / P,
IN SEVEN WEEKS' TIME WE SHALL BRING DOWN MY GOVERNMENT'S
THIRD BUDGET. CLEARLY IT MUST BE REGARDED AS ONE
OF THE MOST CRUCIAL BUDGETS OF MODERi TIMES, FRAMED
AGAINST A BACKGROUND OF EXTRAORDINARY COMPLEXITY AT
HOME AND ABROAD, LET ME ACKNOWLEDGE AT THE OUTSET
THE GOVERNMENT'S RECOGNITION OF THE HIGH STAKES THAT
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY HA\ E, NOT JUST IN
THE BUDGET ITSELF, BUT IN THE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS WHICH
IT PARTLY CREATES. I SAY " PARTLY" BECAUSE IT SHOULD
BE RECOGNISED THAT FEDERAL GOVERNMENT POLICIES,
MUCH LESS A SINGLE BUDGET, ARE NOT THE SOLE DETERMINING
FACTOR IN THE NATION'S ECONOMY.
THERE ARE FEW NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS WHOSE ECONOMIC POWERS
ARE MORE CIRCUMSCRIBED BY THE CONSTITUTION, BY THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM, BY THE NATURE OF THE ECONOMICS SYSTEM
OF A MIXED ECONOMY. AND BY INTERNATIONAL CONDITIONS
RESULTING FROM OUR POSITION AS ONE OF THE GREAT TRADING
NATIONS. I SAY THIS ONLY TO PUT MATTERS IN PERSPECTIVE,
NOT BY ANY MEANS TO DOWNGRADE OUR PRIMARY AND INESCAPABLE
RESPONSIBILITY AS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
6~ 
WHILE ACKNOWLEGING YOUR SPECIAL INTEREST IN THE BUDGET,
YOU WILL UNDERSTAND HOWEVER THE CONSIDERABLE RESTRAINT
I AM UNDER AT A STAGE WHEN WE ARE STILL HAVING THE
PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS WITH INDUSTRY AND WHEN
THE CABINET DISCUSSIONS ARE ABOUT TO BEGIN.
THE SPECIAL INTEREST FARMERS NATURALLY HAVE IN THE
BUDGET AND ITS OUTCOME SPRINGS FROM TWO SOURCES, ONE
PARTICULAR,. ONE GENERAL. FIRST THERE IS THE
SPECIFIC BUDGETARY MATTER OF GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS TO AND
RECEIPTS FROM AGRICULTURE. THESE ARE A VERY GREAT
AND GROWING FACTOR IN THE BUDGET NOW GREAT ENOUGH
TO BE A VERY SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN THE OVERALL STRATEGY
OF THE BUDGET ITSELF.
BUDGET OUTLAYS FOR ALL AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY WERE
$ 329 MILLION IN 1972/ 73, $ 303 MILLION IN 1973/ 74
AND AN ESTIMATED $ 727 MILLION IN 1974/ 75 AN INCREASE
ON 1973/ 74 OF $ 424 MILLION. RECEIPTS IN THE SAME YEARS
WERE $ 45.6 MILLION, $ 82 MILLION AND $ 178 MILLION.
SO NET GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE WAS $ 283 MILLION IN 1972/ 73,
$ 221 MILLION IN 1973/ 74, AND $ 548 MILLION ESTIMATED IN
1974/ 75. THAT IS, AN INCREASE OF $ 327 MILLION IN 1974/ 75
OVER THE PREVIOUS YEAR. 
THE BIG INCREASE IN OUTLAYS CAME OF COURSE THROUGH
woo/
LOANS TO THE AUSTRALIAN taft CORPORATION TO OPERATE
THE FLOOR PRICE PLAN. IT'S NOT MY INTENTION IN
GIVING THESE FIGURES TO SUGGEST THAT FARMERS ARE THE
* RECIPIENTS OF HUGE AMOUNTS OF GOVERN4MENT LARGESSE,
YOUR PRESIDENT, iR HEFFERNAN, RECENTLY EXPRESSED CONCERN
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC WAS BEING MISLED INTO
BELIEVIN'G THAT PRIMARY INDUSTRY WAS RECEIVING MASSIVE
HANDOUTS AT THE TAXPAYERS IEXPENSE AND HE RIGHTLY SAID
THAT IN THIS REGARD, THE DISTINCTION SHOULD BE MADE
BETWEEN LOANS AND DIRECT SUBSIDIES. THE POINT I WISH
TO MAKE HOWEVER, IS THAT IN A BUDGET CONTEXT, THE
OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS ARE OF A MAGNITUDE TO BE A
SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN OVERALL PLANNING.
iHE SECOND, MORE GENERAL INTEREST TO FARMERS, LIES AT
THE VERY HEART OF THE NATURE OF OUR CURRENT ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS. WE ARE ALL DAMAGED BY INFLATION NONE MORE
THAN FARMERS. AND OF COURSE THE INTER-REACTION BETWEEN
COSTS AND PRICES IS MOST ACUTE IN THE CASE OF FARM
PROiJUCI'S PARTICULARLY PRICES FOR FOOD.
IN THE PAST EIGHTEEN MON'THS THE rI: AJOR ECONOMIES OF THE
WOtkLD SEVERELY AFFECT11) BY 14W. OIL P'RICE RISE AND THE
DESTA31LISIN1G L! FFECTS OF THAT ON WORLD TRADE HAV/ E BFEN
STRUGGLING WITH. THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF RISING UNEMPLOYMENT
AND RISING INFLATION. AUSTRALIA HAS NOT BEEN ABLE TO
INSULATE ITSELF FROM THAT WORLD SITUATIONS 
BUT IN AUSTRALIA AS IN OTHER COUNTRIES THE BATTLE IS
NOW ON TO RESTORE A MORE BALANCED ECONOMIC ORDER.
WE ARE SEEING ECONOMIC GROWTH BEGINNING AGAIN.
THE RISE IN UNEMPLOYMENT SEEMS TO HAVE COME TO AN END
AND 1975/ 76 PROMISES TO SEE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
ON THE INCREASE AGAIN. BUT INFLATION REMAINS DEEP-SEATED.
FIRM AND RESPONSIBLE POLICIES WILL HAVE TO BE FOLLOWED
IF IT IS TO BE BROUGHT UNDER CONTROL.
SOME OF THE UNCERTAINTIES THAT SURROUNDED THE OUTLOOK
FOR INFLATION EARLIER THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN CLEARED BY THE
DECISIONS OF THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION
IN THE NATIONAL WAGE AND METAL INDUSTRIES CASES.
THOSE WERE RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS, GOVERNMENTS MUST ALSO
DO ALL THEY CAN TO CREATE AN ECONOMIC CLIMATE IN WHICH
THE SUGGESTED WAGE DETERMINATION GUIDELINES HAVE THE
PROSPECT OF BEING ADHERED TO.
WE AIM TO ENSURE THAT THE RECOVERY IN THE ECONOMY
STRENGTHENS AND CONTINUES BUT DOES NOT REACH A PACE THAT
ONCE AGAIN LEADS TO A SCRAMBLE FOR RESOURCES.
AN ORDERLY RECOVERY WILL HELP ACHIEVE A CLIMATE CONDUCIVE
TO THE EXPANSION OF INVESTMENT THAT IS NECESSARY TO ENSURE
CONTINUED PROSPERITY AND GROWTH OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES,
ONE THING IS CLEAR THEE HAS * i OI L. E ABATcET THE
RATE OF INCREASE ? iJ GOV! ER:. T sPENDING IF WE ARE TO GET OULi
OF OUR PRESENT TROUBLES.
r P 2 
BUT IT IS A GROSS OVERSIMPLIFICATION TO IMAGINE THAT
THE WHOLE SOLUTION TO THOSE TROUBLES LIES IN THAT
ONE AREA ALONE. GOVERNMENT SPENDING IS JUST ONE
OF THE THREE MAJOR INTERNAL FACTORS DETERMINING THE
PRESSURE ON RESOURCES AND INFLATION WHICH MAY RESULT
FROM IT. THE OTHER FACTORS ARE INCOMES AND CREDIT
WHICH ARE NOT DIRECTLY DETERMINED BY THE BUDGET.
IN THE BUDGET WE WILL BE STRIVING TO CREATE THE
CONDITIONS WHERE THE WAGE INDEXATION PROPOSALS CAN
HAVE A CHANCE TO WORK
IN PREVIOUS ADDRESSES TO FARM ORGANISATIONS I HAVE
ALWAYS STRESSED THE INTERDEPENDENCE BETWEEN THE RURAL
SECTOR AND THE REST OF THE ECONOMY. I HAVE NEVER
ACCEPTED THE FALSE DIVISION BETWEEN COUNTRY AND CITY.
IT IS A FALSE DISTINCTION ECONOMICALLY, SOCIALLY AND
POLITICALLY. THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN THE
INTERDEPENDENCE WAS MADE MORE MANIFEST BY THE INTER-REACTION
OF ONE SECTION OF THE ECONOMY ON ANOTHER, WHEN THE
PROBLEMS OF ONE SECTION AFFECTED THE PROBLEMS OF EVERY
OTHER SO CLOSELY AND QUICKLY. WE ARE ALL AFFECTED BY
OUR DEPENDENCE ON EACH OTHER AND WE ARE ALL AFFECTED BY
OUR INTERDEPENDENCE WITH OUR TRADING PARTNERS.
INFLATION DEMONSTRATES THIS VERY CLEARLY, OFTEN VERY
IHAkSHLY. v. I.
i
i l W Jt+,"
h + I
I J T i.
s
m " t 
WE HAVE SEEN HOW EASY IT IS FOR EMPLOYEES TO PRICE
THEMSELVES OR THEIR FELLOWS OUT OF A JOB EQUALLY,
IT IS VERY EASY TO PRICE OURSELVES OUT OF MARKETS,
PARTICULARLY FOR A GREAT TRADING NATION LIKE AUSTRALIA
AND PRIMARY PRODUCTION STILL ACCOUNTS FOR THE
MAJOR PART OF OUR EXPORTS IN4FLATION IS THE COMMON
ENEMY WHATEVER SECTOR OF THE ECONO0MY 1~__ WE ARE
A
INVOLVED.
ONE OF THE MOST CONSIDERABLE PROBLEMS OF COMMUNICATION
AT THE POLITICAL LEVEL IS TO GET ACROSS THE CONSEQUENCES
OF OUR ROLE AS A TRADING NATION, ON THE SURFACE IT
SEEMS SIMPLE ENOUGH. IT IS EASY ENOUGH TO SAY
" AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF THE WIORLD'S GREAT TRADIN4G NATIONS".
THE PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONJS ARE NOT SO EASILY, GRASPED OR
APPRECIATED. THERE ARE VERY VOCAL ELEME14TS IN THE
COMMUNITY WHO WOULD PRESSURE OOVERNMENTS VIRTUALLY TO
CUT OFF ALL IMPORTS, OR AT LEAST THOSE IMPORTS WHICH
AFFECT THEIR INDUSTRY. LESS BLATANTLY, IT TAKES THE
FORM OF DEMANDS FOR ALL SORTS OF TARIFFS AND QUOTAS
AND RESTRICTIONS, BUT WE HAVE TO LOOK BEYOND THE DEMANDS
OF ANY PARTICULAR INDUSTRY TO THE EFFECT OF A DECISION
ON THE ECONOMY A WHOLE AND IN PARTICULAR OF OUR OVERALL
POSITION AS A TRAD) ING NATION. 
THE BASIS OF UNLIMITED PRODU. CTIOi.. O INDUSTRY CAN
THOSEP EOPLE WHO WANT UI N ASU STRALIA TO CUT OFF IMPORTSNMENT
HAS CAUSTRALIA SHOULD REMEMBER THAT WHEN WE DOCTUHET SF ACT
AND TO THE EXTENT WE DO IT WAE GSRPEOAITL THE CASE WE CAN
PRESENT TO COUNTRIES WHICH CUT OFF IMPORTS FROM AUSTRALIA.
THIS BIS VERY RELEVANT TO PRIMARY INDUSTRY. 0 INDUSTRY CAN
ASSUME IT HAS A RIGHT TO SURVIVE, NOBEEN MORE DIFFICULT
INFFOR ME TO ARGUE FORCEFULLY WITH THE COUTRIES MOAFT ESTERN
HOW COSTLY, SIMPLY BECAUSE IT EXISTS.
THOSE PEOPL WHO EW ANT US IN ABOUT THE STLOA SCHUINTG OFF IMPORTS
TBEE IMPORTS FROM AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE WE IN AUSTRALIA
HAVE HAD THEE XTENT WE IM PFORROTMS THOSE COUNTRIES. CAINWE
WE CUT OFF IMPORTS ANDWC HOIIUFCNH T ORTIHEESR CUT OFF FROM AUSOTURRA LEIXAPORTS
THIS ISOENVE EROYF US IS POORER, WHETHER WE LIVE IN CITIES ORINDUSTRY
IN THE COUNTRY VISITS REGION ON ACNAYN LPIAVRET ICULAR
INDUSTRY, IF TRADE OVER-ACEFULL STAGNATES OR DIES OF ESTERN
EUROPE OR JAPAN OR AMERICA ABOUT THE SLASHING OF THEIR
BEEF IMPORTS FROM AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE WE IN AUSTRALIA
HAVE HAD TO REDUCE IMPORTS FROM THOSE COUNTRIES, IF
WE CUT OFF IMPORTS AND IF OTHER COUNTRIES CUT OFF OUR EXPORTS,
EVERY ONE OF US IS POORER, WHETHER WE LIVE IN CITIES OR
IN THE COUNTRY. INI0 REGION CAN LIVE ON ANY PARTICULAR
INDUSTRY, IF TRADE OVER-ALL STAGNATES OR DIES. 
' o
IN PURSUIT OF THE FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVE OF TRADE
PROMOTION;, MY GOVERNMENT HAS MADE MORE TRADE TREATIES
WITH OTHER COUNTRIES THAN ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT.
WE HAVE RE-NEGOTIATED MANY OF THOSE WHICH EXISTED.
WE HAVE BEEN PARTICULARLY ACTIVE IN OUR OWN REGION$
FOR IT IS CLEAR THAT INDUSTRIES WHICH USED TO DEPEND
SOLELY ON THE MARKETS OF WESTERN EUROPE AND BRITAIN,
HAVE NOT AS GOOD A FUTURE AS THOSE INDUSTRIES
WHICH HAVE PROSPECTS IN THE MARKET IN OUR NEIGHBOURHOOD. 
IN THE C. O. N EXT OF THES~ E GENEIRAL REMARK(
INOW ADDRESS MYSELF TO SOME QUESTIONS WHICH
YOUR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ' IR FORSTER, HAS
INDICATED YOU WOULD LIK'E ME TO ANSWER.
I MUST SAY( THE QUESTION4S TEJD TO BE SHORT ON
SPECIFICS AND LON~ G 0: 1 ARGUMENT SO0 YOU W1LL
FORGIVE ME IF I TEND TO RESPOND IN KIND. 
" QUESTION: As IT IS LIKELY THAT THE SECOND ALLOCATION OF
CARRY-ON FINANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE
BEEF INDUSTRY WILL BE INSUFFICIENT TO MEET THE DEMAND
FROM ELIGIBLE PRODUCERS, WOULD THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CONSIDER MAKING THE BALANCE OF THE ORIGINAL ALLOCATION
AVAILABLE AT THE CONCESSIONAL INTEREST RATE OF 4% o AND
ADJUST THE LOANS OF THOSE PRODUCERS WHO HAVE ALREADY
BORROWED AT 11.5%?
THERE HAVE BEEN TWO SCHEMES ANNOUNCED BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FOR THE PROVISION OF CARRY ON FINANCE FOR
BEEF PRODUCERS. THE FIRST SCHEME, ANNOUNCED LATE LAST YEAR,
INVOLVED AN ALLOCATION OF $ 20 MILLION FOR LOANS THROUGH
THE COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT BANK AT COMMERCIAL RATES
OF INTEREST THEN 11., BUT LATER CUT TO 11% IN LINE
WITH A GENERAL REDUCTION IN BANK RATES. AT THAT TIME
THE GOVERNMENT WAS RESPONDING TO A REQUEST BY THE
AUSTRALIAN I'IATIONAL CATTLEMEN'S COUNCIL FOR SPECIAL FUNDS
AT COMMERCIAL RATES. THE COUNCIL DID NOT SEEK CONCESSIONAL
INTEREST RATES. I UNDERSTAND THAT AT LEAST $ 13 MILLION
OF THE $ 20 MILLION ALLOCATION HAS BEEN LENT ALREADY AT
COMMERCIAL RATES OF INTEREST. , A2 
fl~
ON APRIL 23 THIS YEAR, SENATOR I'RIEDT ANNOUNCED THAT
THE GOVERNMENT WOULD MATCH A $ 19.6 MILLION OFFER BY THE
STATES FOR CARRY-ON FINANCE FOR BEEF PRODUCERS.
LOANS ARE AT 11 WITH NO INTEREST OR CAPITAL REPAYMENTS
IN THE FIRST 12 MONTHS. IT IS STILL TOO EARLY
TO. KNOW IF IT WILL BE SUFFICIENT. IUCH WILL DEPEND
ON THE BEEF MARKET AND HOW QUICKLY IT RECOVERS.
THE MOST HOPEFUL SIGN IS LAST WEEK S ANNOUNCEMENT BY
JAPAN THAT IT IS RE-OPENING ITS MARKET FOR AUSTRALIAN
BEEF. FURTHER, AS AT 31 SARCTHH, E AUSTRALIAN HERD
IS SMALLER BY ABOUT 1 MILLION HEAD. THAN HAD BEEN EXPECTED
ON THE BASIS OF PAST GROWTH.
ON APRIL 23 '. RIEDT SAID THAT THE PROGRESS OF THE SCHEME
WOULD BE REVIEWED AT THE END OF THREE MONTHS.
THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONSIDER THE RESULTS OF THAT REVIEW
AND ANY REQUESTS FOR CHANGES IN THE SCHEME OR
ADDITIONAL FUNDS THAT MAY EMERGE. 
QUESTION: DOES THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WISH THE DAIRY FARMERS
OF AUSTRALIA TO PRODUCE FOR THE EXPORT MARKET AT THE
SAME TIME ENSURING BY SUCH PRODUCTION THAT THERE WILL BE
SUFFICIENT SUPPLIES OF DAIRY PRODUCTS PRODUCED IN
AUSTRALIA TO MEET AUSTRALIA'S DOMESTIC NEEDS?
IF SO, WILL THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAY A BOUNTY ON
ALL EXPORTS OF DAIRY PRODUCTS EQUAL TO THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE ACTUAL EXPORT PRICE AND AN UNDERWRITTEN
PRICE WHICH WOULD APPROXIMATE THE HOME PRICE NOW
BEING FIXED BY THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL?
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S WISH IS THAT AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION, INCLUDING DAIRYING, BE GEARED TO MARKET DEMANDS,
IT DOES NOT MAKE COMMERCIAL GOOD SENSE TO PRODUCE WITHOUT
REGARD TO MARKET TRENDS AND PRICES. ' IE WANT OUR POLICIES
TO BE FAIR TO PRODUCERS, CONSUIMERS AND TAXPAYERS.
BOUNTY PAYMENTS CAN ONLY BE PROVIDED BY TAXPAYERS INCLUDING
THOSE WHO, AS CONSUMERS, ALREADY PROVIDE FOR SOME
PRODUCTS HIGHER DOMESTIC PRICES THAN ARE AVAILABLE OVERSEAS,
EXPERIENCE HAS SHOW: I THAT BOUNTY PAYMENTS RELATED TO
PRODUCTION LEAD TO PROBLEMS OF DISPOSAL ON WORLD MARKETS
AT UNECONOMIC PRICES. A BOUNTY ON EXPORTS WOULD HAVE
A SIMILAR EFFECT IF THERE IS NO INCENTIVE TO RELATE
PRODUCTION TO AVAILABLE ECONOMIC IMARKETS THE REAL
OBJECTIVE THW IINDUSTRY SdOULD SET FOR ITSELF, Ig uaI
CI~-C-r 4-
OWING TO THE ENORMOUS. AND CONTINUING INCREASE IN THE COST
OF TRANSPORT, SUPERPHOSPHATE AND OTHER FARM REQUIREMEjNTS
NARROWING THE GAP BETW.-EEJ. FARN COSTS AND INCOME, CAN
YOU GIVE FARMERS ANY INSURANCE AT ALL OR EVEN HOPETHAT
THEIR INVESTMENTS IN PRODUCTION WILL YIELD A RETURN?
FARMING IS3 A BUSINESS AI1D PREDOMINANTLY IT IS UP TO
THE FARMER TO ESTIMATE WHETHER A DECISIONJ TO PRODUCE
A CERTAIN COMHODITY WI1LL YI'ELD A RETURNE i N T
THE 6OVERNMENT HAS SUPPORTED THE RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME
AIND IHAS INTRODUCED SPECIAL INDUSTRY SCHEMES TO HELP
IN THE PROCESS. IT' S NOT POSSIB3LE OR DESIRABLE FOR ANY
oOVER~ IIHEN'T TO GUARAI T'LE A RETURN IF THIS FLIES IiN THE
FACE OF MARKET FORCES. IN SO FAR AS PEOPLE MUST EAT
AND BE CLOTHED THERE WILL ALWAYS BE A RETURN ON INVESTME11T
IN AN EFFICIENT AND SELF RELIA* JT AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY.
IBELIEVE THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR WILL IREMAIN ANl AVENUE
FOR PROFITABLE RESOURCE USE. 
A. NL. j VII
WOULD NOT A MAJOR. PROPORTION OF THE MONEY WHICH
THE 6JOVER1NMEI-IT SPENDS ON WELFARE A14D UNEMPLOYMENT SCHEMES
BE PUT TO BETTER USE IN SUBSIDISING CON4SUMER PRICE
INDEX ITEMS AT RAW MATERIAL LEVEL THEREBY HOLDING PRICES
AND GIVING INDUSTRY A CHNCE TO STABILISE AND PLAN?
AgswER: FUNDS FOR PENSIONS, U!' JEMPLOYME; IT RELIEF,
THE R. E. D. SCHEME ETC., ADD TO CONSUIMER DEMAND FOR
GD:, TAKING FUNDS AWAY FR01* 1 A'IREAS WOULD
REDUCE DEMAND.
14HAT WOULD BE THE COST OF CONSUAER SUBSIDIES?
1.1HAT PRODUCTS WOULD BE SUBSIDISED? HOW WOULD
A SUBSIDY Oil ONE PRODUCT EFFECT DEIMAND FOR AND THEI
PROFITABILITY OF ANiOTHER? WOULD YOU END
SUCH A SYSTEM IN1 THE FUTURE WITHOUT GREAT DISRUPTION'?
IWOULD INSTAN4CE THlE WAR-TINE DAIRY BOUJNTY THAT WAS
CONTINUED AND BECAME L; UILT IN4TO THE PRICE OF LAND
AND WAS OF NO LASTING B3ENEFIT TO PRODUCERS AND
DISTURBEDT THE ALLOCATION OF RSESOURCES IN DAIRYING.
IN SHORT, TH4E GOVFRNMNT PRLFERS PEOPLE TO HAVE FUNDS
TO MAKE THEIP OWN CONSUMPTION CHOICES AND NOT BE
SUBSIDISED AT THE OTHER END EXCEPT IN SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES, 



P RI M IF. MNST Press Statement No. 527
I. July 1975
ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
The Prime Minister today announced that a revised
Administrative Arrangements Order had been approved by the
Executive Council this morning.
The order incorporates new legislation passed during
the recent sittings of Parliament and brings up to date the
citations of Acts which were amended during those sittings.
The Order also consolidates the variou s amendments
which have been approved and gazetted since the last
consolidated Order was issued on 10 February 1975.
These amendments include those made on 6 June last
concerning the minerals and solar energy research activities
of the C. S. I. R. O. The Prime Minister said that he wished to
make it clear that the fact that the Minister for Minerals
and Energy was responsible for those aspects of the C. S. I. R. O.' s
research work did not entail the transfer of the C. S. I. R. O. staff
S concerned to the Public Service. These staff would remain
employed under the Science and Industry Research Act, and
it is not proposed that they should be transferred.
S Both the Postal Commission and the Telecommunications
Commission commence full-scale operations today. These two
separate statutory commissions are . responsible to the
Postmaster-General, Senator R. Bishop, and have taken over
almost all of the functions previously exercised by the
Postmaster-General's Department, which will be responsible to
the Postmaster-General.
The consolidated Order also includes some other changes
which have been in the course of preparation for some time as
a result of decisions and actions previously taken, particularly
as a result of the abolition'' in 1974 of the Department of
Supply. A number of functions of-the Department of Manufacturing
Industry ( which absorbed many of the functions of the former
Department of Supply) have been reallocated.
As previously announced on 1 July 1974 administrative
control of the'Research and Development Division of that
Department, and the associated Government establishments concerned
with defence science, were transferred to the Minister and
Department of Defence. The transfer of control was formally
effected under the order approved today. / 2 
a -2-
The Go% 7ernment has also previously announced the transfer
of the purc I and disposals function from the Department
of Manufacturing Industry. The purchasing and disposals
function has today been transferred to the Department of
Services and Property, which already has responsibility for
Australian Government purchasing policy. The Stores and
Transport function has also been transferred to the Department
of Services and Property.
The other functions of the Department of Manufacturing
Industry which the Government has decided are more
appropriately located within other departments are Defence Aid,
Defence Standardisation, the Defence Printing Establishment
and the Guided~ Weapons and Electronics Support Facility all of
which ha re bs en transferred to the Department of Defence.
The Prime Minister also said that the Patent, Trade
Marks and Designs Offices had been transferred from the
administration of the Minister for Science and Consumer Affairs
to the Attorney-General.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIM-E MINISTER,
THE HION. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE 1975 AUSTRALIAN LEGAL CONVENTION
CANBERRA, 2-JULY 1975
Many of the matters proposed at earlier
conventions have been debated in the Parliament in this
city since the last convention. Many of the matters I
myself mentioned at that convention have been discussed
here. Some have come to fruition; others have not done so,
at least not yet. At the 10th Australian'Legal Convention
in 1957, Sir Owen Dixon suggested a federal Law Reform
Committee to prepare and promulgate draft reforms for
adopt'ion by the Parliaments of Australia and the States.
He pointed out that in all or nearly all matters of
private law there is no geographical reason why the law
should be different in any part of Australia. Is it
not unworthy of Australia as a nation, he asked, that we have
varying laws affecting the relations between man and man?
If I may quote Tacitus corruptissima
republica plurimae leges: The Commonwealth is most marred
when it has most laws.
At long' last, * that suggestion by Sir Owen
Dixon has borne fruit. An Act of the Australian Parliament
has established a Law Reform Commission. The Commission
has been charged Wi. th the task of preparing proposals for
the reform of laws, not only on matters within the direct
competence of " the Australian Parliament, but on matters
on which it is desirable that there should be uniformity
of law in the States and Territories. The Commission
has a full-time Chairman, Mr Justice Michael Kirby, and
five part-time members. We have sought, by advertisement,
indications of interest from lawyers throughout Australia
in being appointed as full-time members of the Commission.
Without waiting to be fully established,
the Commission has embarked on its first reference, the
difficult and delicate task of reconciling the protection
of civil liberties with the requirement for strong and
effective police action at the national level to combat
the growth in sophisticated crime.
A paper entitled ' The Necessity for a New
Federal Court' was delivered at the 13th Legal Convention
in Hobart in January 1963 by Mr Maurice Byers, Q. C.,
and Mr Paul Toose, now respectively the
Solicitor-General of Australia and judge of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales. In the discussions
on the paper the Solicitor-General Sir Kenneth Bailey, Q. C.,
announced on behalf of the Attorney-General, Sir Garfield
B~ arwick, that the Cabinet had authorised him to design a newfederal
superior court. Sir Kenneth went on to say that the 
paper would be of material assistance to Sir Garfield whose
congratulations be extended to the learned authors.
Attorney-General Bowen delivered a paper
on the proposal for the 15th Legal Convention on
17 July 1967. He declared that there was a broad
concensus that such a court should be established. He
stated categorically that ' a decision has been taken to
establish.. the court' and that arguments advanced
against the idea are now ' academic'.
He presented a Corrconwealth Superior
Court Bill on 21 November 1968. My Government's bill, although
promised at both the 1972 and 1974 elections, has beentwice
rejected by the Senate. There has in fact been
much lobbying by State Supreme Court judges.
Following the report of the Sen~ ate
Committee on Securities and Exchange, the Government
has introduced the Corporations and Securibies Industry
Bill to establish a Securities and . Exchange Commission
to provide where regulation is necessary, a proper
regulation of the securities industry on a nationl basis.
Finally, work is well advanced on the
preparation of a National Companies Bill. When this is
enacted it will end the frustration suffered by companies
who wish to operate on a national basis but find themselves
confronted with eight set"-s of company laws. The high
hopes that were entertained with the enactment in each
State and Territory of the uniform Companies Act in the
early 1960' s have not been realised:* Mr John Young, Q. C.,
and Mr Rodd delivered a paper to the 13th ConventCion in
1963. The late Mr Justice H-ardie said then it would
have to be a federal act.
Debate on the National Compensation
legislation, to supplant the litigation based on compulsory
workers' compensation insurance and compulsory third
party insurance, awaits a report from a Senate committee.
I hasten to add that lawyers will be amply
compensated by new fields of jurisprudence arising
from legislation on consumer affairs and the environment
and family law and on international conventions dealing
with matters of commerce and liability and human rights.
And although this gathering would have a smaller percentage
of women present in their own right as distinct from their
being consorts, we can point out in International
Women's Year that the Government has appointed four women
to the Arbitration Commission, two of them presidential
members. ./ 3 
In the past the development of a proper system
of administrative law in Australia has been sadly lacking.
The independence of the judiciary has been largely an
irrelevant safeguard in the face of increasing areas of
government-regulation that have not been subject toreview
by the ordinary courts. The reports of the Commonwealth
Administrative Review Committee, more commonly known as the
Kerr Committee, and of the Committee on Administrative
Discretions, more commonly known as the Bland Committee,
have highlighted the need to enable administrative decisions
affecting individuals to be reviewed on their merits.
They have also shown the need for an independent body to
ensure that an individual has been dealt with fairly by
the Public Service and by statutory bodies. To satisfy these
needs, the Government has introduced into the Parliament
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Bill and the
Ombudsman Bill. They have received strong support on both
sides of the Parliament. The Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Bill place's emphasis on expedition and informality
in the hearing of appeals. It will not be confined to the
traditional role of umpire in an adversary dispute.
Nevertheless, it will provide an opportunity for lawyers
to bring their particular skills to bear in ensuring that
statutory discretions are justly and properly exercised.
When I spoke at the last Convention I
stressed that not only must the courts always be accessible
to the people but that the profession must also be accessible
to the people. Perfect laws and well-organised courts are of
little use if those who most need the protection of the law
cannot afford access to the courts. An essential part of
the Government's program of law reform is its development of
systematic and comprehensive legal aid in Australia. A
great deal has been done by the legal profession itself, but
the provision of legal aid to all those who require it is a
task beyond the scope of the legal profession. it
requires the resources of government. The Australian Government
has done three things. We have had a committee of inquiry into
the provision of legal aid in Australia, the report
of which has highlighted the areas of need. We have provided
funds for existing legal aid schemes. We have established
the Australian Legal Aid office as a salaried service to
provide legal aid in areas where the Australian Government
has particular concerns and responsibilities. The
Government introduced the Legal Aid Bill in the last week
of the Autumn Sittings of the Parliament, so that it may
be open to suggestions for improvement. I hope the legal
profession will use the opportunity that has been given
to them to comment on the Legal Aid Bill.
I want to see the continued development of
a vigorous and independent legal profession. The
maintenance of much of our democratic tradition depends
on the strength and integrity of an independent profession
in representing the citizen, whether against another citizen,
a-large corporation or the Executive Government itself.
There is, I know, a real fear that this independence and 
traditions may become lost in a salaried legal aid service.
Any lawyer, whether a private practitioner or an employee
of a salaried legal aid service, has a duty to uphold
these traditions. We have sought to embody this in
the Legal Aid Bill. There are many in the community today who
doubt the capacity of the courts and the legal system
to play a useful role in new areas of social and economic
concern. It is not only those with money and property
or those who are engaged in commerce who need lawyers.
Lawyers in the past have been in the forefront
in urging reform of the law. They are in a position to
identify and expose the shortcomings of the law. The
legal profession must be careful to maintain this tradition
in the face of the changing expectations of the people.
Otherwise-they will be seen as conservative defenders
of a system that will become irrelevant if it does not
respond to the dem-and for change. Indeed I go further.
Lawyers applying their talents and skills, should continue
to lead the demand for change and not wait to be pushed
by public opinion. I believe we want a world in which the
rights of citizens, rich or poor, are effectively protected
by a vigorous legal profession; in which the mechanism
of the law remains a primary and effective instrument.
It is easy for the public to feel alienated from the law
and the lawyers.. I suggest that it is up to the Government
and the lawyers to see that this feeling of alienation
is replaced by a recognition of the law as a relevant,
accessible and useful instrument for social and economic
adjustment and for protecting the legitimate expectations
of the individual in an increasingly complex, domestic
and international society. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G, WHITLAM,
AT THE AUSTRALIAN-AM1ERICAN ASSOCIATION BALLA
SYDNEY, 4I JULY 1975
Two YEARS AGO ON 19 JULY 1973 THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES, IN A MESSAGE TO THE PRIME MINISTER
OF AUSTRALIA, INVITED THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE TO JOIN
IN COMMEMiORATING THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION ON ITS
200TH ANNIVERSARY. THE INVITATION SAID IN PART:
" THE PRESIDENT AND PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES HOPE
THAT OUR TWO COUNTRIES CAN USE THE OCCASION TO FOSTER
NOT ONLY PERSONAL CONTACTS BUT THE WIDEST POSSIBLE
RANGE OF FRUITFUL INTERCHANGE AMONG PEOPLE
IN THE REALMS BOTH OF IDEAS AND OF ACTIONS." i / 2 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ACCEPTED THAT
INVITATION WITH THE UTMOST READINESS AND PLEASURE.
SO YOUR FUNCTION THIS EVENING COMES ON THE EVE
OF WIDER AND MORE ELABORATE CELEBRATIONS PLANNED
FOR NEXT* YEAR, THOSE CELEBRATIONS WILL HAVE THE
SUPPORT AND ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN A NUMBER OF WAYS AND IN A MOMENTI
SHALL SAY SOMETHING OF WHAT WE PROPOSE TO DO.
THE BIRTH OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC WAS ONE OF THOSE
WATERSHEDS IN HUMAN HISTORY THAT WILL BE COMMEMORATED
BY. DEMOCRATS EVERYWHERE EXPECIALLY IN ENGLISH-.
SPEAKING COUNTRIES -FOR AS LONG AS DEMOCRACY SURVIVES.
IN TWO CENTURIES NOTHING HAS DIMINISHED THE POWER
AND SPLENDOUR OF THE WORDS OF THE AMERICAN DECLARATION
OF INDEPENDENCE, WITH ITS NOBLE CONFIRMATION OF HUMAN
DIGNITY, ITS UNFORGETTABLE AFFIRMATION OF THE EQUALITY
OF ALL MEN AND THEIR RIGHTS TO LIFE, LIBERTY
AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. THOSE WORDS, SO
FAMILIAR, YET FRESH AND IMPERISHABLE, STILL FIRE THE
HEARTS AND MINDS OF MEN -AND THERE WAS NEVER A TIME,
ISUGGEST, WHEN THEIR MESSAGE WAS MORE RELEVANT, MORE
NEEDEDITHAT IT IS TODAY. 
I HAVE A NUMBER OF ANNOUNCEMENTS TO MAKE
THIS EVENING, SO I DO NOT WANT TO EXPATIATE FOR LONG
ON THE SENTIMENTS AND VALUES THAT UNDERLIE THIS
ANNIVERSARY. BEYOND QUESTION, THOSE SENTIMENTS, THOSE
VALUES DEMOCRACY, FREEDOM, THE RULE OF LAW ARE
DEEPLY AND PASSIONATELY HELD BY ALL OF US IN THIS ROOM,
AND BY THE VAST MAJORITY OF AMERICAN AND AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE. BUT THERE IS A SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE IN THIS
OCCASION BECAUSE IT WILL BE ONE OF THE LAST TIMES
WHEN WE WILL HAVE THE COMPANY -AT LEAST IN HIS
PRESENT CAPACITY -OF A 63REAT AMERICAN, A GREAT
DIPLOMATIST, A GREAT FRIEND OF AUSTRALIA, AMBASSADOR
MARSHALL GREEN. I PAY A SPECIAL TRIBUTE TO HIM. I
FIRST MET HIM v4 1964 IN WASHINGTON AT A PRIVATE
DINNER; NEXT IN JAKARTA, HE WAS APPOINTED UNITED
STATES AMBASSADOR To AUSTRALIA IN 1973, SHORTLY AFTER:.
THE CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT, AT A TIME, ICONFESS, WHEN
IT WAS EASY FOR OUR TWO NATIONS, OLD FRIENDS AS THEY
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN, TO MISUNDERSTAND EACH OTHER't S PURPOSES.
THERE WERE EVEN SOME WHO LABELLED HIM A HATCHET MANI*
WHATEVER THAT MAY MEAN, SUPPOSE THERE ARE TIMES WHEN
ALL OF US MUST USE THE HATCHET, GEORGE WASHINGTON IS
SAID TO HAVE DONE so, BUT I MUST SAY THAT I FOUND HIM
UNFAILINGLY AMIABLE, COURTEOUS, UNDERSTANDING, SYMPATHETIC.
To AUSTRALIA, AND OF COURSE, AN AMBASSADOR OF THE UTMOST
PROFESSIONAL SKILL AND INTELLIGENCE. WE OWE A VERY GREAT
DEAL TO MARSHALL GREEN. No AMERICAN HAS DONE MORE TO
DEVELOP AND STRENGTHEN THE FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND
THE UNITED STATES, AND TO PLACE THAT FRIENSHIP ON A NEW BASIS
OF MATURITY AND HEALTHY UNDERSTANDING ON BOTH SIDES# 
IT IS NOT SO LONG SINCE THERE WAS A GREAT
DEAL OF SILLY AND MISCHIEVOUS TALK IN THIS COUNTRY
ABOUT A STRAINED RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AMERICA AND
AUSTRALIA. YOU DON'T HEAR THAT TALK ANY MORE, AND
IT WAS NEVER REALLY TRUE, EXCEPT* IN THE MOST SUPERFICIAL
SENSE. OF COURSE IT WAS POSSIBLE TO PLAY UP
ISOLATED STATEMENTS, BUT THE REALLY ENDURING QUALITIES
IN OUR RELATIONSHIP HAVE ALWAYS EXISTED AND HAVE NEVER
BEEN CHALLENGED.-THAT IS NOT TO SAY THAT OUR
RELATIONSHIP IS THE SAME AS IT ALWAYS WAS, IT IS
NOT;~ BUT THE CHANGES IN TONE, * IN QUALITY, IN EMPHASIS,
HAVE BEEN ALTOGETHER BENEFICIAL AND WERE IN FACT
INEVITABLE. NO ONE HAS ACKNOWLEDGED AND DESCRIBED THIS
NEW RELATIONSHIP ONE OF DEEPER MUTUAL RESPECTJ#
OF MATURITY, OF HEALTHY CANDOUR, OF REAL FRIENDSHIP
BASED ON A FRANK RECOGNITION OF OUR PARTICULAR NATIONAL
INTERESTS WITH GREATER ELOQUENCE THAN MARSHALL GREEN.
No ONE HAS DONE MORE TO BRING-ABOUT THESE CHANGES1
OUR RELATIONSHIP IS VERY MUCH STRONGER AS A RESULT.
IT IS RARE THAT I AM ABLE TO QUOTE THE PRESS IN
SUPPORT OF my GOVERNMENT ESPECIALLY THESE DAYS -BUT
I THINK THE FINANCIAL REVIEW PUT THE SITUATION FAIRLY
IN THESE WORDS ON TUESDAY:
" THE AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ALLIANCE HAS
WEATHERED THIS FLUID PERIOD REMARKABLY WELL,
A PERIOD IN WHICH ONE SIDE WAS STRUGGLING TO
ESTABLISH A MORE INDEPENDENT IDENTITY AND THE
OTHER TO MAINTAIN ITS POWER AND PRESTIGE IN A
RAPIDLY CHANGING WORLD. sm 
i R GREEN ACKNOWLEDGED THIS AND PLAYED A
VERY EXPERIENCED HAND IN CANBERRA. HE WAS
PROFESSIONAL ENOUGH TO REALISE THAT THE
INTERESTS OF BASICALLY LIKE-MINDED NATIONS
WOULD ULTIMATELY TRANSCEND A CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT,
CLASH OF PERSONALITIES AND MINOR DIFFERENCES
IN POLICY
T ACCEPT THAT JUDGMENT. AMBASSADOR GREEN
IS NOW MOVING TO MORE EXALTED LEVELS, BUT WE SHALL
ALL MISS HIM IN AUSTRALIA. WE SHALL WISH HIM WELL.
HE AND I HAVE HAD THE HONOUR TO BE JOINT
PATRONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN FESTIVAL TO BE
HELD IN SYDNEY NEXT MARCH AND APRIL AS PART OF THE
BICENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS. FOLLOWING THE MOTTO OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION BICENTENNIAL ADMINISTRATION
" A PAST TO REMEMBER, A FUTURE TO MOULD" THE
FESTIVAL PROMISES TO BE AN EVENT OF TRULY MEMORABLE
IMPORTANCE, A GREAT DEAL OF PLANNING HAS ALREADY
BEEN DONE, AND MUCH-OF IT WILL BE FAMILIAR TO YOU
SCHOOL PAGEANTS, DRAMA, MUSIC AND BALLET PERFORMANCES,
THE " SISTER CITIES" PROGRAM, I COMMEND ALL THOSE
INVOLVED I* N THESE PLANS, TONIGHT, HOWEVER, I WANT
TO MENTION SOME OF THE SPECIFIC PROPOSALS FOR WHICH THE
AUSTRAL: AN GOVERNMENT IS RESPONSIBLE. o. ,/ 6 
FIRST, I HAVE HAD THE HONOUR TO INVITE VICE-PRESIDENT
NELSON-RoCKEFELLER TO VISIT AUSTRALIA FOR THE FESTIVAL.
HE HAS ACCEPTED. I AM HOPEFUL THAT HIS VISIT WILL TAKE
PLACE IN MARCH. SOME '. OF YOU WILL RECALL THAT WE HAD A
VISIT FROM ANOTHER ROCKEFELLER IN MARCH AND APRIL
THIS YEAR THE PRESIDENT OF THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART
IN NEW YORK, BLANCHETTE ROCKEFELLER. MRS JOHN D.
ROCKEFELLER 111, SISTER-IN-LAW OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS
A GREAT LADY, THE* MOST ELEGANT OF PATRICIANS!
WE THOUGHT IT ONLY PROPER, IN INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S
YEAR, THAT THE FEMALE ROCKEFELLER SHOULD* COME HERE FIRST$
( THE MODERN MASTERS EXHIBITION, INCIDENTALLY, ATTRACTED
382,000 VISITORS. THERE'S NOT DOUBT THAT A ROCKEFELLER
CAN PULL IN THE CROWDS).
MUCH CAREFUL THOUGHT HAS BEEN GIVEN TO THE
ROLE AUSTRALIA SHOULD PLAY IN CELEBRATING THE
BICENTENNIAL IN THE UNITED STATES HERSELF, THE GOVERNMENT
HAS BEEN ASSISTED IN THIS BY AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE OF 24
DISTINGUISHED CITIZENS LED BY PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK, A. C.
I NOTICE THAT SOME OF THEM ARE WITH US TONIGHT. ON THEIR
RECOMMENDATION THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO ENDOW A
CHAIR OF AUSTRALIAN STUDIES AT HARVARD. PRELIMINARY
TALKS WITH HARVARD HAVE ESTABLISHED THAT THE CHAIR WILL BE
AT RESEARCH LEVEL AND FORM A CENTRE FOR AUSTRALIAN
STUDIES BY OTHER AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES. THERE ARE A
NUMBER OF DETAILS TO BE WORKED OUT. WE SHALL WANT.'
TO TAKE ACCOUNT OF HARVARD'S WISHES IN THIS REGARD. 9 a./ 7 
IT IS HOPE THAT THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
CHAIR BE A FIRST STEP ONLY. WE HOPE IT WILL
FORM TE NUCLEUS OF EXPANDED AND CONTINUING ACADEMIC
STUDIES IN AMERICA OF ALL ASPECTS OF AUSTRALIA AND
OF AUSTRALIAN INTERESTS IN A WIDER REGIONAL CONTEXT,
I COMMEND THIS PROPOSAL TO THE GREAT COMPANIES AND
CORP0RAAT-: NS MANY OF WHOSE REPRESENTATIVES ARE HERE
TONIGHT WHICH OPERATE IN OUR TWO COUNTRIES, SOME
OF THEME I TRUST, WILL SEE IN THE CHAIR A FOCAL
POINT F2R FURTHER RESEARCH ENDOWMENTS IN THEIR OWN
NAMES IN DISCIPLINES OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO THEM.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PLANS TO SPONSOR
A FELLOWSHI? PROGRAM TO FACILITATE EXCHANGE VISITS
BY A NON-ACADEMIC CROSS SECTION OF THE COMMUNITY
FARMERS, BUSINESSMEN, CIVIC LEADERS, TRADE UNIONISTS
BETJEEH AUS-? ALIA AND AMERICA, WE SHALL SUPPORT
AN AMERICAN TOUR BY THE AUSTRALIAN YOUTH ORCHESTRA
AND ART, CRAFTS, AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS. WE SHALL
SET ASIDE FUNDS TO ENABLE AUSTRALIANS TO PARTICIPATE IN
SPECIFIC EENTS ARRANGED BY AMERICAN STATES, CITIES
AND INSTITUTIONS. FOR EXAMPLE, THE SMITHSONIAN
INSTITUTION THE BIGGEST MUSEUM COMPLEX IN THE
UNITED STATES AND IN THE WORLD HAS INVITED AN
AUSTRALIAN EXHIBIT TO TOUR ITS CIRCUIT OF MUSEUMS.
WE SHAL. L ACCEPT THIS INVITATION, DRAWING FROM MANY
AUSTRAL: AN MUSEUMS MATERIAL RELATED TO AUSTRALIANAMERICAN
LINKS FROM OUR EARLIEST TIMES TO THE PRESENT DAY. 
THERE IS ONE OTHER PROPOSAL I HAVE TO
ANNCUNCE TONIGHT. AMERICANS HAVE MADE MANY
CONTR-SUTIONS TO AUSTRALIAN LIFE. NONE IS MORE
ENDURING OR STRIKING THAN THAT OF WALTER BURLEY
GRIFFIN. SINCE GRIFFIN'S DESIGN FOR CANBERRA WAS
SELECTED IN 1912, THE NATIONAL CAPITAL HAS BECOME
A MCNU-ENT TO HIS VISION AND ARCHITECTURAL SKILL
A GARBE-CITY. GRIFFIN MADE GREAT CONTRIBUTIONS TO
ARCHITECUJRE, LANDSCAPE AND TOWN PLANNING IN
OTHER PARTS OF AUSTRALIA. NOVEMBER 1976 WILL SEE THE
CENTENARY OF HIS BIRTH. THE GOVERNMENT INTENDS TO
HONOUR HIM WITH THE ERECTION OF A MEMORIAL IN CANBERRA.
g-N
THIS WILL ALSO COINCIDE WITH THE BICENTARY CELEBRATIONS.
A COMPETITION WILL BE HELD THIS YEAR TO CHOOSE A DESIGN
FOR THE MEMORIAL, THE MEMORIAL WILL BE SITED ON
THE SUMMIT CF MOUNT AINSLIE. I UNDERSTAND THAT THE
NATIONAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION WILL BE
GIVING FURTHER DETAILS OF THE. COMPETITION IN A
STATEMENT THIS EVENING. / 9 
I THANK PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK AND HIS
COMMIF.= E FOR THE TIME THEY HAVE SPENT AND THE WORK
THEY -A-E DONE IN PREPARING PROGRAMS FOR THE BICENTENARY
FESTIVAL. I THANK AMBASSADOR GREEN; MR ALLEN
MOYES, PRESIDENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION,
AN CF= ICER OF THE ORDER FOR AUSTRALIA FOR
" DISTINGUISHED SERVICE OF A HIGH DEGREE IN THE FIELDS
OF A-E-EMENT AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS";
MR CHARLES BERNARD, PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY; AND MR BROOKS WILSON, A VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION AND CHAIRMAN OF THE
AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN FESTIVAL 1976. I AM HAPPY THAT
THE AUSTRALIIAN' GOVERNMENT WILL BE CONTRIBUTING IN FULL
MEASURE TO AN OCCASION THAT WILL HONOUR THE NOBLEST
IDEALS IN T-E AMERICAN TRADITION AND DEVELOP FURTHER
THE INDISSCLUBLE FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN THE AMERICAN
AND AUSTRALIAN PEOPLES, 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
KIRRIBILLI HOUSE, SYDNEY,
JULY, 1975
PRIME MINISTER: I want to speak to you about the announcement that
-the Speaker of the House of Representatives made -this morning. You
were told that he had notified all members that the House would sit
at 2.30 next Wednesday afternoon. During the week many members of
the Opposition and many of the media have made allegations about
the Government in general and about individual Ministers ccncerning
the propriety of their actions, in particular in respect to the
inquiries that had been made about overseas loans. Now the proper
place for such political issues to be determined is in the supreme
political forum of the nation, the House of Representatives itself.
There the Opposition can make charges against Ministers and can
substantiate them, if it can. And the Australian people will there
and thien have the opportunity to judge the facts and the mo-tives of
any such allegation.
I had earlier told your representatives that when Parliament next
sat I would table the reports I have received from the Ministers, the
Departmental Heads, the other officials concerning the letters to
Mr George Harris about which Dr Cairns spoke on the last afternoon
that the House sat. I shall, of course, now table those next
Wednesday afternoon. I shall also table the letters to and from
Dr Cairns about the subsequent letter or the letter which
subsequently came to light, the letter of the 7th of March.*
Also I will table Mr Connor' s letters to Mr Khemlani.* Now
Mr Fraser, when the House meets, will be able, if he wishes, to
make any of the charges which any of your media have made, or any
of his colleagues, or that his Deputy have made against Ministers;
they will also be able to make charges against any individuals.
' 17ey will be able to make charges against individuals who are not in
Parliament with complete safety, no legal consequences for them if
they make any charges at all, including some of the extraordinary
charges that have been made by these guttersnipe hirelings that
some of your employers have engaged. They will be able, for
instance, to explain, if there is an explanation for this story
in this morning's " Age", that a London finance broker said that
Isomeone in Australia had been prepared to pay up to $ 2 million to 
-2
acquire certain vital documents relating to efforts by Australian
Ministers to raise multimillion US dollar loans"
Now all this can be said in Parliament and it can be substantiated
in any way that's available to.-the Opposition. The only thing
is that the Opposition will have to state the facts as they know them
or as they are prepared to authenticate or identify. There will be
a great opportunity for Mr Fraser and his associates, in the good
old Australian phrase, " to put up or to shut up". Now are there
any questions that any of you would like to ask?
QUESTION: Why, after so many refusals, have you now decided to table
the letter from Connor to Kheinlani?
PRIME MINISTER: Because of the allegations which have been made by
the various newspapers. In view of some of the statements and
interpretations -that have been made and given, let the public see
for themselves.
QUESTION: It has been hinted that you and Mr Connor are involved
just as much as Dr Cairns, would you care to comment?
PRIME MINISTER: Well would you identify the source of the hint?
QUESTION: Well, in the press.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but there is press and press and there is
radio station and radio station. Well, let me say, I have written
no letters at all to anybody that has been named in Parliament or
outside it. I notice that some of the papers mentioned on Friday
morning, I think it was, that a gentleman was writing to me to
claim $ 5 million commission on funds which he had been able to
secure. I haven't seen any such letters; I've been informed that
that gentleman for at least the last five years has been putting
proposals to the Treasury and the Department of Trade the
Department of Overseas Trade as it now is and that nobody has ever
given a second thought to his proposals. I'm told that he is or has
been a bankrupt and that there is some medical disturbance also.
But this is the only thing that I have seen concerning me.
QUESTION: What about Mr Connor sir? 
-3
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you will be able to judge this from the letters.
The great difference between Mr Connor and Dr Cairns is that
Mr Connor was authorised to pursue inquiries and took advice on
any responses he had and was, in general, con-sulting with his
colleagues. Dr Cairns was not authorised, did not consult.
QUESTION: Have you met Mr Khemlani or had any verbal negotiations
with him? Have any of your staff or your Permanent Head, Mr Menadue,
negotiated with Mr Khemlani or any one else in such matters?
PRIME MINISTER: Now a couple of days ago when I was asked in writing
by one of the Canberra Press Gallery a question which any of you.
are entitled to put to me in writing along the lines which you have
just put I was asked whether in effect I had ever met or spoken to
Mr Khemlani. My written reply to your colleague was: that I had
never met him, I had never communicated with him, I believe I had
never seen him. I would believe that the same applied to the Head
of my Department and every member of my staff. I have heard nothing
to the contrary.
QUESTION: Would you describe the Labor Government's loan raising
activities as extraordinary?
PRIME MINISTER: Unprecedented in degree, that is all. There is
nothing illegal whatever. It is significant that nobody has suggested
that there was anything illegal or that there was anything so extraordinary
as to be improper in the fact that the Government authorised
one Minister to pursue inquiries in response to approaches that had
been made to him. I emphasise: -there has been nothing illegal,
there has been nothing which was so unusual as to be improper. This
is a great opportunity in the Parliament for people who are
answerable to the public, that is members of Parliament, Opposition
Leaders and others to specify if there is anything illegal or if there
is anything so unusual as to be improper. I would like to emphasise
that, as was reported in the press, we had a loan raising, the other
day, in New York which was filled in a single day. Now this was in
the light of reports which are made by the agencies which assess the
credit worthiness of various nations. For the first time, about last
September or October, Australia was given a triple A credit rating,
the top credit rating in the world equal to Canada, France, Germany 
4
and -the like; the first time that Australia had ever got it.
And recently the other agency came to Australia and confirmed that
assessment. Standard and Poor were here last month or the previous
month and confirmed it. So Australia has an equally top credit rating
with any country in the world; the last loan we raised was filled
in a single day.
QUESTION: Will the Caucus Meeting be put forward due to the
recalling of the House of Representatives?
PRIME MINISTER: No) I haven't planned to do so.
QUESTION: Will the guidelines of raising loans overseas be changed
or reviewed by you in light of what's happened in recent times?
PRIME MINISTER: The method for the Government to raise a loan has
for countless years back been the same. A loan is raised on the
authority of the Executive Council.
QUESTION: Did you ever consider having a judicial inquiry into the
overseas loan-funds borrowing, and if so does the recalling of
Parliament now overshadow that?
PRIME MINISTER: I have considered having a judicial inquiry, a
Royal Commission into any matters where a Royal Commission is
appropriate. I will still consider that if any questions arise which
would seem to show that that was the proper course. If allegations
are made or documents produced in Parliament for which there is no
proper explanation and a Royal Commission would be the appropriate
procedure to seek an explanation, then of course I will appoint the
Royal Commission. But let me point out this: that Royal Commissions
or inquiries of any kind are only set up to ascertain facts. They
don't issue decisions, they don't bring down judgements, they don't
impose penalties, they don't deliver verdicts. A Royal Commission is
only to ascertain facts and it can make a recommendation, it can make
a report on the facts as it sees it. But the fact that a Royal
Commission believes that the facts establish certain matters doesn't
conclude the question. If there is any matter which I believe shows
any illegality then I will of course pursue it. I told you a couple
of days ago that it seemed quite possible that Mr Sear'Cowls' action,
admitted by him in a Statutory Declaration his action in falsifying
telexes that that should be investigated. If that was illegal, as 
5
would certainly appear to be possible, then action should be taken
to prosecute hima. It is not clear, it's perhaps unlikely~ that he
has committed any offence against Federal law but the general question
of his having committed an offence against State laws and which State
would have been concerned, that is being pursued. Now here is a clear
case; there would be in that Statutory Declaration admitted facts.
Now if those facts disclose any illegality there will be no hesitation
whatever, there has been no hesitation in pursuing the legal
consequences of that action and bringing them home to Mr Sear Cowls.
QUESTION: Would you see your sacking of Dr Cairns based solely on
his not having authority to raise loans?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Dr Cairns had his commission terminated because,
on the facts as they appear, he has misled the House of Representatives
You will remember that he stated on the 4th June, in answer to a
question by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, and an interjection
by the Leader of the Opposition, that he had not offered anybody a
commission or a brokerage fee of 2 on any loan monies that he
found or introduced. Subsequently, a photostat appeared of a letter
of the 7th of March which had Dr Cairns' signature on it and which
offered a brokerage fee of 23 to Mr George Harris in those
circumstances. I discussed this photostat with Dr Cairns last
Tuesday, late afternoon, and we agreed that he should think about
it and the following day give me a written explanation. He gave
me a written explanation at 6.00 p. m. on Wednesday afternoon that
he had no recollection of having signed the letter of which we
had looked at the photostat. In those circumstances there would be
an allegation that he had misled the House. It would have been an
irresistible allegation in the absence of any explanation. That
is why I advised the Governor-General to terminate Dr Cairns'
commission. QUESTION: Members of your own Party have been critical of that action
because there was no inquiry first and it didn't have the backing of
Caucus. The dismissal of Dr Cairns as Deputy. 
-6
PRIME MINISTER: There was no option for any Prime Minister in
such a matter. No Prime Minister can have a Minister against whom
it could be said that he has misled the Parliament.
QUESTION: Would you allow Dr Cairns to serve as a Minister again
under you?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Do you propose tabling also Departmental documents
associated with the Connor loan raising propositions?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I propose to, as I said, to table the documents
which have been signed by Ministers and those documents which, as I
have told you, I have sought from Departmental Heads and those
officials concerning letters signed by Ministers.
QUESTION: How many communications between Mr Connor and Mr Khemlani
will you be tabling?
PRIME MINISTER: Two letters.
QUESTION: The letter and the memorandum?
PRIME MINISTER: The two letters.
QUESTION: And are you satisfied at_ having looked at those again
recently ) that no interpretation of them could lead to an agency
or commission or any understanding by Mr Khemlani that he was
to operate on Australia's behalf?
PRIME MINISTER: That is right. I am satisfied of that. That's not
only my own opinion but of course, in such matters I seek the advice
of the crown law authorities, that has been given. It confirms that
opinion. That advice was sought some weeks ago. Mind you, you will
remember that I stated in the Parliament, I think it was on the
of May, that not a cent had been paid to Mr Khemlani, not a
cent had to be paid to Mr Khemlani and that not a cent would be paid
to Mr Ehemlani. I made that statement in the confidence that there
was no inducement offered to Mr Khemlani which would give him any,
which would lay any obligation at all on the Australian Government. 
7
QUESTION: At the time that you agreed to Mr Connor seeking an
overseas loan, did you have a clear idea of the detailed purposes for
whicbhit was required and are you prepared to say what each amount
was to be spent on?
PRIME MINISTER: I have in mind that if this matter arises in the
House the information can be given.
QUESTION: The Opposition apparently is already considering recalling
the Senate to use its majority to force a judicial inquiry over
this issue. Would that concern you?
PRIME MINISTER: Now. I have made it plain on earlier occasions, I
mightn't have mentioned it to you, that neither House of Parliament
can hold a judicial inquiry. A judge is commissioned to hold an
inquiry by the Governor-General acting on the advice of the Ministry
or at the request of a Minister. Judges are not appointed to hold
inquiries by either House of the Parliament or by both Houses of
Parliamenh. You might remember that there have been resolutions by
Houses seeking judicial inquiries. For instance -there was a year or
so ago a motion by the House of Representa. tives that there should be
an inquiry into various social issues. The Government, of course,
commissioned the judge, the archbishop and the other women who are
conducting that inquiry as a Royal Commission. Again the Senate,
a couple of months ago, asked that there should be a judicial
inquiry into the qualifications of Members of Parliament, outside
interests and so on.., arising from the Webster case. It was, of course,
recognised by the Senators who unanimously passed that resolution that
it lay upon the Government to commission the judge or judges to hold
that inquiry. Also in that matter there is a case pending and there
has been another judgemnent given and judges are not available, they
are not willing to serve on that inquiry until the next court case
has been determined. So let that be quite plain. The only inquiry
that either House of Parliament could hold itself would be by its
own members. I don ' t believe that that sort of inquiry impresses
the public because every Member of Parliament is a partisan and
votes accordingly. 
8-
QUESTION: Mr Prime Minister there has been increasing pressure on
Mr Fraser, particularly from people like Mr Bjelke-Ptersen, to
precipitate a double dissolution. Do you believe Mr Fraser will
hold out still against that pressure on him or will he cave in
and try for a double dissolution?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh Mr Bjelke-Petersen is not the only one that has
given this advice, Sir Charles Court has given it also. It is
quite plain however that the proper course is to allow any
Parliament to run the full course for which it was elected. And the
House of Representatives is elected for a period of up to three
years from the first day on which it-sat, that is, the House of
Representatives should go until the middle of 1977.
QUESTION: Mr Fraser has said that but also he gave himself an out
by talking of extraordinary circumstances. You don't believe that
the events of the past week would constitute those extraordinary
circumstances. PRIME MINISTER: There have been some extraordinary circumstances,
namely the circumstances which led me to terminate Dr Cairns'
commission. But nobody has doubted that I, Mr Fraser hasn't doubted
that I did the correct thing. So that's not an extraordinary
circumstance which would justify trying to get non-Labor Senators
to vote against Supply. It was an extraordinary situation for any
Minister and regrettably the Deputy Prime Minister of all ministers,
to mislead the House as we must assume was the case in the absence
of any explanation at all. Now-, the proper result ensued.
QUESTION: Your answer before last you gave very good reason for
not letting either House inquire into this matter by saying that such
an inquiry would be partisan. Surely it would seem that the proper
course would be a judicial inquiry? It's still not clear to
me why you are not having a judicial inquiry?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I thought that TDT people were sharper than
that. I thought that the facts would be clear. Let me go over it
again. Where there are facts which appear to be the foundation of
legal proceedings, those legal proceedings will be taken' as far as
the Government is concerned. They are being investigated now in the 
9
one case where the facts are known and where it would appear that
there might have been illegalities. Now where there is something
which is illegal or so unusual as to be improper and it is not
possible to ascertain the facts by ordinary police inquiries, by
ordinary investigations, then there can be a case for a R6yal
Commission. But I repeat that a Royal Commission or any form of
inquiry can only seek facts. It can then express its view on
those facts. But its view has no legal consequences'whatever and
it can make recommendations but those recommendations do not lead
to any necessary action. But what I believe we all have to recognise
is that if there has been a breach of the law in any respect then
the courts exist to see that that breach of the law is punished. 



rIBtAUU: 7 IP. M. OUNDAY
QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO, 16
THE SENATE
SUNDAY 6 JULY 1975
WHEN SENATOR BERT MILLINER DIED LAST
WEEK QUEENSLAND LOST ONE OF ITS ABLEST AND BEST LOV ED
PARLIAMENTARIANS. BERT MILLINER WAS A FAMILY FRIEND
OF MINE, SO IT'IS NATURAL THAT I SHOULD FEEL STRONGLY.
ABOUT HIM. BUT LET ME JUST SAY THIS: HE SERVED HIS
UNION, HIS PARTY AND THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR
MORE THAN A QUARTER OF A CENTURY WITH GREAT
DISTINCTION AND THE UTMOST INTEGRITY. MY COLLEAGUES
ADIWILL M1i33 HIM KEENLY.
WAS SORRY TO SEE, WITHIN A FEW HOURS.
OF HIS DEATH, A WELTER OF SPECULATION IN THE MEDIA ABOUT
WHETHER THE lQUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT WOULD APPOINT
ANOTHER LABOR SE-NATOR TO REPLACE HIM. IDON'IT WANT
TO SOUND SANCTIMONIOUS ABOUT THESE THINGS, BECAUSE WE
ALWAYS HAVE TO FACE THE REALITIES OF POLITICS; BUT THE
POINT IS THAT AT NO STAGE SHOULD THERE HAVE BEEN THE
SLIGHTEST DOUBT ABOUT THE PROPER AND HONOURABLE COURSE
FOR THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES.
YET WHAT HAPPENS? THE QUEENSLAND PREMIER STALLED.
HE REFUSED TO ACKNOWLEDGE HIS CLEAR OBLIGATION TO REPLACE
SENATOR MILLINER WITH ANOTHER SENATOR FROM THE SAME PARTY.
HE WENT ON ABOUT THE NEED TO CONSIDER THE MATTER, TO KEEP
THE PRIME-MINISTER. GUESSING AS IF THE INTERESTS OF
QUEENSLAND VOTERS WERE THE LAST THING THAT MATTERED. 
2.
YOU'LL REMEMBER THAT WHEN SENATOR LIONEL
MURPHY RESIGNED FROM THE SENATE EARLIER THIS YEAR,
THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT FLEW IN THE FACE OF THE
LONG-ESTABLISHED AND HITHERTO UNBROKEN CONVENTION
THAT CASUAL VACANCIES IN THE SENATE SHOULD BE FILLED
BY A PERSON OF THE SAME PARTY AS THE SENATOR WHOSE
PLACE WAS BEING TAKEN. MR LEWIS SHOULD HAVE HAD NO
HESITATION IN DOING THE RIGHT AND PROPER THING
IN STICKING BY THE RULES OF THE GAME. INSTEAD HE
DECIDED TO PLAY IT SMART. HE BROKE THE RULES
AND APPOINTED A NON-LABOR MAN. IT DIDN'T MATTER TO HIM
THAT HIS OWN PARTY, INCLUDING MR SNEDDEN WHO WAS
TIHEN ITS LEADER AND EVEN THE SENATE ITSELF URGED
HIM TO STICK 3Y THE RULES AND DO THE PROPER THING.
HE BROKE ONE : F ThE FUNDAMENTAL CONVENTIONS OF OUR
DEMOCRATIC E~ 1, AND WHENEVER THAT HAPPENS THERE
IS ALWAYS A 7EMPTATION TO BREAK THE RULES AGAIN, THE
ROT SETS IN. ONCE A RULE IS BROKEN, OR A CONVENTION
DEFIED FOR THE SAKE OF SHORT TERM POLITICAL ADVANTAGE,
THE WHOLE SYSTEM IS WEAKENED. So IT'S NOT SURPRISING
THAT MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS BEEN TEMPTED, AND Nd DOUBT
ENCOURAGED, TO " DO A LEWIS". I CAN ONLY SAY THAT WHILE
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN ANDI HAVE OUR DISAGREEMENTS
OCCASIONALLY, I HAVE A CERTAIN RESPECT FOR
I AM HOPEFUL THAT IN SENATOR MILLINER'S CASE HE WILL DO
THE RIGHT AND PROPER THING AND APPOINT A LABOR PARTY
SUCCESSOR. QUITE FRANKLY, IT WILL BE SCANDALOUS IF
HE DOES OTHERWISE. s ./ 3 
3,
NO DOUBT THERE ARE ELEMENTS IN THE
OPPOSITION WHO FEEL THAT, BY TAKING ADVANTAGE OF
A SENATOR'S DEATH, THEY CAN BOOST THEIR OWN
NUMBERS IN THE SENATE AND BE ABLE MORE EASILY TO
BLOCK THE GOVERNMENT'S LEGISLATION, WHAT WE HAVE
TO REMEMBER IS THE SHEER INIQUITY OF THESE TACTICS,
IT CANNOT BE STRESSED TOO OFTEN THAT THE OPPOSITION
HAS NO RIGHT WHATEVER TO BLOCK GOVERNMENT MEASURES
FOR WHICH THE PEOPLE HAVE EXPRESSED THEIR SUPPORT
THROUGH THE BALLOT BOX. A LITTLE WHILE AGO MR
FRASER WAS MAKING MUCH OF HIS NEW-FOUND SENSE
OF RESPONSIBILITY IN DECLARING THAT THE OPPOSITION..
iOULD NOT FRUSTRATE THE ELECTED GOVERNMENT'S
PROGRAM. IN FACT, THE OLD CAMPAIGN OF OBSTRUCTION
HAS CONT-INUE AS BEFORE. I CAN GIVE YOU A WHOLE
LIST OF BILLS WHICH HAVE BEEN REJECTED OR DELAYED
OR UNACCE. PTALY AMENDED IN THE SENATE OUR
REDISTRIBUTION PROPOSALS, OUR BILL TO MODERNISE
AND SIMPLIFY THE ELECTORAL LAWS, OUR BILLS TO
ABOLISH APPEALS TO THE PRIVY COUNCIL, TO ESTABLISH
A SUPERIOR COURT OF AUSTRALIA, TO DEAL WITH SHADY
PRACTICES IN THE SECURITIES INDUSTRY AND W
THE STOCK MARKETS, TO ESTABLISH A GOVERNMENT
PURCHASING COMMISSION, TO PROVIDE SIMULTANEOUS
ELECTIONS FOR THE SENATE AND THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES. .9 / 4 
EVEN MORE SERIOUS THAN THESE ABUSES
IS THE BELIEF, FOSTERED BY THE OPPOSITION AND ITS
FRIENDS, THAT THE OPPOSITION CAN FORCE AN ELECTION
WHENEVER IT SUITS THEM. I ASK AUSTRALIANS TO
KEEP IN MIND THE ENORMITY, THE MONSTROUS INJUSTICE
OF THIS PROPOSITION. UNFORTUNATELY THIS IS ONE MORE
CASE OF A RULE ONCE BROKEN BEING EASIER TO BREAK
AGAIN. WE ALL KNOW THAT THE OPPOSITION LAST YEAR
FORCED AN ELECTION AHEAD OF TIME BY REFUSING SUPPLY
IN THE SENATE. THE SENATE WAS ABLE TO TURN OUT
A GOVERNMENT DULY ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE ONLY
16 MONTHS BEFORE' THE OPPOSITION PAID HEAVILY FOR
THAT, BUT THERE IS LITTLE SIGN THAT THEY HAVE
LEARNT THEIR LESSON OR ACKNOWLEDGED, NOT JUST THE
FOLLY, 3UT SHEER IMMORALITY OF THEIR ACTION.
GOVERNMENTS ':-EVITABLY HAVE THEIR UPS AND DOWNS,
AND Ji
GOVERNMENT S GOING THROUGH A VERY STICKY PATCH AT
THE MOMENT. BUT WE HAVE TO KEEP IN MIND THE
FUNDAMENTAL ? RINCIPLE OF ALL WESTMINSTER-STYLE
DEMOCRACIES: GOVERNMENTS ARE MADE AND UNMADE, NOT
IN THE UPPER SOUSE, NOT IN THE SENATE, BUT IN THE LOWER
HOUSE, THE PEOPLE'S HOUSE, THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
GOVERNMENTS WOULD BE QUITE UNWORKABLE IF THEY COULD
BE TOSSED OUT BY AN UPPER HOUSE HALF WAY, OR EVEN A
THIRD OR A QUARTER OF THE WAY THROUGH THEIR TERMS
MERELY BECAUSE IT SUITED THE OPPOSITION TO EXPLOIT
A TEMPORARY ADVANTAGEa 
I WAS APPALLED THE OTHER DAY, FOR EXAMPLE.
WHEN THE VIESTERN AUSTRALIAN PREMIER, SIR CHARLES
COURT, SAID THAT THE DECISION ON WHETHER TO HAVE AN
ELECTION WAS ENTIRELY ONE FOR MR FRASER. THE DECISION
HAS NEVER BEEN ONE FOR MR FRASER, IT IS NOT A DECISION
FOR THE SENATE; STILL LESS IS IT A DECISION FOR THE
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION. BUT IF PEOPLE KEEP
SAYING THAT MIR FRASER IS THE ONE TO DECIDE,
EVENTUALLY A FEW PEOPLE WILL BELIEVE IT. IT'S THE
OLD TECHNIQUE OF-THE BIG LIE THE LIE REPEATED
OFTEN ENOUGH TILL IT GAINS RESPECTABILITY.
THE WHOLE IDEA IS INTOLERABLE, A TRAVESTY OF JUSTICE
AND DEMOCRACY. IHE PEOPLE ELECTED THE GOVERNMENT
A NORMAL 7-. EE--YEAR TERM. THEY ELECTED US TO
-ARRY OUT A WE ARE DOING JUST THAT AND
DUE COURSE, E-N THE TIME COMES, WE WILL SUBMIT
*: LURSELVES TO 7T-E PEOPLE' S JUDGMENT. IT WOULD BE
" 3SURD IF AN El-ECT-D GOVERNMENT IN THE HOUSE OF
-R. RESENTATiVEWSE RE TO DEPEND ON THE CHANCE
EXPLOITATION CF THE HEALTH OF INDIVIDUAL SENATORS OR
OBSCURE TECHNICALITIES IN THE SENATE VOTING SYSTEM.
AMID ALL THE CLAPOUR AND HYSTERIA OF THE MOMENT,
ALL THE RED HERRINGS AND UNSUBSTANTIATED CHARGES
OF THE OPPOSITION AND THE SENSATIONALISM OF THE PRESS,
REMEMBER THAT IT IS THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES WHICH
ALONE DETERMINES WHO SHALL BE THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS
COUNTRY, 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
ADELAIDE
6 JULY 1975
PRIME MINISTER: I believe you wish me to say something about the
elections here next Saturday for your House of Assembly and for
half your Legislative Council.
The sole issue in these elections is whether you.. in South Australia,
are to have the best State Administration anywhere in Australia
replaced by an Opposition which is linked with -the Liberal
negativism and obstruction in Canberra. Because -that's what it
is all about. This election was brought about because of Liberal
obstruction in the Legislative Council of South Australia, you had
Liberal Members and an LM. Member voting against the Labor mihners-of
the Council and also, of course, there were some, to their credit,
there were some Liberal Members of the Legislative Council who also
voted with the Labor members of the Council: which is a sufficiently
extraordinary thing to do. But you have got this situation, that in the
Legislative Council here you have some Liberals so cussed, so
obstructive, that they will vote against something which is clearly
in the interests of the State. You have the extraordinary situation
that most of the Liberals in the Council and an LM. Member of the
council voted against a Bill which had gone through the Federal
Parliament without opposition.
Now you all know very well that if there is any ground for opposition
to any legislation that my Government introduces in the House of
Representatives or the Senate there will be criticism of it and
obstruction of it and frustration of it. But in this Bill, the Bill
to ratify the agreement between the Australian Government and the
South Australian Government for the acquisition of the non-metropolitan
railways in South Australia, there was not only no vote against the
Bill in either the House of Represenatives or the Senate but there
was not even any criticism of it in either the House of Representatives
or the Senate. It was in fact supported by many of the Liberals.
It was supported by Senator Steele Hall, and it's unquestionably of
benefit to the State. Because not only does the State gain outright
an additional $ 10 million this year, but in addition to that it is
saved the inevitable increase in railway deficits which occur as
long as Australia' s railways are run in the separate State compartment 
2-
So it was an absolute bonanza for the State. It meant that the
State got rid of something which could never fail in later years
to be an increasing burden to it.
QUESTION: Mr Prime Minister it will be alleged tonight on a televis~ fon
program that you yourself k-new as far back as December last year
when Mr Crean lost the portfolio as Treasurer, about the overseas
loans issue. Also
PRIME MINISTER: If you don't mind. There is no basis in such
allegations at all. But I'm not answering questions on those
matters. I gave a very full Press Conference yesterday in Sydney
on this: I think you were represented there. Certainly it was
shown on T. V. in Adelaide last night. So I have nothing to say on
this, the Matter will come out in the proper form now, next Wednesday
afternoon, in the House of Representatives. If anything is to be
produced of that nature then the Liberals will be perfectly free to
produce it. I invite them to do so..
QUESTION: On the State issue then, may I ask you a question?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course.
QUESTION: It has been reported that Federal taxes are crippling
the South Australian Wine Industry. Can anything be done to
assist the Wine Industry in this State?
PRIM4E MINISTER: Yes, something is being done on this matter.
Mr Dunstan was in touch with Treasurers this year, my Treasurers,
and -there has been a thorough examination made of the situation of
the wine firms in South Australia. The position is not the same
with all of them, of course, nor is the seriousness of the situation
the same in all cases. But I gave Mr Dunstan a note on this last
night you know we were together at a function last night, a
-thousand people or so there at the Juventus Ball and so he knows
and he will convey the details of what we are going to do. But the
net position is thist the people who produce wine in South Australia
will be in no worse position than other business people in Australia
as regards their taxation liabilities. 
-3
QUESTION: What about unemployment in that industry?
PRIME MINISTER: Well this matter will deal with that. I mean that
there is no question that the wine industry in South Australia has
a very rosy future. There can be no question of that. This is one
of those industries where there -rural industries -where there is
not only a certain increase in domestic demand but there is also
very largely due to the new markets being sought by my Government,
which has made more trade agreements with other countries than any
previous Australia Government a s a result of that there is a very
much increased appreciation of and demand for Australian wines.
And as you would say here, that obviously means particularly
South Australian wines. anyway
QUESTION: Is it true that Mr Lynch has claimed/ that Mr Dunstan
asked you not to come to South Australia during the current.......
PRIME MINISTER: Mr Dunstan gave a very effective reply to that.
Nobody believes Mr Lynch; there was no basis in that at all. I
would certainly have been here more occasions if I hadn't had other
preoccupations. QUESTION: Do you believe your presence here during this weekend
in particular Sir,.
PRIME MINISTER: Were you there last night., did you see the
reception I got last night?
ANSWER: No.
PRIME MINISTER: Well it's a pity you didn't because we-were,
I--could say, raptur-usly received. Don Dunstan and I separately
and together.
QUESTION: You don't believe that Federal Issues will have any
part to play in this State election? 
-4
PRIME MINISTER: Indeed they will. The. whole issub is, well the
whole basis of this election, is the nature of the cooperation
between the Federal Government and a State Government. Now
certainly my Government has been very generous to South Australia.
But every other State could have got the same good deal from my
Government as South Australia has got under the Dunstan Government.
The fact is that the Dunstan Government had the nous to move
quickly, to take advantage of the laws which we have been able
to get through the Federal Parliament. And as a result South
Australia was the first of the States, the only Mainland State,
to take advantage of the proposals that my Government made to
relieve the State Governments of two inevitably growing burdens on
their budgets. One is the railways; there is no State which can
look forward to anything other than an increased -deficit on its
railways every year for the foreseeablea future. You just can't
run railways in State compartments, and'we offered to acquire the
railways of each of the States. Now South. Australia wa's the first,
so far the only, Mainland State to respond. And the other thing
of course is the hospital expenses; hospital services and health
services in general are going to be an increasing burden on every
State budget. The percentage of money which has to be spent on
health services, and in particular, hospital services, is going to
increase more than any other public expenditure, Federal or State.
And the proposal we made was that we would pay half the cost of
running the State hospitals if the people who entered the Standard
Wards were not charged fees; if there was no means test, there were
no payments and South Australia was the first of the Mainland States
to accept that.
Now the upshot of all this is that South Australia is the only
State whose books are in the blacks the other five are all in the red.
South Australia is the only State which balanced its budget in the
year just closed or has any hope of balancing its budget in the year
just entered upon 
QUESTION: Providing railway transfer goes thr ough.
PRIME MINISTER: of course. Well I have no doubt that it will
go through, because I can't believe tkat tle people of-. South
Australia would not return the Government which cooperated with
the Federal Parliament on this matter. My Governmen * t introduced
the South Australian Railways Bill, but if was passed by the
Parliament. Now in those circumstances I don't believe for one
minute that the people of South Australia would put in a Government
which wouldn't cooperate with Labor or Liberal federally, whereas
Dunstan, of course, he would cooperate with the Federal Government
if it was doing som~ thing for the advantage of South Australia.
And there can be no question, this is to the advantage of South
Australia. South Australia, the Dunstan Government, is the only
Government in Australia which can promise to remove any form of
taxation in this new financial year: the only one in Australia.
QUESTION: It's been suggested that it was probably a political
bribe for this election. What do you think of that?
PRIME MI1NISTER: The election wasn't due for another year. If one
was having bri-bes one would have it closer.
The promise
QUESTION: No/ I mean the promise of the $ 10 million, if the deal
goes through.
PRIME MINISTER: No. What do you mean? What $ 10 million?
QUESTION: If the, the announcement last week that $ 10 million would
be forthcoming.
PRIME MINISTER: No but it has been paid. The money has been paid
over. We kept our part of the bargain. That isfthe Federal Parliament
authorised the payment of a certain sum of money in the last financial
year. So we paid it.
QUESTION: The money from the 1975/ 76 financial
PRIME MINISTER: No the amount, but it is all in the Agreement. 
6
After all, there can't be much wrong with an Agreement which all
the elements in the Senate support. You have got this extraordinary
situation here where there are Liberals and. LM people who will vote
against something which is supported by their Federal colleagues.
And I don't think that anybody can doubt that this is, a bonanza forSoutl
Australia. Because South Australia, more than any of the Mainland
States, depends on good communications. But this is not just something
we have done suddenly. In January 1973 I wrote to Don Dunstan
offering to acquire the non-metropolitan Railways. Why we said
non-metropolitan was, in South Australia alone the metropolitan
railways can generally be separated from the others and there is
the new one along to Christies Beach the first electric
railway you have had in South Australia which obviously can be run
as an urban entity of its own.
Now this offer was made in January 1973 and we have been working
on it, our officials, and our Ministers, Geoff Virgo, Charlie Jones,
ever since: and we concluded the arrangement. Any other State
could come into it but, as a matter of fact Sir Henry Bolte and
Sir Robert Askin, before we came in offered their railways to the
Federal Government. When we came in Mr Hamer said no, I won't now.
And Sir Robert Askin was discussing it with us and about two or three
months ago, Mr Lewis, you know very macho said'The discussions are
off!" But we went on here. But you know in South Australia, you
more than anybody else depend on being able to deliver your consumer
goods to the other States or Territories and this is not only done
by the acquisition of the railways which will certainly transform
their capacity to equip, you know with signals and rolling stock
and so on. But we also have undertaken the Crystal Brook-railway,
the Adelaide to Crystal Brook, which means that there will no longer
be a break of gb ge between any of the State Capitals. When that
railway is finished -We are, of course, now totalling doing it it
means that any of your goods will be able to go without break of
gua. ge to Melbourne as they already can, but also without break of
gua. ge to Perth, which they can't now; to Sydney, which they can't
now; to Brisbane which they can't now. And furthermore we are
also from Tarcoola to Alice Springs, a couple of months ago I
inaugurated it, we are building the largest railway project which
has been undertaken in Australia for over half a century. And there 
-7
too it will be a standard gauge heavy duty railw; ay. And so you
will be able to'go without break of gauge and whatever the weather
from Adelaide to the Centre. Now this transforms the transport
position and immensely improves the economic position of this
State. You've got an excellent deal from my Government. And it
was always possible for the Australian Government to do these things.
Everybody knew they had to be done, but it waited for us to do it.
QUESTION: Sir in the wake of the Bass by-election -there has been
predictions there could be a marked swing against the Labor Government
in the coming elections. Does this concern you?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't think it-' s on: for two reasons, a
by-election is never as good for a Government as a General election;
that was a by-election and people took the opportunity to express
displeasure with the Government in the Parliament to which they were
electing a replacement member. But -this is a general election,
a general election, and I have no doubt whatever that the Dunstan
Government will be returned. well in the House of Assembly and'
it will similarly at last get a majority in the Legislative Council.
This is the first Legislative Council election where everybody will
have a vote, man and woman, 18 and over and I have no doubt that
they will rejoice in exercising the fran-chise for this historic
chamber. QUESTION: Mr Whitlam, -taken that the Federal issues will play a
part in this State election, why won't inflation, unemployment and
high interest rates effect the votes of these South Australi ans?
PRIME MINISTER: Well in most things there can be nothing said
against the Dunstan Government in any way at all. As a matter of
fact the Dunstan Government has achieved, by cooperation with the
Federal Government, much lower land prices than you will get i; n
any Mainland capital. I think it is $ 26 million that my Government
paid to the Dunstan Government in 1974/ 75 to acquire land to be
developed and subdivided and sold at cost. You know you have the
cheapest urban land in any Mainland capital and this has been
brought about because the Dunstan Government accepted the offer 
-8
made by my Government. I'm not saying that this is any favoritism
to South Australia because we would have had to do the same to any
State Government which accepted the offer. Because when we
introduce legislation of this character it is of universal application
through Australia. But the Dunstan Government was the first one on
the mainland to accept the proposals and you've benefited from it.
Now this is a very clear example~ despite all the carping of th. e
Liberals and so on, this didn't have to go through the State
Parliament. It just had to be done by an agreement between the
Premier and the Prime Minister and of course, we have done that.
It went through the Federal Parliament, it couldn't be frustrated
by the State Parliament and Legislative Council and accordingly
the Premier and I were able to consummate the arrangements.
Now if you are worried about inflation, the State Governmenthere has
done more to restrain it than any State Government in Australia.
Furthermore they do have some regulationoprices here, the only State
Government that does, and they are, when this Bill goes throughin
the unusual position of being able to remove a tax, the petrol tax.
The only Government in Australia which will be able to remove a tax.
QUESTION: If South Australians want to lodge a national vote in
protest against inflation and unemployment, don't you -think they
could do so at this election?
PRIME MINISTER: They would be very foolish to take this opportunity
of getting rid of a Government which has/ all a State Government can
do in these matters. done
QUESTION: Prime Minister do you think the loans business has hurt
Labor in this State compaign and will a special sitting of Parliament
help? PRIME MINISTER: The special sitting will undoubtedly help because
the Liberals will then have to produce anything they have and justif
it. They can't just hide behind a press campaign when the alme
sits'they'll have to put up and shut up. 
9-
QUESTION: Mr Fraser says he would like to see the documents before
Parliament sits. Will you make these available to him?
PRIME MINISTER: I am going to propose to him later in the day that
we should give him the documents that my colleagues and I propose
to table and that he should give me the documents that he and those
behind him propose to table.
QUESTION: Sir, the last time Parliament was called together in
such circumstances. I blieve, was in World War II during a national
crisis. Do you regard this as a major crisis?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no I have no more to say on this.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlan, just on that issue if I can.
PRIME MINISTER: No not on that issue.
QUESTION: There was a development yesterday after your news
conference in Sydney regarding the recalling of the Senate.
PRIM1E MINISTER: No, no I have got no comment to make.
QUESTION: The whole thing about South Australia seems to be on
the stability of Govern~ nent. Do you think a coalition Government
formied from the Opposition Parties would bring stability of Goverm~ ent?
PRIME MINISTER: There is no chance. I gather that what the
non-Labor elements in South Australia are putting up is an
extraordinary amalgam of Liberal, Liberal Movement and National
Country Party. This is, of course, a recipe not only for obstruction
to the Federal Government but confusion within the State. I don't
suppose that anybody would really want to wish on South Australia
the sort of collaboration between Liberal and National Country
Party that occurred a month ago in Western Australia. Sir Charleos
Court,, Liberal Premier was deserted and blackmailed by the National
Country Party Ministers, his Deputy Premier and the other Ministers.
And they left the Ministry and Mr Bjelke-Petersen had to come over
and plead with him and so on and then they got a couple of new members 
S-10
to patch things up. This sort of thing made a farce of State
Government in Western Australia. Similarly in Queensland you have
a situation because of a gross malapportionment of electorates there
are more National Country Party members of the Legislative Assembly
than Liberal Members although the Liberal Party gets many more votes than
the National Country Party does at State elections there. And there
you've had this prolonged wrangle over Medibank Hospital Scheme,
Queensland's hospitals were free but they were the most crowded,
the longest waiting list, the worst equipped in Australia. And you
had the Deputy Premier, the Treasurer, the Leader of the Liberal
Party, you had the Attorney-General, a member of the Liberal Party;
you had the Minister for Health, a member of the Liberal Partya11
trying for months to get the benefits for Queensland hospitals of
the Medibank hospital proposals. And Mr Bjelke-Petersen conducted
. a vendetta within the Government Parties,. and bet een them. I was discussed
in their Party rooms, it was then put to the Cabinet, the Cabinet
couldn't make up its mind. It went back to the Party Rooms, they
couldn't make up their minds; it went to the Cabinet again and
finally Bjelke-Petersen was done.
Now is that the soft of thing you want in South Australia? In
Queensland they're at last wanting to enter Medibank. Though instead
of entering it on the ist July they won't be able to enter it for
a few weeks vet: they dragged the chain. And this
was because of a w-ang-Ie between Liberals and Country Party. Now is
that the sort of thing you want to import into South Australia South
Australian politics has been disrupted sufficiently by the wrangle
within the Liberal Party, the creation of the Liberal Movement
arising from the quite monstrous attempt by the Liberal Party to
preserve the electoral boundaries for the House of Assembly and
when they lost their numbers in the House of Assembly then wanting
to preserve a Legislative Council on monstous electoral boundaries
and with a restricted franchise to exercise a veto over initiatives
from the Government in the House of Assembly.
Now that is the only good Government that you've been able to achieve
in South Australia is under Labor which gives you a united Government
in its own right, in the House of Assembly, and as a result of these
first universal elections for the Legislative Council will be able 
11
to do so there as well. And the contrast with Western Australia
a month ago and with Queensland up to a week ago shows that you would
be foolish indeed to replace a constructive united Government, one
that knows when and how to cooperate with the Federal Government, with
a coalition ratbag of conservative elements who where they have been
represented in State Parliaments have not been able to work together
between themselves and not been able to work with the Federal
Government. QUESTION: On that back tax, do you propose to drop that?
PRIME MINISTE I have given the note to Mr Dunstan and he will
be communicating this. You were not here earlier on.
QUESTION: The Federal opposition has made itcl ear that itwi* ll
drop that tax.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I have given it to Mr Dunstan and he will
know how to conixunicate with this. He has been in touch with us for
-quite some months on this; we have made the survey and I have told him
what we are proposing to do and my Treasurer gave me this note for
Mr Dunstan which I gave him last night. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIfME MINISTER,
THE HON, E. G. WHITLAM, MP,
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW PRINCIPAL OFFICE IN VICTORIA
OF THE COMOi'OWEALTHl BAINKING CORPORATION
MELBOURNE, 8 JULY 1975 ' 1a
* 1
IT IS A VERY GREAT HONOUR TO BE OPENING
THIS SPLENDID NEW BUILDING OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS IN
VICTORIA. I HAVE ALWAYS KNOWN THAT MELBOURNE WAS THE GREAT
FINANCIAL AND BANKING CAPITAL OF AUSTRALIA, AT LEAST
THAT'S WHAT THEY SAY IN MELBOURNE, AND AS YOU KNOW.
IN ANY SORT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTION I LIKE TO GET WITH
THE STRENGTH, OF COURSE MELBOURNE DOESN'T HAVE EVERYTHING
-HER OWN WAY BECAUSE THREE OF THE GREAT BANKS OF AUSTRALIA
INCLUDING THE BIGGEST AND THE OLDEST HAVE THEIR
HEADQUARTERS IN SYDNEY. NEVERTHELESS THERE ARE THREE
SOTHER BANKS WIjTH THEIR HEADQUARTERS IN MELBOURNE.
So THE SCORE IS PRACTICALLY EVEN. CERTAINLY
THIS EXCELLENT EDIFICE, THIS MOST IMPOSING AND GRACEFUL
STRUCTURE, WILL MARK A NEW CHAPTER IN THE LONG
AND SUCCESSFUL HISTORY OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS OF
AUSTRALIA, '' r 
2a
IT WAS HERE-IN COLLINS STREET, NOT FAR
FROM THIS SITE, THAT THE COMMONWEALTH BANK OPENED ITS
FIRST OFFICE INj 1912., THAT WAS THE BEGINNING OF A
MAGNIFICENT VENTURE, A SUPERB EXAMPLE OF COMPETITIVE
PUBLIC ENTERPRISE THAT HAS BROUGHT ENORMOUS BENEFITS
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. A LABOR GOVERNMENT THE
GOVERNMENT LED BY* ANDREW FISHER -INTRODUCED THE COMMONWEALTH
BANK BILL IN NOVEMBER 1911. LET ME QUOTE SOME WORDS FROM
FISHER'S SPEECH: " A NATIONAL BANK IS A NECESSITY.* IT WILL
DO THE GOVERNMENT' S BUSINESS HERE AND IN,
LONDON-BETTER THAN ANY OTHER BANK COULD DO
IT. TIME AND EXPERIENCE WIL L SHOW HOW ITS
FUNCTIONS MAY BE EXTENDED. WE CAN REST
ASSURED THAT IF THIS PROPOSAL, WHICH IS NEW
IN MANY IMPORTANT FEATURES, IS A SUCCESS,
ALL PARTIES WILL ULTIMATELY LAY CLAIM
TO A SHARE OF THE HONOUR OF HAVING BROUGHT
IT INTO EXISTENCE. earn 
3.
FISHER SPOKE WIFH GREAT FORESIGHT OF THE
WAY fHE B A KS' FUNCTIONS COULD BE EXTENDED. CERTAINLY,
1' iIT1 Ox WITHOIJT THE ASSISTANCE OF GOVERNMENTS, THE
BANKS' ACTIVITIES HAVE EX" PANDED. IN 1949 THERE WERE
18 PRIVATE TRADING BANKS IN AUSTRALIA TODAY THERE
ARE 13, INCLUDING THE 7 MAJOR ONES. WHEN THE LIBERALS
CAME TO OFFICE THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS' TRADING BUSINESS
WAS ONE OF THE SMALLEST OF THE AUSTRALIAN BANKS;
WHEN THEY LEFT OFFICE IT WAS THE SECOND LARGEST. THE
SAVINGS BANK IS AUSTRALIA'S BIGGEST INSTITUTIONAL LENDER
FOR HOUSING, SINCE 1964 IT HAS ADVANCED MORE THAN
$ 2000 MILLION TO FINANCE HOMES FOR MORE THAN 300,000
AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES, LAST YEAR IT HAD MORE THAN
7 MILLION ACTIVE . ACCOUNTS WITH A TURNOVER IN TRANSACTIONS
OF MORE THAN $ 16,000 MILLION. THERE IS NO NEED FOR ME
TO WEARY YOU WITH LARGE FIGURES. YOU WILL HEAR ENOUGH
OF THEM TOMORROW. THE POINT IS SIMPLY THAT THE COMMONWEALTH
BANK HAS BECOME THE MOST POPULAR, THE MOST TRUSTED,
THE MOST GENEROUS OF ALL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
/ 4 
THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IT IS TIME
TO DO NOW WHAT ANDREW FISHER ENVISAGED AND EXTEND THE BANK'S
FUNCTIONS TO NEW FIELDS. IT HAS ALWAYS BEEN THE
GOVERNMENT'S POLICY TO ' INCREASE THE COMPETITIVENESS OF
THE COMMONWEALTH BANKING CORPORATION. THROUGHOUT ITS
0 HISTORY THE BANK HAS NOT BEEN PERMITTED TO ENTER THE
HIRE PURCHASE OR FINANCE FIELD. ITS COMPETITORS HAVE
o BEEN UNDER NO SUCH RESTRAINT. MANY OF THEM ESTABLISHED*
H IRE PURCHASE INTERESTS IN THE 1950' s. WE SHALL ALLOW
THE COMMONWEALTH BANKTT O JOIN THE PRIVATE TRADING BANKS
IN AFFORDING HIRE PURCHASE-SERVICES. THIS MATTER HAS BEEN
UNDER STUDY BY THE CORPORATION AND THE GOVERNMENT FOR
SOME TIME# THE GOVERNMENT AND THE BOARD OF THE
0CORPORATION HAVE NOW AGREED THAT COMMONWEALTH BANKS
SHOULD ESTABLISH A FINANCE COMPANY SUBSIDIARY TO BE
OWNED JOINTLY BY THE COMMONWEALTH SAVINGS BANK AND THE
COMMONWEALTH TRADING BANK. THE COMPANY WILL BE IN
OPERATION BEFORE THE END OF THE YEAR. I 
THE COMPANY WILL BE PROVIDING SERVICES
SIMILAR TO THOSE NORMALLY AVAILABLE FROM FINANCE
COMPANIES, INCLUDING HIRE PURCHASE, PERSONAL LOANS,
LEASE FINANCING AND COMMERCIAL LENDING. IT WILL ENABLE
THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS TO MATCH SERVICES PROVIDED BY
D OTHER BANKS THROUGH THEIR AFFILIATED FINANCE. COMPANIES
AND PROMOTE FURTHER COMPETITION IN THE BANKING AND
3FINANCE SECTORS1 SHOULD ADD THAT THE PROPOSED FINA NCE
COMPANY WILL HAVE NO ADVANTAGES IN RESPECT TO TAXATION
AND OPERATIONAL ASPECTS COMPARED WITH OTHER BANK-AFFILIATED
FINANCE COMPANIES, IT WILL COMPETE ON AN EQUAL BASIS.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMPANY SHOWS THE. GOVERNMENT'S
DETERMINATION THAT THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS SHOULD NOT BE AT
A DISADVANTAGE COMPARED WITH THE OTHER BANKS AND SHOULD
MATCH THE SERVICES OF OTHER BANKS. IT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S
O INTENTION THAT ALL BANK CUSTOMERS SHOULD RECEIVE ADEQUATE
AND COMPREHENSIVE SERVICES AT REASONABLE COST. THE
COMMONWEALTH BANKS PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE PROCESS,
IN THIS CONTEXT, I REMIND YOU OF THE COMMONWEALTH
BANKING CORPORATION'S ANNOUNCEMENT IN MAY THAT IT COULD
ENTER THE TRAVEL BUSINESS, ACQUIRE TRAVEL AGENCIES, AND
PROVIDE FULL TRAVEL SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS. 



PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
9 JULY 1975
WHEN I CALLED THE PARLIAMENT TOGETHER I CHALLENGED
THE OPPOSITION, TO PUT UP OR SHUT UP. THEY HAVE FAILED
ON BOTH COUNTS, THE OPPOSITION'S CASE HAS BEEN REVEALED
AS UTTERLY THREADBARE, UTTERLY WITHOUT SUBSTANCE,
NOT ONLY DID THEY FAIL TO SUBSTANTIATE ANY SPECIFIC
CHARGE AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR ANY MINISTER; THEY
FAILED TO MAKE ANY SPECIFIC CHARGE, I LISTENED CAREFULLY
TO MR FRASER. HE ASKED A SERIES OF VAGUE, EMOTIVE QUESTIONS,
: HEWOULDN'T LEND HIS NAME HE WOULDN'T GO ON THE RECORD
. WITH ONE SPECIFIC, PRECISE ACCUSATION OF ILLEGALITY OR
:: IMPROPRIETY. HE HID BEHIND THE PRESS. HE HID BEHIND
A BARRAGE OF SMEARS AND GENERALISATIONS. HE DEMANDED
13bED
INQUIRIES AND ROYAL COMMISSIONS, HIS LINE &amp; 4z? DOWN
TO THIS: " I'VE MADE A WHOLE LOT OF ACCUSATIONS ABOUT
SCANDALS AND BREACHES OF THE LAW. I HAVEN'T GOT A SHRED
OF EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT THEM, BUT YOU HOLD A ROYAL
COMMN, S M.. A
COMMISSION AND SOMETHING MAY TURN UP," 
WELL NOTHING WILL TURN UP NOTHING CAN TURN UP
BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOTHING TO HIDE, WE SOUGHT
TO BORROW MONEY OVERSEAS FOR A NUMBER OF SPECIFIC AND
NECESSARY PURPOSES. I OUTLINEDTHOSE PURPOSES TODAY;
THEY HAD ALREADY BEEN GIVEN IN PARLIAMENT. WE NEEDED
CAPITAL ON A LARGE SCALE AND MAKE NO MISTAKE, WE STILL
NEED CAPITAL TO DEVELOP OUR ENERGY RESOURCES AND KEEP
THOSE RESOURCES IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS. THOSE OBJECTIVES
. WERE PROPER AND THE MEANS WERE PROPER,
I SHOWED THAT AT NO TIME WAS PARLIAMENT
SMISLED ABOUT THE NATURE, SIZE OR SOURCE OF OUR LOAN
PROPOSALS, THE PROPOSAL WAS ECONOMICALLY SOUND,
LEGAL ADICE WAS OBTAINED FROM THE . GOVERNMENT'S LEGAL
ADVISERS BEFORE THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS AND ENERGY WAS
' GIVEN AUTHORITY TO PROCEED WITH NEGOTIATIONS FOR THE LOAN,
AUSTRALIA AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT Ws PROTECTED
AT ALL POINTS IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROPOSED BORROWING,
PROPER CHECKS WERE MADE ON THE BONA FIDES OF THE
INTERMEDIARY INVOLVED, NOT A CENT HAS BEEN PAID OR
S WILL BE PAID OR IS LIABLE TO BE PAID TO THE INTERMEDIARY.
THERE HAS BEEN NO IMPROPRIETY. THERE HAVE BEEN NO
BREACHES OF THE LAW. UNDER THIS GOVERNMENT AUSTRALIA HAS
ACHIEVED THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE STATUS A TRIPLE-A RATING
SAS AN INTERNATIONAL BORROWER, THAT STATUS REMAINS UNCHANGED,
If L 



4 IL
FIJIEJIU-! ISTER' Q SII\ TEEEli
flo SQE ED MT IVES -9 JU LY 1975
( CHECKED AGAINST DAILY HANSARD)
THIS HOUSE HAS BEEN RECALLED SO THAT ONCE AND FOR ALL THE
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA MAY HEAR AND JUDGE ANY ALLEGATIONS OF
IMPROPRIETY, ILLEGALITY, . ALPRACTICE OR MALFEASANCE AGAINST
THE GOVERNMENT OR ANY MINISTER. IN ALL THE WELTER OF
INFORMATION AND MISINFORMATION OF THE PAST TWO WEEKS, IN ALL
THE ORGY OF TRIVIA DRUMMED UP AS INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING.-
ONE CLEAR FACT EMERGES: NO RESPONSIBLE PERSON HAS EXPRESSLY
OR DIRECTLY MADE ANY SPECIFIC CHARGE OF IMPROPRIETY, OF
ILLEGAL OR CORRUPT CONDUCT ON THE PART OF my GOVERNMENT,
MYSELF OR ANY INDIVIDUAL MINISTER. INNUENDO, INSINUATION,
-THE SNEER,. THE SMEAR, CERTAINLY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
MR MALCOLM FRASER AND HIS DEPUTY, WILLING TO WOUND YET
LAFRAID TO STRIKE, HAVE PROVED ADEPT AT IT; BUT NO SPECIFIC
CHARGES. IF SUCH CHARGES ARE TO BE MADE, THIS IS THE PLACE
TO MAKE THEM. Now. IS THE TIME TO MAKE THEM. Now IS THE.
TIME TO PUT UP OR SHUT UPS
2. THE PRIVILEGES OF THIS PARLIAMENT FULLY PROTECT
MEMBERS WHO BELIEVE THAT THEIR INFORMATION, EVEN PARTIAL
INFORMATION, EVEN SUSPECT INFORMATION, WOULD WARRANT MAKING
SPECIFIC CHARGES OF IMPROPRIETY AGAINST MINISTERS WHICH THE
LAWS OF DEFAMATION MIGHT RENDER DANGEROUS IF MADE OUTSIDE.
HERE, ALLEGATIONS CAN BE MADE, PERSONS CAN BE NAMED AND
DOCUMENTS CAN BE PRODUCED WITH IMPUNITY AND IMMUNITY. IT IS 
29
NOT ONLY A PRIVILEGE WHICH PARLIAMENT BESTOWS BUT A
RESPONSIBILITY WHICH IT IMPOSES. THROUGH THIS PARLIAMENT,
MINISTERS ARE RESPONSIBLE TO THE PEOPLE, BUT AN EQUAL
RESPONSIBILITY RESTS WITH OPPOSITION MEMBERS, TO PRODUCE
THEIR INFORMATION, IF THEY HAVE ANY, TO FORMULATE THEIR
CHARGES, ! F THEY HAVE ANY. THIS IS THE PLACE TO MAKE THEM;
THIS THE PLACE WHERE THEY SHALL BE ANSWERED. THE
INQUISITION BY INNUENDO IS OVER. THIS IS THE TRIBUNAL IN
WHICH THE OPPOSITION AS MUCH AS THE GOVERNMENT, WILL BE
JUDGED -IN THE HIGHEST COURT, BY THE JURY OF THE PEOPLE.
WE ARE ALL ON TRIAL NOW.
3. THERE IS A SPECIAL AND O VERRIDING REASON WHY THIS
PARLIAMENT IS THE PROPER PLACEI FOR IT IS UPON THE VERY
QUESTION OF PROPER PARLIAMENTARY CONDUCT THAT THE ONE
AUTHENTIC EVENT IN A WEEK OF SQUALID INTRIGUE TURNED NOT
THE. PSEUDO EVENTS OF THE MEDIA BUT THE ONE DEFINITE EVENTIP
TREMENDOUS IN THE LIFE OF A PARTY, OF A NATION, SUPREMELY
TRAGIC IN THE LIFE OF A MAN. ON 2 JULY, I ADVISED THE
GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO TERMINATE THE COMMISSION OF THE MINISTER
FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION. As DOCUMENTS WHICH I
MADE PUBLIC ON 2 JULY MAKE CLEAR, I TOOK THAT DECISION AND
WAS OBLIGED TO TAKE THAT DECISION ON TWO GROUNDS. THEY WERE
THE SOLE GROUNDS FOR THAT DECISION. FIRST, THERE WAS A
TOTAL DISCREPANCY BETWEEN A REPLY GIVEN ON LjJUNE AND A
LETTER WRITTEN ON 7 MARCH 1975, SECONDLY, REPORTED 
33
ACTIVITIES BY A MINISTERIAL OFFICER, A GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE,
WOULD MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR HIM TO MAKE A PROFIT FROM HIS
POSITION ON HIS MINISTER'S STAFF. I RECEIVED NO
SATISFACTORY EXPLANATION FOR THESE ACTIVITIES$
4. THE EXPLANATIO1N I SOUGHT FROM THE MINISTER DID NOT
CONCERN THE PROPRIETY OR PRUDENCE CF ANY ACTIVITIES HE HAD
ENTERED INTO As TREASURER CONCERNING PETRODOLLAR LOAN
RAISINGS. EMPHASISE THIS TO DRAW THE CONTRAST BETWEEN MY
DECISION TO TRANSFER HIM FROM THE TREASURY To ENVIRONMENT ON
6 JUNE AND MY DECISION TO ADVISE THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO
TERMINATE HIS COMMISSION. THE FIRST DECISION SPRANG FROM MY
BELIEF IN THE UNWISDOM OF HIS ACTION.
IN THE CASE OF HIS DISMISSAL, THE ISSUE WAS VERY
PRECISE; THE STANDARDS WHICH THIS GOVERNMENT SETS AND UPON
WHICH IINSIST, WERE NOT UPHELD. THE PERSONAL INTEGRITY OF
MY COLLEAGUE WAS NOT AN ISSUE AND IS NOT IN DOUBT. THE
FAULT WAS GRIEVOUS, BUT IT LIES NOT IN HIS INTEGRITY OR
REPUTATION AS A MAN OF HONOUR, HE HAS RENDERED REM4ARKABLE
SERVICE TO HIS PARTY AND THE NATION. BUT THE LAPSE FROM THE
STANDARDS WHICH THIS PRIME MINISTER AT LEAST, AND THIS
GOVERNMENT AT LEAST, INSISTS UPON, LEFT ME WITH NO CHOICE.-
AND IN THIS LIES THE SUPREME IRONY OF THE PRESENT
OCCASION. THE DISMISSAL OF A DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER, FOR
WHATEVER REASON, CANNOT BUT BE DAMAGING TO ANY GOVERNMENT.-
THIS DISMISSAL OF A DEPUTY LEADER, FROM THE MINISTRY,
PARTICULARLY ONE HELD IN THE REGARD -AFFECTION -OF HIS
PARTY IN AND OUT OF PARLIAMENT AS IS THE HONOURABLE MIEMBER
FOR LALOR, IS A TRAGEDY FOR ALL THE PARTY, NOT LEAST ITS
LEADER. THE COURSE WAS TAKEN BECAUSE IT HAD TO BE TAKEN.-
BECAUSE OF STANDARDS, BECAUSE OF PARLIAMENTARY PROPRIETY.
7. YET THE GOVERNMENT AND PARTY WHICH HAS SET FOR
ITSELF THESE STANDARDS AND WHICH HAS SHOWN IN ACTION HOW
SWIFT, COMPLETE, CONDIGN IS THE PENALTY FOR ANY LAPSE FROM
THEM, IS AT THE SAME TIME BEING SMEARED FOR IMPROPER
CONDUCT. THE HOUSE CAN JUDGE THESE MATTERS FOR ITSELF.
ASK-LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO PRESENT PAPERS RELATED TO OVERSEAS
LOAN NEGOTIATIONS WITH MR GEORGE HARRIS AND TO NOTE A MOTION
TO AUTHORIZE THE PUBLICATION OF THE PAPERS.
( WHEN LEAVE GRANTED)
8. PRESENT THE FOLLOWING PAPERS:.
LETTERS FROM THE PRIME MINISTER AND REPLIES TO HIM
AND A MEMORANDUM FROM THE SOLICITOR GENERAL COMMENTING ON
THOSE REPLIES'ARISING FROM THE LETTER TO MR HARRIS OF
MARCH AND THE 2 LETTERS TO HIM OF 15 APRIL AND CABLES AND
LETTERS ARISING FROM THE LETTER TO MR HARz&amp; OF 7 MARCH I
MOVE: 
A. THAT THIS HOUSE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PROVISIONS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY PAPERS ACT.
1908-J. 974, AUTIIOSISES THE PUBLICATION OF
PAPERS RELATING. TO OVERSEAS LOAN NEGOTIATIONS
PRESENTED TO THE HOUSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THIS DAY.
( WHEN LEAVE GRANTED, MOVE MOTION PROVIDED BY THE CLERK)
IASK LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO HAVE INCORPORATED IN
HANSARD THE TEXTS OF THE PAPERS WHICH IHAVE JUST PRESENTED.
9. STATEMENTS MADE IN THIS HOUSE ARE CENTRAL TO ANY
EXAMINATION OF THE MATTER NOW BEFORE THE HOUSE -THE
OVERSEAS BORROWINGS SOUGHT BY THIS GOVERNMENT. THE BASIC
* FACTS HAVE BEEN STATED IN THIS PARLIAMENT IN ANSWERS TO
QUESTIONS, NONE OF THE SO-CALLED REVELATIONS, NONE OF THE
PHOTOSTATS, THE P URCHASED OR P URLOINED DOC UMENTS, NONE OF
TELEAKS FROM THE DISAFFECTED OR DISLOYAL, ALTER BASIC
FACTS WHICH HAVE BEEN WELL KNOWN FOR FIVE MONTHS.
UNTIL WE RECALLED THE PARLIAMENT FOR THIS MATTER,
MEMBERS-OF THE OPPOSITION RELIED ON THE PRESS TO CREATE AN
IMPRESSION OF NEW AND NEVER-ENDING REVELATIONS, WHEN THE
PARLIAMENT WAS SITTING THEY INITIATED NOTHING, ALTHOUGH THE
NATURE AND AMOUNT OF THE PROPOSED LOAN. HAD BEEN PUBLIC 
6.
KNOWLEDGE FROM THE SECOND WEEK OF FEBRUARY, WHEN THE SESSION
BEGAN. ON NO OCCASION DID THE OPPOSITIO01 MOVE A SPECIFIC
MOTION DEALING WITH OVERSEAS LOAN BORROWINGS, NOT UNTIL. THE
LAST DAY OF SITTING DID IT MOVE FOR THE SUSPENSION OF
STANDING ORDERS.
11. FOR FOUR MONTHS, THEY TOOK NO OPPORTUNITY TO RAISE
THE MATTER ON THE ADJOlURNMENT OR BY WAY OF AN URGENCY
MOTION*.* IT REFUSED MY REPEATED I NVITATIONS TO PLACE
QUESTIONS ON NOTICE. IT RELIED UPON NEWSPAPERS TO CREATE AN
ATMOSPHERE, AND YET AT THE END OF IT ALL, THE RESEARCH TEAM
OF JOURNALISTS OF THE MELBOURNE AGE, THE PAPER WHICH HAD
BEEN MOST ACTIVE IN THE MATTER, HAD TO CONCEDE THE BASIC
FACT REMAINED AS I STATED IT IN THE PARLIAMENT. IN
YESTERDAY's AGE MR PETER COLE-ADAMS WROTE FROM LONDON:
AS FAR AS WE KNOW AUSTRALI A HAS NOT IN FACT
LOST ANY MONEY AS A RESULT OF THE AFFAIR.."
ICOULD HAVE SAVED THE AGE 8,000 POUNDS STERLING BECAUSE ON
26 MAY I TOLD THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSIT ION:
" THERE HAS BEEN A VERY GREAT DEAL OF SPECULATION
ABOUT THIS. LET ME NAIL IT IMMEDIATELY. NOT A
CENT HAS BEEN PAID TO THE GENTLEMAN, NOT A CENT
HAS TO BE PAID TO THE GENTLEMAN. NOT A CENT WILL
BE PAID TO THE GENTLEMAN." 
7.
THE AGE WILL NOT QUERY THEM IT WILL JUST CONDEMN, BEHIND
THAT FACT LIE ALL THE OTHER BASIC FACTS WHICH THERE HAS
NEVER BEEN THE SLIGHTEST ATTEMPT To CONCEAL. THEY ARE
THESE: SINCE 1~ 4 DECEMBER 1974 THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS AND
ENERGY MR CONNOR HAD EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO BORROW
UP TO $ US10,00 MILLION AND TO DETERMINE ON BEHALF OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE
BORROWING. THE MINISTER WAS ALSO AUTHORISED TO SIGN AND
DELIVER PROMISSORY NOTES FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE BORROW] NGI
OR TO AUTHORISE ANY OTHER PERSON IN WRITING TO SIGN AND
* DELIVER THE PROMISSORY NOTES. THAT AUTHORITY WAS REVOKED ON
7 JANUARY 1975 SINCE IT HAD NOT BEEN USED AND IT CINFLICTED
WITH A DEUTSCHMARK LOAN THEN PENDING# ON 28 JANUARY 1975
THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AUTHORISED THE MINISTER TO RAISE A
LOAN NOT EXCEEDING $ US2, OOO MILLION. THE AUTHORITY WAS
REVOKED ON 20 MAY 1975 SINCE NEGOTIATIONS WERE IN TRAIN FOR
A BORROWING OF $ US100 MILLION THROUGH MORGAN STANLEY CO,
INCORPORATED OF NEW YORK. EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AUTHORITIES ARE
-USUALLY SOUGHT ONLY WHEN A LOAN MATTER APPROACHES FINALITY.
THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT NEGOTIATIONS OR DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
POSSIBIL ITIES ARE PRECLUDED WITHOUT EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
AUTHORITY. 12. THE PURPOSE OF THE BORROWINGS, AS SET OUT IN THE
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDA FOR THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, WAS TO MEET
THE NEEDS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR ' SUBSTANTIAL SUMS
OF NONEQUITY CAPITAL FROM ABROAD FOR TEMPORARY PURPOSES, 
8.
AMONGST OTHER THINGS TO DEAL WITH EXIGENCIES ARISING OUT OF
THE CURRENT WORLD SITUATION AND THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
CRISIS, TO STRENGTHEN AUSTRALIA'S EXTERNAL FINANCIAL
POSITION, TO PROVIDE IMMEDIATE PROTECTION FOR AUSTRALIA' S
SUPPLIES OF MINERALS AND ENERGY AND TO DEAL WITH CURRENT
AND IMMEDIATELY FORESEEABLE UNEMPLOYMENT IN AUSTRALIA'
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INTENDED TO CARRY OUT THESE
PURPOSES BY SPENDING THE BORROWED MONEYS ON DEVELOPMENT OF
THE NATION IS EN ERGY RESOURCES. AT MY PRESS CONFERENCE
ON 10 JUNE 1975 1 SAID THAT HENCEFORTH NO PERSON WILL HAVE
ANY AUTHORITY TO DO ANYTHING IN RELATION TO BORROWINGS
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, UNLESS IT IS DONE WITH THE
TREASURER'IS AUTHORITY.
13, THESE ARE THE BASIC FACTS. THE-FUNDAMENTAL FACTS
OF THE AUTHORISATION4S TO THE MINISTER; FIRST TO RAISE UP TO
0 US4" AMI# LLIoONo 0AN0D THEN-TO . RA. ISE NO T MORE THAN $ US2; 000
MILLION, WERE CONFIRMED BY THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS AND
0ENERGY IN PARLIAMENT ON 23 APRIL IN RESPONSE TO A QUESTION
FROM THE DEPUTY LEADER O F THE OPPOS. ITI~ ON',* M'R LYNCH',' FROM. THE
VERY OUTSET, AS EARLY AS 13 FEBRUARY -IN THIS HOUSE, ON
THIS MATTER -IFREELY ACKNOWLEDGED THAT OPEN GOVERNMENT DID
NOT AND SHOULD NOT APPLY TO TWO FINANCIAL MATTERS -OVERSEAS
BORROWINGS AND THE VALUE OF THE CURRENCY. THE REAL
FINANCIAL UNORTHODOXY, THE REAL BREACH OF CONVENTION, LIES
WITH THOSE WHO WOULD ASSERT THAT A RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT
SHOULD NOT STR IVE TO PRESERVE CONFIDENTIALITY IN LOAN
NEGOTIATIONS, 
9.
14L. WHAT WERE THEf-AL" INTERNATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD TO CONFRONT? IN 1973 AND 1974
ERUPTIONS OF UNPRECEDENTED MAGNITUDE SHOOK THE FINANCIAL
WORLD. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS SURPLUSES FROM THE SALE OF OIL
BEGAN TO ACCUMULATE IN ENORMOUS QUANTITIES IN THE
ORGANIZATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES WORLD,
PRINCIPALLY IN THE MIDDLE EAST. SURPLUSES AMOUNTING TO NO
C) LESS THAN $ US55 BILLION TO $ US6O BILLION ARE BELIEVED TO
HAVE ACCUMULATED IN THIS WAY IN 1974 ALONE. THIS HUGE SHIFT
IN THE LOCATION OF CAPITAL GREATLY ALTERED THE SITUATION OF
THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS OF NEW YORK AND LONDON WHICH HAD
TRADITIONALLY DOMINATED THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL WORLD.
THIS IS NOT TO SAY, OF COURSE, THAT THEY HAVE NOT STRUGGLED
TO MAINTAIN THEIR HOLD ON INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL BUSINESS.
LIKE THE REST OF US, HOWEVER, THEY HAVE HAD TO DEPEND ON THE
OPEC COUNTRIES, THE MIDDLE EAST, FOR FUNDS.
LET ME POINT OUT THAT THERE HAVE BEEN SOME VERY
LARGE BORROWINGS OF PETRODOLLARS, SINCE THE OPEC-
* SURPLUSES BEGAN TO ACCUMULATE A YEAR AND A HALF AGO.
IN AUGUST 19714 THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND RAISED
$ US3,11 BILLION, AND THE WORLD BANK HAS MADE A SERIES OF
QUITE LARG BORROWINGS, WE ALSO ARE AWARE OF INDIVIDUAL
BORROWINGS OF $ US1 BILLION OR MORE BY THE UNITED
KINGDOM,' JAPAN AND FRANCE.' BUT IF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SEEKS IT.-THIS IS SINISTER, THIS IS A SCANDAL. THIS
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS INTERESTED IN OBTAINING LOANS FROM 
THAT SOURCE, WE WERE LAST YEAR AND WE STILL ARE. W4E MAKE
NO APOLOGIES FOR IT. IT IS ABSURD TO SUGGEST THAT THIS
GOVERNMENT OR ANY FUTURE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE ABLE
TO IGNORE THIS POTENTIAL SOURCE. No GOVERNMENT WILL. BE
ABLE TO FLY IN THE FACE OF ECONOMIC REALITY FOR THE REST OF
THIS CENTURY.
16. SOURCES OF OVERSEAS LOAN DO CHANGES TODAY'S
UNCONVENTIONAL SOURCES ARE TOMORROW'I S TRADITION4AL SOURCES.
K WHENEVER POSSIBLE. PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS HAVE
READILY TURNED TO NEW SOURCES, EVEN THOUGH AT TIMES THERE
HAS BEEN RESISTANCE AND CRITICISM, AT HOME AND ABROADS IN
THE 190O'S AND 1930' s AUSTRALIA BORROWED MAINLY ON* THE*
LONDON MARKET. l AFTER THE WAR WE BEGAN TO LOOK MUCH MORE TO
THE UNITED STATES AND SWISS MARKETS, AND EVEN TO CANADA.
THEN, WITH THE EFFECTIVE CLOSURE OF THE UNITED STATES
CAPITAL MARKET AS A RESULT OF THE INTRODUCTION OF THE
INTEREST EQUALISATION TAX IN 1963, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT TURNED To EUROCURRENCY RAISINGS IN TH E GERMAN.-
DUTCH AND SWISS MARKETS. THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT ALSO.
BORROWED ON THE JAPANESE MARKET.
178 MANY MEMBERS, INCLUDING THOSE WHO SERVED IN
PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTS, WILL BE AWARE THAT UNSOLICITED OFFERS
OF OVERSEAS LOANS ARE RECEIVED FROM TIME TO TIME. THE VERY
FACT THAT A NEW SOURCE OF BORROWINGS OF UNPRECEDENTED
MAGNITUDE APPEARED IN THE MIDDLE EAST HAS MEANT THAT THERE 
II1
HAS BEEN A GREAT INCREASE IN4 THE OFFERS FROM PEOPLE OUTSIDE
THE TRADITIONAL CHANNELS WHO HAVE CLAIMED TO HAVE ACCESS TO
THESE FUNDS, OBVIOUSLY, A GOVERNMENT WHICH HAS MADE CLEAR
ITS INTEREST IN SEEIKING SUCH FUNDS, AS WE HAVE, WILL
RECEIVE A GREAT MANY SUCH OFFERS. THERE IS NO REASON IN
PRUDENCE OR PROPRIETY WHY THEY SHOULD BE IGNORED, OR JUST
PUSHED ASIDE. TREASURY RECORDS INDICATE THAT OV'ER THE LAST
TEN YEARS FrHERE HAVE BEEN ABOUT FIVE HUNDRED NAMES
ASSOCIATED WITH APPROXIMATELY 250 OFFERS CLAIMING ACCESS TO
LOAN FUNDS AVAILABLE OVERSEAS. ALMOST ONE HUNDRED OF THESE
OFFERS HAVE BEEN RECEIVED IN THE LAST TWELVE MONTHS, NO
DOUBT AS A RESULT OF THE CHANGES THAT HAVE OCCURRED IN THE
DISTRIBUTION OF CAPITAL FUNDS IN THE FINANCIAL WORLD,
18. I HAVE HAD A SCHEDULE PREPARED IN THE TREASURY OF
UNSOLICITED/ UNCONVENTIONAL OFFERS OF LOANS REFERRED TO THE
TREASURER OR THE TREASURY BY MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT IN THE.
PE RIOD 1950 TO 1975. THE SCHEDULE LISTS APPROACHES MADE
WITHIN THE PERIOD INDICATED, THROUGH THENSERVING THREE
STATE PREMIER'S SEVEN FEDERAL MINISTERS, TWO SENATORS, FIVE
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE, TWO STATE MEMBERS, ONE STATE
TREASURER AND ONE FORMER PRIME MINISTER AND THE PRESENT
PRIME MINISTER, TO BE PRECISE, THROUGH MY DEPARTMENT, To
PRESS THE POINT IMENTION THAT THE SCHEDULE INDICATES
APPROACHES MADE THROUGH MY OWN GOOD OFFICES AND THOSE, TO
QUOTE LIVING MEMBERS.-OF SENATOR THE HONOURABLE R. C. 
12.
WRIGHT, THE HONOURABLE SIR JOHN CRAMER, THE HONOURABLE
DAVID FAIRBAIRN, THE HONOURABLE IAN SINCLAIR, THE RIGHT
HONOURABLE JOHN GORTON, MR MICHAEL MACKELLAR., SENATOR THE
HONOURABLE JOHN WHEELDON, THE HONO URABLE LES JOHNSON, THE
HONOURABLE JIM CAIRNS AND 11R ARMITAGE.
19. SOMETIMES THE APPROACH H AS BEEN MADE TO THE
TREASURER HIMSELF. FOR INSTANCE, IN A LETTER DATED 7 APRIL
0 1961, A MR PISTERMAN OF MELBOURNE, APPARENTLY THE
AUSTRALIAN ATTORNEY OF A SWISS INSURANCE COMPANY, WROTE TO
0 THE THEN AUSTRALIAN TREASURER, THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HAROLD
HOLD PUTTING FORWARD A PROPOSITION FOR A BORROWINGS OF 205
MILLION SWISS FRANCS IN SWIT* ZERL AND BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, AFTER EXAMINATION BY THE TREASURY, AND
MR PISTERMAN ABOUT THE PROPOSITION. SUBSEQUENTLY A SENIOR
OFFICER OF THE TREASURY WHO WAS OVERSEAS IN CONNECTION WITH
0 VARIOUS LOAN MATTERS VISITED SWITZERLAND AND HAD
DISCUSSIONS WITH THE SWISS INSURANCE COMPANY TO WHOM
MR PISTERMAN HAD DIRECTED HIM. NOTHING CAME OF THE MATTER.
CLEARLY THE GOVERNMENT my GOVERNMENT IS NOT ALONE IN
RESPONDING TO SUCH OFFERS AND FAIRLY IT MAY BE ASSUMED THAT
THE GOVERNMENT HAS, AS WE SAY, AN OBLIGATION TO CHECK SUCH
REFERENCES. THIS WE HAVE DONE AS HAVE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENTS, IN THE CASE OF THE AUTHORITY TO THE MINISTER FOR
MINERALS AND ENERGY, GREAT CARE WAS EXERC . ISED, WITH THE
ASSISTANCE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S LEGAL ADVISERS, TO ENSURE 
~ tLZ~. Ufl~ 13.
THAT THE INTERMEDIARY, MR K( HEMLANI, WOULD HAVE NO CLAIMS
AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT AND THAT THE GOVERNMENT WAS
PROTECTED AT ALL POINTS IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROPOSED
BORROWINGS. SWISS LAWYERS WERE ACTUALLY ENGAGED TO ADVISE
AT THE SETTLEMENT STAGE AND ARRANGEMENTS WERE MADE FOR A
SENIOR OFFICER AT ATTORNEY-GENERAL'-S DEPARTMENT TO GO TO
SWITZERLAND TO BE PRESENT AT THE SETTLEMENT DISCUSSIONS.
MR KHEMLANI WAS NOT AN AGENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
HE HAS ALL ALONG BEEN DEALT WITH BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AS A PERSON REPRESENTING UNDISCLOSED PRINCIPALS.
THE MINISTER WILL TABLE PAPERS RELATING TO THIS
SECOND NEGOTIATION AND HERE, TOO, THE HOUSE CAN JUDGE FOR
ITSELF. I REPEAT NOT A CENT HAS BEEN PAID, HAS TO BE PAID,
WILL BE PAID TO THE GENTLEMAN.
22. THERE HAS BEEN MUCH DELIBERATE CONFUSION CREATED
ABOUT THE MANNER OF USE BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THESE OVERSEAS
BO RROWINGS. ANY MONEYS BORROWED BY THE GOVERNMENT WOULD
BECOME PART OF THE LOAN FUND, IN THE PUBLIC ACCOUNT,
REQUIRING AN APPROPRIATION BY THE PARLIAMENT FOR
EXPENDITURE FOR THE PURPOSES OF AUSTRALIA. NONE OF THE
MONEYS COU LD HAVE BEEN SPENT EXCEPT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
PARLIAMENTARY APPROPRIATION.
23. LOAN RAISINGS ARE NOT NORMALLY REFERRED TO
CABINET FOR DECISION AND THEY WERE NOT IN THIS CASE. IT
WAS PROPER TO AUTHORISE THE LOAN RAISING NEGOTIATIONS BY 
1' 4,
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL INSTRUMENT AND THIS WAS DONE. THE
INITIAL EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETING COMPRISED SENIOR
MINISTERS OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THIS INSTAN4CE MYSELF, THE
THEN TREASURER, THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS AN4D ENERGY, AN4D
THE THEN ATTORNEY-GENERAL. BEFORE MAKING THEIR
RECOMMENDATION TO THE GOVERNORGENERAL, THE MINISTERS HAD
THE ADVICE OF THE FIRST AND SECOND LAW OFFICERS OF THE
CROWN. IT WAS PROPER FOR THE GOVERNORGENERAL TO ACT ON THE
ADVICE OF HIS MINISTERS.
24.1 IT IS NO SECRET THAT THE TREASURY HAD RESERVATIONS ABOUT
my GOVERNMENT'IS INTENTION TO AUTHORISE THE MINISTER FOR
MINERALS AND ENERGY TO INVESTIGATE LOAN RAISING OVERSEAS IN
THE TERMS OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AUTHORITY, I FREELY
ADMIT THAT FACT, WHICH APPARENTLY HAS BECOME KNOWN TO THE
OPPOSITION AND THE ELECTORATE THROUGH THE LEAKING OF
DOCUMENTS. IN THE EVENT WE TOOK THE ADVICE OF OTHER
DEPARTMENTS. IN SAYING THAT WE DID NOT ACCEPT THE TREASURY
RESERVATIONS I MAKE NO APOLOGY, AS I MAKE NO APOLOGY FOR
THE GOVERNMENT'S ORIGINAL CONCEPT OF BORROWING EXTENSIVE
PETRODOLLARS FOR CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT. NOR SHOULD Is IT IS
AN ARROGANT SUGGESTION" THAT A GOVERNMENT, WHATEVER ITS
POLICIES, SHOULD BE FRUSTRATED IN ITS DECISIONS BECAUSE OF
ANY BUREAUCRATIC OPPOSITON.
IS THERE ANY REAL CHALLENGE TO THIS VIEW FROM THE
OPPOSITON? CERTAINLY THERE WAS NONE WHEN IT WAS IN
GOVERNMENT, IF IT NEEDS SUPPORT, I NEED GO NO FURTHER THAN 
THE 1968 GARRAN ORATION BY THE FORMER GOVERNoRGENERAL AND
FORMER MINISTER OF THE CROWN, SIR PAUL HASLUCK, WHO
EXAMINED V'ERY CLOSELY THE PROPER RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
ADVISERS AND MINISTERS.
26. THERE ARE NUMEROUS OTHER AUTHORITIES, SUCH AS
THOSE QUOTED BY THE SOLICITOR-GENERAL IN THE MEMORAN4DUM
INCORPORATED IN TODAY'IS HANSARD. THIS REACHES TO THE HEART
O OF THE MATTER THE REAL ORIGINS OF THIS PRESENT
CONTROVERSY, OUR DECISION HAD POLITICAL OBJECTIVES, IT
o WAS A DECISION ABOUT POLICIES.
27. THOSE-POLICIES MEET* OPPOSITION FROM MANY
QUARTERS. SOME OF THE OPPOSITION COMES FROM THOSE QUARTERS
WHO PREFER TO BELIEVE THEY ARE THREATENED OR DISADVANTAGED
BY OUR POLICIES AND OUR PROGRAM. THE ALLEGATIONS OF
0 IMPROPRIETY ARE JUST A SMOKESCREEN FOR THE REAL GROUND OF
OPPOSITION. THE WAY TO DESTROY THE POLICIES IS TO DESTROY
Q THE MEN WHO PROMOTE THEM.
it 28. THERE IS NO PART OF THE PROGRAM OF THIS
GOVERNMENT SO DEPLORED AND RESISTED BY THE BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENT THE NATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT AND THE
INTERNATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT, THE ORTHODOX AT HOME AND
ABROAD. THAN OUR DETERMINATION THAT AUSTRALIANS SHALL HAVE
THE MAXIMUM SHARE IN THE OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF
AUSTRALIA'IS RESOURCES.
29. EQUALLY, THERE WAS NO ASPECT OF OUR PROGRAM WHICH
RECEIVED MORE SUPPORT FROM THE AUSTRAAAN PEOPLE IN TWO 
16,
ELECTIONS, IN THE 19741 ELECTION1 IT WAS PERHAPS THE
DECISIVE ISSUE THE ENEMIES OF THAT POLICY KNOW1 THAT THE
PEOPLE SUPPORT IT, THEREFORE, TO0 DISCOURAGE POPULAR
SUPPORT FOR THE POLICY, THE METHODS THROUGH WHICH THAT
POLICY CAN BE IMPLEMENTED MUST BE DISCREDITED,
BECAUSE THE LOAN PROPOSALS WHICH THE MINISTER FOR
MINERALS AND ENERGY WAS GIVEN AUTHORITY TO PURSUE WERE TO
BE THE VEHICLE FOR CARRYING OUT THOSE POLICIES, THE
PROPOSAL ITSELF MUST BE DISCREDITED. THE BORROWINGS WE
SEEK'FOR ENERGY PURPOSES IN4VOLVE PROJECTS OF IMMENSE SCOPE
AND GREAT CONSEQUENCE TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIA BY
AUSTRALIANS. THOSE PROJECTS'INVOLVE IMMENSE SUMS OF MONEY.
31. A FEATURE OF THIS WHOLE AFFAIR HAS BEEN THE WAY
IN WHICH FIGURES HAVE BEEN WILDLY BANDIED ABOUT. THE FACT
IS THAT OVER A PERIOD MR CONNOR-DISCUSSED VARIOUS SUMS WITH
MR KHEMLANi. AT NO STAGE, HOWEVER, WAS THERE AUTHORITY TO
CONCLUDE ANY BORROWING OUTSIDE THE TERMS OF THE TWO
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AUTHORITIES.. IT WOULD BE ABSURED TO
SUGGEST OTHERWISE. EQUALLY THERE HAS BEEN MUCH DELIBERATE
CONFUSION ABOUT TH. E NATURE OF COSTS WHICH MIGHT HAVE BEEN
PAID. IN FACT THE INTEREST RATESPROPOSED AND THE EXPENSES
ASSOCIATED WITH THE LOAN, INCLUDING COMMISSIONS, WERE NEVER
AT ALL OUT OF THE ORDINARY BY COMPARISON WITH OTHER
GOVERNMENT LOAN RAISINGS OVERSEAS. FOR INSTANCE, DURING
19711-75, THERE WERE TEN OVERSEAS BORROWINGS BY THE
0' 
17.
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE GERMANI SWISS AND NEW YORK
MARKETS. THE HIGHEST RATE PAID WAS 10 PER CENT FOR A
GERMAN LOAN OF 200 MILLION DEUTrSCHMARKS IN SEPTEMBER 1.97L1,.
WITH AN ISSUE PRICE OF 99 PER CENT AND TOTAL EXPENSES
ESTIMATED AT 2.22 PER CENT. AS A RESULT THE YIELD TO THE
INVESTOR WAS 10.23 PER CENT AND THE COST TO THE B3ORROWER
10.74 PER CENT, THE INTEREST RATES FOR ALL THE OTHER LOANS
0 WERE INTH E RANGE OF 8 TO 10 PER CENT. EXPENSES OF
BORROWING HAVE ALSO FLUCTUATED, AND IN A NUMBER OF
0 INSTANCES TOTAL EXPENSES HAVE EXCEEDED 5 PER CENT OF THE
FACE VALUE OF A LOAN FOR INSTANCE LOANS RAISED IN
SWITZERLAND IN 1967; 1968 AND-1970 WHEN THE RIGHT
HONOURABLE GENTLEMAN WHO INTERJECTS WAS TREASURER, A Swiss
LOAN RAISED AS RECENTLY AS MARCH 1975 HAD A COUPON RATE OF
8 PER CENT, AN ISSUE PRICE OF 100 PER CENT AND TOTAL
EXPENSES ESTIMATED AT 4.' 37 PER CENTS THE PROPOSAL
BORROWING BEING NEGOTIATED THROUGH MR KHEMLARI HAD A
COMPANY RATE OF 8.35 PER CENT, AN ISSUE RATE OF 100 PER
CENT, AND IT WAS UNDERSTOOD THAT ALL EXPENSES, INCLUDING
THE COMMISSION, WOULD BE MET BY THE LENDER. THIS WOULD
HAVE MEANT THAT THE YIELD TO THE LENDER AND THE COST TO THE
BORROWER WOULD ALSO BE 8.35 PER CENT.
32. FURTHER, IT IS SUGGESTED THAT SUMS LIKE $ US2,000
MILLION ARE SO VAST AS TO BE UNMANAGEABLE OR UNUSABLE. YET
ONLY THIS WEEK, CONZINC RiOTINTO OF AUSTRALIA LTD, MADE A 
18,
SUBMISSION TO THE INQUIRY INTO THE PETROLEUM AND MINING
INDUSTRIES BEINIG CONDUCTED BY THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION, IN ITS SUBMISSION, CRA CLAIMS THAT AUSTRALIA
WILL NEED TO IN\ VEST MORE THAN $ 4,000 MILLION TO BOOST
MINERAL PRODUCTION BY 1980 TO MAINTAIN AUSTRALIA'IS POSITION
IN THE WORLD MINERALS TRADE. IT IS INVESTMENT OF THIS
MAGNITUDE WE HAVE TO BE THINKING ABOUT, LET ME RECALL
SOME OF THE MATTERS WHICH WERE CONCERNING THE GOVERNMENTALONG
WITH ALL GOVERNMENTS IN COMPARABLE COUNTRIES WHEN
DRAFTING THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MINUTE OF LAST DECEMBER.
UNEMPLOYMENT WAS RISING TO A LEVEL QUITE UNACCEPTABLE TO MY
GOVERNMENT, THE WORLD ENERGY CRISIS HAD SHOWN NO SIGNS OF
EASING, WORLDWIDE INFLATIONARY PRESSURES COMPOUNDED BOTH
PROBLEMS. 339 WE SAW ONE OPPORTUNITY TO COUNTER THESE
TEMPORARY, SHORTTERM PRESSURES ON4 OUR ECONOMY AND OUR
ENERGY SOURCES, WHILE AT THE SAME TIME REAPING LONG-TERM
BENEFITS OF ENDURING SIGNIFICANCE To AUSTRALIA, IF THE
OPPORTUNITY WAS TO BE SEIZED, WE KNEW WE SHOULD ACT
PROMPTLY. WE WANTED TO DISTRIBUTE THE MONEY WE WERE HOPING
TO RAISE QUITE PROMPTLY IN A WAY WHICH WOULD MOST
EFFECTIVELY COUNTER THE IMMEDIATE PROBLEMS FACING THE
NATION. THESE WERE THE CONSIDERATIONS AND THE
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH PROMPTED OUR URGENCY.
314. THE OPERATION OF THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT WAS OF COURSE
CONSIDERED, THE FORMER ATTORNEY-GENERAL ADVISED ORALLY
THAT IN THE EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES I HAVE OUTLINED, THE 
19.
BORROWING COULD PROBABLY BE REGARDED AS A BOR'ROWIING FOR
' TEMPORARY PURPOSES' WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE FINANCIAL
AGREEMENT. THERE WERE NO REQUIREMENTS UNDER THE FINANCIAL
AGREEMENT FOR CONSULTATION WITH THE STATE PREMIERS FOR A
BORROWING OF THIS KIN4D FOR TEMPORARY PURPOSES. IT IS OF
COURSE USUAL AND PROPER FOR LOANS TO BE SOUGHT OVERSEAS IN
ADVANCE OF LOAN COUNCIL APPROVAL. THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS
OF A PROPOSED OVERSEAS BORROWING ARE USUALLY REFERRED FOR
APPROVAL TO THE OTHER MEMBERS OF THE LOAN COUNCIL THE
STATES -ONLY WHEN THERE IS A FIRM PROPOSITION TO PUT TO
THEM. IMADE OUR POSITION QUITE CLEAR IN THE HOUSE ON
MAY.* THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ASKED ME WHEN WOULD THE
GOVERNMENT SEEK APPROVAL OF THE LOAN COUNCIL FOR THE
PROPOSED 2,000 MILLION BORROWING BY THE MINISTER FOR
MINERALS AND ENERGY$
IANSWERED: " IF AND WHEN THE LOAN IS MADE"
HE ASKED " WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THE LOAN?"
IANSWERED: " FOR MATTERS RELATED TO ENERGY" 
PROVIDED WI1TH THE CAPITAL, AUSTRALIA'S VAST
OPPORTUNITIES TO DEVELOP ITS ENERGY RESOURCES COULD BE
QUICKLY REALISED. THE NATION, EVERY STATE AND TERRITORY
WOULD BENEFIT FROM THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR URANIUM, OUR
NATURAL GAS, OUR COAL OUR IMMENSE NATURAL RESOURCES OF
ENERGY. AUSTRALIA'IS WEALTH OF URANIUM RESOURCES OFFERS
VAST OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ENRICHME14T
PLANT. WE ARE DETERMINED TO EXPLOIT WIESTERN AUSTRALIA'S
ENORMOUS NATURAL GAS POTENTIAL THE NORTHWEST SHELF
BELONGING To AUSTRALIA RATHER THAN SELLING OFF THIS VITAL
PART OF AUSTRALIA'S FARM.
36. IN ORDER TO TAP THE* NATURAL GAS RESOURCES IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, NEW SOUTH WALES AND OFF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
WE HAVE UNDER CONSI DERATION PROPOSALS COSTING OVER $ 1400
MILLION FOR PIPELINES. My GOVERNMENT IS EXPLORING WAYS OF
USING THE VAST COAL DEPOSITS IN NEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND
AND VICTORIA TO PRODUCE OIL BY HYDROGENATION AGAIN AN
ENORMOUSLY EXPENSIVE OPERATION. THE GROWING COAL MARKET IS
INHIBITED BY THE LACK OF ADEQUATE PORT FACILITIES. WE MUST
UPGRADE OUR MAJOR COAL PORTS. AUSTRALIA IS HEAVILY
DEPENDENT ON FOREIGN-OWNED SHIPPING FOR THE CARRIAGE OF HER
TRADE. WE. ARE'ENTIRELY DEPENDENT ON FOREIGN VESSELS TO
CARRY OUR CRUDE OIL IMPORTS. WE SHOULD NOT BE SO DEPENDENT
ON FOREIGN SHIPPING FOR SUCH VITAL RESOURCES, WE NEED
EQUIPMENT TO ELECTRIFY OUR RAILWAYS IN BRISBANE AND
ADELAI'DE AND MANY TRUNK LINES I . N THE EASTERN STATES,' 
21.
37. THESE ARE THE GREAT, THE CHALLENGING USES TO WHICH
WE WERE CONTEMPLATING PUTTING THE FUNDS, ARE WE TO
APOLOGISE FOR SEEKING THESE GOALS? ARE WE TO APOLOGISE FOR
OUR DETERMINATION OUR CONTINUING DETERMINATION -TO SEE
THEM REALISED, OF COURSE, IN ALL SUCH PROJECTS, NOTHING
SHOULD BE DONE BEFORE FULL INVESTIGATION OF THEIR
FEASIBILITY AND COST BENEFITS. QUITE CLEARLY, THERE IS NO
POINT IN INVESTIGATING THE FEASIBILITY OF PROJECTS LIKELY
TO COST AT LEAST $ A3,0OO MILLION, IF ONE HAS NO PROSPECT OF
RAISING SUCH FUNDS. To MAINTAIN AND TO INCREASE OWNERSHIP
BY-THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA OF OUR OWN RESOURCES CALL FOR
IMMENSE SUMS OF MONEY FAR BEYOND EVEN OUR VERY HIGH
* PROPENSITY TO SAVE. WE NEED FOREIGN CAPITAL, BUT AS LOAN
FUNDS, NOT AS EQUITY, IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT WE WERE
AND STILL ARE PREPARED AND ANXIOUS TO BORROW THESE SUMS OF
MONEY ON THE BEST OF ALL POSSIBLE CREDIT, OUR OWN COUNTRY
AND THE WEALTH OF OUR OWN RESOURCES. AND THE REAL
* OPPOSITION TO THIS LOAN PROPOSAL COMES FROM THOSE HOSTILE
TO THAT OBJECTIVE.
381, IT HAS BEEN SUGGESTED BY SOME OF OUR CRITICS THAT
THESE BORROWINGS WOULD HAVE BEEN * INFALTIONARY. IN ECONOMIC
TERMS OF, COURSE, THIS IS PURE NONSENSE, THE PROCEEDS OF
THESE BORROWINGS WOULD OF COURSE HAVE BEEN INVESTED.
OVERSEAS UNTIL THEY WERE REQUIRED, PROBABLY IN NEW YORK
WHERE A GOOD PART OF OUR INTERNATIONAL RESERVES ARE NOW
INVESTED AND HAVE BEEN FOR YEARS PAST. DOES THE OPPOSITION 
22,
SUGGEST THAT IT WOULD BE INFLATIONARY TO IMPORT PIPES,
TANKERS, HYDROGENATION AND ELECTRIFICATION EQUIPMENT,
MINING AND INCLUDING MACHINERY, ALL OR MOST OF WHICH WE
MUST IMPORT. WOULD IT BE INFLATIONARY TO PURCHASE SHARES
IN AUSTRALIAN ENTERPRISES FROM THEIR PRESENT OWNERS IN
LONDON AND NEW YORK?
39. WE SAW OPPORTUNITY THROUGH WHICH THE OBJECTIVES
SO STRONGLY SUPPORTED BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE IN THE LAST
TWO ELECTIONS COULD BE PURSUED, THAT PARTICULAR
OPPORTUNITY HAS NOT YET BEEN REALISED. IF THE OPPORTUNITY
PRESENTS ITSELF WITH REASONABLE CHANCE OF SUCCESS, WE SHALL
TRY AGAIN, IT IS OF COURSE IMPOSSIBLE TO ANSWER EVERY
ALLEGATION, EVERY INNUENDO THROWN UP BY THE OPPOSITION, BY
THE MEDIA, IN ALL THE OUTPOURINGS OF THE LAST WEEK. IN THE
EXACT WORDS OF THE ABSENT RIGHT HONOURABLE MEMBER FOR
. HIGGINS MR ( ORTON, IN A VERY DIFFERNET CONTEXT IN VERY
DIFFERENT DAYS,
" I CANNOT FOLLOW THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
DOWN EVERY MANHOLE, THROUGH EVERY SEWER
SPARE A THOUGHT FOR THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MEMBER FOR
HIGGINS, OVERWHELMED BY A COMBINATION OF THE PRESENT LEADER
OF THE OPPOSITION AND THE INTERESTS WHO OPPOSED HIS EFFORTS
TO SECURE GREATER AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF AUSTRALIAN
RESOURCES. 
23.
THERE HAS BEEN A THIRD LOAN NEGOTIATION BY THE
WAY IN WHICH IT HAS BEEN GIVEN A SINISTER CONNOTATION, AND
THE WAY IN WHICH THE NAME OF A MINISTER BEHAVING WITH
PERFECT PROPRIETY HAS BEEN DRAGGED IN, IT EPITOMISES THE
CONDUCT AND ENCAPSULES THE MOTIVES OF THE OPPOSITION. THE
TELEVISION PROGRAM " THIS DAY TONIGHT" ON 22 MAY ALLEGED
THAT THE TREASURY WAS NEGOTIATING A LOAN WITH TRANSIA
CORPORATION LTD, IN FACT THAT COMPANY HAD BEEN INFORMED IN
FEBRUARY BY THE TREASURER THAT THE GOVERNMENT DID NOT WISH
TO TAKE ANY FURTHER ACTION IN RELATION TO ITS PROPOSAL.
THERE WAS A FURTHER APPROACH FROM TRANSIA CORPORATION IN
APRIL 1975*, THIS TIME THROUGH SIR WILLIAM GUNN', A
S HAREHOLDER OF THE COMPANY AND ALSO A MEMBER OF THE BOARD
OF THE RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA.
41. A PROPOSAL FOR $ US3.7 BILLION IN LOAN FUNDS WAS
PUT FORWARD. SIR WILLIAM RANG THE MINISTER FOR NORTHERN
AUSTRALIA DR PATTERSON, THE TREASURER BEING UNAVAILABLE, DR
PATTERSON PASSED THE MESSAGE ON TO THE TREASURER, RECEIVED
CONFIRMATION FROM THE TREASURER. THAT THE GoVERNEMNT WAS
INTERESTED IN RAISING LOAN FUNDS AND PASSED A RESPONSE BACK
TO SIR WILLIAM GUNN. ON 20 APRIL 1975 SIR FREDERICK
WHEELER THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TELEPHONED SIR
WILLIAM TO SAY THAT THE GOV'ERNMENT WAS TAKING NO ACTION IN
RESPECT OF PROPOSALS HE HAD MADE. IWAS INFORMED ABOUT
TRANSIA CORPORATION'S INVOLVEMENT ON 23 APRIL 1975 IN
RESPECT OF ANSEPARATE APPRAOCH BY THE COMPANY. ON THIS 
OCCASION THE COMPANY WAS REFERRED BY THE TREASURER'S OFFICE
TO THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS AND ENERGY AND SUBSEQUENT
DEALINGS WITH TRANSIA CORPORATION LTD, WERE CONDUCTED BY
THE MINISTER's DEPARTMENT. THE COMPANY HAS NOT BEEN ABLE
TO SATISFY THE GOVERNMENT'IS REQUIREMENTS AS TO THE
VERIFICATION AND IDENTIFICATION4 OF FUNDS AND NOTHING AS
EVENTUATED. 42*, THE PAPERS RELATING To TRANSIA CORPORATION CAN BE
MADE AVAILABLE BUT I WOULD BE RELUCTANT TO PUBLISH THEM.
MANY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ARE MENTIONED. PEOPLE IN THE
FINANCIAL WORLD ARE NAMED AND THEIR STANDING COMMENTED ON.
THE PAPERS RELATE TO TRANSACTIONS IN A DELICATE AREA OF
BUSINESS AND COMPANIES AND INDIVIDUALS ARE ENTITLED TO FEEL
I'N DEALING WITH THE GOVERNMENT THAT THE NORMAL
CONFIDENTIALITY WILL APPLY. SURELY THERE HAS TO BE AN END
TO THE ATTEMPTED DESTRUCTION BY THE OPPOSITION OF THE
COUNTRY'IS GOOD NAME AND REPUTATION AND TO THESE. INSIDIOUS
IMPUTATIONS AGAINST MINISTERS, COMPANIES AND INDIVIDUALS.
43*. OF COURSE*, IN THAT RESPECT, T . HIS HA S BEEN A
DAMAGING AFFAIR.. THE OPPOSITION-INTENDED IT TO BE A
DAMAGING AFFAIR. NO ATTEMPT HAS BEEN MADE TO CHECK THE
BONA FIDES OR MOTIVES OF NOTORIETY HUNTERS AND SELFSEEKSERS,
ATTEMPTS TO DAMAGE MINISTERS AND THE LABOR PARTY
ARE ONE THING -ATTEMPTS TO DAMAGE AUSTRALIA AND 
AUSTRALIA'S CREDIT ARE ANOTHER. THESE HAVE FAILED. OF ALL
THE CHARGES MADE THE ONE THAT CAN BE MOST QUICKLY AND FULLY
DISPRO\ VED IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DAMAGED
AUSTRALIA' S CREDIT-WORTHINESS BY SEEKIN4G THE PETRODOLLAR
LOAN', THE TRUTH IS THAT AUSTRALIA'IS CREDIT HAS NEVER STOOD
HIGHER.' LAST OCTOBER [ IIOODY'S*, ONE OF THE TWO GREAT NEW
YORK CREDIT RATED AGENCIES, HAVE AUSTRALIA, FOR THE FIRST
QTIME, AN AAA RATING, THE H IGHEST AVAILABLE. ON 9 JUNE, AT
A TIME WHEN THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL COMMUNITY WAS
COMPLETELY AWARE OF OUR PROPOSAL TO RAISE THE LOANS WHICH
ARE THE SUBJECT OF THE PRESENT CONTROVERSY, THAT AAA RATING
WAS CONFIRMED BY STANIDARD POOR'S. THE OTHER NEW YORK
CREDIT MATING AGENCY,
414. FOR THE WHOLE PERIOD OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AUTHORITY, OUR CREDIT RATING HAS REMAINED
AT THE HIGHEST. IF THAT IS NOT ENOUGH, LET ME POINT TO THE
EXTREMELY SUCCESSFUL $ US100 MILLION LOAN FLOATED IN THE NEW
0 YORK MARKET IN JUNE. NEW YORK INVESTORS EXPRESSED A
CONFIDENCE IN AUSTRALIA'S CREDIT WHICH SOME AUSTRALIANS
SEEM QUITE WILLING TO UNDERMINE. ICANNOT TAKE ANY
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY DAMAGE OUR OPPONENTS'I APPRAOCH MAY
HAVE; BUT WHERE IT REALLY COUNTS AND WHERE IT CAN REALLY BE
TESTED, WE FIND AUSTRALIA'S CREDIT HIGHER THAN AT ANY TIME
IN OUR HISTORY$ 
26.
LET ME BRING ALL THESE POINTS TOGETHER IN ONE
SUMMARY OF ALL THE ISSUES INVOLVED. AT NO TIME WAS
PARLIAMENT MISLED ABOUT THE NATURE, SIZE OR SOURCE OF OUR
LOAN PROPOSALS, THEIR PURPOSE WAS TO PURSUE POLICIES IN
THE INTERPESTS OF AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF AUSTRALIAN
RESOURCES, THE PROPOSAL WAS ECONOMICALLY SOUND. LEGALADVICE
WAS OBTAINED FROM THE GOVERNMENT'S LEGAL ADVISERS
BEFORE THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS AND ENERGY WAS GIVEN
AUTHORITY BY THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL TO PROCEED WITH
NEGOTIATIONS FOR THE LOAN, PROPER CARE WAS EXERCISED WITH
THE ASSISTANCE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S LEGAL ADVISERS TO ENSURE
THAT THE INTERMEDIARY IN THIS MATTER WOULD HAVE NO CLAIM
AGAINST AUSTRALIA OR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
AUSTRALIA AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WERE PROTECTED AT
ALL POINTS IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROPOSED BORROWING.
PROPER CHECKS WERE MADE ON THE BONA FIDES OF THE GENTLEMAN
INVOLVED, NOT ONE CENT HAS BEEN PAID OR WILL BE PAID OR IS
LIABLE TO BE PAID TO THE INTERMEDIARY, THERE HAS BEEN NO
IMPROPRIETY ON THE PART OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THERE HAVE BEEN NO BREACHES OF THE LAW. AUSTRALIA'S
INTERNATIONAL REPUTATION AS A GOVERNMENT WITH PRIME
BORROWING STATUS REMAINS UNCHANGED, REMAINS AS HIGH AS IT
HAS EVER BEEN. THESE ARE THE REAL MATTERS AT ISSUE, THESE
ARE THE IMPORTANT ISSUES. 
27.
46. IT ALL BOILS DOWN TO THIS:
WAS THERE IMPROPRIETY IN THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT SEEKING A LOAN WHICH WOULD HELP PROMOTE
AUSTRALIA'S IMMEDIATE AND URGENT WELLBEING AND PROMOTE
GREAT LONGTERM AUSTRALIAN OBJECTIVES? WAS THERE ANY
IMPROPRIETY IN THE MANNER IN WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT SOUGHT TO ACHIEVE THOSE OBJECTIVES? THE
OBJECTIVES WERE PROPER' THE MEANS WERE PROPER. LET THOSE
WHO SAY OTHERWISE NOW SPECIFY THEIR ALLEGATIONS OF
IMPROPRIETY OR ILLEGALITY SPECIFY THE PRECISE CHARGE, THE
PRECISE BREACH.
47. THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH WE SOUGHT THE LOAN COMMAND
THE CLEAR SUPPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. THE PURPOSES,
THE MEANS WERE PERFECTLY PROPER. THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
HAVE SHOWN THEIR CLEAR SUPPORT FOR OUR OBJECTIVES IN
PROMOTING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF AUSTRALIAN RESOURCES, WHICH
IN THE FINAL ANALYSIS IS NOTHING SHORT OF AUSTRALIAN
CONTROL OVER AUSTRALIA'S DESTINY,
48, IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF THESE GREAT OBJECTIVES, THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WILL DESPISE THE PETTINESS, THE SELFSERVING,
OF THOSE WHO HAVE CHOSEN THIS ISSUE TO UNDERMINE
THE FULFILMENT OF THOSE OBJECTIVES. THEY WILL QUICKLY SEE
THAT THOSE WHO WOULD USE ANY WEAPON TO DAMAGE THIS 
28.
GOVERNMENT, DO NOT GIVE A DAMN IF IN THE PROCESS, THEY
DAMAGE AUSTRALIA HERSELF. THAT IS THE GREAT IMPROPRIETY IN
THIS AFFAIR THE WILFUL ATTEMPT TO DAMAGE AUSTRALIA, HER
CREDIT, THE PEOPLE' IS CHANCE TO CONTROL AND DEVELOP THE
RESOURCES OF THEIR OWN LAND. THOSE EFFORST WILL FAIL AS
THEY DESERVE. AUSTRALIA'S. CREDIT REMAINS UNTARNISHED; AND
ON ANY CHARGE OF IMPROPRIETY OR ANY TOLERATION OF
IMPROPRIETY, THE RECORD WILL SHOW THAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS
EQUALLY UNTARNISHED, 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH
AT OPENING OF NOW, COBURG, VICTORIA,*
11 JULY, 1975.
IN A WEEK MOMENTOUS IN THE HISTORY OF THIS
NATION,* A WEEK IN WHICH PARLIAMENT WAS RECALLED FOR A
SPECIAL SESSION, A WEEK IN WHICH THE OPPOSITION SHOWED
ITS FAMILIARITY WITH INTERNATIONAL F INANCE AND INTERSTATE
INTRIGUE IT IS APPROPRIATE TO COM~ E BACK TO EARTH TO THE
GRASS ROOTS LEVEL OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN THE STATE
WHERE I WAS BORN 59 YEARS AGO TODAY.
IWAS INVITED HERE BY A GREAT AUSTRALIAN, A GREAT
SERVANT OF AUSTRALIA, A GREAT FRIEND,. DR COOMBS, A. C.,
THE MAN ENTRUSTED WITH THE CONDUCT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION
INTO AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION WHICH MY GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHED JUST A YEAR AGO, ' I F I 
I IT IS WORTH REMEMBERING THAT FACT, BECAUSE IN ALL
THE WELTER OF WORDS ABOUT THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ITS
OBLIGATIONS IN RECENT WEEKS, FEW HAVE BOTHERED TO RECALL
THE FACT THAT THE ROYAL COMMISSION HAS BEEN CONTINUING
ITS INVESTIGATION INTO THE PUBLIC SERVICE AT ALL LEVELS
AND FROM ALL ANGLES, FOR A WHOLE YEAR. AND THAT FACT IS
TOO READILY FORGOTTEN BY OUR DETRACTORS. SURE, IT HAS
HAD A GOOD DEAL OF PUBLICITY AT TIMES, SUCH AS WHEN
PERMANENT HEADS HAVEPRESENTED SUBMISSIONS AND SPOKEN
TO THEM, BUT NOT NEARLY SO MUCH WHEN ORDINARY MORTALS
HAVE BOTHERED TO PRESENT THEIR VIEWS.
IT IS, HOWEVER, TO THE VERY REAL CREDIT OF THIS
ROYAL COMMISSION, UNDER DR COOMBS, THAT ITS OFFICERS HAVE
DELIBERATELY SOUGHT OUT AND ENCOURAGED PEOPLE ON THE
RECEIVING END OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE TO COMMENT ON THE
QUALITY AND COMPETENCE OF. THAT SERVICE AT THE POINT WHERE
* D IT REACHES THE PUBLIC,
THAT, OF COURSE, IS WHERE NOW COMES IN, BECAUSE IT
IS THE CREATION, THE BRAINCHILD, OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION,
AND A VERY PARTICULAR EXTENSION OF ITS RESEARCH PROGRAM.
IT IS AN ATTEMPT TO SEE HOW MUCH BETTER SERVED PEOPLE COULD
BE, GIVEN A MORE FLEXIBLE, IMAGINATIVE APPROACH TO THEIR
NEEDS AS CONSUMERS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE PRODUCT. ITS A
SWING AWAY FROM THE SPECIALIST BOUTIQUE, AND BACK TO THE
ANYTHING AND EVERYTHING STORES OF AUSTRALIA'S CHILDHOOD
COUNTRY TOWNS. i as /. 3 
3,
THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ADMINISTRATION TO USE ITS FORMAL T ITLE HAS BEEN TOLD
REPEATEDLY, ALL OVER AUSTRALIA, THAT THE DELIVERY OF
WELFARE SERVICES, ALL OVER AUSTRALIA, IS CONFUSED AND
CONFUSING. IT IS A SAD COMMENT ON THE WAY THINGS HAVE
DEVELOPED IN OUR SOCIETY-THAT THOSE VERY SERVICES DESIGNED
TO HELP PEOPLE FREQUENTLY ADD TO THEIR SENSE OF BEWILDERMENT
AND ALIENATION AT THE VERY TIME WHEN THEY NEED THE MOST
SUPPORT. EVEN AT. THE BEST OF TIMES,_ PEOPLE OFT . EN HAVE
DIFFICULTY KNOWING WHICH LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT, LET ALONE
WHICH DEPARTM'ENT, OR WHICH SECTION OF WHICH DEPARTMENT,-.
CAN HELP THEM. AND IT'S ALL VERY WELL SAYING THAT YOU CAN LOOK
IT UP IN A PHONEBOOK, BECAUSE -QUITE APART FROM. WHETHER
YOU CAN READ ENGLISH TO START WITH -, IT'S ANYONE'S GUESS
WHERE YOU MIGHT FIND A PARTICULAR SERVICE LISTED.
SO, NO0W I S AN EXPERIMENT DEVISED BY THE ROYAL
COMMISSION OFFICERS TO SEE WHETHER LOCATING* AUSTRALIAN,
STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND VOLUNTARY WELFARE AGENCIES
IN THE ONE PLACE WILL HELP PEOPLE TO. FIND THE PARTICULAR
SERVICE THEY NEED, s es/ 
NOIS ALSO AN EXPERIMENT IN WORKER PARTICIPATION
IN THE SENSE THAT IT WILL GIVE OFFICERS OF THESE VARIOUS
ORGANISATIONS THE OPPORTUNITY TO WORK TOGETHER ON WORKING
OUT HOW TO IMPROVE THE SERVICE THEY GIVE THE PUBLIC.
AT A TIME WHEN MORE PUBLICITY IS GIVEN TO THOSE
THINGS WHICH DIVIDE THAN THOSE THINGS WHICH UNITE BRANCHES
OF GOVERNMENT IN THIS COUNTRY, IT IS REFRESHING AND
COMMENDABLE THAT THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED TO
JOIN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN CONDUCTING A TRIAL RUN
OF THE NOW SHOP FOR A TWO YEAR PERIOD. DURING THIS TIME
THE EXPERIEMNT WILL BE EVALUATED FROM THE POINT OF VIEW
OF THE-PEOPLE WHO USE ITS SERVICES AS WELL AS THE PUBLIC
SERVANTS WORKING-IN THE SHOP,
INITIALLY THE NOW SHOP WILL INVOLVE OVER TWENTY
PEOPLE IN EITHER FULL OR PART-TIME POSITIONS, AND IT WILL
BE OF PARTICULAR BENEFIT TO THOSE WHO LIVE AND WORK IN THE
NORTH WEST REGION -THAT is. BRUNSWICK. COBURG, FAWKNER AND
CAMPBELLFI ELD1 
THERE WILL BE TEN STAFF MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT
r
OF SOCIAL WELFARE TWO SIMILAR DEPARTMENTS WHOSE SHORTENED
NAMES, " SECURITY" AND " WELFARE", ARE EASY FOR THE BUREAUCRATS
TO DISTINGUISH, BUT IT'S A DISTINCTION THAT MANY PEOPLE MAY
NOT READILY APPRECIATE$
NOW AT COBURG WILL RECEIVE APPLICATIONS FOR
PENSIONS AND BENEFITS, ADVISE ON ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSIONS
AND BENEFITS AND FORWARD APPLICATIONS RECEIVED TO STATE
HEADQUARTERS FOR PROCESSING AND PAYMENT. A SOCIAL WORKER
WILL BE STATIONED IN THE OFFICE AND WILL UNDERTAKE SOME
CASE WORK ACTIVITIES AS WELL AS LIAISE WITH OTHER WELFARE
BODIES WITHIN THE COBURG/ BRUNSWICK AREA TO HELP PLAN AND
IMPLEMENT COMMUNITY WELFARE PROGRAMS, A FULL INFORMATION
SERVICE ON SOCIAL SECURITY MATTERS WILL BE PROVIDED IN AN
EFFORT TO MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE IN THE AREA BECOME PROPERLY
AWARE OF WHAT ASSISTANCE THEY CAN EXPECT THROUGH THE
AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY, NOW REALLY WILL
BE A ONE-STOP-SHOP,
THE NORTH WEST REGIONAL COUNCIL-FOR SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT HAS BROUGHT TOGETHER VOLUNTARY AGENCIES IN THE
NORTH WEST AREA TO WORK IN WITH NOW, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS
ALSO BEING INVOLVED THROUGH THE REGIONAL ORGANISATION OF
COUNCILS, / 6 
61
SO, IN A VERY REAL SENSE, NOW WILL BE A ONE-STOP-SHOP
WITH NOT ONLY AN ABUNDANCE OF CUSTOMERS, BUT ALSO AN EXISTING
AND DEVELOPING GOODWILL.*
IT IS, AFTER ALL, A PARTICULAR KIND OF GOOD-NATUR ED
TAKEOVER OF SOMETHING THAT DIDN IT REALLY EXIST BEFORE, IT
REPRESENTS A MERGING OF TALENT/ A BURYING OF REAL AND IMAGINED
RIVALRIES, AND A GREAT CHALLENGE TO ALL THOSE WHO WILL HAVE
THE HEADACHE AND HEARTACHE OF MAKING IT WORK, BELIEVE IT
CAN BE MADE TO WORK$' I HOPE IT DOES.
NOW IS THE HOUR. IT'S TIME TO CUT THE RED TAPE, 



PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENS; LAND BROADCAST NO. 17
THE LOANS DEBATE
SUNDAY 13 JULY 1975
I KNOW YOU MUST BE PRETTY WEARY OF THIS WHOLE
SO-CALLED LOANS SCANDAL BY NOW, BUT I MAKE NO APOLOGY FOR
RETURNING TO IT BECAUSE. WE CAN NOW SEE THE WHOLE ISSUE
IN PERSPECTIVE AND JUDGE THE STRENGTH AND MOTIVES OF THE
OPPOSITION'S CASE, BUT FIRST, LETS RECALL WHAT HAPPENED
THE LAST TIME ThE OPPOSITION AND THE PRESS CAME OUT WITH
THUNDEROUS ACCUSATIONS AGAINST THE. GOVERNMENT'S INTEGRITY,
YOU WILL REMEM. 3ER THAT SOMEONE LEAKED TO OUR OPPONENTS
CONFIDENTIAL CABLES WE HAD SENT TO OUR AMBASSADORS IN
VIETNAM. LOUD CRIES WENT UP ABOUT SCANDAL, DUPLICITY,
DECEPTION AND ALL THE REST OF IT, So WE HAD A DEBATE
IN PARLIAMENT, AS SOON AS I TABLED ALL THE RELEVANT
DOCUMENTS IT IMMEDIATELY BECAME CLEAR THAT THE
GOVERNMENT HAD ACTED WITH COMPLETE INTEGRITY AND CANDOUR.
THE CPPOSITION Cr. SE COLLAPSED AND NOTHING MORE HAS BEEN
HEARD ABOUT THE IETNAM CABLES FROM MR FRASER OR ANYONE ELSE.
Ii ~ I_ 
2.
EXACTLY THE SAME THING HAPPENED LAST WEDNESDAY.
THE OPPOSI TIO FAILED TO SUBSTANTIATE ANY SPECIFIC CHARGE
OF ILLEGAL OR IMPROPER CONDUCT AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR
AGAINST ANY M1INISTER; MORE THAN THAT, THEY FAILED To
MAKE AiYSEII HRE THEY HAD THEIR CHANCE; THEY
FLFED 1T. YUDNTH'EOTAEMY WORD FOR THAT,
THE VERY NEWSPAPERS-WHO HAVE BEE" LEADING THE CAMPAIGN FOR
MiR FRASER, THE SAE NEWSPAPER COMPANIES WHO HAV/ E SPENT
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS-BUYING SO-CALLED-INCRIMINATING .0
* DOCUMENTS3 TO. DISCREDIT THE GovE/ MENT, HAVE HAD TO
TAHM I FTILTYOFTHE EXERCISE, IN THE MIELBOURNE
AGE O N T E 3DA Y R PETER COLE-ADA. Ms WROTE FROM LONDON:
" AS FA-R ASWE KNC'. 4, AUSTRALIA HAS NOT IN FACT LOST ANY(
MONEY A S A R ES-L. OF THE AFFAIR." ADTHE FINANCIAL
REVIEW SAID AF T ER WENESDAY'S DEBATE:*
IT" IT CANNOT B E SAID THAT THE LEADER OF THE0
OPAPOS: 7 10NP ~ R FRASER, MADE OUT A CONVINCING
CASE Y&amp; EA FOR THE IMMEDIATE APPOINTMENT * 0
. OF A ~ Y L COMMISSIoN INTO THE GOVERNMENT'S
OVERSEIS LOAN RAISINGS. THIS IS WHAT HE CALLED
~.. ArCu. ENTS ADVANCED YESTERDAY BY
SE OR A ROYAL COMMISSION' WERE NOT
C= Z TL N CRMA L GRAVITY OR SUBSTANCE REQUIRE
-OR SUCH AN EXERCISE." 
S0O OF-COURSE THEY WEREN'T: SO MUCH FOR THE SCANDAL
THE IMPROIRIETY, THE ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE LAW, LET'S
LOOK INSTEAD AT THE REAL ISSUE -WHY WE'VE SOUGHT THESE
LARGE SUM'S CF NONEY, TlY WE DECIDED TO EXPLORE THE
POSSIBIL ITIES OF BIG OVERSEAS LOANS. IWSINTERESTING.
THAT THE LIBERALS AND. THEACUNTRY PARTY HAVE NEVER DARED
TO : ATTACK THE BASIC PURPOSES BEHIND OUR INTENDED LOAN J
RAISINGS,. H NEE T DEVELOP OUR GREAT MINERAL AND ENERGY
R: PESOURC ~ wAHE. NEED: TO KSEP. TOSE RSOURCES IN. AUSTRALIAN'. 0 s
HANDS, TO M~ AKE SURE THAT AUSTRALIA : KEEPS CONTROL OF HER
OWN DEST&gt; QY HER OWN FUTURE. N A VERY TROUBLED WORLD,
THE MEN. sct-n* Z ALU STRALIA SHORT, WHO KEPT SELLING OFF
TEAM73 3VERSEAS IN1TERESTS -THE SORT OF THING
S IR ** JC -N !-Eww AN UcN GORTON FOUGHT AGAINST -AREN'T
GAME 7 3 ATTAC( S CN HI BASIC ISSUE. SURE, WE'VE BEEN
ACZ12SiD OF BE:: G 7:-D A, 83ITIOUS, OF WANTING TO DO TOO
MUCH FOR AuSTRAL: A. THAT'S AN ACCUSATIO. N I CAN LIVE WITH
AT ANY TIMEAUBG PLANS WE CERTAINLY HAVE FOR THIS
COUNTRY4 AND JUiDGED BY THE:. TMID, ORTHODOX STANDARDS
OF-THE OPPOSITION, THEY MAY SEEM VERY BIG INDEED. BUT
Wi-ODOUBTS. THEIR NECESSITY, WHO. ; OUSTS THEIR ULATE'
LONG-TERM WISDPM? 
1.1
1
7= I-I
1. I I
I I
I . i
1. 1. I 1. I I I I
tj .1 I
. f I
i I
1 I
I 7 i. . i
1.
1 I
I t
I I il= LIVE I N A* WO RL D WHEREL _ VAST B0 RR 0 liq I NG S AN Di : 1
I I
VAST I NV ES T. EN T S ARE MORE AND MORE COi'v) i") OjN PLACE. I
I I 1. , t -i I
t A U ST RA L IA INE: AR E O ING TO GRASP THE
I-I
I i,.
7 I BEFOR7E. L1A ST, N TOI KY. 1O , -f'.] 1R : 7. C. Oi'qNOR NEOGUORTCIAETS, E D1" TWH* IE'T -H1W. . Tr1Z H -L -_ Z
1 I 4 1 i .1 i
1. 4 7 i I
I I. I I
.1
t JAP1A. N fE SrE L _ STEEL, 4 1C COH-17' , ,11, Pq AIIN L I EfSB .' 1A7 W i F0 RIj , TV ELH _ . v0A1_ cV7 ' A H R-R : -C11 O0 A B L ILELX IP OO RjT US nD; I OLLAR. 4S t
-Z .1
-TO, ' AuST: IALI'* IT I LL BR 1 NG VAS I TUON J EEE -
S 0 ** QU NSLAND
k i r L_ I
i. * rI* IN PAv R i i CU L AR 1. I JD I D. NJ ' T SE MiR ELO NiNO. 1R GEE T7 : 7I C1." I . IE D 1 T -I 1; 1t ,
-i .1 i, J 7 1 J
I -V FOR t T" I WE I EK S-DELB_ ATLE_ ' 9,' 1 AS : H E . PO IN T tE-D -OU T I i\ 1
I
f n
.1 -1 _ 7
-1 y .7, Z 41
q PA R'L IA 1-E .1 4 4 IPi cIf1; I1O -VE N RECOVERABLEL _ MI m N Lc R_ AL:' A\ iID.-: .1 O I
j -r f,
L -I 7 17.
C 7-
EN GY L , AROUND OLL
: 1 L'_ L 1* L. L I I 1 A RS r
-A iq C ill C M 1 C T 1_: 11
-A5 c AT JODAY S PRICES, THEY ' WILL ' BE
11 1, I
Z L-V E N MORR I ' 0D 1 . 7: ARE. THE* SORT OF SUM1 S AG A 1 . IN ST L m-
1.
1. ; 1 7
-1 7
I. NG I'DDCJLc-CT -NEEDS TO BE CONSIDERED. I -i L
-1 It
Z I 1 3, .1 r.
L L. L 1 I L I ' 1aZ-1 . o1: t . 1 ' If _ L 7 , 4L t. e ' 1jn, . d t I
1. I-. I
I i. t IL 1 i I
I-f. 7 L I -1 4
-7
I 1 I .1 7 . L I. -t .1. t f
7 1
1. I " o 1% -Z
1. -fi.
1
I t I
: Z -1 57 F 1 I I ' t ! Jl 17.1 77rJ
7-7 k i' 4
I-LI % 7
I -t
-1 -1 t L,
I -1 f. I A: I I 1: I -n . Z I7, ;
: 1 I 1, 67 e j I I I . L -7 o : 1
J I J -1
F _ L z I
17. I I I r: I I 1-
s
L L f-r I
7 t I t -7
* 1 I 4. i I I .1 .1
7
1_ 1t I 7-1 7
jt-
1
LL. 2 L o. 7, f:
L'
I
7 ir ' r
3 z L' 7
' L t L, 1
i. : t e L, z 7:
t_ t Z
-4 7 I L " C 1-1 I
L a La
z i
. z ,, Ly" f 7 L f i I ' r
-7 7n,: I z 7 -; 71
1
.7 r, f7 -7 I r -i
7 T. j
I V. r 17 1. I -1 .1 I r, Lz 7* zi
7 z
L ri I a 0. I
L
, Z Z-_ V .7 .1 ; 7 i
I Z!
L. t 7. L. a I t n ? 7 .4 Z: -r
1. t; I
t Z-4_ .1 i -7 t ! 7 1
i t
.11 1: 7. 7. 1 -1 i I
1,7
L 7. 7. L.
.7 I I t. * 1
r ' I 7 ' I
ls I ,7 1, : f
7 I I . I1 , L. I 77
I L I
I I
* w 7 t i n, .1 I
I .1 I 7. o 7
1 I I
I I . L Z, I
I I
.1 o"
-L 77 _ 1 I
I -1 L L 7. I . f I. 1. I.
.1 ' 41 z
-1 7 f,
I
z I 1_ 4. I.
o I
i-1. 1 
! PARLIAMENT ON WEDENSDAY I MENT IONED SOM'E
,,~ sOUR LOAN FUNDS COULD HAVE, BEEN USED.
vETO REMEM', BER THAT EVERY BIG MINERAL OR ENERGY.
iICSOECS TLYI-IT'S NO USE BELIEVING WE CAN
-VELOP OUR RESOURCES ON THE CHEAP, ONE REASON WE
HAVE SOUGHT. MONEY IS TO PRODUCE OIL FROM A PROCESS
CALLED THE HYDROGENATION OF COAL US-ING QUEENSLAND' S
VAST. COAL, DEOS MR CONNOR M E NTIO0N ED ON WEDN E SDAY
TH DE TO EXP N D THE GREAT COAL' EXPORTING HARBOURS
IN QUEENS3LAND. THYPIN LDSTONE, . To DO
TH IS. JC3 ?' RCERLY WILL COST HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
~ AKE NO MSTAKXE, I F THESE PROJECTS ' ARE. TO GO AHEADf IF
WE ARE 73DE60Z CUD GAS, OUR COALS : OUR URANIUM DEPOSITS
I N O0E ST'T_= S AS W~ ELL, WE'LL NEED CAPITAL bN A LARGE
S LZH VIE ARE INe TO N EE D MORE AND MORE CAPITAL IN
iTE YEARS AH= AJ. D 7: 1
OUR MATNERAL ViD EERGY
BY ' Wl" 1C. 4 W E CNBR OUR OWN SOURCES AND FROM OVERSEAS.
. RESERVES GIVE US THESECURITY
IT, SI' 7. 
6.
I LEAVE YOU Iq ITH THIS THOUGHT: THE TIME
HAS PASSED WHEN WE COULD SIT BACK AND CONTEMPLATE -THE WORLD
ACCORDING TO THE COMFORTABLE, DO-NOTHING RULES OF THE
LIBERALS AND THE COUNTRY PARTY. IT SO HAPPENS THAT
ON THIS OCCASION W E DIDN' SUCCEED IN BORROWING
THE MONEY WE NEEDo THAT WON'T STOP US TRYING AGAIN,
WE ARE PROUD OF OUR EFFORTS AND CUR OBJECTIVES, UNDER
-S
THIS GOVERNET : AUSTRALIA HAS ACHIEVED THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE
STATUS A TRIPLE-A RATING AS AN INTERNATIONAL BORROWER.
THATSTATUS REMAINSCHANGED, OURHOPES AND PLANS
FOR AUSTRALIA ? EAIN UNCHANGED, .7 -I
7 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT OPENING OF ST, FRANCIS
XAVIER PRIMARY SCHOOL, LURNEA, N. S. W, ON 13 JULY 1975.
AFTER THE TURMOIL OF CANBERRA, IT IS CURIOUSLY
REFRESHING TO COME HOME TO MY OWN ELECTORATE, TO WERRIWA, FOR
FRIDAY AND SATURDAY NIGHT AND SUNDAY AFTERNOON. I HAVE BEEN
IN EXCELLENT COMPANY ALL WEEKEND, AS SOME OF YOU MAY KNOW.
LAST NIGHT WAS THE ALL SAINTS PARISH BALL AND I HAD
THE PLEASURE OF SEEING His LORDSHIP BISHOP CREMIN AGAIN. W'
LAST MET AT THE BLESSING AND OPENING OF ST. BEDE'S HOME AT
HURSTVILLE, WHERE HE TOLD A VERY LONG AND COMPLICATED JOKE WHICH
SUBSEQUENTLY GOT RECORDED IN MY WIFE'IS MAGAZINE COLUMN.-IN
WOMAN'S DAY.' TAT MORE THAN MY JOKES DO.
TODAY, OF COURSE, His EMINENCE CARDINAL FREEMAN IS
HERE TO GIVE HIS BLESSING TO THE OPENING OF YET ANOTHER CATHOLIC
PRIMARY SCHOOL. WE LAST MET ON THE OCCASION OF THE BLESSING AND
OPENING OF ST. JOSEPH'S, MOOREBANK. I REMEMBER WE TRADED
OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE TWO THOMAS MOORES THE ONE WHO ENDOWED
A PROTESTANT THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE IN SYDNEY AND AFTER WHOM
MOOREBANK IS NAMED, AND THE OTHER GREAT ENGLISHMAN, ST, THOMAS MOORE,
AFTER WHOM SO MANY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS IN THIS COUNTRY ARE NAMED. 
2.
OPENING DAYS ARE ALWAYS A SOURCE OF IMMENSE
SATISFACTION TO THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN PLANNING
AND FUNDRAISING TO GET A PARTICULAR PROJECT, LITERALLY, ItOFF
THE GROUND" TODAY IS NO EXCEPTION: IAM ALWAYS DELIGHTED TO BE
ASSOCIATED WITH SUCH CEREMONIES, PARTICULARLY WHEN, IN THE CASE
OF SCHOOLS, IT MEANS THAT A NEW SCHOOL HAS BEEN CREATED IN A
RAPIDLY DEVELOPING OUTER SUBURBAN* AREA, WITH A CLEAR NEED FOR
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES TO CATER FOR THE HIGH PROPORTION OF.
SCHOOL-AGE AND YOUNGER CHILDREN. IT HAS BEEN THE CONSISTENT
BELIEF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT THAT ALL CHILDREN
ARE ENTITLED TO EVERY POSSIBLE CHANCE OF A GOOD EDUCATION, NO
MATTER WHERE THEY LIV E IN AUSTRALIA. I B EL IEVE THAT WHAT WE
HAVE DONE FOR EDUCATION IN THIS COUNTRY WILL BE REMEMBERED WITH
GRATITUDE IN YEARS TO COME.
TIME WAS, AND NOT EVEN TWENTY YEARS AGO, WHEN IT WOULD
HAVE BEEN QUITE UNTHINKABLE FOR A PERSON OF MY POLITICS TO BE
ASKED TO DECLARE OPEN A CATHOLIC SCHOOL. AND YET, HERE WE ARE,-
CARDINAL FREEMAN AND I, -AT OUR SECOND CATHOLIC PRIMARY SCHOOL
OPENING IN THIS WERRIWA ELECTORATE IN THREE MONTHS. IT IS JUST
THREE MONTHS TO THE DAY APRIL 13-THAT ST. JOSEPH'S WAS
OPENED. AND NOW ST. FRANCIS XAVIER'S. 
BOTH TII; l CATIIOLIC PRIMARY SCHOOLS HAVE
ATTRACTED IDENI It,\ l A/ I\ TRALIAN GOVERNMENT GRANTS OF $ 140,000
UNDER THE CAP IAI ill IOR SCHOOLS PROGRAM 1973-74. THEY CAN
BE SEEN AS PART t~ uI; AUiSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S VASTLY
. IINNCCRREEAASSEEDD EEXXPPEENNIIgn11,1,, 1 ON EDUCATION OF ALL KINDS AND AT ALL
LEVELS. THREE Yt Al: i TIIE AMOUNT OF MONEY BEING SPENT
BY THE FEDERAL ( 1VII) I IJMENT ON CATHOLIC EDUCATION THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA WAS BIAllly $ 30 MILLION, THIS YEAR IT IS THREE
AND A HALF TIME:, MUCH. IT IS OVER $ 100 MILLION. NOW
THAT IS VERY MlI,' 1 FilUI THAN WOULD BE REQUIRED BY AN INCREASE
IN ENROLMENT OR AN INCREASE IN INFLATION IN THAT PERIOD,
THE PRINCIII II THAT WE HAVE ADHERED TO THROUGHOUT,
AS I SAID BEFORI, I I IAT IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE FOR CHILDREN
WHEREVER THEY LIVI WHATEVER THEIR PARENT'S MEANS, WHATEVER
THEIR PARENTS 1l:-II:; 11, WHATEVER THEIR PARENTS OCCUPATION
TO HAVE AS GOOD AN I IJCATION AS THIS COUNTRY CAN PROVIDE. 
AND THE BASIS UPON WHICH WE MAKE THAT PROVISION
IS PERFECTLY OPEN; IT'fS UNDER AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT. IT
IS ADMINISTERED BY A COMMISSION WHOSE MEMBERSHIP IS
APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DAY. IHAVE NEVER
HEARD ANY CRITICISM OF THE PEOPLE, MEN AND WOMEN, BOTH
LAY AND RELIGIOUS, WHO HAVE BEEN APPOINTED TO THAT
COMMISSION. IT IS A VERY DILIGENT COMMISSION, WITH A
VERY SERIOUS JOB TO DO. ITS RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 1974 AND
1975 HAVE TRANSFORMED EDUCATION IN AUSTRALIA AND I WOULD
BE ABLE TO SAY7THAT IF I WENT TO ANY STATE SCHOOL, IF I
WENT TO ANY CATHOLIC SCHOOL, OR IF I WENT. TO ANY
NON-GOVERNMENT, NON-CATHOLIC SCHOOL, ANYWHERE IN AUSTRALIA.
THREE YEARS AGO, HAD ICLAIMED THAT IWOULD BE ABLE
TO SAY THAT IN THE FUTURE, THERE MIGHT WELL HAVE BEEN A VERY
GREAT NUMBER OF DOUBTING-THOMASES AMONG YOU. WHAT I SAID
MIGHT HAVE BEEN RECEIVED WITH SCEPTICISM, IF NOT DISBELIEF.
IBELIEVE THAT THIS AUDIENCE -SO MUCH INVOLVED IN
THE PROFESSION OF TEACHING, SO MUCH CONCERNED ABOUT THE
QUALITY OF EDUCATION, AND SO MUCH AWARE OF THE NEEDS OF THE
YOUNG POPULATION IN OUR BURGEONING OUTER SUBURBS -KNOWS
HOW MUCH WE. HAVE TRIED TO DO IN THE EDUCATIONAL SPHERE, AND
HOW REAL ARE OUR INTENTIONS TO CONTINUE OUR POLICIES IN THIS
AREA. 
I HAVE VERY GREAT PLEASURE : i DECLARING OPEN
ST. FRANCIS XAVIER SCHOOL. 
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON CATHOLIC EDUCATION
IN WERRIWA
SACRED HEART, CABRAMATTA
GENERAL BUILDING GRANT
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT
CAPITAL GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED) $ 200,000 45,564 3,937 6,000 5,770
11,948 ALLOCATED ( 1974)
( APPROVED TO
APRIL 1975)
( a ST. THRS'S, SADLIER-MILLEN
RECURRENT GRANT 197LV
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT
CAPITAL GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED) ,30,770 1,697 2,000 7,520
12 242
OUR LADY OF MIT. CARMEL, MIT. PR'ITCHARD
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT
CAPITAL GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED) ( 1974)
( APPROVED TO
APRIL 1975)
40,446 3,500
20,000 3,000 ( 1974)
9,120
A SPECIAL POINT OF INTEREST IS THE EXPENDITURE OF $ 9,000 ( INCLUDED
WITHIN THE ABOVE-FIGURES) ON A REMEDIAL READING TEACHER BEING SHARED
BY THE THREE SCHOOLS. ALL THREE. HAVE A HIGH PROPORTION OF PUPILS
WITH SEVERE READING DIFFICULTIES. 
HIGH SCHOOLS
PATRICIAN BROTHERS HIGH SCHOOL, LIVERPOOL
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
1ST PAYMENT 1975
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT $ 104,335 88,741 2,625
ST. MARY'S HIGH SCHOOL, LIVERPOOL
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
1ST PAYMENT 1975 88,552 74,880
GRANTS TO NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
YEARAUSTRALIA 1970/ 71 32,508,000
1971/ 72 36,236,000
1972/ 73 47,755,000
1973/ 74 70,163,000
1974/ 75 ( ESTIMATE) $ 127,5331/" o INCREASE 11,4% 31.7% 46.9% 81.7% N. S. W,
$ 12,136,000
$ 13,234,000
$ 17,277,000
$ 24,564,000
$ 45,206,000 
S
CHILDHOOD SERVICES PROGRAM4
ELECTORATE OF WERRIWA
1973/ 74 1974/ 75
( 1/ 1/ 74 to ( 1/ 7/ 74 to
Iocation 30/ 6/ 74) 31/ 3/ 75)
*.., Ition to salary costs,
in pre-school centres.
_,, Orthy Pre-Schoo, Holsworthy 2,747 4,572
. c Village Pre-School, Holsworthy 2,031 3,312
,... leburn Pre-School Kindergarten 1,656 4,622
: 3jbi Kindergarten, Ingleburn 993 1,563
jreen Valley Pre-School, Miller 6,170 12,966
Liverpool Pre-School Centre,
Liverpool 4,755 7,875
Ashcroft Pre-School Kindergarten 2,674 4,668
2. Contribution to salary costs, staff
S in child care centres. 1972/ 73 1973/ 74 1974/ 75
Ingleburn Child Care Centre,
( Methodist Church) 365 4,424 3,955
Ashcroft Child Care Centre,
S( Methodist Church) 3,639 4,329
3. Before and After School Proaram
( Approved 5/ 3/ 75 under Childhood
Services Program)
Heckenberg Primary School
equipment costs 2,370
4. Child Care Centres Capital Cost
( Approved under Child Care Act)
Child Care Centre for 40 children
aged 3-5 years Ingleburn 57,000
( Methodist Church), completed
operational
Child Care Centre for 53 children
aged 0-5 years Liverpool 200,000
( Lutheran Church)-( approval in
principle awaiting preparation
of building plans)
Child Care Centre for 40 children
aged 3-5 years Macouarie Fields 180,000
( Salvation Army, plans being
prepared). N. S. W. Education Dept.
Pre-School Centres Capital Cost,
Approved in 1973/ 74 Interim Pre-School
Child Care Services Program. / 2 
-2-
Double Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Busby West
Public School 38,555
Single Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Sadleir
Public School 46,695
Single Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Canley Heights
Public School 36,960
Single Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Lurnea
Public School 44,435
A number of other proposals are now being
considered. 



PRIME MNAIATEU Press Statement No. 529
14 July 1975
CHALLENGES* TO ENVIRONMvENTAL LEGISLATION
The Prime Minister and Minister for Environment,
Mr E. G. Whitlam, stated today that there had been two important
challenges made in the High Court to actions undertaken by the
Australian Government in consequence of recent Acts of the
Australian Parliament. These related to the Environmental
Inquiry being held in relation to Fraser Island and to the
acquisition of Towra Point, on the foreshore of Botany Bay,
for nature conservation purposes.
The Prime Minister said the challenge to the Fraser
Island Inquiry had been taken out by parties associated with
the Dillingham-Murphyores consortium when the hearing was well
advanced. He said that transcripts of evidence now totalled some
1,400 pages, that over 200 documents had been tabled and that the
Inquiry was about to adjourn to Brisbane for the final stage of
the hearing. The attitude of the consortium contrasted with the
reported attitude of the Premier of Queensland, who, whilst
questioning the power of the Inquiry to call witnesses and
while not accepting that there was any legal obligation on the
Queensland Government to present a submission, nevertheless indicated
that, because of the public controversy and interest developed by
the Committee of Inquiry, his government would provide the
inquiry with information in the public interest.
The Prime Minister went on to say that the public
could draw their own inferences about the consortium's concern
for environmental obligations but, because they had raised a
point turning on the letter of the law regarding the scope of the
inquiry, this had to be examined by the Government. Consequently
to ensure that there was no ambiguity as to where the Government
stood and to provide a firm legal basis for the inquiry to be
carried through, he had revoked the existing direction to the
Commissioners and issued a new one to them which was specifically
related to the Australian Government's export powers and which,
on the advice of the Attorney-General, could withstand any
High Court challenge. 
2.
The new direction requires that " an inquiry be
conducted in respect of all of the environmental aspects of
the making of decisions by or on behalf of the Australian
Government in relation to the exportation from Australia of
minerals ( including minerals that have been subjected to
processing or treatment) extracted or which may hereafter
be extracted from Fraser Island in the State of Queensland".
The Prime Minister said he hoped that the Commissioners
would be able to complete hearings under these new terms as
soon as practicable. He also said that he hoped the great bulk
of material already gathered could be considered by the new
inquiry. With respect to the challenge by the N. S. W. Government
to the purchase of Towra Point for national park purposes, he
said he was certainly not attracted to the proposition that the
Australian Government, having regard to its status as a national
government, cannot acquire a national park or national nature
reserve under an enactment of the national parliament. He
hoped the High Court would clarify this as soon as practicable.
CANBERRA, A. C. Tm 



Press Statement No. 530
14 July 1975
THE MINISTRY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, tonight announced
a change in the Ministry. The change follows the election
of Mr J. M. Berinson, to the Ministry at the Caucus
Meeting of the Australian Labor Party that was held in
Canberra earlier today.
The Prime Minister said that the Governor-General
had tonight sworn-in Mr Berinson as Minister for Environment.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER' S PRESS COINFERENCE, CANBERRA,
July 1975
I should make it clear that I do not intend to respond
to any questions or speculation about the Budget to be brought
down on 19 August.* I-have take n that attitude in 1973 1974
that is normal practice. Nevertheless, it will help you if I
say something about the Government's general approach to the
Budget in the context of our present economic situation.
The forthcoming Budget will be the result of fuller
preparation and consultation than any Budget before it. This
process of consultation and preparation has-been going on for
months. It is a process that involves, not just the Cabinet
and our officials, but many outside groups and interests. The
Economic Committee of the Parliamentary party met yes terday to
discuss the broad terms of our economic policy, with " ir. H~ en,
the Treasurer. The Government's consultations with outside
groups are more extensive this year than they have ever been,
They will conclude with a meeting with A. C. T. U. representatives
tomorrow morning. In addition, the Government itself has set
up new procedures to develop its budgetary strategy. We
established earlier this year you remember, the Expenditures
Review Committee of Cabinet, backed by a committee of officials
who have been wotrking for the last two months.
I want to emphasise that I regard this as a major
innovation in budgeting procedures and one with which I am
very satisfied. The committee of officials is chaired by an
officer of my department and includes officials from the
Treasury and the Departments of Social Security, Labour and
Immigkration ana" Urban and Regional Development. The Cabinet
committee, which is under my chairmanship, has proved very
useful in scrut~ ising the proposals of individual ministers
and looking at hr. ad economic policy. The officials' committee
has produced two vdery full reports on the whol&amp; range of
iGovernment exze-ditures. Ministers will be considering these
reports and debaJ-ting the Budget in general all next week.
As kzn ow, the Government since coming to office has
made many innovatLions and introduced many social policies and
programs that were long overdue. We saw that a lot of things
had to be done, and our task was made more urgent, and more
costly, by the-fact that nearly all these areas had been
neglected for so long by our predecessors. That is why
Government expenditures rose so rapidly in the past two years.
In addition, It was necessary to push expenditures ahead at a
time when unemployment was high and the economy was in recession.
But we also recognised that it would be necessary to review
Government expenditures as the economy recovere
That is what we are doing. In April tifis year I wrote
to all ministers telling them to prepare for c ~ tbacks in
expenditure and draw up their own programs fok cutbacks. 
2.
We instructed the officials' committee to examine
thoroughly all on-going programs and new proposals and to
identify the options open to us for reducing expenditures
in the Budget. They have done so in the two reports I have
mentioned. The basic fact is that the industrial western nations
are now starting to climb out of the deepest recession experienced
since the second world war. This recession has not been confined
to Australia; it is not a local affair. Every major country
in the industrialised world has been going through a recession
over the last 12 to 18 months and in most of them the severity
of the recession has been much greater than it has been in
Australia. For instance, in the United States, by far the biggest
economy in the world, industrial production during the recession
has declined by about 14 percent compared with 8 percent in
Australia and gross domestic product is running nearly 8
percent below its level in the last quarter of 1973 in the
United States, compared with a fall of 3 percent in Australia.
Unemployment in the United States has passed the 8 percent
mark. In Australia it is 4.5 percent.
In Japan the decline in production was of the order
of 20 percent. Real gross domestic product fell by about
1 percent. Zn the European Economic Community there appears
to have been a ein in production of about 6 percent over
the last year. : eai gross domestic product of these countries
increased by on-y 1.3 percent in 1974 following a 5.6 percent
growth in 1972. C_-auunity-wide unemployment has risen from
2.7 million to 4.2 million over the past 12 months.
Not only is the recession not confined to Australia:
there are grounds far arguing that it had world-wide origins.
0-r experience has zeen part of the total experience of the
ilu. strialised wor-i-There are, however, grounds for optimism.
T-e latest indicatfins are that the recession is ending in the
United States, Ja= an and Western Eurpoe. And there are
indications tha. it is ending in Australia. 
PRIME MINISTER: Are there any questions?
QUESTION: I refer to your letter that you mentioned you
sent to Mr Berinson and other Ministers about their staff.
Why have you zecided to ask Ministers to give you such
detailed infor.. ation about their personal staff, and isn't
this task already undertaken by the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation?
PRIME MINISTER: The Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation doesn't concern itself with aspects other than
security. Itdoesn't concern itself, for instance, with
any business activities, or personal connections of that
character,, which Ministers' secretaries may undertake.
Quite clearly it is necessary to insure that Ministers'
staffs do not do anything which Ministers themselves
are not allowed to do, or not expected to do. I gave
Sevidence on this matter before Mr Riordan's committee
concerning the pecuniary interests of members of the
Parliament. I said that people whom the ministers
appointed should have to make the same declarations,
their interests should be registered, in the same way
O as I advocated, and as the Labor party advocates in its
platform, should be the case with ministers. Now it's
quite clear that ministers'staffs ought to be under the
same, they should operate under the same standards, as
ministers themselves, and I propose to ensure that from now
on this is t-he case.
QUESTION: Who do you expect will be enforcing these
standards? Will it be yourself, Sir? To what use will
this information be put? Will it come to you and will you
O then vet Ministeri-al staffs? The second question, quite
different. Do y: ui hope that in the near future to be
making an announcement about the new Governor of the Reserve
B ank? MINISTER: The second one: yes. The first one, I
have to be informed by ministers of the persons that they
propose to appoint to their staffs. As I say, I need to know
the previous enoio-ment history, the academic attain ments,
and the famil -v noersonal connections of any proposed
appointments. I, in my view, the appointements are not
suitable, then of course, the persons concerned will not
be appointed. I would imagine, however, that discussion
with the minister concerned will see that appropriate
people are appointed.
QUESTION: Have you been happy in the past with the A. S. I. O.
checks on ministerial staff, particularly since December
1972, and is it true that since December 1972 full checks
have only been carried out by A. S. I. O. on two ministerial
staffs? PRIME MINISTER: No, I believe that there have been A. S. I. O.
checks on the staffs of all ministers who would have any 
2.
in
connection with matters/ which A. S. I. O. was concerned.
Not only them, but on most ministers. This question
arose several times early in 1973 and answers were given
in those cases. I have no reason to believe that A. S. I. O.
checks were . r adequate. The matters of dissatisfaction
which have clearly emerged would not come within the
sphere of A. S. I. O.
QUESTION: You've prevented witnesses, public service witnesses
under your control, from testifying before the Senate.
You've offered no alternative inquiry into the loans
affair. In the normal procedures of the Parliament you
haven't offered the documents that the -Opposition has
required. And I ask, what are you hiding, how long
can it be hidden, and in particular, is there any truth at
all in the letter that was written by Professor Colin
Howard to the Age, who . was at the time, as is still,
an adviser to the Attorney-General, that the Government's
design was to avoid, was to arrange a method by which it could
get around the Senate's rejection of Supply?
PRIME MINISTER: The Government is hiding nothing. I didn't
read through Professor Colin Howard's letter to the Age,
I don't know if he is . i. adviser to the present Attorn,-y-General.
Nevertheless, I stated in the Parliament last Wednesd. Ay
that there was no bypassing of Loan Council procedures.
I was asked a question about this late in March, I think,
late in May, and I gave an answer. And the answer was correct,
and it hasn't zeen challenged. The matter arose at the
last meeting of the I n Council and nobody demurred at the Loan...
QUESTION: I'm referring to the rejection of Supply, Prime
Minister, not the Loan Council. Professor Howard's
suggestion...
S PRIME MINISTER: Oh, well look, if you don't mind, I think
it was two colur:-sthe letter, so I didn't really read it
through. I thougah you said Loan Council. I didn't read
Professor Howard's letter, and I don't think it's satisfactory
for you to ask -e to comment on your summary of it. The
Government is : zncealing nothing, the Government has
responded to v-erything that the Opposition has asked in the
proper way. Than is, by questions to ministers or motions
concerning ministers. It is the normal procedure for the
Crown to plead privilege in the matters which are in the
Senate summons. The Senate summons concerned the, a meeting
of the Executive Council and matters prior and subsequent
to that meeting. Quite obviously they are privileged. Any
Government would claim privilege for them. You might as well
say that if a witness was called from a newspaper, if an
editor of a newspaper was called-and no Crown. privilege could
be pleaded in respect of a journalist or a newspaper editorthe
journalist or the editor would certainly plead privileges
as to the sources of his information. Are you then to say
that you're hiding something?
QUESTION: Well, you would be hiding something, Prime Minister... 
3.
PRIME MINISTER: But the fact is that privilege has
always been claimed, and properly claimed for proceedings
of the Executive Council. That's what the Senate summons
mentioned. That, and that alone. They called public
servants alone. You don't politicise the public
service in this jay. Privilege is something which is
claimed by many people in the Courts or, in the exceptional
circumstances of them being summonedbefore a Parliament.
A journalist pleads privilege as often as not when he's
called as a witness. A doctor pleads privilege similarly;
a lawyer pleads privilege. It is the normal thing, and
it is the proper way in which these things are conducted.
It's been recognised for centuries.
QUESTION: Today Senator Withers, in the Senate, gave notice
that the Senate would affirm its right to summon
the people before it. ( Unclear). This runs in the face of the
Idirections the ministers have given to the permanent heads...
PRIME MINISTER: With respect, it does not.
QUESTION: Well, my answer is, Prime Minister...
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I thought you were wanting an answer
from me...
QUESTION: Well t do you propose to do if the Senate
summons, brings. a permanent head before it, asks a question,
doesn't get an aannds wtehre n decides that he's in breach
of Senate privilege?
PRIM MINISTER: be the day when the Senate presumes
to iorison a pub-Servant for obeying instructions.
QU: STCN: Would v-ol: care to explain the difference between
public servants givinz evidence to Estimates Committees
in the Senate, a5 niic servants giving evidence to the
Senate as a con--ee of the whole?
PRIME MINISTER: No public servant has ever been asked by a
Senate com-mittee to give evidence concerning, say, a meeting
of the Executive Council or the proceedings prior or
subsequent to a meeting of the Executive Council. The Senate
has accepted, furthermore, that public servants do not discuss 1
at Senate committee meetings matters of policy, the advice
given to ministers, and so on. Or the discussions between
ministers or the discussions between departments on advice
to ministers. The Senate committees have accepted this
principle. It's all set out in the book of the Senate Clerk
on these matters. / 4 
4.
QUESTION: Has the traditional approach been for public
servants to claim Crown privilege on matters of Government
policy, and not on matters of fact?&gt; Have you now received'
new advice th,-public servants are able to claim Crown
privilege on z=.-tters of fact,. as distinct from Government
policy? PRI14E MINIST.-: R: No public servant has ever been summoned
before the Senate before. The only person who's ever
appeared to give evidence before the Senate before was
the Governor of the Reserve Bank. It may be, I don't
assert it to be the case, it may be, that people like the
Auditor-General or the Governor of the Reserve Bank,
might he able to give evidence. The Auditor-General.
of course, is obliged to advise the Parliament. The
Solicitor-General may possibly be asked to advise, as long
as it doesn't cut across opinions which he's given
to the Governmnent. As long as it's not upon subjects;
the evidence sought from him doesn't touch upon advice7
which he has given to the Government. But public
servants have never previously been summoned before the
Senate, and nor have they been, say, in Britain. The
nearest parallel to this was in 1951 when a Senate
committee requested the Chiefs of the Armed Forces
to appear before it, and the Acting Prime Minister at the
time, Mr Fadden, as he still was, conveyed to the Chairman
of the SenatI--e committee which made the request that they
would not be attending.
QUESTION: M~ r Thomas. fron, tho Age, Sir, if the Government
is concealing nothing about the loans
OPRIME MINISTER: Mr'doubting'Thomas 
QUESTION: Could you explain which New York and London based
companies the Government intended to buy back with part of its
$ 4,000 million borrowings. And how did the Government intend
to breach the gap between the 8.35 cost of the borrowings and
the dividend yield of major resources companies here of about
3 or 4 per cent?
PRIME MINISTER: This was all discussed last Wednesday No
I know I didn't and I don't propose to now.
QUESTION: In the likely event that the Senate decides that
the Senate will decide what is privilege-"-. hat evidence
is privileged and not the Government.-Wnat is your reaction to
that? If the Senate tomorrow says that this evidence of
Fred Wheeler/ is, in fact, not t-rue?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I expect that the Senate will accept the
advice of Senator Greenwood when he was Attorney-General and
Mr Ellicott ; hen he was Solicitor-General. That is they will
treat the cerwiicates of the Ministers as conclusive.
QUESTION: And i Eney don't?
P?: 2z MINISTER: seli in that case if the Public Servants obey
S their instructions, they would technically be in contempt of the
Senate maybe. T dn't believe the Senate would so resolve and
if it didit's not likely to send them to Goulburn Gaol.
QUESTION: Can't you take it to the High Court Sir. In that event
would the Government try and get a ruling from the High Court on
that matter?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, wait until they get to gaol. There may
be dungeons below the Senate Chamber, I don't know. The Senate
Attendants wouldhave their time cut uutguarding thenm,. keeping them
chained up.
QUESTION: A question in relation to ministerial staff / 6 
PRIME MINISTER; This is the third from the Financial Review;
we have had 2 from the Age, 3 from the Financial Review. Are
there any other newspapers?
REID: ( interjection: he's not a newspaper).
PRIME MINISTER: Any other media?
REID: Reid, A. C. P.
PRIME MINISTER: This is not the medium; this is the message.
Mr Reid.
REID: In your speech in the House you revealed the oral advice
given by the then Attorney-General on the loans matter to the
Executive Council. Why not then reveal the advice of the
Solicitor-General in the same circumstances as asked for by
Mr Ellicott and other Members of the Opposition.
PRIME MINIST: R: I quoted already the letter which Mr Byers the
Solicitor-General, that is the second Law Officer of the Australian
Crown, wrote to the President of the Senate this afternoon. He
pointed out quoting Attorney-General Greenwood and
Solicitor-General Ellicott, his predecessor, that the privilege
of the ' Crown extends to opinions -of the Law Officers. The principle
applies whether thev be written or oral and Mr Byers, the
Solicitor-General, said " as one of its law officers I may not
consistently with my constitutional duty intentionally act in
opposition to its claim". I didn't quote the opinion of the
then Attorney-General, I said we acted on his advice, his oral
advice. QUESTION: In relation to staff appointments were you told last
year in the presence of Sir John Bunting and several other people
that a certain person who was later appointed to a Ministers staff
had offered bribes in an attempt to obtain Cabinet Documents
from another person connected with another Minister's staff and
-was the same advice given to both Dr Cairns and the former
Attorney-General, Lionel Murphy. / 7 
PRIME MINISTER?.: I have never heard of any of this. Sir John
Bunting never mentioned any such matter to me.
QUESTION: I didn't suggest he did. He was present
when it was suggested to you.
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember any such occasion. I don't
remember anybody saying such a thing to me. If you care to tell
me afterwards about it, I'll -pursue it.
QUESTION: I'll do that.
QUESTION: Prime Minister in your speech last week you said the
Attorney-General advised orally that the $ 4 billion loan could
probably be legal within the terms of the financial agreement.
Can you tell me have you received any written advice on this
subject. If so who from? And have you got any advice that
the borrowing was definitely within the terms of the financial
agreement and not just probably within the terms of it?
PRIME MINISTER: There was no written advice sought or received.
The matter was also discussed with Mr Byers and the Secretary of
the Attorney-General' s Department by me.
0 = SSUION: Can v.: u tell us what advice you got from Mr Byers and
. e Secretary O: fh Department as well as what you got from the
2ttorney-General?
PRIME MINIS__: i sought the advice from the three persons
and I acted in accordance with the advice.
QUESTION: Have you decided that Miss Morosi is not to be employed
on any Ministerialstaffs and have you and have you issued the
appropriate instructions? a
PRIME MINISTER: I believe I was asked this at another Press
Conference about a fortnight ago. I gather that your question is
based on one of the Sydney afternoon papers. It could have been
either of them I must confess. Their sense of responsibility 
8.
saying that had issued an instruction in respect of Miss Morosi.
I have never m-entioned that the suitability of Miss Morosi's
employment t-D any of my Ministers.
QUESTION: You were quoted in some papers this morning as telling
Caucus that the Auditor-General is somehow involved in
some aspect of the Cairns business and the loans business. Can
you tell us the involvement of the Auditor-General, what he is
investigating, why
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't see any report in the newspapers to this
effect. I don't, what I said in Caucus yesterday was not very fully
reported. For very good reason I didn't tell any of you.
I didn't give a briefing and I didn't give a conference or an
interview to any of you or in any of the Media on the Caucus
proceedings. I don't, I'm not intending to.
QUESTION: can I -clear something' up.: was the
Government intending to dodge a refusal of supply by hocking
what is called now our national heritage
PRIME MINISTER: I saw some suggestion of this. This bright
idea was never discussed. Nor, of course, having been made
in one of the Fairfax papers, was it checked with any of the
persons that . i-t be concerned. 



7-/ 4 7
JAUSTRALIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 531
16 July 1975
I. W. Y. CONFERENCE WOMEN POLITICS
Australia's lready significant contribution to International
Women's Year would achieve new goals with a major conference on
women and politics to be held in Canberra soon, the Prime
Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, announced today.
Mr Whitlam said the Women and Politics Conference would be held
0 at the Australian National University, Canberra, from August
to September 6.
It would bring together women from all over Australia and
selected speakers from overseas to create a greater understanding
of the means ty which women could participate in the making of
political decisions. The Conference also would highlight the
difficulties confronting women who desired to be politically
active.
S Mr Whitlam said that already Australia's efforts in International
O Women's Year were receiving world-wide attention. This new
Conference, to which both women and men were being invited, would
be an historic event for Australia's women and for Australia's
politics.
0 He said that cth traditional and new viewpoints were being sought
and the Conference would be a focal point of exchange of ideas
between those -ho had previously been politically active and
those who would like to be.
It would be an opportunity for women from other nations to share
their experiences in achieving significant social and political
change wit ' in their own communities. About 20 outstanding
women from cverseas will participate.
And ultimately, it would be the base from which women themselves
can launch a renewed attack on community attitudes now preventing
them from playing their full role in creating a more humane, a
more compassionate society. / 2 
V"-2.
Mr Whitlam sL-the intention of the International Women's
Year Secret=--. it at the Conference was to seek both traditional
and new vie-2.. r. ts. Emphasis would be on individuals and not on
organisatic-_= -d it was hoped that people from all walks of life
would atten-. Delegates would become agents of awareness after
the Conferen. ca, returning to their communities with experience
which will help dissipate some of the taboos surrounding women's
participation in community decision-making.
Long distance air fares and accommodation were being subsidised
by the Australian Government to encourage women from far flung
communities, including aborigines, to take part. A maximum
return economy fare of $ 52.40 would be payable and accommodation
at Australian National University halls of residence would be $ 35 for
the conference week. Registration fee was
Mr Whitlam said those interested in attending should apply
in writing to hne Women and Politics Conference Office,
P. 0. Box 725, Canberra City, A. C. T. 2601, for an
application rform.
CANBERRA. A. C. 7% 



-L mms
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 532
17 July 1975
SENATE INTERROGATION
S three daTyhse hoapvpeo sibteeino n'dse plaocrtaibolnes. in Int hea n Seenxaetrec isoev ert hetyhe past
knew would achieve nothing they subjected senior and
respected public servants to an unnecessary and humiliating
experience. They tried to turn the Senate into a Star
Chamber. They made a mockery of proper parliamentary
practices. The Opposition knew on Tuesday that senior
public servants would be protected from harassment about
activities for which they bore no responsibility. Public
servants advise Ministers; Ministers alone are responsible
for the Government's actions.
Rlaying failed to persuade public.; servants to disobey
their instructions, the Opposition is now turning its might
on private citizens.
It has called Mr Karidis, an Adelaide builder, to
appear before it on Tuesday. Would it then call Mr Harris,
the Melbourne dentist? It seems unlikely, because Mr
Harris, has had dealings not only with Mr Lynch,
according to published affidavits, but also, whether the
Victorian Premier knows or admits it or not, with the
Chairman of the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of
Works, Mr Croxford, and the head of the Melbourne
Underground Rail Loop Authority, Mr Roscoe.
The Opposition is hell-bent on finding evidence of
misconduct by the Government. The Government's opponents
have resorted to the use of confidence men, men with
histories of mental instability and crooks to uncover
evidence of Government misconduct but they have failed.
They bill find no evidence because the Government has done
nothing which is illegal or improper.
All relevant documents concerning the loans have been
tabled in Parliament. They don't suit the Opposition because
they do not support their innuendoes of impropriety. So
the opposition chooses to ignore the facts in its mindless
and desperate search for headlines. / 2 
0 2.
The activities of the Senate, in the past three
days, have wasted the time of senior public servants
and produced nothing of value. They have already
delayed the Government's work on this year's Budget,
a Budget which will be one of the most important
to be brought down since the War. The Cabinet and its
Committees could not get on with the job of framing
the Budget while Senate Ministers and senior officials
were tied down in the Opposition's fruitless continuation
of the Senate sitting.
Although the Opposition was told repeatedly that
public servants had been ordered not to answer questions,
it proceeded with the farce of questioning them knowing
they would not answer. The Opposition's aim was clear:
0 it wanted to attack the Government by attacking the
public servants. As the Leader of the Opposition said
in one of his revealing asides to Government members,
" It's you fellows I want not them. And I'll get you".
But Senator Withers and his colleagues are not prepared
to attack the Government directly. They have asked many
questions in the Parliament, most of which have already
been answered, and the remainder of which will be.
They are not prepared to use proper parliamentary
forms. They have still not formulated any charges
against the Government.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



I lr Speech by the -Prime Minister at Opening of
. Ipswich, C ivic Hall.,. July. 19 75
Mr Mayor., Madam Mayoress, Treasurer, Mrs Hayden, Ministers
Mrs Campbell, Mrs Edwards, Senator and Mrs Bonner,
Mr Marginson, Mrs Marginson, Mr Hales, M. L. A.
Mrs Hales, Civic Fathers and Citizens.
Now this is the formal opening that I am about to perform. I
did the symbolic opening two hours ago at dusk in the presence
of hundreds and hundreds of the rising generation. And I believe
that symbolises what this occasion means for this city. Because
there were representatives, it seemed to me) of all possible
youth groups in the city and round about there gathered to
watch me unveil the plaque commemorating the opening of the
Civic Hall. The first instalment of the great new civic centre
which will embellish and exalt the heart of this ancient citythe
oldest free city, I'm always told, in Queensland.
Because all the people who were watching there for the rest of
their lives will remember this day, what it means to them. This
Civic Hall provides facilities for a great range of activities.
That the whole of civic centre contains two whole city blocks,
we will be the heart of all the activities which a modern city,
a complete community should provide. And which the rising
generation expects.
Now in this auditorium where I am speaking now there are many
many hundreds of citizens. In the intervening two hours the
Mayor and Mayoress entertained many of us in the lower ground
floor. There are three rooms there, the Cunningham room, the
Logan room and the Lockyer room. We were in the Cunningham room,
the largest and we were very well entertained and replenished and
fortified and prepared. The civic fathers did us very well
indeed and we who were in the Cunningham room are grateful to
them. I thought probably the Cunningham room was the most suitable
place to entertain us in the intervening two hours, not only
because of its size but because of its association, the fact
that Alan Cunningham discovered the place. It mightn't have been
appropriate to have the meeting in the Logan room because that,
of course, is named after the Commandant of the Penal Settlementthe
original foundation in this State. I wouldn't have minded
the Lockyer room because Lockyer was a very great man and one
of those whom I have always aspired to follow. His son was
a very great man, a member of the old Interstate Commission,
the original Interstate Commission, and he was born when the
Lockyer who's remembered round here, was 71 years of age.
So, of course, -we in Public life always regard Lockyer
as a proper example to follow. 
1" 2.
Now this occasion is the third that my wife and I have been
here last year and this. My wife was here early last year
just after the floods. I was here late in the year, some
people said just before the deluge But we've come together
on this occasion, the date was ar . ranged between the Mayor and
me through the intervention of Bill Hayden, who is, I'm
certain , about to 6 ffect a successful transition from the most
enlightened and benevolent Minister for Social Security the
country has ever had to the greatest of Australian Treasurers.
But you know, and I can never forget, he is also the M. P. for
Oxley. And he deliberately arranged, I'm certain, for this'
opening to coincide with the weekend immediately before we
consider the Budget. Because I believe he wanted to bring
home to me the demonstration of what the Australian Government
should be doing because in Ipswich we can very easily see in
many ways what it can do in respect to local government and
civic and community facilities..
A few years ago it would have been remarkable to ask a Prime
Minister to open any Municipal civic facility . such as this.
In fact, I receive a remarkable number of such invitations
these days from Cairns to here, over the border to Murwillumbah
and so on. And I think it is because my Government is the first
Australian Government which has accepted a responsibility in
respect to local government. And-the Mayor has already mentioned
some of them. I think next Tuesday we start clearing the site
for the Humanities Building $ 800,000 part of the Regional
Employment Development Scheme. But last year, last financial
year, for the first time the Australian Government asked the
Australian Parliament to make provision for grants to local
governments. And it did so on advice of an expert impartial
body, the Grants Commission, and Ipswich got about $ 360,000 to
spend as it wished. Brisbane got more, $ 2 million, more than
any place in Australia. But you've got more than most.
And then I recall that last financial year there was $ 840,000
provided for the National Sewerage Program for Ipswich;
$ 200,000 for Child Minding Centres; another $ 800,000 for
Regional Employment Development; there is going to be a
$ 1 million office block; and then there is going to be a
Queensland Government Office Block which means that in these
two blocks citizens will be able to have all facilities
provided by local government, State government, Federal
government handy to each other. Very puzzling for citizens
to know where they can get assistance or advice from elected
representatives. It will' be easier than most places to find out
and to get the assistance and advice in Ipswich because they
will all be adjacent to each other in proper buildings. The
staff will be servicing their fellow citizens in a convenient
spot and decent building.
Then I should mention Community Health Centre in East Street
and the Australian Legal Aid Office. In*, all these respects
I think can be seen, that there hare been initiatives which
mean that if citizens want professional advice, medical or
legal, if they want Governmental advice, if they need
municipal facilities, public facilities, then they are on the
way to being provided. / 3 
V6 3.
It's a very happy moment, indeed, for me to come to Ipswich
first, so that one can see these things properly arranged
side by side, planned ahead. This is the largest building
erected in Ipswich for very many years. In the heart of the
city there are other buildings to follow. A whole range of
facilities which we can't provide as individuals or as
families will now be provided through proper cooperation, local,
State and Federal, in the heart of this old city, this city
which from now on will have as modern and appropriate facilities
as any city in Australia.
Thank you very much indeed for asking my wife and me to be with
you on this opening night. We are enjoying ourselves immensely.
And looking at all the people as we come in, I'm certain we can
be proud to think that as ratepayers, as taxpayers, as electorate
persons, as citizens, we are building well for the future of
this regional centre, this great provincial city, this oldest
free city in Queensland. And as I come into your airport,
Amberley itself, to go back tonight to Canberra, I realise how
easy it is to get here, how pleasant it is and when you're here
how hospitable the place is.
Mr Mayor, Madam Mayoress thank you very much for your invitation
on behalf of your fellow citizens to me and my wife to come
here at the inauguration of the Ipswich Civic Centre and in
particular to the opening of the Ipswich Civic Hall. I wish
well to everybody who comes to this auditorium, everybody who
partakes of the hospitality in the lower ground floor; all the
people who come to the seminars, the exhibitions, that will be
held week in, week out, in this great building the Centre of
Ipswich, the revived exalted part of this city.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now declare officially open the Ipswich
Civic Hall. 



S* * 1 J
PRIM] E MINISTER'S QUEENISLAhD BROADCAST NO, 18
THE SENATE INQUISITION
JULY 1975*
THIS WE-EK WE HAVE SEEN YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE
OF THE OPPOSITION'S CONTEMPT FOR PARLIAMENTARY PRINCIPLES
AND ESTABLISHED POLITICAL CONVENTIONS ONE HAS TO KEEP
RETURNING TO THIS THEME BECAUSE THESE PRINCIPLES, THESE
rCONVENTIONS AREN'T JUST DRY LEGAL FORMALITIES--THEY ARE
THE BASIC RULES OF THE POLITICAL GAME&gt; EVER SINCE WE CAME
TO OFFICE THE OPPOSITION HAS BEEN BREAKING THESE RULES
S WHENEVER IT SUITS THEN, THEY HAVE REJECTED LEGISLATION
IN THE SENATE FOR WHICH THE PEOPLE HAVE VOTED; THEY'VE
REFUSED SUPPLY TO T-E ELECTED GOVERNMENT; THEY'VE
REFUSED TO FOLLOW THE CONVENTION ABOUT FILLING CASUAL.
VACANCIES IN THE SENATEA IT'S ALL PART OF THE SAME
WRETCHED PATTERN-LAST WEEKEND THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA SHOWED ',-HAT THEY THOUGHT OF AN UPPER HOUSE
OBSTRUCTING POPULAR LEGISLATION WHEN THEY RETURNED DON
DU DUNSTAN'S GOVERNMENT FOR ANOTHER TERMA BUT THIS WEEK THE
OPPOSITION IN CANBERRA HAVE BEEN AT IT AGAIN, THEY HAVE
DRAGGED PUBLIC SERVANTS THROUGH A POLITICAL INQUISITION
IN THE SENATE-AND NOW THEY'RE THREATENING TO DO THE SAME
WITH PRIVATE CITIZENS/ THEY HAVE UNDERMINED THE TRADITIONAL
NEUTRALITY AND INTEGRITY OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE THEY HAVE
IGNORED THE PRINCIPLE THAT MINISTERS ALONE, MINISTERS
ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE, ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ACTIONS OF
A GOVERNMENT. 
YOU SHOULD NOT BE FOOLED BY THE OPPOSITIOIN LINE
THAT WHAT WAS AT STAKE THIS WEEK WAS THE SUPREMACY OF
PARLIAMENT OVER THE BUREAUCRACYv THE SUPREMACY OF
PARLIAMENT IS PRECISELY WHAT MY GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
DEFENDINGMC LET'S GO BACK TO THE BEGINNING AND SEE HOW
THIS DEPLORABLE BUSINESS BEGAN, AFTER THE PARLIAMENT
ROSE FOR ITS WINTER RECESS THE OPPOSITION AND THE PRESS
BEGAN MAKING WILD ACCUSATIONS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OVER
CERTAIN OVERSEAS LOAN NEGOTIATIONs, LEAKED DOCUMENTS,
FABRICATED DOCUMENTS, DOCUMENTS FOR WHICH NEWSPAPERS HAD
PAID MANY THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS BEGAN APPEARING IN THE PRESS
AMID A GREAT CHORUS OF ALLEGATIONS AND UNSUBSTANTIATED
CHARGES AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT AND PARTICULAR MINISTERS
I DECIDED THAT PARLIAMENT WAS THE PROPER PLACE FOR THESE
CHARGES TO BE MADE AND DEBATEDY So I RECALLED THE PARLIAMENT
FOR A SPECIAL SITTING, ' MIND YOU, WE HAD ALREADY GIVEN
THE PARLIAMENT MOST OF. THE INFORMATION ABOUT THE NATURE
AND PURPOSES OF OUR LOAN NEGOTIATIONS . BUT I DECIDED THAT
THE. OPPOSITION SHOULD HAVE THE FULLEST OPPORTUNITY
TO QUESTION THE GOVERNMENT, DEBATE THE ISSUE FURTHER AND
tA. KE ANY CHARGES THEY WISHEDX DURI-NG THAT SPECIAL SITTING
THE GOVERNMENT AVAILABLE SCORES OF DOCUMENTS AND PAPERS
RELATING TO THE LOANS ISSUE, WE HAVE ANSWERED NEARLY EVERY
QUESTION THAT OPPOSITION MEMBERS HAVE PUT TO ' US IN THE
PARLIAMENT AND EVERY QUESTION WILL: BE ANSWERED THROUGH THE
NORMAL PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURES DURING THE SPECIAL SITTING
OF THE HOUSE THE OPPOSITION FAILED TO SUBSTANTIATE ANY
SPECIFIC CHARGE OF ILLEGALITY OF IMPROPRIETY AGAINST THE
GOVERNMENT OR ANY MINISTERA No SPECIFIC CHARGE WAS
SUBSTANTIATED; NO SPECIFIC CHARGE WAS EVEN MADE. ./ 3 
3,
IF THE OPPOSITION REALLY WANTED TO PURSUE THIS
MATTER IT -AD EVERY RIGHT TO DO SO THROUGH THE NORMAL
PROCESSES CF PARLIAMENT: THOSE PROCESSES WERE BY NO MEANS
. EXHAUSTED THEY CAN NEVER BE EXHAUSTED INSTEAD THEY
DECIDED TO SUBJECT SENIOR AND RESPECTED PUBLIC SERVANTS
TO AN UNNECESSARY AND HUMILIATING INQUISITIONy THEY
TRIED TO TURN THE SENATE INTO A STAR CHAMBER, IT WAS A PURE
POLITICAL STUNT, AND WE WEREN'T GOING TO HAVE A BAR OF THOSE
TACTICSy , iE EREN'T GOING TO ALLOW PUBLIC SERVANTS TO
BE DRAGGED B-FORE THE SENATE AND INTERROGATED ON MATTERS
FOR WHICH THEY ARE NOT RESPONSIBLE AND CANNOT BE
RESPONSIBLE IINISTERS ALONE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
GOVERNMENT'S ACTIONS, MINISTERS ALONE ARE ANSWERABLE
TO THE PARLIA'ENTO So Tr: S S STHE SITUATION: THE.' SENATE HAS SAT
FOR THREE DA" YS NCW, AND THE OPPOSITION HAS FAILED TO
TURN UP A SI'-LE NEW FACT OR MAKE A SINGLE SPECIFIC
ALLEGATION CN T-IS MATTER DESPITE ALL THE OPPORTUNITIES
GIVEN TO THE&amp;. V : ET THEY GO ON WASTING THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS
A DAY IN PUBL. C KEEPING THE SENATE IN SESSION THEY
HAVE BROUGHT PUBLIC SERVANT HALFWAY ROUND THE WORLD
FOR THIS RIDIC'JLOUS PIECE OF GRANDSTANDING THEY HAVE
WASTED THE TI: E OF SENIOR PUBLIC SERVANTS AND MINISTERSA
THEY HAVE ALREADY DELAYED THE GOVERNMENT'S WORK ON THE
BUDGET) AND ALL FOR NOTHING' ALL FOR A FUTILE, CYNICAL
EXERCISE IN WITCHHUNTING AND INTIMIDATIONX ALL FOR A
FISHING EXPEDITION TO HELP THE OPPOSITION'S POLITICAL
PURPOSES, IT IS AN UTTER ABUSE OF PARLIAMENTARY PRACTICE, 
I HAVE ALREADY QUOTED WHAT SIR ROBERT I'IENZIES
SAID ABOUT EXPOSING SENIOR PUBLIC SERVANTS TO A PARLIAMENTARY
INQUISITION i5ERE ARE SOME OTHER WORDS OF SIR ROBERT
MENZIES ON THIS QUESTION:
" CIVIL SERVANTS OUGHT NOT TO BE DRAGGED INTO
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE... IT WOULD BE DEPLORABLE
TO HAVE THEIR NAMES AND VIEWS BANDIED ABOUT IN
PARLIAMENT, THUS INVOLVING THE CIVIL SERVANT MUCH
AGAINST HIS WILL IN PARTY POLITICAL CONTROVERSY,"
THOSE WERE SIR ROBERT MENZIES' VIEWS AND SIR
ROBERT IS NOT THE ONLY LIBERAL POLITICIAN WHO HAS SUPPORTED
OUR STAND IN THIS MATTER&gt; ALL GOVERNMENTS HAVE TAKEN THE VIEW 3
THAT PUBLIC SERVANITS AND THE GOVERNMENT'S LAW OFFICERS CANNOT
REVEAL DETAILS OR BE QUESTIONED ON CONFIDENTIAL GOVERNMENT
DISCUSSIONS THAT OPINION WAS SUPPORTED IN A PARLIAMENTARY
PAPER PREPARED IN 1958 BY SENATOR GREENWOOD, THE FORMER
LIBERAL ATTORNEY-: : ERAL, AND BY MiR ELLICOTT, THE FORMER
SOLICITOR-GENERAL D N: OW A LEADING SPOKESMAN FOR THE OPPOSITIONFOR
THE LIBERALS ? ERFECTLY WELL THAT ANY GOVERNMENT
LABOR OR LIBERAL -S TO DEAL CONSTANTLY WITH ' PUBLIC
SERVANTS ON EVERY : ATTER, AND IF PUBLIC SERVANTS BREACH THE
PRINCIPLES OF CC'. ODENTIALITY THE WHOLE SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT
BECOMES UNWORKA3' BLE AND GOVERNMENTS ARE FORMED IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESE: NTATIVES-YOU WON'T FIND THESE STAR CHAMBER
TACTICS IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES BECAUSE GOVERNMENTS
THERE ALWAYS HAVE . A MAJORITY THIS IS A TECHNIQUE THAT CAN
ONLY BE USED TO EMBARRASS A GOVERNMENT THAT LACKS A MAJORITY
IN THE SENATE.-IT HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH FACT-FINDINGCIT
IS A PURE POLITICAL EXERCISE. 
VE KVE TO RENEMB ER THAT PARLIAMENTARY INQUISITIONS
OF THE KiND THE OPPOSITION IS SEEKING OR EVEN
ROYAL COMMiSSIOIS FOR THAT MATTER, HOWEVER RESPECTABLE
THEY SOUND ARE QUITE FOREIGN TO THE FORMS AND
PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED OVER MANY CENTURIES TO APPLY
THE LAW OF THE LAND' IT'S TRUE THAT PARLIAMENT HAS CERTAIN
POWERS IN DEFENCE OF ITS OWN PRI\ VILEGES, BUT THAT'S A
DIFFERENT MATTER; AND IN ANY CASE, THE PRIVILEGES OF
PARLIAMENT ARE FOR BOTH HOUSES TO DETERMINE, NOT JUST
THE SENATP GATHER THAT WHAT THE OPPOSITION IS
-A
DESPERATELY S* EEING IN THIS CASE IS SOME EVIDENCE OF
Q CRIME OR MALPRACTICEA BUT IFA PERSON IS ACCUSED OF
A CRIME HE IS ENTITLED TO HAVE PROPER NOTICE OF THE
CHARGE AGAINST HIM, TO BE TRIED BY A COURT WHICH CAN
APPLY THE RULS COF EVIDENCE AND, IF HE'S GUILTY,
IMPOSE SOME SIMILARLY, IF A PERSON HAS BROKEN
SOIME CIVIL LK. IS ENTITLED TO THE SAME RIGHTS AND
PRIVILEGES: KS &gt; GSE MAY BE HEARD BEFORE A JUDGE AND THE
FACTS DETEP SE-Y A JURYN THE SENATE OR A ROYAL
COIiSSIN CAN . iNE OF THESE THINGSv A ROYAL COMMISSION
HAS NO POWER TO 2 VE VE~ RICTS OR MAKE JUDGENTSj IT
CAN'T FIND PE2? LE GUILTY OR NOT GUILTY( IT CAN'T AWARD
DAMAGES -OR -I P* 3SE SE&gt; NTENCESI ITS FINDINGS HAVE NO
FORCE IN LAW 19ATEVER, AS FOR THE SENATE
IT'S BOUND BY : O RULES AT ALL, NO RULES OF EVIDENCEI
NO RULES OF PROCEDURE2 IT CAN DO WHATEVER IT LIKES,
WHATEVER A MAJORITY OF PARTY POLITICIANS DECIDE, IMAGINE IT
TRIAL BY POLITICIANS, TRIAL BY LIBERAL AND COUNTRY PARTY SENATORS. 
6,
' IE S; ULD BE DEEPLY ALARMED WHEN PUBLIC SERVANTS
OR PRIVATE CITIZENS CAN BE HAULED BEFORE A POLITICALLY
MOTIVATED CHAMBER TO SERVE THE INTERESTS OF A POLITICAL
PARTYv THIS IS A VERY SINISTER AND DANGEROUS ABUSE
f
OF PARLIAMENT'S POWERS. ONCE WE START SUMMONING PRIVATE
CITIZENS FOR POLITICAL ENDS WHERE IS IT GOING TO STOP?
WHO WILL BE SAFE FROM POLITICAL INTERROGATION? THE
SENATE HAS S T A DIRE AND PERHAPS DISASTROUS PRECEDENT
IN ITS ACTIONS THIS WEEK" PARLIAMENT HAS ITS ROLE TO
PLAY IN OUR :, MOCRACY THE PUBLIC SERVICE HAS ITS
ROLE;: THE COURTS HAVE THEIR ROLE. THOSE ROLES
ARE SEPARATE D DISTINCT I'E MUST NOT ALLOW AN
ANTI-GOVERN. N T MAJORITY IN ONE HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT
TO DESTROY T:-E INTEGRITY OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE OR
BYPASS OR THE FUNCTIONS OF THE COURTS
IHAT WAY LIES C--S AND TYRANNY, 0 



Press Statement No. 533
21 July 1975
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT STAFFING CEILINGS
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced
today that the Government had directed that staff ceilings
for the financial year 1975/ 76 were to be applied to
Australian Government employment.
The decision to impose the ceilings reflects
the Government's determination to restrain government spending
and bring down a responsible Budget in keeping with current
needs. A staff ceiling of 1.5% has been applied to the
operative staff growth of the Public Service. In line with
this approach, the Australian Government has also advised
Statutory Authorities of their staffing limit for this
financial year, Mr Whitlam said.
The Government has sought the co-operation
of Departments ard Statutory Authorities in maintaining a
tight discipline on the use of overtime, consultants and
part-time staff. The Prime Minister said that some further
reduction in the staff growth of Australian Government
employment may be determined by the Government in the light
of Budget Cabinet considerations.
CANBERRA A. C. T. U 



ii &gt; AST ALIAC
PIM# E MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 534
23 July 1975
VIETNAMESE REFUGEES
The Australian Government has decided to initiate
a special longitudinal survey of Vietnamese refugees who had
recently settled in Australia, the Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam
announced tonight. The study will be carried out by Dr Jean Martin of
the Australian National University. Dr Martin and her associates
will interview the refugees at regular intervals over a period
of about five years.
The survey would concentrate on those who had neither
relatives nor friends here. It would record fully their experiences
in making new lives in Australia.
Mr Whitlam said that if there had been Government
follow-up studies of earlier refugee groups who had made their
0 homes in Australia, the task of selecting refugees now would be
easier. Mr Whitlam said the study would encompass such things
as The refugees' reasons for leaving their own country;
Their social characteristics;
* Their aspirations in their new homeland;
* What Australian Government assistance in maintenance and
welfare they requ., Iested, or needed, and received;
The problems they thought they might have to face in settling
in Australia, and how these compared with the problems
actually encountered;
The problems of culture and language difference they had to
face, and what happened to their cultural identity in the
process of re-settlement; and
To what extent if at all they suffered from racism. / 2 
Other factors which would emerge from the study
would be employment patterns, the use made of qualifications
and skills possessed by the refugees, their success in becoming
integrated, and the time they took to become indistinguishable
from the rest of the Australian community in their requirements
of the Australian Government.
" This is the first time that Australia without
regard to racial origins has offered resettlement opportunities
to people displaced in Asia who had no identifiable connection
with this country," Mr Whitlam said.
" In living up to her responsibilities in the
international community, Australia accepted those considered
most in need of humanitarian assistance and who were unlikely
to be offered resettlement opportunities elsewhere."
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



AA
Jj AUlSTKAI.! A, 1
PR. IE gINBSTER PRESS STATEMENT 53' 0
24 July 1975
DAME IVY WEDGWOOD, D. BE.
0 Dame Ivy Wedgwood, will be fondly
remembered by all Victorians as the first woman to
represent their State in the Senate, and by all of us
who served with her in the Parliament as a gracious
and esteemed colleague.
CANBERA, A. C. T. 



0?
', CSAUA Press Statement No. 536
July 1975
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES
SPECIAL GRANTS
The Prime Minister announced today that the Australian
Government had approved the recommendations of the Grants
Commission on applications made by the Queensland and South
Australian Governments for special financial assistance for
the year 1975/ 76.
The amounts approved for payment in 1975/ 76 total
$ 36,300,000 for Queensland and $ 2,500,000 for South Australia.
The Prime Minister said that special grants are
paid to Queensland and South Australia to compensate them
for such factors as lower capacity to raise revenue from
their own resources and the higher costs of providing
government services of a standard similar to those in the
financially stronger States.
The grants are in addition to those decided upon
at the Premiers' Conference in June 1975, when the Australian
Government agreed that Queensland and South Australia should be
provided with financial assistance grants totalling
$ 564.4 million and $ 379.2 million respectively.
Mr Whitlam noted that South Australia withdrew from
the Grants Commission at the end of 1974/ 75 and that the
Australian Government had agreed to increase the State's
financial assistance grant as from 1975/ 76 to compensate for
loss of special grants. The grant of $ 2,500,000 in 1975/ 76
is a final completion payment in respect of 1973/ 74.
The Prime Minister concluded by pointing out that
the aggregate of over $ 38 million in special grants represents
a significant effort by the Australian Government to assist
these two States.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR PRIME 1MINISTER FOR CIVIC RECEPTIOIN, TUMUT,
26 JULY 1975
1, I AM DELIGHTED TO BE HERE TODAY WITH MY WIFE TO
SHARE THE WARMTH AND HOSPITALITY OF TUMUT SHIRE. IT SEEMS
LIKE YESTERDAY THAT WE WERE IN THE AREA TO HELP CELEBRATE
THE TUMUT AND DISTRICT SESQUI-CENTENARY'WHICH EVERYONE
ENJOYED SO MUCH.
SON THE WAY DOWN FROM CANBERRA THIS MORNING I HAD
ANOTHER LOOK AT THE SPECIAL SOUVENIR PROGRAM WHICH WAS
PREPARED LAST YEAR FOR THOSE 150 ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS,
AND IT CONTAINS QUITE FASCINATING INFORMATION ON THE EARLY
YEARS OF SETTLEMENT HERE, ESPECIALLY ON THE PIONEERING
FAMILIES WHOSE TIRELESS EFFORTS FULFILLED THE VISION OF
0 HUME AND HOVELL.
S 2. I WAS ESPECIALLY PLEASED TO READ THE ARTICLE BY
MY OLD AND VERY DEAR FRIEND, THE LATE FRANK GREEN, ON THE
S ORIGINAL BATTLE FOR CANBERRA. MORE THAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN
AUSTRALIA, TUMUT FELL AN EARLY VICTIM-TO SENATE OBSTRUCTION.
BUT IT TOOK TIME, AS SENATE OBSTRUCTION ALWAYS DOES. IN
THESE HEADY DAYS OF ENTHUSIASM FOR APPOINTING ROYAL
COMMISSIONS, IT'S INTERESTING TO RECALL THAT AS EARLY AS
1903 A ROYAL COMMISSION WAS APPOINTED TO EXAMINE SITES AT
ALBURY, ARMIDALE, BOMBALA, LAKE GEORGE, ORANGE AND TUMUT
AND TO REPORT ON THEIR SUITABILITY AS POSSIBLE SITES FOR A
NEW NATIONAL CAPITAL. AND TOWARDS THE END OF THAT YEAR, THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DECIDED ON TUMUT, AFTER AN
EXHAUSTIVE AND DOUBTLESS EXHAUSTING VOTE. 
-2-
I WAS THAT CLOSE TO BEING ABLE TO LIVE AT THE LODGE, TUMUT.
3. BUT THE SENATE, IN THE WAY SENATES HAVEDECIDED
AGAINST TUMUT AND SUBSTITUTED BOMBALA INSTEAD, THE HOUSE
IN TURN DECLINED TO AGREE TO THE CHANGE AND THE BILL LAPSED,
DOUBLE DISSOLUTIONS WERE A LONG WAY OFF. IN 1904, A BILL
WAS INTRODUCED INTO THE SENATE, NAMING BOMBALA AS THE SITE BUT
WHEN. IT WENT TO THE HOUSE, THE MEMBERS DECIDED AGAINST.
BOMBALA AND SUBSTITUTED DALGETY. AND. PRESUMABLY BECAUSE
NEITHER BOMBALA NOR TUMUT HAD WON, AND HONOUR. WAS VINDICATED,
THE SENATE GRACIOUSLY AGREED TO DALGETY.
THAT IS WHEN THE BATTLE REALLY STARTED OF COURSE
BECAUSE DALGETY WAS OVER 200 MILES AWAY, AND QUITE BEYOND
THE PALE.., THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT OFFERED SITES
ONLY AT TUMUT, LYNDHURST AND YASS AND-CONVINCED MEMBERS
OF THE HOUSE THAT THE 1904 ACT HAD TO BE RECONSIDERED,
4. IT TOOK UNTIL 1908 FOR ANOTHER BILL TO BE INTRODUCED
PROVIDING FOR EXHAUSTIVE BALLOT ON NOMINATED SITES, AND TUMUT
1WAS BACK IN THE RUNNING, ONLY TO BE DEFEATED BY CANBERRA IN
THE END, BUT THE BATTLE CONTINUED IN THE PRESS, IN THE HOPE
THAT THE SENATE WOULD REJECT CANBERRA, PLUS CA CHANGE.
AND THE SENATE SUCCUMBED TO THE PRESS, AS IS ITS WONT, AND
LOOKED LIKED DEADHEATING ON CANBERRA. Sa / 3
I 
t
-3-
SENATOR lCCOLL SUDDENLY NOMINATED TUMUT, WHICH
WOULD HAVE SECURED CANBERRA'S SELECTION, SO THE DALGETY
SUPPORTERS VOTED FOR TUMUT, RESULTING IN 18 VOTES EACH
FOR CANBERRA AND TUMUT. IN A SECOND BALLOT, SENATOR McCOLL
AS SENATORS SOMETIMES DO CHANGED HIS MIND, DESERTED TUMUT
AND CAME BACK TO CANBERRA,
THE DEAKIN GOVERNMENT WAS TOTTERING AT THE TIME
THAT VOTE WAS TAKEN ON 6 NOVEMBER 1908, AND A WEEK LATER
WENT OUT OF OFFICE,. TO BE REPLACED BY ANDREW FISHER'S LABOR
GOVERNMENT. FISHER AND BILLY HUGHES THOUGhTTHE ARGUMENT
HAD GONE ON LONG ENOUGH, AND PROBABLY SAW NO JOY IN ANY
MORE UNNECESSARY TRIALS OF STRENGTH WITH THE SENATE, EIGHT
DAYS AFTER TAKING OFFICE, PRIME MINISTER FISHER SENT A COPY
OF THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT ACT TO THE NEW SOUTH ' ALES
PREMIER, WHOSE CO-OPERATION WAS IMMEDIATELY FORTHCOMING,
STRANGE, ISN'T IT, THAT LESS THAN TEN YEARS AFTER FEDERATION,
WHEN STATES RIGHTS WAS A VERY GENUINE PREOCCUPATION, A
NEW SOUTH IALES PREMIER SAW FIT TO PUT THE NATIONAL INTEREST
FIRST, REPLYING: " THIS GOVERNMENT IS ANXIOUS TO HAVE THE'LOCATION
OF THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT DETERMINED WITHOUT DELAY
AND WE ARE PREPARED TO CONSIDER IN A LIBERAL
MANNER ANY PROPOSAL OF THE. COMMONWEALTH IN THAT
DIRECTION. To SECURE FINALITY CONCESSIONS MAY
BE NECESSARY. THIS STATE IS NOT LIKELY TO
INSIST ON A RIGID INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
0
AND I FEEL SURE THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH
SWILL RECIPROCATE THE GENEROUS SPIRIT IN WHICH WE
ARE PREPARED TO DEAL WITH THE SUBJECT." 
-4-
PEHAPS I SHOULD SEND A COPY OF THAT GRACIOUS MISSIVE TO
MR LEWIS,
6. I CAN'T SAY NOW THAT I REGRET THE DECISION TAKEN
BY OUR PREDECESSORS EIGHT YEARS BEFORE I WAS BORN. TUMUT
IS A MUCH MORE RELAXING PLACE FOR NOT BEING THE FEDERAL
CAPITAL, AND I'M SURE ITS CITIZENS LIVE LONGER. THIS
AFTERNOON I'M TO MEET THREE RESIDENTS TO BE OF BLAKENEY
LODGE. THEIR COMBINED AGES ADD UP-TO 253 YEARS, I'M
SURE THEY RECALL THE CAPITAL CONTROVERSY; I WOULD BE
SURPRISED IF THEY WOULD HAVE WANTED TUMUT TO CHANGE TOO
MUCH IN THE LAST 80 YEARS.
7, ALTHOUGH TUMUT HAS NOT LOST ANY OF ITS CHARM,
IT HAS BEEN CLOSE TO AND AFFECTED BY ONE OF THE GREATEST
ENGINEERING UNDERTAKINGS OF THIS CENTURY, THE SNOWY IMOUNTAINS
O SCHEME. BEGUN BY BEN CHIFLEY'S LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 1949;
THE $ 800 MILLION SCHEME HAS PROVIDED STIMULUS AND EMPLOYMENT.
O IN AND AROUND TUMUT CULMINATING IN THE COMPLETION LAST
FINANCIAL YEAR OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF TUMUT 3, THE LAST AND
SLARGEST OF THE SNOWY PROJECTS. BUT THAT FACT SHOULD NOT BE
THOUGHT OF AS AN ENDING ONLY, RATHER IT IS THE END OF THE
-BEGINNING, BECAUSE TUMUT IS ONE OF THE GATEWAYS TO THE SCHEME
AND TO ALL THE TOURIST AND RECREATION FACILITIES IT HAS OPENED UP,
a 
I KNOW THE SHIRE COUNCIL IS ANXIOUS TO PURSUE
NEW EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE PEOPLE OF TUMUT, AND
THAT MUCH THOUGHTFUL WORK HAS BEEN DONE IN THIS REGARD,
I HAVE READ WITH INTEREST, FOR EXAMPLE, THE CASE YOU HAVE
PREPARED ON THE POSSIBILITY OF LOCATING A PULP AND PAPER
MILL FOR TUMUT, I UNDERSTAND YOUR RESERVATIONS AS WELL AS
YOUR ASPIRATIONS FOR ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN THE AREA, AND
YOUR POSITION IN RELATION TO THE CURRENT CLIMATE FOR RURAL
INDUSTRIES, INEVITABLY AFFECTED AT PRESENT BY WORLD ECONOMIC
-TRENDS. I LOOK FORWARD TO MEETING AND, IN MANY CASES TO
RENEWING ACQUAINTANCE WITH COUNCILLORS AND THEIR WIVES WHO
CAN GIVE ME THE MOST UP TO DATE INFORMATION ON THE PROBLEMS
AS WELL AS THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE TUMUT SHIRE.
8, I MUST SAY I AM ALWAYS PLEASED TO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY
. TO DISCUSS THE BROADER ISSUES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AT GRASS ROOTS
LEVEL-I TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THE FACT THAT MY GOVERNMENT,
THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT, HAS GONE OUT OF ITS WAY TO
DEMONSTRATE ITS REAL INTEREST AND CONCERN FOR THE THIRD TIER
OF GOVERNMENT, THE ONE CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE, THE LEVEL OF
GOVERNMENT MOST IGNORED BY OUR COALITION PREDECESSORS. ONLY
LAST YEAR WE LEGISLATED TO PROVIDE FOR THE ALLOCATION OF
DIRECT FEDERAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT, DIRECT
GRANTS BASED ON THE CASE ADVANCED IN EACH INSTANCE AT THE
GRANTS COMMISSION HEARINGS, AND, SIGNIFICANTLY, WITH NO
STRI NGS ATTACHED. I BELIEVE TUMUT SHIRE COUNCIL RECEIVED
$ 126,000 LAST YEAR AND I AM QUITE SURE YOU HAVE PUT UP A SOUND
AND PROPER CASE FOR THE NEW FINANCIAL YEAR,
dsC 
-6-
9. I KNOW THAT TUMUT, LIKE THE REST OF AU'STRALIA,
HAS SUFFERED FROM THE WORLD-WIDE ECONOMIC RECESSION AND
SUBSEQUENT UNEMPLOYMENT.
RED SCHEME GRANTS HAVE GONE SOME WAY TOWARDS
ALLEVIATING IMMEDIATE LOCALISED UNEMPLOYMENT. IN ALL boo
HAS BEEN ALLOCATED TO 26 PROJECTS INVOLVING / 62 JOBS,
MAJOR SHIRE COUNCIL UNDERTAKINGS HAVE INCLUDED ROAD REPAIR
AND MAINTENANCE WORK FOR 20 MEN FOR 16 WEEKS ($ 30,000),
AND $ 24,000 FOR WORK ON REPAIRING AND EXTENDING THE TUMUT
BOYS CLUB HALL, ANOTHER GRANT OF $ 25,400 MEANT 15 WEEKS
WORK FOR 8 MEN EMPLOYED ON RECREATIONAL PROJECTS OF
CONTINUING BENEFIT TO THE COMMUNITY,
THE NIATIONAL RURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL SET UP BY
SENATOR ' IRIEDT IS KEENLY AWARE OF THE PROBLEMS OF THE MAN
AND WOMAN ON THE LAND, AND IS CURRENTLY ENGAGED IN A
DETAILED STUDY OF HOW TO ATTRACT YOUNG PEOPLE INTO FARMING,
AS WELL AS LOOKING INTO EMPLOYMENT ALTERNATIVES WHICH WOULD
ENABLE OLDER PEOPLE TO LEAVE THE LAND EARLIER, IF THEY SO
WISH. THE QUESTION OF FARMER CO-OPERATIVES'IS ALSO BEING
STUDIED. ALL THIS WORK TOUCHES ON SOME OF TUMUT'S RURAL
PROBLEMS. ./ 7 
-7-
11, THE AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION SET UP.
LAST SEPTEMBER HAS RECEIVED A GRANT OF $ 200,000 TO FINANCE
MARKET RESEARCH PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT PROMOTION
ACTIVITIES. IN ADDITION TO SEEKING TO DIVERSIFY EXPORT
MARKETS, THE CORPORATION HAS MOUNTED A 1975 SEASON
PROMOTION CAMPAIGN TO STIMULATE CONSUMER DEMAND FOR APPLES.
WE CAN EXPECT THIS TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON APPLE PRODUCTION HERE
IN THE BATLOW TUMUT AREA. ALTHOUGH FRESH APPLE PRICES INSYDNEY
THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN SLIGHTLY BELOW COMPARABLE 1974
LEVELS, THEY ARE SUBSTANTIALLY ABOVE. COMPARABLE 1973 LEVELS,
O OBVIOUSLY A STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION.
As FAR AS THE FRUIT CANNING INDUSTRY IS CONCERNED,
THE PICTURE IS BRIGHTER, BECAUSE THE 1974/ 75 TOTAL QUANTITY OF
CANNING FRUIT HAS INCREASED BY 12.5 PER CENT, AND PRICES
FOR APRICOTS ARE UP 32 PER CENT, PEACHES ARE UP 36 PER CENT
AND PEARS ARE UP 12 PER CENT OVER THE PREVIOUS YEAR. THE
INCREASE IN BOTH PRICES AND PRODUCTION INDICATE THAT GROSS
RETURNS TO GROWERS WILL BE UP ON LAST SEASON.
A NEW NATIONAL PANEL OF VEGETABLE GROWERS AND PROCESSORS
OF PEAS AND BEANS HAS RECENTLY BEEN ESTABLISHED TO BRING
PEOPLE TOGETHER TO. DISCUSS THE LONG-TERM FUTURE OF THE
INDUSTRY AND CONTRACT CONDITIONS. STANDARDISATION OF CONTRACTS,
PRICE RELATIVITIES, PRODUCTION AND MARKETING WILL ALL BE-.
DISCUSSED BY ThE PANEL WITH OBVIOUS BENEFIT TO PRODUCERS IN
THIS AREA. 
r -8-
12. ALTHOUGH THE FOREST INDUSTRIES AT TUMUT, AS
ELSEWHERE IN AUSTRALIA, ARE AT PRESENT SOMEWHAT DEPRESSED AS
A RESULT OF SOME DOWNTURN IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY, THE
FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE ASSURES ME THAT THE
SLONG TERM FUTURE OF THOSE INDUSTRIES IN THE TUMUT REGION IS.
S CONSIDERED TO BE QUITE BRIGHT.
W BEEF PRODUCERS CAN TAKE HEART FROM THE FACT THAT
WE ARE DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO DEVELOP MEAT MARKETS
AND REDUCE ARTIFICIAL TRADE BARRIERS, You MAY RECALL THAT.
S. IN APRIL THIS YEAR, SENATOR WRIEDT ANNOUNCED AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION OF $ 19,6 MILLION TO MATCH THE STATES IN
CARRY-ON FINANCE FOR AUSTRALIAN BEEF PRODUCERS. THIS IS
AVAILABLE TO FARMERS AT L PER CENT INTEREST WITH NO INTEREST
ON CAPITAL PAYMENTS FOR THE FIRST TWELVE MONTHS, AND OF
b COURSE IT WILL BE A GREAT HELP TO VERY MANY PEOPLE, BUT
CE'RTAINLY IN THE SHORT TERM BEEF PRODUCERS ARE GOING THROUGH
A DIFFICULT PERIOD.
13. BUT, LIKE THOSE MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WHO OVER SEVENTY YEARS AGO EXPRESSED THE-IR BELIEF IN TUMUT,
I AM CONVINCED THAT THE LONG-TERM FUTURE OF TUMUT IS EXCELLENT.
I THINK YOU ALL FOR THE MARBLE GIFT WHICH WILL REMIND ME OF
YOUR KINDNESS AND HOSPITALITY TODAY IN TUMUT. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
AT THE OPENING OF BLAKENEY LODGE, TUMUT, 26 JULY 1975
IT GIVES ME VERY GREAT PLEASURE TO RETURN TO
TUMUT WITH MY WIFE TO SHARE JN THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF
BLAKENEY LODGE. WE HAVE BEEN HAPPY TO BE PRESENT AT
THE OPENING OF A NUMBER OF OLD PEOPLE'S HOMES IN NEW
SSOUTH WALES IN THE PAST FEW WEEKS. IN FACT, THIS IS
OUR THIRD IN JUST TWO MONTHS ST. BEDE'S AT HURSTVILLE
WITH BISHOP CREMIN, OZANAM VILLA IN LISMORE WITH
O BISHOP SATTERTHWAITE AND NOW THE MOST BEAUTIFUL, AND
THE EASIEST TO PRONOUNCE, BLAKENEY LODGE, TUMUT, WITH
ARCHBISHOP CAHILL,
THE LAST TIME ARCHBISHOP CAHILL AND I SHARED
SUCH AN OCCASION WAS ON ST. VALENTINE'S DAY LAST YEAR
SWHEN OZANAM HOUSE IN CANBERRA WAS OPENED, I BELIEVE IT'
IS A TRIBUTE TO HIS AWARENESS OF THE NEED FOR SUCH
ACCOMMODATION THAT TWO SUCH HOSTELS HAVE BEEN BUILT
IN HIS DIOCESE IN LESS THAN 18 MONTHS. I REALIZE,
OF COURSE, THAT THE PARISH PRIEST OF TUMUT, FATHER TIERNAN,
HAS HAD MORE THAN A LITTLE TO DO WITH GETTING BLAKENEY
LODGE LITERALLY OFF THE GROUND: PARISH PRIESTS ARE EXPECTED
TO DEVELOP SUCH TALENTS EARLY IN THEIR CAREERS, BUT
FATHER TIERNAN WAS FOLLOWING IN ILLUSTRIOUS FOOTSTEPS,
NONE OTHER THAN THOSE OF THE LATE MONSIGNOR BLAKENEY
AFTER WHOM THE LODGE WAS NAMED, 
-2-
I MUST SAY 7-AT, IN ITS SHORTENED FORM, THE LODGE, IT BEARS
A REMARKABLE RESEMBLANCE TO MY OWN ADDRESS IN CANBERRA,
AND IT'S SOBERING TO THINK THAT THAT ADDRESS COULD SO EASILY
HAVE BEEN THE LODGE, TUMUT, HAD THAT FATEFUL VOTE ON
THE SITING OF THE FEDERAL CAPITAL GONE DIFFERENTLY BACK
IN 1908. SiJT TO RETURN TO MONSIGNOR BLAKENEY WHO WAS BORN
IN TUMUT A YEAR BEFORE THAT VOTE WAS TAKEN, WHICH EXEMPTS HIM
FROM ALL BLAME IT WAS HE WHO REALISED THE NEED FOR
ACCOMMODATION HERE IN HIS HOME TOWN, AND APPROACHED HIS
ARCHBISHOP ON THE MATTER, OFFERING AT THE SAME TIME TO PROVIDE
LAND NEXT TO HIS CHURCH, FREE OF CHARGE IN CASE HIS
LoRDs-iTP REQUIRED ANY ADDITIONAL ENCOURAGEMENT,
T*-E .3T iS HISTORY, BUT VERY MUCH A COMMUNITY
HISTORY, SINCE = Cœ CTS LIKE THIS, NATURALLY AND PROPERLY,
BECOME THE CWCE= CN THE WHOLE COMMUNITY, A CONCERN THAT
THE USTRAL :-EMENT IS ANXIOUS TO SEE MAINTAINED.
IT DOES NO: AS OUR OPPONENTS ASSERT, THAT BECAUSE
WE PROVIDE FOORS SOCIAL WELFARE ACTIVITIES LIKE HOUSING
FOR THE AGED. HAT THEREFORE WE SEEK CONTROL OF SUCH
PROGRAMS. IoC. hING COULD BE FURTHER FROM THE TRUTH. IT IS
IN FACT AN M= CRTANT ELEMENT IN ALL THE SOCIAL AND
COMMUNITY PRCGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THAT LOCAL
COMMUNITY AWARENESS AND INVOLVEMENT SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED,
PARTICULARLY IN THOSE PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO HELP PEOPLE. o,/ 3 
I E. LIEVE THAT ALL THOSE INVOLVED IN CATHOLIC CARE
FOR THE AGED, WHO HAVE HAD THE OVERALL RESPONSIBILITY IN
NEW SOUTH WALES FOR CO-OPERATING WITH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS IN THE FIELD OF HOUSING FOR THE AGED, WOULD
TESTIFY TO THIS,
, EE IN TUMUT, FOR INSTANCE, FOLLOWING THE
FORMATION C' A ANAGEMENT COMMITTEE, A PUBLIC MEETING WAS
CALLED SO THAT ANYONE IN TUMUT WHO WANTED TO GET INVOLVED
IN THE BLAKENEY LODGE PROJECT COULD DO JUST THAT. AND THAT
HIGH LEVEL OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT WILL CONTINUE BECAUSE
ITS NOT ALL OVER YET. SURE, MY GOVERNMENT HAS GLADLY
PROVIDED $ 312,000 FOR BLAKENEY LODGE UNDER THE AGED PERSONS
5osE-3s ACT E ICREASED THE SUBSIDY FROM $ 2 TO $ 1
UP T-S FOC LATE LAST YEAR BUT THE PEOPLE OF TUMUT
HAVE RAISED 3 , GOO THROUGH SHEER HARDWORK AND GOODWILL.
ALL T-E OLD SE=-: E =? SANISATIONS, APEX, ROTARY, LIONS,
AND NE ONES, : C '-AY INDIVIDUALS HAVE MADE IT THEIR
. SU.:-SS TO -E I EVEN NOTICED WEIGHT WATCHERS
COMING TO ON THE FRONT PAGE OF LAST WEEK'S NEWSPAPER,
AND IT IS -ANT THAT THIS LEVEL OF COMMUNITY CARING
SHOULD CONT:_--E LONG AFTER THE BALANCE SHEETS ARE ACCEPTABLE
TO FATHER T: E. AN AND BISHOP CAHILL, I KNOW THEY WILL
AGREE THAT ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT THAT PLACES LIKE
BLAKENEY LGE SHOULD TAKE ROOT IN THE COMMUNITY AND BECOME
ACCEPTED AS ANOTHER COMPONENT OF THE TOTAL LIFE OF THE
COMMUNITY, NOT IN ANY WAY CUT OFF OR REMOTE. 
-4-
IT IS IMPORTANT THAT THE PEOPLE WHO COME TO LIVE
HERE IN BLAKENEY LODGE SHOULD RECOGNISE THIS TOO, BECAUSE
THAT FACT MAY HELP THEM TO REALISE THAT ALTHOUGH IT
REPRESENTS A NEW BEGINNING FOR THEM, AND FOR THEIR FAMILIES
AND FRIENDS, IT'S REALLY JUST AN EXTENSION OF THE LIFE
THEY HAVE BEEN LEADING, ALBEIT IN NEW SURROUNDINGS, BUT
THOSE SURROUNDINGS ARE SO WELCOMING AND COMFORTABLE THAT THE
O TRANSITION SHOULDN'T BE TOO DIFFICULT.
OBVIOUSLY MOST RESIDENTS WILL BE COMING TO
O BLAKENiEY LODGE FROM AROUND TUMUT, BUT I EXPECT THAT OTHERS
WHO MAY HAVE DRIFTED AWAY OVER THE YEARS WILL HAVE A
YEARNING TO COME BACK, TO COME HOME TO TUMUT AS THEY GET
OLDER AND TIRE OF THE RAT RACE AWAY FROM THE
EXTRAORDINARY BEAUTY OF TUMUT, I HAVE A FEELING THAT MANY
OLD FRIENDSHIPS WILL BE RENEWED HERE, AND THAT MANY PEOPLE
WHO COME HERE iLL L: TERALLY TAKE ON A NEW LEASE OF LIFE
-I T-= IR NEW iDENT COMFORT, THEIR NEW COMFORTABLE
:œ: ENDENCE, I AA LOOKING FORWARD VERY MUCH INDEED TO MEETING
A NUMBER OF THE FIRST RESIDENTS TO BE OF BLAKENEY LODGE,
ALL BORN BEFORE THAT FEDERAL CAPITAL VOTE WAS TAKEN, ALL
BORN BEFORE FEDERATION, FOR THAT MATTER. THERE'S MISS CHRISTINE
McGREGOR AND MR TED CURLL, WHOSE AGES ADD UP TO ABOUT 168
I CAN'T BE MORE SPECIFIC WITHOUT BEING ACCUSED OF LACKING
IN GALLANTRY AND WHO WERE EACH CONNECTED WITH OLD
PIONEERING FAMILIES. AND THERE IS MRS ELSIE WILLIAMS WHO, BY
VIRTUE OF HER LONG SERVICE, IS DOUBTLESS VERY MUCH MORE
FAMILIAR WITH THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S RESIDENCE, YARRALUMLA, THAN I AM.
e. 
I EXPECT YOU ALL KNOW MY FASCINATION FOR AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. I
AM QUITE SURE THAT A LITTLE LATER ON I WILL LEARN A GREAT
DEAL OF HISTORY THAT HASN'T YET FOUND ITS WAY INTO THE
TEXTBOOKS. I AM ONLY SAD THAT MONSIGNOR BLAKENEY HIMSELF
CAN'T BE WITH US TO SHARE THE REMINISENCES ON THIS GREAT
OCCASION. AS THE TUMUT AND ADELONG TIMES NOTED IN
JANUARY LAST YEAR: " HE WAS A GREAT SON OF TUMUT, A PRODUCT
OF THE LOCAL CONVENT SCHOOL AND THE TOWN AND PROVED A
0 WORTHY SON OF HIS LOCALLY BORN MOTHER AND FATHER, HIS
VERY PRESENCE DIGNIFIED ANY GATHERING AND HIS PERSONALITY
LENT GRACE TO ALL PUBLIC FUNCTIONS HE ATTENDED IN AN
OFFCIAL CAPACITY. -E WON THE ADMIRATION AND RESPECT
OF ALL THOSE WHO SAW HIM GROW FROM BOYHOOD TO THE HIGH
OFFICE OF j'ONSINCR.
IT NG THAT HIS NAME SHOULD BE REMEMBERED
S -EE THE -E LOVED AND THROUGH THE PROJECT THAT
WAS SO DEAR T3 HIS -EART. I HAVE MUCH PLEASURE IN
: ECLARING OPEN BLAKENEY LODGE. 



PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 19 -THE BUDGET
SUNDAY 27 JULY 1975
On Friday my colleagues and I finished a week of
intensive Cabinet discussions to frame the Budget which the
Treasurer, Bill Hayden, will be bringing down next month.
It wouldn't be proper to tell you what is in the Budget, but
I can tell you something of our general approach to it. I
might mention in passing that our Budget discussions were
more than a little hampered by the farce which the Senate
has enacted in the past two weeks, requiring Ministers to be
on hand for the Opposition's interrogation of public servants*
and others. But those are the Senate's priorities political
inquisitions first, the national Budget second.
It is not exaggeration to say that the coming Budget
will be the most important for Australia for a very long time.
And more preparation and consultation has gone into this
Budget than any before. We've listened to the views of
consumners, of unions, of employers, of farmers' organisations,
of industry a whole host of people in the community. And
P months ago we set up important new procedures to plan and
develop the Budget strategy. A special committee of ministers,
backed by a committee of officials, has worked hard to review
the whole range of government expenditures. So simply: this
will be the most thoroughly prepared and carefully planned
Budget Australia has ever had.
Our first two Budgets in 1973 and 1974 were ones
of heavy Government expenditure. There was a good reason for
that. When we came to office we had the task of redressing
many years of neglect by previous Governments in almost every
field of national life. For 23 years the Liberals had neglected
education, neglected our cities, neglected our country towns,
neglected local government, neglected the urgent needs of
public transport, health, the environment, migrants, women,
Aborigines, pensioners, children. A great many things were crying
out to be done programs and reforms of a fundamental and
long-term nature. After all, the people in two elections in
1972 and 1974 had given us a clear mandate, clear instructions
to get on with the tasks we inherited. So we had to spend
money big money. Things like Medibank, and better schools and
higher pensions don't come cheap, but it would have been utterly
irresponsible for us to ignore the people's demands for such
services. on top of that, there were other heavy unexpected
calls on Government finance such as funds for Darwin and for
flood relief here in Queensland.
While these programs were getting underway a further
need arose for heavy Government expenditure. Last year the
whole western world entered on the worst recession experienced
since the war. Australia has not escaped. In such circumstances
at a time of rising unemployment it was necessary to push
Goverhment expenditure further ahead in order to boost our
economy and keep Australians at work. On the whole that strategy
paid off. The recession in Australia has been a good deal less
severe than it has been in other countries. / 2 
-2-
Let me illustrate. In the United States, industrial
production during the recession has declined by about 14 per cent
compared with an eight per cent decline in Australia.
Unemployment in the United States has passed the eight per cent
mark. In Australia it is 4.5 per cent. In Japan the decline
in production was of the order of 20 per cent compared with
eight per cent here. So don't get the idea that unemployment
and recession have been confined to Australia; it's been a
world-wide upheaval with world-wide causes.
The point is that the world is nejust beginning to
climb out of the recession. The signs of recovery are appearing
both here and abroad. So we have this difficult problem:
flow much longer should we push ahead with expenditures to combat
unemployment, how much longer should we maintain our high levels
of spending on the great social programs we have started?
Economic questions of this kind have never been more complex
and difficult, because we have to try to look ahead and take4
decisions now whose effects won't be felt for many months to
come. In general we feel that, now that the worst of the
recession is behind us, our priority must be to at-tack inflation.
Inflation is another problem that has bedevilled every western
country. In former years, the standard way to attack inflation4
was to bring about a recession and throw people out of work.
That was thE! method the Liberals used. And of course it no
longer works anywhere in the world. We staunchly resisted that
approach when it was put to us in the Budget discussions last
year. True, unemployment has occurred, but we have managed to
keep it at lower levels than in most other countries. The
question now is: what other approach can we take to hold down
inflationary pressures?
There are two things we can do. One is cut back the
growth of Government qxpenditure. As part of this process, 4
I announced on Monday that we would be putting a strict limit
in the next financial year on the growth of the Australian Public
Service which, incidentally has been growing at a slower rate
than the State public services. In addition we are looking at
ways of reducing Government expenditure in other areas. This4
doesn't mean that we are no longer committed to our national
goals better public facilities, wider opportunities for all
Australians. It means that, having got these programs started,
having set up the machinery to run them, we can now take a breather
and slow down our spending sharply in the interests of the whole
economy. This won't be popular with those who benefit from our
programs and I don't need to tell you that it isn't particularly
palatable to us but it has to be done. And the other thing we
have to do is keep the national wages bill within reasonable
limits. Our economies in expenditure won't be much use in
countering inflation if wages and salaries in both the public
and private sectors are allowed to grow too quickly and push
prices up further. My Government fought a hard battle to persuade
the Arbitration Commission to give wage indexation a fair trial.
Indexation will protect the real living standards of every
employee. It must be given a chance to work. / 3 
-3-
I wouldn't be honest with you if I said there were
easy solutions to our economic problems. I can't promise a
popular Budget but I can promise a sound and responsible
Budget if you like, a tough Budget.. In the next twelve
months we are going to need all the help and co-operation we can
get in making the Budget work, in safeguarding our living
standards. I'll have no patience with knockers and whingers.
We must make sure that Australia is one of the first countries
in the world to come through this recession, and to come
through it in good shape, in fighting trim. We can do it.
We cannot afford to fail. 



ljj&gt; AUSTRALIA.. J
PRUME NIMSTMER Press Statement No. 537
July 1975
MEDIBANK AGREEMENTS
The Prime Minister today signed the Medibank hospital
agreements under which the Australian Government will meet half
the net operat;. ng costs of the public hospital systems of
Victoria and West-ern Australia.
The agreements will be flown to Melbourne and Perth
tonight for endorsement by the Premier of Victoria, Mr Hamer
and the Premier of Western Australia, Sir Charles Court. The
agreements are due to take effect from Friday 1 August.
The Prime Minister said the Australian Government's
financial commitment to the States' hospital systems this
financial year would be $ 200 million for Victoria and $ 78 million
for Western Australia.
The State governments would meet similar amounts.
The Medibank agreements would ensure that everyone in
those States was entitled to free access to standard ward public
hospital treatment free of means test.
This restored the situation which was introduced by the
Chifley Labor Government in 1947 and allowed to lapse under the
Menzies Government five years later.
Apart from providing sorely needed funds for the public
hospital systems, the Prime Minister said, the Medibank agreements
would also reduce the charges for private and intermediate ward
care in public hospitals.
Private hospital insurance contributions would also be
reduced considerably because the Australian Government benefits
of $ 2 a day, under the old National Health Act, would be
increased by $ 16 a day.
The agreements signed today mean that four States have
now entered the Nedibank hospital plan.
The States of South Australia and Tasmania joined the
plan on July 1. Negotiations are continuing for the entry of the
remaining States of New South Wales and Queensland as soon as
they accept the same arrangements as the other States.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO.
QUALITY OF LIFE
SUNDAY. 3 AUGUST 1975
IT'S NO SECRET THAT OUR. NEXT BUDGET WILL PUT
SOME PRETTY TIGHT RESTRAINTS ON GOVERNMENT SPENDING1
BUT THAT DOESN'IT MEAN WE WON'IT BE SPENDING ON THINGS THAT
MATTER, OUR OPPONENTS ARE VERY FOND OF KNOCKING ANY
SORT OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE, AS IF ALL GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURE WERE WASTEFUL AND UNNECESSARY, WE HAVE TO
REMEMBER THAT THE LIBERALS IN OFFICE WASTED MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN GRANTS TO WEALTHY SCHOOLS, EXPENSIVE SUBSIDIES
TO CERTAIN INDUSTRIES AND SUCH EXTRAVAGANCIES AS THE
F-ill. IT'S QUITE ABSURD WHEN THE QUEENSLAND PREMIER
AND THE COUNTRY PARTY PUBLICLY ADVOCATE NUCLEAR WEAPONS
AND MISSILE SYSTEMS FOR AUSTRALIA THE SORT OF THINGS
THAT WOULD COST BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IF WE'WERE MAD ENOUGH
TO TAKE THEIR ADVICE AND THEN COMPLAIN ABOUT' LABOR'S
SOCIAL WELFARE PROG RAMS AND GRANTS TO THE ARTS. THIS
CONSTANT WHINGEING ABOUT GRANTS TO THE ARTS IS ONE VERY
GOOD EXAMPLE OF OUR OPPONENTS HATRED OF ANYTHING THAT
REALLY IMPROVES THE LIVES AND OPPORTUNITIES OF ORDINARY
PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY MINORITY GROUPS IN THE COMMUNITY, 
2.
THE FACT IS THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS A NUMBER
OF PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO MAKE LIFE HAPPIER AND MORE
ENJOYABLE FOR PEOPLE IN SMALL, AND SOME WOULD SAY,
RATHER UNUSUAL WAYS. WE SEE THESE AS AN ESSENTIAL
PART OF THE GOVERNMENT'S WORK. GOVERNMENT ISN'T
JUST A MATTER OF PROVIDING ROADS AND PENSIONS AND
EDUCATION, WE WANT TO DO WHAT WE CAN TO ENLIVEN AND
INVIGORATE PEOPLE'IS LIVE* S, TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
REWARDS AND SATISFACTIONS OF THE ARTS, AND DECENT
OPPORTUNI-TIES FOR SPORT AND RECREATION AND HOLIDAYS,,
ARE SHARED BY AS MANY PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE AND NOT JUST
BY A FORTUNATE ELITE. AND THE TRUTH IS THAT IN THE
TOTAL SCHEME OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE THESE EFFORTS
ARE ACTUALLY VERY, VERY INEXPENSIVE. OUR TOTAL BUDGET
FOR THE ARTS, FOR EXAMPLE, HAS BEEN $ 20 MILLION. THAT'S
LESS THAN ONE-TENTH OF ONE PER CENT OF THE GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT. THE IDEA THAT SUCH EXPENDITURES ARE
INFLATIONARY IN THEMSELVES IS TOO SILLY FOR WORDS,
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER ANY SUCH EXPENDITURE SHOULD BE
A PART OF A GOVERNMENT'S OVERALL ACTIVITY, I CERTAINLY
BELIEVE IT SHOULD. THE FACT THAT THE LIBERALS DID NEXT
TO NOTHING IN THESE FIELDS DOESN'IT MAKE THEM UNIMPORTANT,
t v s/ 3 
3.
I SHOULD MAKE IT CLEAR THAT THE GOVERNMENT
ITSELF DOESN'T DECIDE WHAT GRANTS SHOULD BE MADE FOR
THE ARTS, THIS IS NOW IN THE HANDS OF THE AUSTRALIA
COUNCILI AN INDEPENDENT BODY IT USED TO BE CALLED
THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THEARTS WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT SET UP AS A STATUTORY AUTHORITY, OF
COURSE IT RECEIVES AN ANNUAL BUDGET FROM THE GOVERNMENT,
BUT JUST HOW THOSE FUNDS ARE SPENT IS FOR THE COUNCIL,
WITH ITS OWN BOARDS AND EXPERT ADVISERS TO DECIDE, I
RECALL SOME LOUD CRIES OF ANGUISH NOT LONG AGO WHEN
THE COUNCIL MADE A GRANT OF $ 500 TO A DAHLIA FESTIVAL
IN VICTORIA, WELL, I SUPPOSE IT'S EASY TO MAKE FUN OF
PEOPLE WHOSE INTERESTS AREN'T CONFINED TO RACING AND
THE STOCK MARKETI BUT THE PARTICULAR FESTIVAL TO WHICH
THAT GRANT WAS APPLIED HAPPENS TO BE THE ANNUAL OCCASION
OF CENTRAL IMPORTANCE IN THE LIFE OF THE WHOLE BENDIGO
REGION, WE ALL HAVE DIFFERENT TASTES AND INTERESTS
AND IT'S PART OF OUR POLICY TO GIVE ENCOURAGEMENT AND
EXPRESSION TO DIVERSE AND EVEN OFF-BEAT ACTIVITIES
IF THEY HAVE A LEGITIMATE FOLLOWING AND CAN ENRICH
THE LIVES OF OUR CITIZENS, IT DOESN'T COST MUCH,
BUT THE RETURNS ARE VERY GREAT, 1 1/ 4 
LET ME GIVE A FEW EXAMPLES OF WHAT THE
AUSTRALIA COUNCIL HAS DONE IN QUEENSLAND, THE MAJOR
ARTS GRANTS GO TO THE BIG THEATRE AND BALLET COMPANIES
AND ORCHESTRAS, BUT IT ISN'IT JUST A MATTER OF FUNDING
HIGHBROW PURSUITS IN THE BIG CITIES. SMALLER GRANTS
HAVE GONE TO THEATRE AND DANCE COMPANIES IN OUTBACK
PARTS OF THE STATE, SUCH AS THE PIAREEBA REPERTORY
SOCIETY, THE TOWNSVILLE LITTLE THEATRE AND THE FAR
NORTH QUEENSLAND AMATEUR THEATRICAL-ASSOCIATION.
M'ONEY HAS GONE TO LOCAL FESTIVALS AND COMMUNITY ARTS
FESTIVALS ALL OVER QUEENSLAND, !, WE HELPED THE QUEENSLAND
BALLET TOUR IN REMOTE AREAS LIKE COOKTOWN AND THURSDAY
ISLAND. JAZZ, FOLK MUSIC AND ABORIGINAL ARTS ARE SUPPORTED
AS WELL, ALTOGETHER, IN 19714, THE COUNCIL MADE 259
GRANTS IN QUEENSLAND WITH A TOTAL EXPENDITURE OF JUST
UNDER A MILLION DOLLARS. 
THE OTHER AREA WHERE WE ARE WORKING TO IMPROVE THE
QUALITY OF LIFE AND PEOPLE IS OPPORTUNITIES FOR
FULFILMENT AND ENJOYMENT IS TOURISM AND RECREATION,
WE SET UP A NEW DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION
AS SOON AS THE GOVERNMENT CAME TO OFFICE. IT'S
SURPRISING HOW MUCH CAN BE DONE WITH SMALL SUMS APPLIED
CAREFULLY FOR LOCAL PURPOSES. IT'S NOT NECESSARILY A
MATTER OF BUILDING VAST STADIUMS THOUGH SOMETIMES BIG
PROJECTS ARE INVOLVED BUT MAINLY IT IS HELPING LOCAL
GROUPS AND AUTHORITIES IMPROVE EXISTING FACILITIESA
NEW CHANGEROOM, AN EXTRA TENNIS COURT, FLOODLIGHTING
FOR AN OVAL. HERE ARE SOME EXAMPLES: $ 4000 TO PURCHASE
A BUILDING FOR A YOUTH CENTRE AT CHARTERS TOWERS.
$ 6000 FOR SQUASH COURTS AT WINTON, $ 42,000 FOR TENNIS
AND BASKETBALL COURTS AT GLADSTONE, $ 8000 FOR A STADIUM
AT rARYBOROUGH. IN ADDITION, WE' RE DEVELOPING A NUMBER
OF NATIONAL PARKS, MUSEUMS AND HISTORIC SITES IN QUEENSLAND
TO IMPROVE THEM AS TOURIST RESORTS SO THAT ALL AUSTRALIANS
CAN ENJOY THE NATURAL BEAUTIES AND PLACES OF HISTORIC
INTEREST WITH WHICH THIS STATE ABOUNDS. ALTOGETHER
THIS PROGRAM IS COSTING. SOMETHING OVER $ 230,000 IN
QUEENSLAND A TINY SUM As GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES GO.-
BUT ONE THAT IS GETTING RESULTS AND BRINGING PLEASURE
TO GREAT NUMBERS OF PEOPLE. i m v/ 6 
QUITE FRANKLY, WE DON'T SEE THIS KIND OF OUTLAY
AS FRIVOLOUS OR UNNECESSARY, LIKE EVERYTHING ELSE,
THESE EXPENDITURES HAVE TO BE REVIEWED AT BUDGET TIME, BUT
GRANTS OF THIS KIND HAVE AN ESSENTIAL PLACE IN THE
GOVERNMENT'S THINKING, FOR ONE THING, OPPORTUNITIES
FOR SPORT ARE BUILDING A MUCH HEALTHIER GENERATION
FO YOUNG AUSTRALIANS, WE OUGHT TO BE ON GUARD AGAINST
MEAN-SPIRITED PEOPLE WHO RESENT THE IDEA OF GAMES AND
PLEASURE FOR COMMUNITIES WHICH LACK DECENT FACILITIES
FOR SPORT AND RECREATION. IN THE SAME WAY, LET'S BE
WARY OF THE PHILISTINES IN OUR iMIDST WHO OBJECT TO
ANY GOVERNMENT ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS. WE CAN BE A
PRETTY TOUGH AND CYNICAL PEOPLE WHEN IT SUITS US,
BUT THERE HAS TO BE A PLACE IN ANY HEALTHY SOCIETY FOR THE
INTANGIBLE THINGS THE MENTAL, INTELLECTUAL AND SPIRITUAL
REWARDS THAT THE ARTS CAN BRING, ONE DAY WE MAY COME TO
SEE THAT THESE ARE THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS OF ALL, 



4 J) SXI PRCESS. STA TEMENT NO. 538
6 August 1975
ENTRY OF FURTHER GROUP OF VIETNAMESE REFUGEES
The Prime Minister announced today that Australia
had agreed to resettle approximately 300 more refugees
from Vietnam. The refugees will be flown by chartered Qantas 747
jet to Brisbane on Saturday morning, 9 August, where they
are due at 11.00 a. m.
They will be resettled in Brisbane, where Queensland
authorities have assured support and assistance.
At present about two-thirds of the refugees are on
St Jphn's Island in Singapore harbour, with the remainder
on Perhentian Island off the East coast of Malaysia.
In June Australia selected 200 refugees who have been
settled in East Hills, Sydney,
Mr Whitlam said that as part of its commitment to
the United Nations High Commission for Refugees program
Australia had now taken refugees from Hong Kong,
Singapore and Malaysia.
In each case, Mr Whitla-m said, Australia had. selected
refugees who were least likely to be selected for entry to
other countries and those who appeared most in need of the
humanitarian assistance which entry to Australia would provide.
Most of the refugees have no recognised skills or
qualifications and under normal migration criteria would not be
eligible for entry to Australia. They would need extensive
long-term assistance from the Australian Government and the
community, Mr Whitlam said.
He recalled his announcement of 23 July of a long-term
study of the Vietnamese refugees and the problems which they
encounter and said that he hoped this study would identify
early any problems which refugees were facing and the means of
resolving them. ./ 2 
2.
Mr Whitlam said the refugees ranged in age from
infants to an 81 year old woman, and included a Cistercian
Monk, a former interpreter for an Australian civil
affairs unit stationed in Phuoc Tuy Province, a number
of single parent families and a number of adolescents who
had become separated from their parents.
He emphasised that in their immediate resettlement all
the refugees would be provided with the maximum assistance
available through agencies of the Australian Government
for housing, welfare, language training and employment.
Mr Whitlam expressed his gratitude for assistance
provided to the Australian Immigration selection team by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and the
Governments of Singapore and Malaysia.
CkNBERRA, A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 539
8 August 1975
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today released the
Report on Radio by the Priorities Review Staff. w
Mr Whitlam said that although the Government did not
agree with all its recommendations, the report should be a
valuable contribution to public debate on radio in Australia.
" He said that since requesting the PRS to make the
review last year, the Government has pursued its commitment
to promote and support public radio with the establishment
of experimental stations in Sydney and Melbourne.
Encouarged by the response to these initiatives,
the Government wanted the broadest possible community involvement
in the further development of public radio.
CANBERRA J, AUSTRAL! A 



7/ Illyj
PRINE MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO Pl
WOMEN
SUNDAY 10 AUGUST 1975
A FEW WEEKS AGO MY WIFE AND ONE,, OF MY
ADVISERS, ELIZABETH REID, RETURNED FROM -qINTERNATIONAL
WOMEN'S YEAR CONFERENCE IN MEXICO CITY. IT'S NOT MY
USUAL STYLE TO PAY PUBLIC TRIBUTES TO MY STAFF, BUT
IT'S FAIR TO POINT OUT JUST HOW MUCH CREDIT ELIZABETH
REID BROUGHT TO AUSTRALIA DURING THAT CONFERENCE AND
HOW MUCH SHE HAS DONE TO HELP THE CAUSE OF WOMEN IN
AUSTRALIA AND, INDEED, IN OTHER COUNTRIES, SHE WOULD
BE THE LAST PERSON TO CLAIM CREDIT FOR THE MANY
REFORMS MY GOVERNMENT HAS INTRODUCED FOR WOMEN, BUT
HER VERY APPOINTMENT TO MY STAFF SAYS SOMETHING,
I THINK ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENT TO WOMEN'S
NEEDS AND INTERESTS, INTERNATIONAL WIOMEN'S YEAR HAS
BEEN A REMARKABLE EXPERIMENT IN GETTING PEOPLE EVERYWHERE
TO THINK ABOUT THE PROBLEMS OF WOMEN AND PERSUADING
GOVERNMENTS TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT THEM, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS MADE SUBSTANTIAL GRANTS TO ORGANISE
CONFERENCES, SEMINARS, BOOKS AND DISCUSSIONS DURING
THE YEAR. ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT CONFERENCES WILL BE
HELD IN BRISBANE LATER THIS MONTH ON THE THEME OF
WOMEN'S HEALTH, s / 2 
2. 2
SOME OF YOU MAY FEEL THAT ALL THIS TALK
ABOUT WOMEN IS RATHER HIGH-FLOWN AND IMPRACTICAL,
AND THAT THE ONLY WOMEN WE ARE CONCERNED TO HELP
ARE THE MINORITY OF YOUNG, CAREER-MINDED WOMEN
WITH HIGHER EDUCATION, NOTHING COULD BE FURTHER
FROM THE TRUTH, I DON'T THINK EVEN THE MOST
RADICAL WOMEN'S ORGANISATION WOULD WANT TO
FORCE WOMEN INTO ANY ROLE THAT THEY WOULDN'T CHOOSE
FOR THEMSELVES, IT MAY WELL BE TRUE THAT IF THEY
WERE COMPLETELY FREE TO CHOOSE, MOST WOMEN TODAY
WOULD CHOOSE THE TRADITIONAL ROLE TO BE WIVES, TO
BE MOTHERS, TO STAY AT HOME, WOMEN WHO CHOOSE
THOSE ROLES, THOSE HONOURABLE ROLES, HAVE AS MUCH
RIGHT TO HELP AND GUIDANCE AS ANYONE ELSE, THE
POINT IS TH; AT WOMEN SHOULD BE FREE TO MAKE THEIR
CHOICE; THEY SHOULD HAVE EXACTLY THE SAME
OPPORTUNITIES AS MEN TO EDUCATION, TO HIGHLY PAID
AND SATISFYING JOBS, TO POSITIONS OF RESPONSIBILITY
AND PERSONAL FULFILMENT, IT IS THIS FREEDOM THAT
WE WANT TO ENLARGE, ./ 3 
OF COURSE THE MOST OBVIOUS WAY THAT A
GOVERNMENT CAN HELP WOMEN IS IN THE MATERIAL THINGS
PAY AND CONDITIONS FOR WORKING WOMEN, YET EVEN
THESE OBVIOUS THINGS WERE NEGLECTED FOR MANY YEARS,
WITHIN DAYS OF COMING TO POWER IN DECEMBER 1972,
THE GOVERNMENT :' ADE ITS ATTITUDE TO THE QUESTION
OF EQUAL PAY FOR WOMEN VERY CLEAR, WE SUPPORTED
THE A. C. T. U.' S CASE FOR EQUAL PAY AND THE ARBITRATION
COMMISSION UNCONDITIONALLY ACCEPTED THE PRINCIPLE OF
EQUAL PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE. EQUAL PAY FOR
WOMEN UNDER FEDERAL AWARDS HAS NOW BEEN FULLY
IMPLEMENTED, AND FROM THIS MONTH THE MINIMUM WAGE
APPLIES EQUALLY TO WOMEN AND MENi IN ADDITION, WE
HAVE VASTLY IMPROED THE STATUS AND OPPORTUNITIES OF
WOMEN IN THE FIELD OF EMPLOYMENT WHERE WE HAVE FULL
RESPONSIBILITY AS A GOVERNMENT IN THE AUSTRALIAN
PUBLIC SERVICE, ,1/ 4 
4,
UIT THIS IS A VERY SMALL PART OF THE
PROBLEM, IN BRISBANE TWO YEARS AGO, IN ONE OF MY
FIRST SPEECHES ON THIS SUBJECT, I SAID THIS:
HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE INEQUALITY OF WOMEN
IN SOCIETY IS DEEPLY EMBEDDED NOT JUST IN THE
INSTITUTIONS BUT IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE SOCIETY,,,
IT'S THAT PSYCHOLOGY, THOSE OLD HABITS OF THINKING,
THAT REALLY MAKE THINGS DIFFICULT FOR WOMEN. THERE'S
THE FEELING, FOR EXAMPLE, THAT GIRLS SHOULD HAVE A
DIFFERENT SORT OF EDUCATION FROM BOYS THAT THEY
SHOULDN'T AIM TOO HIGH, THAT THEY SHOULD STICK TO
CERTAIN SUBJECTS AND LEAVE SCHOOL EARLIER AS INDEED,
3T GIRLS DO, THAT JUST ISN'T GOOD ENOUGH; AND THE
SCHOOLS CMISSION WHICH MY GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED
IS CURRENTLY SEEKING TO REMOVE DISTINCTIONS IN BOYS'
AND GIRLS' SCHCOLING AND PUT THE EMPHASIS ON RAISING
THE ASPIRATIONS OF GIRLS, WE ARE ALSO ENGAGED IN
A STUDY CALLED fIMOE N AND PLANNING, IT'S INVESTIGATING
ALL THE OBVICUS AND NOT-SO-OBVIOUS RESTRICTIONS ON
WOMEN S OPPORTUNITIES IN THE WORKFORCE, IN
SHOPPING AND RECREATION FACILITIESt IN HEALTH AND
WELFARE SERVICES AND TRANSPORT, 
i 2E REALISTIC WE HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
THE GREATEST HELP iWE CAN GIVE TO WOMEN AND NOT JUST
WORKING WOMEN IS IN THE CARE OF BABIES AND YOUNG
CHILDREN, GOOD SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL
SERVICES AREN'T SUFFICIENT IN THEMSELVES THERE
MUST BE SPECIAL PROVISION FOR CHILDREN OF PRE-SCHOOL
AGE, THIS YEAR WE SET UP THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION
TO ADMINISTER A COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF SERVICES FOR
CHILDREN PRE-SCHOOL, DAY CARE, PART-TIME AND
EMERGENCY CARE SERVICES, AFTER SCHOOL AND HOLIDAY
PROJECTS, ~ ELL OVER 100,000 CHILDREN HAVE BEEN
CATERED FOR ALREADY UNDER THIS PROGRAM, IN
QUEENSLAND IN THE LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WE PROVIDED
MORE THAN $ S5 MILLION TO MEET THE COST OF STAFF IN
PRE-SCHOCLS A. D PLAY CENTRES OPERATED BY LOCAL
GOVERNMENT BODIES AND COMMUNITY GROUPS AND TO HELP
ESTABLISH 77 NEW PRE-SCHOOL CENTRES THROUGHOUT THE
STATE, THIS -ON1EY HAS BEEN PAID THROUGH THE STATE
GOVERNMENT, i: TOP OF THAT WE HAVE MADE DIRECT GRANTS
TOWARDS THE COST OF OTHER CHILD CARE CENTRES. WE
BELIEVE THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN CHILD SHOULD HAVE THE RIGHT
TO A PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION, EVERY MOTHER WHO NEEDS OR
WANTS CHILD CARE FACILITIES SHOULD HAVE THEM. THESE
THINGS SHOULDN T BE PRIVILEGES FOR THOSE WHO CAN PAY, 
61
LL I I\ L" TO TELL YOU OF ALL THE OTHER
TH! INGS ' tiE -AVE FO) R WOM" EN HIGHER SOcITAL
SERVICE PAY&gt;! 4ENTS, THE SUPPORTING NOTHER' S BE! iN-El: IT
FOR S INGLE WOMEIN AIND DESERTED IVES, THLE NEW WMEN S
COrMMUNrITY HEAT CENTRE AND THE RAPE CR~ ISIS CENIh
INj BRf. ISBANE YrU CAM FIND OUT iMORE ABOUT THESE
BN EF ITS A ND S ER VI C ES F RO0M THE AUSTRALIANi GoVERIhIEN'T
OFFI~ CES OR YOUC" R MEMB1ER OF PA'RLIA]" IfENT. 10E ARE THE
FIRST AUTLNGOVERNMEINT TO TACKLE WOMEN'" IS PROBLE! M: S
AND LOOK DELEPLY ADSERIOUSLY AT WOMEN'S LONG-TERM
NEEDS. BUTl THERE IS A LlIMIT TO WH0 GOVERNMENTS
CAN DO, OUljR GREATEST DIFFICULTY LIES IN THE OLD
H+ A3T-S AND PRJDCSTHAT PERSIST THROULiGHrOUT THE:
CO0Mt 1U NIT Y~ ' IOMEN HAVE TO OVEPCONE THOSE FtEELINGS,
C i I~ V'A U TS E THE IIR PR IDl) E D -1G iIT Y,, AN11D
INDEENDECEAND TRY TO SEE THAT MEN, AND M'ORE~
liMPORTANT PE THlEIR FELLOW-WMEN, SHARE THOSE
FEEE_' NGS ADAPRTOS 



4j,, AUSTRALIA~
PRIME MINISTER Press Statemrent No. 540
11 Atrjust 1975
VISIT BY THE PRINCESS MARGARET
Details of the program for the visit in October by
Thie Princess Margaret, to-the Australian C, 4pital Territory,
Victoria and New South Wa-les have nnw been approved.
It will be recalled that on 29 May 1975 I released a
statement issued by Kensington Palace announcing that Princess
Margaret had accepted the Australian Government's invitation
to visit Australia to attend engagements in Sydney connected
with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the formation of the
Women's Royal Australian Army Corps.
Princess Margaret will visit Canberra from 22 October
to 24 October, Melbourne from 24 October to 28 October with
a one-day visit to the Latrobe Valley on 27 October, Sydney
from 28 October with the last official engagement on 31 October.
Princess Margaret has taken a close personal interest
in the preparation of the program.
It reflects some of her special interests and
responsibilities as a Princess of Australia, as Colonel-in-Chief
of the WRAAC, as an officer of a number of organisations, and as
a person in her own right.
As I have said previously, Princess Margaret, among her
many interests in Australia, is President of the Girl Guides
Association, of the Doctor Barnardo's Homes, and of the
Victoria League for Commonwealth Friendship. Her Royal Highness
is also Grand President of the St John Ambulance Association and
Brigade. Princess Margaret will be able to pursue her interest
in the arts during her visit to Australia.
The program includes attendance at a concert, and at
a performance by the Australian Ballet, and visits to art
galleries and historic National Trust buildings housing
important artifacts and works of art.
The public will have opportunities to see Her Royal
Highness on a number of occasions at each of the cities to be visited. ./ 2 
-2-
In Canberra, Princess Margaret will lay a wreath at
the Australian War Memorial and study Canberra's development
from Mount Ainslie lookout and at the National Capital
Development Commission's display at Regatta Point.
Her Royal Highness will visit the Woden Shopping Plaza
and Berwick House, Dr Barnardo's Home for Children, as well
as attending receptions, dinners and luncheons.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
FOR PRESS:
BACKGROUND NOTE: ROYAL VISIT OCTOBER 1975
The Prime Minister has announced the Australian
itinerary for the visit to Australia by Her Royal Highness
The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, in October 1975.
He has also given an outline of the engagements in Canberra.
The program of engagements in Victoria and New
South Wales will be released simultaneously at 1700 hours
EST Monday 11 August by the Premiers of Victoria and New South
Wales. The full program of engagements is attached. It
is made available for the convenience of news media
tepresentatives in Canberra.
Office of Government Ceremonial and Hospitality,
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
CANBERRA A. C. T. 2600
August 1975 
FOR PRESS RADIO AND TELEVISION
NEWS SERVICES
ROYAL VISIT OCTOBER 1975
HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS MARGARET,
COUNTESS OF SNOWDON, G. C. V. O.
PROGRAM FOR AUSTRALIA
Ofi('' c( o' Government Ceremonial and Hospitality,
D]-l, ar-1tnent of the Pr: ime Minister and Cabinet,
CAN IL; IkRA A. C. T. 2600
AIugust, 1975 
WEDNESDAY 22 OCTOBER 1975 CANBERRA
Arrivesat RAAF Base Fairbairn
Stays at Government House
At Government House
Afternoon Evening
THURSDAY 23 OCTOBER Visits Mt Ainslie Lookout
Lays wreath at Australian War Memorial
Visits Planning Exhibition at Regatta Point
At Government House receives informally
representatives of Press, Radio and Television
Dinner at Government House
1975 CANBERRA
Morning
Lunch Afternoon Evening No official engagements
As guest of Commonwealth High Commissioners
and wives
Visits Woden Shopping Plaza, Phillip and
Dr Barnardo's Home for Children at
Berwick House, Curtin
At Government House receives representatives
of voluntary organisations with which
associated
Dinner at The Lodge
Attends Reception at Parliament House
Morning Lunch 
FRIDAY 24 OCTOBER 1975 CANBERRA AND MELBOURNE
Morning
Lunch
Afternoon Evening Leaves RAAF Base Fairbairn for Melbourne
Guard of Honour inspection
Artillery Salute 21 guns
Informal arrival at Melbourne Airport
Stays at Government House
At Government House
Visits St. John's Home for Boys and Girls
at Canterbury and the National Gallery
of Victoria
At Melbourne Town Hall meets Lord Mayor and
Councillors and wives
At Government House receives informally
representatives of Press, Radio and Television
Dinner at Government House
Attends State Reception in the Ballroom at
Government House
SATURDAY 25 OCTOBER1975 MELBOURNE
Visits the Royal Botanic Gardens and plants
a tree
Attends Girl Guides Rally at Hawthorn
At Government House
Afternoon Evening Attends Racemeeting at Moonee Valley Racecourse
Cox Plate and Moonee Valley Gold Cup)
At Government House receives senior officers
of the Order of St. John of' Jerusalem;
attends St. John Ambulance Parade and
presents Long Service Medal Awards
Attends performance by the Australian Ballet
at the Palais Theatre as a guest of the
Government of Victoria
Morning
Lunch 
SUNDAY 26 OCTOBER 1975 MELBOURNE
Attends Divine Service at St Paul's Cathedral
Afternoon and
Evening No official engagements
MONDAY 27 OCTOBER 1975 VISIT TO LATRQBE.\ V. ALY
Leaves by train for Moe
At Moe receives Civic Welcome and visits
Coach Road Lookout and Yallourn " W"
Power Station
As guest of State Electricity Commission
AfternoonVisits Gippsland Folk Museum
Leaves by train for Warragul
At Warragul receives Civic Welcome and
plants a tree in Civic Park
Returns to Melbourne by train
EveningDinner at Government House
Attends reception as guest of the Victoria
League for Commonwealth Friendship at
the Old Customs House
Morning
Morning Lunch 
TUESDAY 28 OCTOBER 1975 MELBOURNE AN]) SYDNEY
Morning Lunch
Afternoon Evening Leaves Melbourne Airport for Sydney
Informal arrival at Flight Facilities'
Terminal, Sydney Airport
Stays at Government House
At Government House
Visits Art Gallery of New South Wales
At Sydney Town Hall meets Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and their wives
At Royal Naval House meets members of the
Victoria League for Commonwealth Friendship
At Government House receives informally
representatives of Press, Radio and Television
Dinner at Government House
WEDNESDAY 29 OCTOBER 1975 SYDNEY
Pre-lunch
Lunch Afternoon Visits the Sydney Opera House travelling
from Government House via the historic
Rocks area
At Opera House
Visits Taronga Park
At Bondi sees demonstration of surf life
saving equipment and techniques
At Government House receives representatives
of the Women's Royal Australian Army Corps
Attends Piano Recital by Rudolph Serkin in
the Concert Hall
Evening
TUESDAY 28 OCTOBER1975 MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY 
THUSD3A0 OCTBER1975 : VISIT TO PARRAMATTA
Lunch Afternoon
Evening At Old Government House, Parramatta
Visits Experiment Farm Cottage, Parramatta
Visits the Roy McCaughey Barnardo Centre
at Auburn
Visits the Girl Guides State Training Centre
at North Turramurra
Attends Dinner on board m. v. JOHN CADMAN
as guest of the Government of New South
Wales
FRIDAY 31 OCTOBER 1975 SYDNEY
At Victoria Barracks attends a Parade as part
of the twenty fifth anniversary celebrations
of the foundation of the Women's Royal
Australian Army Corps
At Victoria Barracks
AfternoonReturns to Government House
No official engagements
Morning Lunch
THURSDAY 30 OCTOBER1975 VISTT TO PARRIMI~ TI
Thereafter 
SATURDAY 1 NOVEMBER 1975 No official engagements
SUND) AY 2 NOVEMBER 1975 No official engagements
MONDAY 3 NOVEMBER 1975
MorningLeaves Sydney ( Kingsford-Smith) Airport
for overseas 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON.. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE WORLD ASSEMBLY OF WAR VETERANS IN AUSTRALIA,
SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE, 11 AUGUST 1975
I welcome on behalf of the Australian Government
the overseas delegates to this important assembly. Among
you are distinguished war veterans; many of you are renowned
for acts of conspicuous valour in the field or as prisoners of
war. It is an honour to have you among us. Your presence
is a reminder of the great world-wide fraternity of
ex-servicemen the universal kinship between men and women
who have fought for their country in war. Every nation recognises
an obligation to its war veterans. Australia accepts and
honours that obligation.
This is an appropriate moment and an appropriate
gathering at which to reflect on some of the great contemporary
issues of peace and war issues that concern you as former
servicemen and as responsible citizens of your countries.
Last week saw the thirtieth anniversary of the end of World
War 11. In the same week the heads of the European and North
American powers met in Helsinki to acknowledge formally the
realities of power in Europe and consolidate the basis of a
lasting peace. That meeting was part of the great international
movement of detente a movement that remains the supreme
challenge to modern statesmanship. Australia must lend her
voice to this movement. Australia must be part of this
worldwide quest for peace and international understanding.
. It has not always been easy for ex-servicemen' s
organisations to support these causes wholeheartedly. As an
ex-servicemen, as a member of the R. S. L. for the past 30 years,
I admire the efforts of the league to improve the welfare
of ex-servicemen and encourage the spirit of comradeship between
men and women who have served their country. Yet all too rarely
the sentiments and options of the R. S. L. strike a chord with
contemporary generations. Too often the R. S. L. seems out of
step; too often its public statements strike a note of
intolerance, of fanaticism. While Brezhnev and Ford were
meeting in Helsinki, what did we hear and read last week
in Sydney? the slogans of the fifties, the catchcries of
cold war ideology. The week before in another capital a
State Premier was advocating the acquisition of nuclear
weapons and guided missiles. It takes a brave man to query
fading slogans. But there have been brave men. Three years
ago at the New South Wales R. S. L. Congress the Governor,
Sir Roden Cutler, challenged the approach to Vietnam
and a decade before the Governor-General, Viscount De L'Isle, V. C.,
warned the National Congress on Cold War attitudes. The R. S. L.
must bring its influence and prestige to bear in a relevant and
constructive examination of the problems of peace and security.
Too often the younger generation likens the R. S. L. smoko, which
all of our generation enjoy, to Alexander's Feast, at which the
King in his cups Grew vain,
Fought all his battles o'er again,
And thrice he routed all his foes
And thrice he slew the slain. 
This year has seen the end of a long and terrible
war in Asia, a war that devastated a large part of our region
and baffled and demoralised the greatest democracy on earth.
The full consequences of the war its full cost in terms
of human life, material destruction, world inflation, shattered
morale, lost faith and broken ideals will perhaps never
be known. Perhaps the most evil consequence of Vietnam has
been a general disillusionment with democratic governments.
People are no longer disposed to believe what their governments
tell them. They are quite ready to believe that Governments
will lie and deceive their people when it suits them. The
necessary trust between governments and governed has been
undermined. The most urgent task for democracy is to rebuild
that trust in a geniune search for peace and human betterment.
And what R. S. L. leader was right on Vietnam?
Above all, we must not waste the opportunity
for peaceful reconstruction and international cooperation
which is now presented to the nations of South-East Asia,
including Australia. Opportunities for peace in the region
have been tragically wasted before; they must not be wasted
again. To say this is not to belittle the sacrifice and
courage of those who fought in Vietnam. To honour our war
dead, it is not necessary to approve of the conflicts in which
they took part. The frank acknowledgement of our past mistakes
and the greater those mistakes the franker and fuller that
acknowledgement must be is the first step to greater wisdom
and security. At the root of the whole ghastly malaise in
Vietnam, the whole tragic and futile struggle, was the
absence of any basic popular conviction that war was just.
The people did not believe in the war. The people of the
United States did not support it. The people of Australia
did not support it. And the people were right.
I believe the chief lesson of Vietnam has been
that no longer will it be possible for governments to fight a
war successfully without the broad support of their people.
There is no longer any automatic or slavish patriotism among
our people. Some may find this unpalatable or shocking;
others may see it as a mark of enlightienment. The fact remains
that the days have passed when any war could be relied upon
to bring an instantaneous surge of national fervour. It was
possible once to depend on such feelings in Australia. When
Australia was founded half the population was in uniform.
We were settled by the Royal Navy and a contingent of troops.
Australians fought in every war in which Britain was engaged,
up to and including the Malaysian campaign. Their first
expedition was to the Sudan 90 years ago; it embarked a few
hundred metres from where we are meeting. It was only in the
last decade that Australians fought overseas without British
troops beside them. The imperial connection which was the root
of our former patriotism is no longer sufficient to stir us.
The sending of a few battalions to Vietnam can no longer provoke
the automatic popular response, the unquestioning commitment,
that prevailed during the Boer War, for example, or during
World War 1 or 11. No one doubts that we were right to fight
Hitler and Tojo, but can the same be said of the earlier wars
in which Australia took part? From our present vantage point
the horrors of World War 1 are difficult to explain and
impossible to justify. I shall have the same difficulty in 
3.
justifying it to my grandson as Kaspar had in justifying
Blenheim: " And everybody praised the Duke
Who this great fight did win."
" But what good came of it at last?"
Quoth little Peterkin.
" Why that I cannot tell," said he,
" But -' twas a famous victory."
Apart from a few isolated incidents, the Australian
population has never experienced the horrors of war as the
civilian populations of Britain, Japan and the European
countries have done. The rigours of war have fallen on our
warriors alone. It is only recently through television
that we have seen in Vietnam what war means to a whole
population. It is perhaps for this reason that the anti-war
movement, the general revulsion against war as an instrument
of policy, has been-slower to take root in this country
than it has abroad. It is perhaps for this reason that
bellicose sentiments and cold war thinking have survived longer
in Australia, as they have in the United States, whose
civilian population has also been spared the devastation of modern
warfare. Our isolation has compounded these effects in
another way. As a result of the last war we embarked on a
vast program of immigration. In the first years of that
program many new citizens came here as refugees from Europe.
Many of those who came from the countries of eastern Europe
are inclined to think that those countries are the same as
they were before the war. They are reluctant to accept
the realities of the post-war world; they go on believing
that the old regimes will somehow be restored. In the case
of Yugoslavia, for example, this obsession has persuaded a
sizable minority of new Australians to get together and
venerate our enemies in the last war. By extolling the
Ustasha and the quisling Pavelic they advocate the
dismemberment today as they did in 1941 of the only nation
on the continent of Europe which had declared itself our
ally. It is an utter disgrace that a regime accepted
internationally a nation visited by President Ford and
the Queen should be vilified by a minority of agitators
in Australia. After Helsinki, does anyone really believe
that the situation in Europe will be changed by military
means or that the old regimes in Europe can be restored?
Our true interests lie in putting an end to
these obsessions with the past, in recognising the new
realities in our region and in the world at large, and in
developing humane and rational policies for peace and
international cooperation. These should be the concerns of
all progressive and contemporary ex-servicemen's organisations.
I pay tribute to the R. S. L. in promoting the welfare of
ex-servicemen and serving members of the forces. My own
Government has done a great deal in this field. Indeed
there is some irony in the fact that Australians with active
overseas service have been treated somewhat differently from 4 
4.
other Australians in the provision of government services.
Under our Federal system, the national Government has been
able to provide for servicemen and ex-servicemen such things
as health services, housing and adult training services
-that governments have failed or refused to provide for the
rest of the population. There is certainly a role for ex-servicemen's
organisations in looking after their members' interests.
There is a role for ex-servicemen's organisations as
concerned observers of the nation's defences. But let
this role be discharged in honest and constructive terms.
Let it take account of the realities of the world and the
aspirations of people everywhere for true peace and progress.
For who can doubt -that the world has changed
permanently in the last quarter of a century? For all
our present anxieties. and immense problems, who can doubt that
the world is a safer place than it was at the time of
Berlin, of Korea, of Cuba? For the first time in nearly
years no member of the Australian armed forces is fighting
in an overseas war. No Australian is on active service. The
gates of the temple of Janus are closed. The comparative
peace we now enjoy in our region and the comparative peace
we enjoy in the wider world should renew our determination to
preserve and strengthen peace everywhere. Ex-servicemen's
organisations must lend their support to this process.
In the presence and as the host of the most distinguished
and representative gathering of ex-servicemen in this
country the R. S. L. can make its contribution and bring
inspiration to this noble endeavour. 



, A U Si IHAL IA Press Statement No. 43W-$ 4
11 August 1975
PAPUA NEW GLJINLA BOUGAINVTLLE
Following his discussions with the Chief Minister of
Papua New Guinea, Mr Michael Somare, today, the Prime Minister
said that he wished to make crystal clec-r the Austral. ian Goverrnent's
position in relation to Bougainville.
The Prime Minister recalled that, in advising Mr Somare
on 19 June that the date of 16 September for independen~ ce
nominated by the House of Assembly was acceptable to the
Australian Government, he had taken the opportunity to reaffirm
that the Australian Government's policy was that Papua New Guinea
should come to independence as one country in accordance with
the wishes of the overwhelming majority of Papua New Guinea's
elected representatives. This remained Australia's firm policy.
The Prime Minister also recalled that he had informed
Mr Somare on 19 June that the Australian Government would give
no sympathy, aid or support in any form to any group in Papua
New Guinea working to undermine their country's unity. This
remained the firm Australian position.
The Prime Minister said that he had today advised Mr Somare
that a unilateral declaration of independence, if given effect,
would be an illegal act. It could not by itself alter in terms of
the law of Papua New Guinea the authority of the Government of
Papua New Guinea over the whole of the territory of Papua New Guinea.
Nor could it detract from Australia's international rights and
duties under the Trusteeship Agreement.
Austral. ian policy was to regard 13apua New Guinea as
to tho-COv~ rnmenht 6E Papiua NOw C.., iinea. ii + his-i, siituatifoh Atistralla
tr i d, 0 ,1 diir. dl rIns o'il Lu~ r-Ct on oby~ o~ i~
c Ion t, howevor Lhal FillY Ili;'' Vco o~ I. lDicaktI l. J lIi i
inidependott be. tcro 16 Sc pLi:' bc* woU! d Jt~ ki. drO 11ot ofliy tha finant
of the Governnhunt of P. apua NOW ( Thiii': a bjut-clso that ot the Aitralian
Government and the United Nationg. Tihe Aus -trtlian Government would
not a., 3surit nor, in the PIm. ie M. i .' iiste:' s 2 uO~ gemvet, would. the
United ' Nati. ns, / 2 
-2-
The Australian Government naturally remained interested
and concerned about developments in Bougainville. The Prime
Minister and Mr Somare had agreed to keep in the closest touch.
The Prime Minister said that he had given Mr Somare
renewed assurances of Australian support and had every
confidence that the move to independence on 16 September of a
united Papua New Guinea would proceed smoothly. He understood
that the way was open for further discussions between the
central government and the Bougainvilleans. He hoped that all
concerned would use their best endeavours to find an amicable
and enduring solution.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



8
UI 7I, Press Statement No. 542
12 August 1975
HOBART TRANSPORT ADVISER
Mr R. D. Phillips, Deputy Secretary of the Department of
Transport, has resumed duty in the Department after serving
for approximately three months as special adviser to the
Premier of Tasmania on Transport co-ordination in the Hobart
area. Mr Phillips was appointed to this position in April as a result
of discussions between the Prime Minis-ter and the Premier,
Mr Neilson.
Following the collapse of the Tasman Bridge early in January,
the Tasmanian authorities have taken a number of steps to
provide alternative means of transport between the eastern
and western shores of -the Derwent River.
Government and private passenger ferries now operate regularly
across the river, connecting Hobart's central business district
with suburbs on the eastern bank. The Government has constructed
the necessary berthing facilities, passenger terminals and car
parks, and has purchased two large ferries.
A temporary Bailey Bridge is being constructed, an additional
vehicular ferry will soon be in operation, and roads on both
sides of the river are being progressively and urgently upgraded.
The Australian Government has accepted responsibility for
meeting the costs associated with these projects, as well as those
related to the restoration and widening of the Tasman Bridge and
the construction of an additional permanent bridge in the Hobart
area at a later date.
During the past three months Mr Phillips has assisted in
co-ordinating the various works, which are the responsibilities
of several authorities, and has acted as a link between the
Tasmanian Government and the Joint Federal State Co-ordinating
Committee established to administer the Australian Government's
financial contributions. ./ 2 
2.
The Premier, Mr Neilson, has expressed his sincere appreciation
of Mr Phillips' efforts. " He has helped us tremendously in a
difficult situation", said Mr Neilson, " and his advice and
co-ordinating work has undoubtedly contributed to achieving
greater progress in the many transport tasks which faced us in
recent months". Mr Neilson added that he had been grateful to
the Prime Minister for making Mr Phillips' services available.
The Prime Minister has also thanked Mr Phillips for his work
in Tasmania, and indicated to the Premier that Mr Phillips will
be available for further consultation on Hobart transport
matters should the need arise.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIN; E MINISTER,
THE HOIN. E. G. WHITLA-Q. C . Hi. P.,
AT NORNINGTON PENISINSULA MUN ICIPALITIES ASSOCIATION,
MORNINGTON, VIC. 12 AUGUST 1975
IT GIVES ME GREAT PLEASURE TO BE HERE WITH
YOU TONIGHT AS A GUEST OF THE QUARTERLY SOCIAL EVENING
ASSEMBLY OF THE MORNINGTON PENINSULA, MUNICIPALITIES
ASSOCIATION. I PAY TRIBUTE TO YOUR VISION IN CHOOSING
TO MEET TOGETHER, IN ASSOCIATION, WITH THE BEST INTERESTS
OF YOUR PENINSULA-AT HEART. WITHOUT SACRIFICING
YOUR DISINCTIVE INDIVIDUAL ELEMENTS, YOU WERE FARSIGHTED
ENOUGH TO REALISE THAT ON SOME MATTERS IT WOULD MAKE MUCH
MORE SENSE TO GO IT TOGETHER RATHER THAN ALONE. I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE INITIAL DIFFICULTIES YOU MIGHT HAVE FACED
IN PERSUADING PEOPLE THAT A QUARTERLY MEETING TOGETHER WAS NOT.
TANTAMOUNT TO SELLING OUT YOUR BIRTHRIGHT, BUT POSSIBLY A
STEP TOWARDS RECOVERING THAT BIRTHRIGHT, PARTICULARLY
IN AN AREA SO ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AS THE HIORNINGTON
PENINSULA, / 2 
2..
IAM QUITE SURE THAT EACH MEMBER ORGANISATION
THE CITY OF FRANKSTON AND THE SHIRES OF FLINDERS,
HASTINGS AMD JORNINGTON ITSELF -VALUES THE OPPORTUNITY
OF SHARING PROBLEMS AND WORKING TOGETHER ON SOLUTIONS
WHICH WILL BENEFIT THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE WHOLE
OF THE [ iORNINGTON PENINSULA. AND NOT JUST ONE PART OF
IT,. YOU HAVE A GREAT DEAL TO TEACH MANY OTHER DISTRICTS,
MANY OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES WHO MAY BE STILL INCLINED
TO SHY OFF THE IDEA OF ANY KIND OF REGIONALISM FOR FEAR
OF LOSING THEIR " INDIVIDUAL IDENTITIES. YOU HAVE
DEMONSTRATED, WITH YOUR ASSOCIATION, THAT THIS IS AN
UNFOUNDED FEAR. INDEED YOU ALL BELONG, AS WELL, TO
THE WESTERNPORT REG I ONAL ORGANI SATI ON OF COUN'CI LS WHICH
HAS DRAWN SUPPORT FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
. REGIONAL ORGANISATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM,
IT IS GRATIFYING TO ATTEND GATHERINGS
LIKE THIS, BECAUSE THEY PROVIDE AN EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY
FOR ME TO HEAR AT FIRST HAND HOW THINGS ARE GOING AT THE
GRASS ROOTS LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT, THE ONE CLOSEST
TO THE PEOPLE, IN THE LAST THREE MONTHS I HAVE ATTENDED
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS FROM FUMUT To LAUNCESTON.
FROM IPSWICH TO FOF; SES AND IN THE SPRAWLING SUBURBS
OF SYDNEY WHICH FORM MY OWN ELECTORATE. THE ACTUAL,
PROBLEMS DIFFER FROM PLACE TO PLACE, ACCORDING TO
DEMOGRAPHIC SHIFTS, BUT ESSENTIALLY THE CONSTANT ISSUE
IS HOW BEST TO FACILITATE THE DELIVERY OF GOVERNMENT
SERVICES TO PEOPLE WHERE THEY LIVE, BECAUSE THAT IS WHAT
AFFECTS THE QUALITY OF THEIR LIVES, 
L2 3.
THERE WAS A TIME, OF COURSE, WHEN PRIME
f "] INISTERS TENDED NOT TO GET INVOLVED IN AN YTHIN', G AS
ORDINARY AND BASIC AND RELEVANT AS LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS BENEATH THEIR DIGNITY TO BOTHER THEMSELVES WITH
HOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT COULD POSSIBLY MAKE ENDS MEET,
WITH FIOW ESSENTIAL SERVICES COULD BE MADE AVAILABLE
IN OUTER SUBURBAN' AREAS, WITH WHAT THE QUALITY OF LIFE
WAS GOING TO BE LIKE FOR ANY BUT THE COMFORTABLY
OFF. THAT WAS THE TIME WHEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS
RATHER LESS THAN A POOR RELATION, MORE LIKE A
FOUINDLIN'IG THAT NEITHER PREMIERS NOR PRIME MINISTERS
WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT. BUT THINGS HAVE CHANGED, CHANGED
UTTERLY, ANID IN A REMARKABLY SHORT TIME,
JUST TWO WEEKS AGO, WE ANNOUN CED THIS YEAR'S
GRANTS COMMISSION ALLOCATIONS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES,
$ 79,908,000 THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, WITH $ 20,21-2,000
COMING TO VICTORIA. IT MAY NOT BE TOO OBVIOUS IF I MIENTION
THAT $/ 410,000 CAME TO THLE INDIVIDUAL SHIRE AND CITY COUNICILS
MAKING UP THE 1': 1ORNINGTON PENINSULA N'UNICIPALITIES ASSOCIATION,
THIS YEAR,) GRANTS REPRESENT AN INCREASE OF 387. FOR
VICTORIA ON LAST YEAR'S GRANTS, AND THE LEVEL OF PER
CAPITA ASSISTANCE HAS RISEN FROM $ 4.07 IN 1974/ 75 TO
$ 5.58 IN 1975/ 76. o,/ a4 
IT'S SO EASY NOW TO TALK ABOUT THIS
YEAR IS AND LAST YEARIS ALLOCATIONS AS THOUGH THEY
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN AROUND. BUT, OF COURSE, THEY HAVEN'T.
REMEMBER WHAT A STRUGGLE WE HAD TO GET THE PRINCIPLE
OF FUNDING ACCEPTED? SOME OF YOU MIGHT RECALL A CERTAIN
SECTION OF MY POLICY SPEECH IN 1972:
" VIE WILL GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FULL
ACCESS TO THE LOAN COUNCIL AND GRANTS COMMISSION
NOT ONLY BECAUSE THE BURDENS BORNE BY TAXPAYERS AS
RATEPAYERS MUST BE REDUCED, BUT BECAUSE THE INEQUALITIES
MUST BE ATTACKED BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ACTING
WITH AND THROUGH LOCAL GOVERNMENT."
IT WASN'T A VERY GLAMOROUS PROMISE BUT
IT WAS AN1 IMPORTANT ONE, AND IT WAS ATTACKED BY OUR
OPPONENTS AT STArE AND FEDERAL LEVELS, IBECAUSE THEY
WERE NOT INTERESTED IN THE RESPONSIBILITIES AND BURDENS
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, THEY WERE UNABLE TO RESPOND TO
OUR PLEDGE TO HELP LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN ANY WAY OTHER THAN
TO KICK THE CENTRALIST CAN, BUT AS I POINTED OUT IN
ANOTHER POLICY SPEECH, IN MAY LAST YEAR,
" THE ROLE WE ASSIGN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE REAL
ANSWER TO CHARGES OF CENTRALISM. UNDER A VARIETY OF
PROGRAMS WE HAVE PROVIDED LOCAL GOVERNMENT WITH THE FUNDS
TO UNDERTAKE THE RANGE OF ACTIVITIES PREVIOUSLY
INADEQUATELY CARRIED OUT OR TOTALLY NEGLECTED." 1 
I THEN MIENTIONED THE AUS;' RALIANi AssISTANCE
PLAN WHICH IS NOW UNDER CHALLENGE BY YOUR STATE
GOVERNMENT, ALONG WITH SUCH SUBVERSIVE PROGRAMS AS
MEALS ON WHEELS, HANDICAPPED PERSONS' WELFARE, HOME
NURSING SUBSIDIES AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICES.
THE HIGH COURT CHALLENGE WILL DETERMINE
WHETHER THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN GIVE DIRECT
HELP TO THESE WELFARE SERVICES MANY OF THEM BEGUN
UNDER PREVIOUS PRIME MINISTERS, VICTORIAN PRIME MINISTERS
LIKE HENZIES, AND GORTON AND WHETHER SUCH AID MUST PASS
THROUGH THE DELAYING HANDS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
OF WHATEVER HUE. BUT ALL THE PEOPLE IN RECEIPT OF
THESE SERVICES CARE ABOUT IS THAT THEY SHOULD BE PROVIDED
WHEN THEY ARE NEEDED. THEY ARE NOT LIKELY TO BE
SPEEDED UP BY PASSING THROUGH ANOTHER BUREAUCRACY.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES COULD TESTIFY TO THIS,
PARTICULARLY HERE IN THE MORNINGTON PENINSULAR WHERE
YOU HAVE NOT ONLY L12% OF YOUR POPULATION UNDER 21,
BUT ALSO A VERY HIGH PROPORTION OF ELDERLY AND RETIRED
PEOPLE WHO WILL BECOME INCREASINGLY DEPENDENT ON THE
SERVICES UNDER CHALLENGE IN THE HIGH COURT. ALREADY
A REGIONAL COUNCIL FOR: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT HAS BEEN
ESTABLISHED THROUGH THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN IN THE
WESTERNPORT REGION, AND IT HAS RECEIVED $ 57,468 IN THE
LAST TWO YEARS. 
6,
IN 1975/ 76, DEPENDING ON THE SUCCESS OF THE
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT'S CHALLENGE, THIS REGIONAL
COUNCIL WILL HAVE ACCESS TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE GRANT
OF $ 10,000 AS WELL AS GRANTS OF $ 12,000 EACH FOR FOUR
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS. I LEAVE YOU TO
DECIDE WHETHER SUCH ASSISTANCE COULD BE PROVIDED
MORE EFFECTIVELY IF IT HAD TO BE CHANNELLED THROUGH
STATE GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES, HAVING ORIGINATED
WITH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS,
IT'S DISTRESSING TO SEE HOW OTHER EFFORTS
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE ON BEHALF OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN THWARTED BY STATE GOVERNMENT,
BY STATE PREMIERS. YOU WILL RECALL OUR INSISTENCE THAT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BE REPRESENTED AT THE CONSTITUTIONAL
CONVENTION. BUT WE PROMISED ALSO TO GIVE YOU ACCESS TO
THE LOAN COUNCIL, AND I THOUGHT THAT I HAD SECURED SOME
SORT OF AGREEMENT FROM THE PREMIERS AT THAT CONVENTION
IN SEPTEMBER 1973. W'HEN TiHEY C'IME TO C/ NBERRA THE NEXT
MONTH, OCTOBER 1973, TO DISCUSS THE PROPOSAL, ALL THE
OLD PREJUDICES WERE ON SHOW AGAIN, ALL THE OLD JEALOUSIES
WERE PARADED, AND THE VOTES OF STATE PREMIERS EXCLUDED
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FROM THE LOAN COUNCIL. So THEN WE TOOK
IT TO A REFERENDUM. THE OFFICIAL CASE FOR NO WAS A
MARVEL OF MISREPRESENTATION, DELIBERATELY CREATING
CONFUSION IN PEOPLE'S MINDS ABOUT THE FUNCTIONS OF THE
LOANS COUNCIL AND THE GRANTS COMMISSION, NEVERTHELESS,
IN VICTORIA 47,383 VOTED YES, BECAUSE ENOUGH PEOPLE
IN VICTORIA REALISED HOW VITALLY THE PROPOSAL COULD AFFECT
THEM AS TAXPAYING, RATEPAYING CITIZENS, 
-7-
NOR WERE VICTORIANS IMPRESSED BY THE VIGOUR WITH WHICH
OUR OPPONENTS KICKED T HE CENTRALIST CAN IN THAT WHOLE
CAMPAIGN, As I SAID IN I'IAY LAST YEAR, THE AUSTRALIAN
ASSISTANCE PLAN AND SIMILAR PROGRAMS " ARE ALL ACTIVITIES
WHICH CANNOT BE CLOSELY REGULATED FROM THE CENTRE AND
ARE BEST PLANNED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORK( ING WITH LOCAL
COMMUNITIES." So MUCH FOR OUR CENTRALIST POLICIES,
IWELCOME THE OPPORTUNITY TO CLEAR UP THAT PARTICULAR
MISCONCEPTION, AND I AM GLAD THAT OUR SECOND ANNUAL
GRANTS COMMISSION ALLOCATIONS, LlIKE LAST YEAR'IS), HAVE
NO STRINGS ATTACHED. THAT IS IN LINE WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S FAITH IN THE FUNDAMENTAL GOOD
SENSE OF LOCAL GOV/ ERNMENT AND ITS ABILITY TO ORDER
IT-S OWN AFFAIRS AND SET ITS OWN PRIORITIES.
FOR flY PART, I WILL BE PARTICIPATING IN A SPECIAL
MEETING IN CANBERRA TOMORROW OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL
IN 16-
CONVENTION-3 G COMMITTEE DEALING WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
FRESH FROMIS AHRN TONIGHT, I WILL BE ABLET
GIVE PARTICULAR ATTENTION TO THE WORK( ING PARTY REPORTS
ON THE SUBMISSION MADE TO THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
BY THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL ON LOCAL GOVERNM ENT. WE SHALL
ALSO BE CONSIDERING THE GENERAL QUESTION OF GRANTS TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE PROBLEMS INVOLVED IN BORROWING.
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
SO YOU CAN SEE THAT OUR CONCERN FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT DOES
NOT STOP WITH THOSE STRAIGHT OUT., NO-STRINGS ATTACHED
GRANTS COMMISSION ALLOCATIONS. A 
-7, ATHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO MOVED IN
OTHER AREAS TO HELP LIFT THE FINANCIAL BURDENS OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AND TO ENSURE AS MUCH EQUALITY AS
POSSIBLE BETWIEEN REGIONS, ATTEMPTING TO ENSURE THAT
PEOPLE ARE NOT DISADVANTAGED BECAUSE THEY LIVE
IN ONE REGION RATHER THAN ANOTHER, WE ARE ATTEMPTING
TO REDUCE THE GAPS APPARENT IN THE PROVISION OF BASIC
SERVICES LIKE SEWERAGE PROGRAMS, URBAN LOCAL ROADS
AND TRANSPORT, CHILD CARE PROGRAMS, ATTEMPTING TO
REDUCE THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS WHICH HAVE
BEGGARED THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THIS COUNTRY, 
-8-
TAKE SEWERAGE, FOR EXAMPLE, IT IWASN'T A VERY NICE
WORD TC INTRODUCE INTO MY POLICY SPEECH IN 1972, BUT I DEFIED
THE NICETIES AND MENTIONED IT, AND MORE IMPORTANTLY, WE HAVE
DONE SOMETHING ABOUT IT IN THIS AREA. IN CONSULTATION WITH
STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES WE HAVE EMBARKED ON A NATIONAL
TEN YEAR PROGRAM TO CLEAR THE BACKLOG IN SEWERAGE SERVICES,
AND IN 1974/ 75, $ 2 MILLION WAS MADE AVAILABLE TO AUTHORITIES
IN THE MORNINGTON PENINSULA AREA FOR RETICULATION ANDt
TREATMENT IORKS. IT I'S HARD: TO REALISE THAT THIS KIND OF
EXPENDITURE ONLY CAME IN WITH A FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT,
BUT WE ARE PROPERLY PROUD OF IT, I AND TO THINK JHAT JOHN GORTON
ONCE DEROGATIV LY DESCRIBED ME AS TALKING LIKE A SHIRE
PRESIDENT IT IS INTERESTING TO COMPARE THE CENSUS, FIGURES
OF 1947, JUST AFTER THE , AR,: WITH THOSEOF'OUR LAST CENSUS
iN 1971; IN 1947, MORNINGTON HAD 4004 PEOPLE; IN 1971, 14,289.
IrN 1947 FLINDERS HAD, 7,561 PEOPLE; IN 171, 15,481. AND
iN 1947 THEY COUNTED FRANKTON AND HASTINGS TOGETHER WITh
11,672 PEOPLE. IN 1971, HASTINGS HAD GROWN TO 8,927.,
FRANKSTON WAS UP TO 59,410. i
. HILE THE AVERAGE AGE WAS 32.4 AT 1947 CENSUS TIME
IN FRANKSTON/ HASTINGS IT HAD COME DOWN TO 28.7 BY 1971.
THIS HELPS EXPLAIN WHY TODAY, 42 PER CENT OF THE POPULATION
IS UNDER 21, AND. WHY THE CIY OF FRANKSTON ALIONE HAS 18
STATE PRIMARY SCHOOLS, 4 HIGH SCHOOCS, 3 TECHNICAL SCHOOLS,
7 PRIVATE SCHOOLS, 16 PRESCHOOLS AND 10 INFANT WELFARE CENTRES
FOR ITS PRESENT POPULATION, OF 74,000,
.7 
.7 3-
YET AT THE SArMIE TIME; A LARGE PROPDRTION OF THE
POPULATION ARE ELDERLY PEOPLE Wk-HO A-lAVE CHOSEN TO LIVE OUT
' TrHEIR RETIREMENT YEARS NOT JUST TH_,-IR SUMPAIERS I: ET [
PENI NS U LA S UNNSr I NE THESE-OLDER RESIDENTS HAVE A RIG. HT
TO SEE K SUPPORTIVE , SERVICES FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
ASSISTED BY THHEl USTRALI N GVERNM'ENT.' I " KNOW THE
irI-NEPS SFIIrE HAS ' DUILT TWO ELDERL'i( CITI 7ENS CLUBS, IN
TrHE LAST fO EARRLS401 , WOV IT R000RTHOE FEDERAL
bOVER~\ iM: TO RTOSEBUD AND $ 73,050 TO IROJMNAA NA
I1 THE rHOIEL P EN INSULA AREA WE HVE PROVIDEl OVER
IiIL ,0DQE LI-/ ERED MEALS SUBSIDY SINCE 1972, AND $ 231,643
FOR~ PESONAL CARE SUBSi--S-Ii\ 4 19714 wE GAVE 37I. 0
TO TH E C" OUIINTRY liOMEN'llS ASSOCATATIONM, H0' i1OJNGTN FOR FOUR
HO STFEL -BEDS AND IN MlAY Li ST YlAR A COM. iNED; CURCH o
ENLA ) D PROJECT FOR ST PAcUL'S FRAiNKSTbVN rECIVED A GRANT
OF $ 555,720 FOR 1. iHOSTEL BEDS UN. 1D IER' ' B'OT H THE AGUED
PERSONs ' i" HMES AND HOSTELS A CTS,
IT IS NOT SURPRIS. ING THAT TH E FRAN STON COUNCIL
FHAS'APP ED UNND\ ERTA'K NIG OF A COMPREHENSIVE
STRATEGY PLAN FOI-ALL 3CT$ OF FUTURE DEVELOPlENT OF
THE CITY. I BELIEVE A \ STRONG WORKI NG RELATIONSH 1P
EXISTS 1ETWEEN THE TO14iNil PLANNING AND SOCIAL'WELFARE
DEPAERTMIE1 TS SO THE SOCIAL CONiSEQUENCES OF THE PLANNING
OF FACILITIES AND AMENITIES CAN BE PREIDETERMINED,
I a':' k
,1. a
I " Ia 
REALISING THE EFFECT ON QUALITY OF LIFE OF
INADEQUATE PUBLIC TRANSPORT GENERALLY, AND PARTICULARLY
IN AREAS SUDDENLY SUBJECT TO COMMUTER PRESSURES,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN 1973/ 74 APPROVED
CONSTRUCTION OF A THIRD TRACK BETWEEN CAULFIELD AND
MORDIALLOC, AND AN ADDITIONAL PLATFORM AT INTERMEDIATE
STATIONS UNDER THE URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROGRAM.
AT JUNJE 30 THIS YEAR, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD
SPENT $ 1,9 MILLION ON THE PROJECT, WHOSE FIRST
STAGE, ALREADY APPROVED, BETWEEN CAULFIELD AND
CHELTENHAM IS ESTIMATED TO COST $ 6 MILLION,
IN ADDITION TO THIS, $ 424,000 HAS BEEN SPENT ON
URBAN LOCAL ROADS IN THE PENINSULA AREA IN 1974/ 75
AND $ 5,663,500 ON LAND ACQUISITION AND CONSTRUCTION
OF URBAN ARTERIAL ROADS, INCLUDING THE MIORNINGTON
PENINSULA FREEWAY AND THE FRANKSTON FREEWAY,
BUT COMMUNICATIONS DON'T STOP WITH ROADS
AND RAILWAY LINES. LAST MONTH A NEW TELEPHONE EXCHANGE
WAS OPENED AT MORNINGTON, ADDING TO THE 13 SMALL
EXCHANGES OPENED SINCE 1972, AND NEW ONES ARE PLANNED
FOR BAXTER, HASTINGS, LANGWARRrN, SOMERVILLE AND
TYABB AT AN ESTIMATED COST OF $ 5 MILLION, , l/ ii 
Il.
THIS GIVES 501E IDEA OF THIE AMOUNT OF
WORK WHICH MUST BE ON TO COPE ALL TIHES; E Nl" EW
DEMOGRAPHIC PRESS. 1URES, A11. TO ENSUIRE * r-iAT LIVING STANDARDS
ARE PlAlINTAINED WHEN PEOPLE, FOR WHATEVER REASOINS FIND
THEMHSELVES LIVIN-, G AND aO: RKING IN PLACES VIHICH ' NOT SO LONi-G
AGO, USED TO IDE A LONG Wt'AY AWdAY,
Li i\ i FRuAW., KSTON CITY COUNCIL, ALL THE MEMBERS
OF THE : I1ORN1INGTON1 PE-H1lNSULA IlUNICIPALITIEs ASSOCIATION
HAVE REAL ISED THE FUN" DAMEN-TAL I MPORTANCE OF PLANING
FOR THE FUTURE. ch iRIGO SHIRE ITSELF, TAKING
il-l liN'IH ILI A, N0iO2'! IINGTON AND ;"-IOU~ NT IARTHA, HAS HAD
A INCREASE IN POPULATION IN 10 YEARS. ITS NEWEST
TOWNil PLANING SCEEHAS BENPRE-PARE" D BY COUNCIL IN
ASSOCIATIONl WI1TH TOWN PLANN11ING CON" SULTANTS AND THE
ES TERNPORT [ REG IONA'LPLAN GATHRIT TO WH ICHFLIN".
DEcRS) SH-1IRE ALSO B'ELONGS. A JI" OUNT E-LIZ7A STUDY HAS BEENM
COMM'ISSJONED JOiNTLY WITH TfHE CITY OF FRA'NKS-ToN AND IS
CURRi) ENTLY 3 lNGCONSIDE! R) ED BOTH COUNCI LS.
IEXPECT THAT BOTH TH-E SE SCHE; MES HAVE THEIR
SH\ RE OF KNOCKERS; INEVITABLY THERE WILL BE SOME PEOPLE
UNHAPPY AT THE PROSPECT OF AN' Y ENCROACHMENT ON THEIR
PROSPECTS AS PROPERTY OWNERS, BUT TIHE IMPORTANT ASPECT OF T1 -E1
[' 1ORN\ INGTON STUDY IS THAT IT PLACES PROPE--R EMPHASIS O . N
LANDSCAPE AN4D CONrSER-PVATFION FEATURES, AND IS LOOKING TO
PRESERVE LAN." D INOW FOR THE ENJOYMENT OF GENERATIONS TO
COME, [ HOISE WHO CAINE EARLY IN SEARCHI OF THE DISTRICT'S
BEAUTY WOULD SURELY APPROVE, / 12 
AND IT IS IN THIS CONTEXT THAT THE URBANi
LAND COUNCILS INVOLVEMENT IN THE PURCHASE OF
HECTARES OF LAND ON THE MIORNINGTON PENINSULA AND 6 ON
PHILLIP ISLAND MUST BE SEEN, THE URBANi LAND COUNCIL
CONTRIBUTED $ IL! MILLION TOWARDS THE TOTAL COST OF.
$ 2.1 MILLION IN 197L4/ 75, THE PENINSULA LAND WILL BE
BROUGHT UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THE VICTORIAN
NATIONAL PARKS ACT 195 AND THE PHILLIP ISLAND
HOLDING WILL BE ADDED TO EXISTING RESERVES.
UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S INATIONAL
ESTATE PROGRAM, THE IORNINGTON PENINSULA WILL BE
INCLUDED IN A $ 21,000 COASTLINJE STUDY WHICH WILL BE
CARRIED OUT BY THE MINISTRY FOR CONSERVATION AND THE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING BOARD OF VICTORIA. ANOTHER
GRANT OF $ 119,350 HAS ASSISTED WITH THE ACQUISITION
OF" THE BRIARS" AS AGREED BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN AND
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENTS AND THE " IORNINGTON SHIRE,
TOURISM AND RECREATION GRANTS OF $ 80,000 HAVE GONE
TOWARDS THE CONSTRUCTION OF SCENIC WALKWAYS AND AN
INFORMATION BUREAU ON PHILLIP ISLAND,
CLEARLY A GREAT DEAL HAS BEEN DONE ALREADY,
BUT MUCH REMAINS TO BE DONE TO PRESERVE AND PROTECT
THE BEST FEATURES OF THE PENINSULA, AND THIS IS A
CHALLENGE TO THE WHOLE COMMUNITY, NO LESS TO INDIVIDUALS
THAN TO SHIRES AND COUNCILS. EVERY EFFORT SHOULD BE
MADE TO INVOLVE PEOPLE IN CARING ABOUT THE FUTURE BY
ENCOURAGING THEM TO CARE ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS TODAY. 
-13-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVER, N M'ENT HAS PROVIDED ASSISTANCE TO
ENViRONMENTAL PROTECTION GROUPS ANXIOUS TO PREPARE
PROPERLY DOCUMENTED SU. BMISSIONS ON CERTAIN DEVELOPMENTAL
PROJECTS, BOTH THE NiOUNT ELIZA ASSOCIATION FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL CARE AND THE AESTERNPORT AND PENINSULA
PROTECTION COUNCIL HAVE RECEIVED GRANTS 1I THE LAST
TWO YEARS. FINALLY I COME TO THE PARTICULAR PROBLEMS OF
THE SHIRE OF HASTINGS, THE SITE OF A NUMBER OF
DEVELOPMENTAL BATTLES OVER THE LAST TEN YEARS. IT IS
MORE INSTRUCTIVE TO LOOK AT ITS INCOME AND EXPENDITURE
FIGURES THAN ITS CENSUS FIGURES. IN 1961/ 52 THE
INCOME OF THE HASTINGS SHIRE WAS $ 180,580 AND ITS
EXPENDITURE $ 217,960, IN 197'!/ 75 ITS INCOME HAD RISEN
SOMEWHAT: TO $ 2,123,00, To BE PRECISE, AND
EXPENDITURE WAS A MERE $ 2,1! 4,14i. 1 THE REASON OF
COURSE IS THE PHENOMENAL INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE
AREA. IT MAY BE A CASE OF THE CHICKEN BEFORE THE EGG.
BECAUSE IT ALL SEEMS TO HAVE HAPPENED AFTER THE/ LAID
THE GOLDEN EGG IN SOMERVILLE, THEN CAME BP.' s OIL
REFINERY AND LIQUID FUELS PIER AT CRIB POINT, THE Esso/
BMHP. GAS FRACTIONALISATION PLANT AT LONG ISLAND, THE
CRESCO FERTILIZER PLANT, WHICH WAS THEN REDEVELOPED BY
Esso/ B,!, P, AND FINALLY-JOHN LYSAGHT'S INTEGRATED STEEL
WORKS AT WESTERNPORT BAY, So FAR $ 92 MILLION HAS BEEN
SPENT ON DEVELOPMENT. EVENTUALLY IT WILL COST IN EXCESS
OF $ 1 BILLION AND PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT FOR 2,500 PEOPLE,
850 OF WHOM ARE ALREADY ON THE JOB, ,/ 14 
a 14,
THE FIGURES ARE REALLY QUITE STAGGERING, SO TOO ARE
THE RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED ON HASTINGS SHIRE COUNCIL
IN ENSURING THAT ALL THIS DEVELOPMENT, WITH ALL ITS
ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL BENEFITS, SHOULD NOT BE AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE WHOLE M ORNINGTON
PENINSULA AREA, I AM CONFIDENT THAT, ACTING IN CONCERT
WITH THE OTHER MORNINGTON PENINSULA MUNICIPALITIES, AND IN
THIS ASSOCIATION, YOU WILL MEET THAT CHALLENGE.
CERTAINLY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE READY TO HELP. 



J) AUSTRALIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 543
13 August 1975
THE AUSTRALIA-JAPAN FOUNDATION
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today announced
that the Government had decided to legislate during the next
session of Parliament for the establishment of an Australia-
Japan Foundation. The objectives of the Foundation will be
to deepen and widen contacts between Australia and Japan in all
fields, including business, academic, cultural, scientific
and the trade unions.
The Pri. e .' inister said that the relationship
bet~ en As---iria 2 J-an was of the highest importance
t oth ccu-. r-ri all readily recognise this importance
in the econcmiz field," said Mr Whitlam. " But there are
wider interests between us which until now have been little
explored or developed. It will be the task of the
Australia-Japan F'undation to assist and encourage wellmotivated
and cc.:: etent Australians and Japanese from all
walks of life to tild knowledge, understanding and goodwill
betw; een the t'-o c..--tries."
The -: fration will promote mutual visits by
selected persons a.-dc also research and comparative studies in
depth of a diverse range of topics embracing but not limited
to the social. institutions of the two countries, the social
and natural scie-ces, industrial and creative arts and the
humanities. rizeri-for assistance by the Foundation will
be based or. crntribution proposals will make to knowledge of
one country i--he other, to filling key gaps in mutual
understanding and to extending the scope for fruitful cooperation
between Australians and Japanese in each country. Those
receiving assis-ance will be competent persons who are already
making a contribution to their own sphere of activity.
The proposed structure and functions of the
Foundation have been under consideration since late last year
by a Committee comprising Mr Kenneth Myer, D. S. C.,
Professor E. S. Crawcour, Mr D. J. Munro, ( Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet), and Mr J. R. Rowland
( Department of Foreign Affairs), under the chairmanship
of Sir John Crawford, C. B. E. The Committee's report
recommended that the Foundation should operate as an
independent non-governmental statutory body with an invited / 2 
2.
national council of not more than 15 members drawn from
key elements of Australian society to give it as wide a base
as possible in the Australian community.
The Prime Minister said that he had foreshadowed
the establishment of -the Foundation during the visit to
Australia last year by the Japanese Prime Minis-ter, Mr Tanaka.
It was a logical next step following on the signature
in Canberra last November of the Australian-Japanese
Cultural Agreement. That Agreement, however, Mr Whitlam
said, was concerned with a range of specific inter-governmental
activities, and there was a need to go beyond it in order
to deepen and strengthen Australia-Japan relations by fostering
better understanding and greater tolerance through people-topeople
contacts in all fields of mutual experience. Only
in this way would each people be able to understand and appreciate
the character, culture and outlook of the other.
For the time being, the Office of the Australia-Japan
Foundation Will1 be centred in the Prime Minister's Department.
-L3EERRA, A. C. 



CHIFLEY MEMORIAL LECTURE, DELIVERED BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
14 AUGUST 1975
As the fourth Chifley Memorial lecturer in 1957 I said:
" The way of the reformer is hard in Australia." I
intended neither pessimism nor prophecy, although one may
concede that little has occurred in the intervening 18 years
or the last two and a half years to lead to the belief that
reform in Australia is altogether a primrose path. In my 1957
lecture I attempted to point up the difficulties confronting
the Australian Labor Party in carrying out its policies under
a federal system and in particular the impediments which the
Australian Constitution placed in the way of achieving reform.
This was no exercise in negativism, in finding excuses.
You will accept that that has never been my way. I was however
concerned then by the way in which the Labor Party's failure
to move on, to look ahead, to attempt to find new ways towards
reform was shortchanging the Australian people and shortchanging
the Party itself. In 1957, the Platform, policies and structure
of the Australian Labor Party had remained basically unchanged
since the days of the Chifley Government, already by then
8 years distant. Even in 1957, the Party still tended to interpret
the 1949 election result as an aberration, much as the Liberals
today still see 1972 as an aberration. The Party became
obsessed with the idea that rather than being about renewal for
the future, its purpose was to return to a more comfortable past
not renovation but mere restoration. As a result, both the
achievements of the past and the hopes for the future receded
equ~ ally . The Party stagnated and the Platform was stultified.
For his heirs, the setbacks which Chifley had met
became not an experience for building but an excuse for baulking.
At best we learnt only half the lesson of the Chifley experience.
We acknowledged that we could not nationalise the banks or indeed
any important part of the economic system, but our rhetoric remained
unchanged the rhetoric both in the Platform and from our
platform speakers. In at least one policy speech the acknowledgement
of the Constitutional impossibility of nationalisation was
presented as if it were a positive undertaking impotence was
to be a guarantee of future good behaviour. The acknowledgement
became an alibi an alibi for the Party's failure to develop new
policies, to work out new programs whereby the basic ends
envisaged by Chifley could be achieved by other means.
In 1956 I had been elected a member of the Joint
Committee on Constitutional Review. By virtue of that experience,
I became better acquainted and more preoccupied with the
difficulties and barriers raised by the Constitution against not
only reform but good government in Australia. With one exception
national responsibility for Aborigines the Constitution remains
unchanged, despite the unanimous all-Party recommendations of the
Committee in 1958 and 1959. These unanimous recommendations covered
a wide range of matters, particularly in the fields of economic
management and electoral reform. All-Party acceptance in 1959
has become partisan resistance whenever the opportunity to
implement these recommendations has arisen. / 2 
-2-
For example, it is often forgotten that all Parties,
the Country Party as much as the Liberal Party, accepted the
recommendation of the Committee that the enrolment in any
electorate should not vary by more than 10 per cent from the
average enrolment in all electorates within a State. As a
result of the Joint Sitting last year, that all-Party
recommendation is now the law of the land. But partisan
resistance has nullified that law. The redistribution proposals
by which alone the recommendation of the Committee of 1959 and
the legislation of the whole Australian Parliament in 1974 could
be made a reality have been rejected by the Senate.
Yet despite the lack of Constitutional amendment, there
has been Constitutional advance not by amendment at referendums,
but by interpretation in the High Court. The High Court, in
such matters as monopolies and restrictive trade practices, civil
aviation and television, has widened the powers of the national
Parliament in ways which, in my 1957 lecture, I looked for
through Constitutional amendment.
The chief purpose of my 1957 Chifley lecture was
therefore to examine not just the barriers against Labor reform
put up by the Constitution but the means by which these reforms
could be achieved within the Constitution. I put the view that,
while amendment of the Constitution must remain a fundamental
objective, neither the Party nor the nation should be expected
to wait indefinitely for amendment before reform. It was not
a question of trying to circumvent the Constitution, but to
make the best use of it, not supinely to accept the limitations
of powers imposed by the Constitution, but to use the powers
offered by it. For example I said:
" In our obsession with Section 92 which is held up
as the bulwark of private enterprise, we forget
Section 96, which is the charter of public enterprise."
I further illustrated how in the fields of social welfare, health,
education, housing, transport, urban and regional development,
industrial relations, restrictive trade practices and law reform,
significant advances could be achieved under existing powers to
a very great extent* The themes foreshadowed in that lecture
became the basis for the substantial rewriting of the Platform
at subsequent Federal Conferences of the Australian Labor Party,
particularly the great reform Conferences of 1967, 1969, and 1971.
The policies thus developed provided the framework for the 1972 policy
speech and to that extent, the framework for the programs of the
Australian Labor Government in the past two and a half years.
My purpose in this lecture is to review those programs
in terms of the basic objectives they were designed to achieve,
to examine how the successes of the program may best be
consolidated in the light of the economic conditions in which
Australia now finds herself.
It is easy enough to generalise about the need for reform.
Reform, however, must be relevant to objectives which are both
desirable in themselves and perceived to be desirable by the public.
A reform Party needs to convince a majority of the people that the
reforms it proposes are desirable and a reform Government has to
keep them convinced. Quite apart from overriding questions of
economic management there are always going to be four special / 3 
-3-
difficulties in that task. The first is the sheer problem of
public perception of what has been done and why it is being donethe
so-called communications problem. There may be even some
Members of Parliament who might not pass an examination of the
substance of the Government's programs.
Secondly, there is a law of diminishing returns in
politics whereby a demand once met ceases to be an issue.
Thirdly, there is frequently a long delay between implementing
a reform and the delivery of its actual benefits. Fourthly,
a great many reforms by their very nature benefit and are
expressly intended to benefit a minority in the community who,
in general, are among the least articulate and least influential
in the community; they are therefore the people least able to
translate their grievances into political action or their
gratitude into effective political support.
In a sense the Party of reform in a democratic system
carries a self-created handicap as a reforming Government.
In Opposition, its essential task is to raise the public
perception of the need for change, the need for reform. That is,
its task is to raise expectations. The nature of politics,
founded as it is on human nature itself, is that there will
always tend to be a gap, a shortfall, between expectations
aroused and expectations met.
A conservative Government survives essentially by
dampening expectations and subduing hopes. Conservatism is
bas ically pessimistic; reformism is basically optimistic.
The great tradition which links the American and French
revolutionaries of the Age of Reason with the modern Parties
of social reform is the tradition of optimism about the possibility
of human improvement and human progress through the means of
human reason. Yet inevitably there will be failures, and the
higher expectations rise, the greater the likelihood of at least
temporary failure to meet them.
Up to December 1972 the task of the Australian Labor
Party was three-fold: first to state the reforms we proposed,
secondly to state the means by which we intended to achieve
those reforms, thirdly to convince a majority of the electorate
that those reforms were both achievable and desirable. We
achieved office because we raised expectations and convinced a
sufficient majority that those expectations could be met.
Yet the specific reforms we proposed were related to
general goals and had to be so related if they were to be seen
and accepted as part of our general mandate to govern. The
meaning of the " mandate" in a Parliamentary system has been
subject to critical analysis by Parliamentarians and academics
for more than a century. In Australia the meaning has been
especially scrutinised in the past two and a half years because
of the very great emphasis my own Government has always placed
on the fulfilment of the program set out in the policy speech of
1972 and confirmed in the policy speech of 1974. Another reason
why the meaning of the " mandate" has become significant in the
current Australian political debate is because of the existence
of a hostile majority in the Senate and the use to which that
hostile majority has been put. So the debate about the meaning
of the mandate has centred on the question of whether in 1972 / 4 
and again in 1974 the Australian Labor Party was given only
a general mandate to govern or a specific mandate to implement
each part of its program.
Is the mandate merely general or is it specific? Is it
a grant of permission to preside or a command to perform? our
opponents naturally interpret it in the weakest sense as a
general and highly qualified mandate to govern on their terms
and indeed by their grace and favour. I interpret the mandate
as being both general and specific a general mandate to govern
for the term for which we were elected and a specific mandate
to implement the undertakings we made, within that term. But even
when I speak of a general mandate I cannot accept the conservative
definition of a mere mandate to govern, a permit to preside over
the administration of government and, hopefully, to administer
the existing system in a sufficiently acceptable way to give
reasonable prospects of re-election for a further renewal of
the mere mandate to preside. The mandate as I interpret it is
to move by specific programs toward the general goals and the
general objectives accepted by the people at the elections.
What was that goal? I defined it in these words in the
Parliament on 5 March 1970:
" on this side we believe there is one clear goal that
this national Parliament should set for itself, which should
define and motivate each specific action we take. It is the goal
of equality. The true quality of our national life will be
principally determined by the way in which and the rate at which
we advance towards true equality. It is this that gives meaning
to our possession of prosperity. If I interpret the history of
this country and the character of our countrymen and women
correctly, it is this search which alone can give any worthwhile,
enduring meaning to our fortuitous possession of this most
fortunate, peaceful and privileged continent in this most turbulent
and deprived region of the world."
I regard the thrust towards equality as the natural
extension of the great thrust of the Chifley Government which
was towards security for all. There is no phrase more quoted
than Chifley's " light on the hill'. Very few remember what the
metaphor meant. As Chifley used it it was not-just a fine phrase
but a quite specific objective it was security. As Chifley
said in the policy speech of 1949:
" it is the duty and responsibility of the community
and particularly those more fortunately placed, to
see that our less fortunate fellow-citizens are
protected from those shafts of fate which leave
them helpless and without hope. That is the
objective for which we are striving. It is the
beacon, the light on the hill to which our eyes
are always turned and to which our efforts are
always directed."
In other words Chifley saw that the fundamental duty of the
community, acting as a whole through its elected representatives,
was to provide security for all its members. To that I add the
basic objective of promoting the basic goal of equality. As I
see it, the two goals are inseparable. I have always put the
search for equality in positive terms, that is, the promotion of
equality, not the imposition of equality. As I implied in my 
1957 Chifley lecture and specified some years later in my
Curtin Memorial lecture of 1961:
" Socialists are now more concerned with the creation
of opportunities than the imposition of restraints.
Within Australia we do not have to ration security
but to plan abundance."
I state the underlying philosophy in this way: in
modern communities, even the wealthiest family cannot provide
its members with the best education, with the best medical
treatment, the best environment, unaided by the community.
Increasingly, the basic services and opportunities which determine
the real standard of life of a family or an individual can only
be provided by the community and only to the extent to which
the community is willing to provide them. Either the community
provides them or they will not be provided at all. In the
Australian context, this means that the community, through the
national government, must finance them or they will not be
financed at all.
over the span of years the common factor which links
the doctrine of security and the doctrine of
equality is the insistence upon community responsibility for
the promotion of these twin goals.
This concept of equality what I call positive equalitydoes
not have as its goal equality of personal income. Its goal
is greater equality of the services which the community provides.
This approach not merely accepts the pluralistic nature of our
system, with the private sector continuing to play the greater
part in providing employment and growth; it positively requires
private affluence to prevent public squalor. The approach is
based on this concept: increasingly a citizen's real standard
of living, the health of himself and his family, his children's
opportunity for education and self-improvement, his access to
employment opportunities, his ability to enjoy the nation'ss
resources for recreation and cultural activity, his ability to
participate in the decisions and actions of the community, are
determined not so much by his income but by the availability
and accessibility of the services which the community alone can
provide and ensure.
The quality of life depends less on the things which
individuals obtain for themselves and can purchase for themselves
from their personal incomes and depends more on the things which the
community -provides for all its members from the combined resources of
the community. What we aim at is the achievement of the classic liberal
idea of the career open to the talents equality of opportunity
in a vastly expanded form. Equality of opportunity is a splendid
ideal; but to confine it to equality of job opportunities is not
merely to restrict it, but to negate true equality of opportunity.
The older, narrower ideal of equality of opportunity concentrated
almost exclusively on education. The assumption was that the mere
provision of free education would guarantee equality of opportunity.
Even in a community as homegeneous and socially mobile as
Australia this has proved not to be the case. / 6 
In modern communities, not least Australia, opportunities,
social, economic and cultural opportunities are really determined
by where a family lives, even more than by a family's income. So
we have no preoccupation with equality of incomes. We are striving
for an equality of environment in the total sense of those things
which increasingly the community alone can provide welfare,
health, education, recreation, transport.
The general argument against this concept turns on the
question of private incentive and individual initiative. This
really gets to the heart of the philosophical differences between
the Labor Party and its opponents. The argument that collective
welfare destroys private incentive is a very old one indeed.
It is the argument which has been used to resist every advance
in social welfare, even the most basic ones, such as the provision
of old-age pensions. It was the argument used at every stage of
the very massive expansion of the social security system under
Curtin and Chifley represented in money terms by an increase
from $ 36 million provided before the war to $ 200 million in 1949.
Such were the colossal sums which Chifley used in those days
to undermine free enterprise and destroy individual incentive.
The argument is in fact based on a particular view about
human nature and human motives. In the final analysis it
predicates fear and greed as being the principal spurs to human
action. It says in effect that if people know they are guaranteed
an income in retirement they will be both lazy and improvident during
their earning days; if people are not afraid of the price of
sickness they will abuse and overuse the health services the
community provides; if public schools are made as good as
private schools then parents will not work so hard to earn the
fees for their children's eductional; if the attempt is made to
make underprivileged communities more decent places to live,
people will lose the competitive urge.
we are going to hear a lot more of these arguments,
put in perhaps more subtle ways. The counterargument is that
the removal or reduction of basic fears and insecurities, far
from being a limitation on individual incentive, represents a
liberation for human creativity. The contest between the two
opposing views of human nature and human society is still the
esseace of the philosophical debate between the Parties to
the extent that the political debate is conducted in terms of
philosophy and to the extent to which either Party can be said
to have a philosophy.
The programs developed between 1967 and 1971 and presented
in the policy speech of 1972 sought to give practical application
to these attitudes. A political program, particularly a program
for a democratic election is of course not an essay in philosophy.
Policies are not developed in a political or economic vacuum;
still less are they implemented in a vacuum once the appeal to the
electorate has been successful. The program as presented in 1972
had to be related to economic and political realities as we
judged them to be in 1972 and as we assumed, to the best of our
judgement, they would exist during the three years for which we
sought and won a mandate. Carrying out the program has to be
related to the political and economic realities as they exist.
In 1972, we made two important assumptions which seemed very
reasonable at the time. One was political; the other was economic.
Both proved partly wrong. The first, the political assumpetion
was that if elected we would have a clear three years to fulfil
the program. / 7 
-7-
The second, the economic assumption was that domestic
growth would be sufficiently restored and that the world economy
would remain strong enough to permit an avowedly expansive and
expensive program of social reform to be implemented without
massive tax increases or without massive inflation.
The fundamental and continuing difficulty of the
Government has been and remains to reconcile the demands of the
program with the falsification of two of the key assumptions on
which it was based.
It is hard to estimate and hard to exaggerate the damage
done to the Australian political system and the Australian economy
by the conduct of the majority in the Senate. From the beginning,
that conduct has had one overriding objective to deny the
very legitimacy of the Labor Government. But its real effect
has been to cast doubt on the legitimacy of an elected Government
itself, to cast doubts on the legitimacy of the electoral and
constitutional proceses.
One has to bear in mind that the elections of 1972 were
for the House of Representatives alone. The program was drawn
up as a 3-year program. Whatever the result of the 1972 elections,
the state of the Parties in the Senate had to remain unchanged;
an anti-Labor majority was guaranteed until at least July 1974.
So the question of who would control the Senate was
never an issue in 1972. If you cast your minds back, you would
agree that nobody approached the 1972 campaign with any thought
other than what Australians were doing then was electing a
Government for a normal three-year term. There. might have been
some fleeting thought given to the possibility of the circumstances
by which Labor, if successful, might be brought to the need for a
double dissolution. But certainly no-one seriously considered
the possibility of the House of Representatives being forced to
an election by the refusal of Supply by the Senate. And no-one
considered the possibility of a double dissolution triggered off by
the threat of refusal of Supply by the Senate. It has been a remarkable
example of the unthinkable becoming apparently quite acceptable.
During the 1974 campaign I frequently quoted an article
written in 1968 by Sir Robert Menzies in which he castigated Senate
pretensions as " a falsification of democracy". That phrase is
now very well known. What is not so well know is that what
Sir Robert Menzies was condemning was not the ultimate falsificationthe
refusal of Supply but the repeated rejection by the Senate
of legislation passed by the House of Representatives by the
majority forming the Government. I quote from Sir Robert Menzies'
article in the Sydney Daily Telegraph of 18 February 1968:
" In Australia we practise the system of ' responsible
government'. Indeed it has been judicially declared
that it is embodied in our Constitution by necessary
implication. In that system Ministers sit in and are
responsible to Parliament; but Cabinet may be
displaced by a vote of the House of Representatives
( not Sir Robert's emphasis the Senate) and therefore
holds office at the will of the House of Representatives...
" It would be a falsification of democracy if, on any matter
of Government policy approved by the House of Representatives
possibly by a large majority, the Senate, representing
the States and not the people, could reverse the decision." 1 
-8-
The basis of Sir Robert's concern at that time early
in 1968 is interesting and instructive. He was writing shortly
after the Liberal Party had elected Senator Gorton as its leader.
Sir Robert's concern was that once the Senate had made the
big breakthrough in providing a Prime Minister, its ambitions
and pretensions would thereby increase. He feared the Upper House
might become altogether too uppity.
He pointed out that the situation by which a Government
in the House of Representatives lacks a majority in the Senate
is frequent enough in itself to be normal. The falsification
aginst which he warned was the rejection of legislation, not the
refusal of Supply. He didn't deal with that question for one
simple reason: it just never crossed his mind that this was a
practical possibility worth arguing about.
Yet the Labor Government, the Australian administration,
Australian business and the Australian community have had to live
with this possibility since April 1973 according to the evidence
of Senator Withers, the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate,
who said in April 1974:
" We embarked on a course some 12 months ago to
bring about the House of Representatives election".
That is, for all but the first few months of the Labor Government
a new and gross element of instability and unpredictability has
been introduced into Australian political life. No important
aspect of our political or economic system has remained
unaffected by it.
It may be true that hanging concentrates the mind
wonderfully but it is not generally regarded as good for the
morale or the health.
We can see in retrospect that the election campaign of
1974 and its long drawn-out aftermath interrupted for more than
four months the normal business of the nation and, at a critical
time, diverted the attention of the planners, whether they were
in Government, in administration, in finance or in business, from
crucial matters relating to the economy to purely political
pre-occupations. One should not think that administrators in Government
can divorce themselves from the preoccupations of their political
associates least of all in so political and politicised a
capital as Canberra. The fact is that during political crises,
decision-making in Australia virtually halts. This regularly and
properly happens when there is a normal election in the normal
course of events that is each three years. To make this turmoil
endemic, to threaten it each six months, is thoroughly destructive
of good administration and good government.
The present Australian Government is the only Government
since Federation and the only Government in the English-speaking
world to have been placed in this situation. I confine my remarks
in this context to the political consequences, the direct
consequences, of the continuing threat by the Senate to refuse
Supply. It's not to my present purpose to deal at length or in / 9 
-9-
detail with the Senate's record of legislative obstruction the
score of key bills which have failed to pass. In passing, however,
I mention two aspects of that obstruction, both related to the
concept of the mandate, as I see it, and the proper working of
democracy, as Sir Robert Menzies saw it.
The legislation rejected in the Senate was foreshadowed
in 1972 and repeated in the 1974 campaign. Much of it was put
as long ago as 1969. These Bills are not ring-ins. They are not
to be dismissed just as Whitlam's whims. I put this proposition:
if a matter is thrashed out in three campaigns and throughout the
intervening years, and if the proposals which a Party has put on
those matters are endorsed by sufficient Australians to result
in that Party being elected, surely in the name of anything that can
pass for democracy, that Party in Government is entitled to claim
a mandate for such proposals. More, is not that Party obliged
as a Government to try to implement such proposals? That has
been the background, the basis put in 1969, in 1972, in 1974
of so much of the legislation now stalled or rejected by the
Senate. Reflect that Medibank itself would not now exist if
the Senate had had its way. Medibank exists only because of the
double dissolution of 1974 and our subsequent ability to get
the legislation through at the Joint Sitting.
Furthermore, for all the present pretensions of the Senate,
for all the Hamlet-like approach of the Leader of the Opposition
to what he will or will not do about the refusal of Supply,
the fact remains that while the Government did not obtain a
majority of the Senate seats in the Double Dissolution, it did
obtain a majority of votes for the Senate over all the Parties
then represented in the Senate a majority of 43,000 over the
Liberal Party, the Country Party, the Democratic Labor Party,
combined. A majority of seats in the House of Representatives;
a majority of votes in the Senate is this or is it not a mandate
to govern? Yet on specific legislation forming an integral part
of the policy put at these elections and on its basic right to
govern, the legitimacy of this Government is challenged month
by month, day by day.
So for most of the period of our Government we have had
to live with an unprecedented political problem. Equally,
there has been the problem of world-wide economic difficulties.
As I said before, our program was predicated on certain assumptions
about internal growth and the strength of the world economy. We
had devised a program of social reform designed to catch up
with a backlog, as we perceived it, created by 23 years of
conservative rule. We were concerned that so wealthy a country
as Australia, which had once been a pioneer and leader in social
reform, should have fallen so far behind. I had stated our
belief in these terms in the 1969 policy speech:
" We make these assertions: firstly, that Australians
should not be deprived of opportunities which citizens
of every comparable country enjoy. Secondly, there is
every reason why Australia, wealthy and well-endowed,
in many respects incomparably so, should be giving a
lead to other nations in the equality of opportunities
and the quality of the opportunities we make for our
own citizens and in the help we can give to others.
Twenty years ago, Australia was indeed a pioneer and a
leader: now we lag behind." 
It should be remembered however that that period of
conservative rule in Australia coincided with an extraordinarily
protracted period of world economic growth. The world had enjoyed
a virtually uninterrupted boom of twenty years. In general, a
relatively high rate of growth was accompanied by a relatively low
rate of inflation. Through most of that period Australia shared
both these characteristics of the world economy. Although in 1972
the Australian economy was already showing the signs of the twin
problems of inflation and unemployment, with a poor growth rate
which was subsequently to become world wide, the great
catastrophes about to fall on the international economy were not
foreseen. With hindsight we should perhaps have foreseen the
inevitable economic consequences of the way in which the United
States chose to finance the war in Vietnam. We could not, however,
have foreseen the energy crisis of 1973.
I know that it is now considered in some quarters to be
mean-spirited, to be buck-passing, for an Australian Minister to
mention international economic problems or to make international
comparisons, or to explain any of our economic problems whatsoever
in international terms. But these international problems remain
a fact of life and, whether we like it or not, they affect our
national life.
When my Government was elected our aim was to finance
our new programs from growth. But world-wide inflation and
recession frustrated this objective. This is no mere selfjustification.
The whole industrialised world is currently going
through the worst peacetime inflation on record and the deepest
recession since the 1930' s. Within the OECD, the membership of
which includes virtually every industrialised country in the
world, the average rate of inflation jumped from 3.9 per cent
per annum in the decade 1962 to 1972, to 7.9 per cent in 1973
and 13.4 per cent in 1974. Real Gross National Product which
ros e at the rate of 5.4 per cent per annum in the decade to 1972
declined slightly for the OECD countries as a whole in 1974 and is
expected to show a decline of about 1.5 per cent in 1975.
The OECD Economic Outlook stated on 17 July 1975:
" The present recession in OECD countries is the most
serious since the war. It is remarkable not only for its length
and depth a third consecutive half-year of negative growth
has now been recorded for the area as a whole but also for its
widespread nature: virtually every OECD country grew by less
than its medium-term average rate in 1974, and no economy is
expected to take up slack in 1975. The margin of idle resources
in the OECD area is now the largest in the post-war period, with
unemployment at record levels. The forecasts presented in the
December Economic Outlook, and to a greater extent those being made
at that time by national authorities, proved to be too optimistic.
Industrial output in the major countries fell very sharply in the
last quarter of 1974 and the first quarter of this year. The extent
and simultaneous nature of the decline was unlike anything recorded
in the post-war period. The combined GNP of the major countries,
which was thought at the time to have increased marginally in the
second half of 1974, is now estimated to have fallen, at an annual
rate, by over one per cent. Output was expected to continue
stagnating in the first half of this year; it may in fact have
fallen at an annual rate of about five per cent. The December
Economic Outlook gave reasons for supposing that the balance of
uncertainties attaching to the forecasts was on the downside; but
the extent to which this proved to be the case is astonishing." / 11 
-11-
There is no way in which Australia could have escaped
being caught up in these disruptive world-wide economic developments.
We are after all a major trading company, . so what happens to
our major trading partners the United States, Japan and the
United Kingdom is bound to affect us. It is estimated that in
the course of the recession industrial production fell by
per cent in Japan, by over 14 per cent in the United States and
by over 8 per cent in the United Kingdom. Even West Germany,
which has ridden out this storm better than most, suffered a fall
in industrial production of over 11 per cent. What is more, these
declines should be viewed against strong upward trends previously
existing at least for the Japan and West Germany; on this
basis the loss of potential output has been much greater than
these figures imply.
What is not widely recognised is that Australia has
fared comparatively well among the industrialised countries during
this period of economic turmoil. Our unemployment has been a
great deal lower than that suffered by a number of industrialised
countries; our loss of production has been less; and many
industrialised countries have had much more severe inflation.
Unlike most industrialised countries, we have moreover been
entirely free of balance of payments problems.
In spite of our economic problems the Australian employee
has on balance done well over the last two years. Average
minimum award rates have risen by 55 per cent and average earnings
by 48 per cent while the cost of living as measured by the CPI
has increased by 32 per cent. There have, therefore, been
substantial real gains to wage and salary earners, supplemented
by improved education, health., and other benefits by this
Government. There is a widespread expectation that 1976 will see
strong economic recovery across the world, accompanied by a
continued slowdown in the rate of inflation. It is important that
Australia should participate in both. There is a widespread view
that, to the extent that inflation is not contained, the recovery
may not be a sustained one. I share this view. I am convinced
that we must get inflation down to an acceptable level in
Australia, all the more if other countries with which we trade
and compete in world markets do so.
I again acknowledge the awful impropriety of my making
international comparisons. I'll have to bear that cross. But
despite everything let me make this assertion: while Australia
shares to a greater or less extent these economic problems, while
in some respects we are making a better fist of dealing with them than
some other nations, we are alone in this that while dealing
with very difficult, with unprecedentedly complex economic problems
which all nations share, we have made significant and enduring
advances in social reform, in so changing the structure of welfare
in this nation as to be of permanent benefit to future generations
. when the problems of the present are but a vague and distant memory.
Our goal now is to consolidate the reforms instituted in
the past two and a half years.
The 1975-76 [ Budget which the Treasurer, iIr Hayden, will
introduce into Parliament next week will be a major step towards
this goal. In spite of the urgency we see in proceeding with our
programs, we have decided to slow down the rate of increase in
outlays this year. Let me emphasise that, contrary to a lot of
ill-informed comment, we are not going to reduce expenditure, but
/ 12 
-12-
to slow down the rate of increase. Our expenditures will still
increase in money terms and in real terms, but less rapidly than
would otherwise have been the case.
One effect should be to leave room for the private sector
of the economy to expand, to play its proper role in the recovery.
Another effect will be to moderate the extent to which the
Australian Government's budget generates monetary expansion.
A slowdown in the rate of monetary expansion is clearly essential
if inflation is to be brought under control.
It is not appropriate, however, for me to say too much
about the Budget at this stage, beyond that it will be a responsible
budget consistent with out long term objectives of reform, with
consolidation of what we have already achieved, and with progress
towards a stable, growing economy. What I can speak of, however,
are our plans stretching beyond this Budget.
We plan, and I use the word advisedly, to review our
programs and commitments to ensure that, in total and in each
category, our expenditures will be consistent with our overall
objectives for the economy and will consolidate the vast new
programs we have introduced.
We have to look carefully at the question of what
proportion of the resources available in the economy should be
directed through the Australian Government's Budget and how these
resources should best be allocated between the various programs
of the Government. I see this task as having immediate priority.
All new programs and proposals will have to be assessed against
and accommodated within this framework.
Now is a time for consolidation, evaluation planning
for the future with an appropriate balance between welfare and
economic responsibility. Policy must always reflect our concern
for those in want; it must choose the most effective and
efficient means to that end.
We have striven to reform the overall structure of the
Australian economy. In our first year in office, before Australia
was engulfed in the world-wide economic turmoil, we pushed ahead
with the revaluation of the Australian currency and tariff reductions
and removed a number of anachronistic subsidies and taxation
concessions which operated to support less efficient industries.
We replaced the aged Tariff Board machinery with the more up-to-date
and broadly constituted Industries Assistance Commission. Trade
Practices Legislation has been passed and a Trade Practices
Commission established to protect the consumer and enhance
competition. I have no doubt that, in the long run, the Australian
economy will benefit greatly from these measures.
We shall certainly continue to maintain proper exchange
rates and tariff policies. We have made clear our resolve to
encourage and assist the Arbitration Commission to maintain a
wages policy consistent with the slowdown in the rate of inflation,
while protecting the position of wage and salary earners in this
country. / 13 
-13-
In the context of arbitration, it is difficult to take
into account the immensely enhanced value of services now provided
by the ccinmunity and no longer provided from incomes. I mention
in particular the Schools Commission in school year 1974 and
onwards, Medibank in fiscal year 1975-76 and onwards.
We are now in the process of adjusting our fiscal policies
to ensure that they will now and in the long run contribute to
the stability of the economy. Through the Reserve Bank and the
banking system we shall maintain responsible monetary policies
which ensure that credit is available, as needed, for the
development of the Australian economy but that the monetary system
is not awash with liquidity in a way which permits and even promotes
inflation. We must all recognise that the path to price stability
and full employment will not be a short one. We certainly
cannot hope to get there in 1975-76. It is important, however,
to make quite sure that we get on that path and stay on it.
Our aim is to consolidate what we have done, to plan ahead
to produce an environment conducive to economic growth, and
thereby to produce the means of completing the task we set ourselves,
and which we were elected to carry out.
An essential part of the consolidation relates to the
provision of income security for all Australians. When we camne
to power in 1972 there was need for immediate improvement in
welfare services. Considerable progress has been made to effect
that improvement. Further improvements of a more fundamental
kind are needed. To assist in determining new directions, the
Government has a number of expert reports which will form the
basis of a review process over the next year.
We have the reports of the Woodhouse Committee and the
legislation arising from it which the Senate hasreviewed and inxotedupon.
We have some of the reports of the Henderson Inquiry into Poverty.
We have the interim report of the Hancock Inquiry on National
Superannuation, and the final report is expected within the next
few weeks. We have a report from the Priorities Review Staff
canvassing issues raised in the inquiries already mentioned and
discussing possibilities for social welfare reform in Australia.
We are expecting a report later in the year from Mr Justice Toose
on Repatriation. The Asprey Report on Taxation also needs to
be mentionedt there is, of course, a very close relationship
between reforms in the welfare and taxation areas.
Two of the reports I have just mentioned the Henderson
and PRS reports will be released before the end of this month.
They both draw attention to a number of problems which need
attention and to a variety of possible solutions to those problems.
They are reports which require the most careful examination by
the Government. They are reports which I hope will stimulate
public debate and public contribution of a kind which will assist
the Government in taking decisions on them in due course.
Against that background, the Government has decided that
a full year should be set aside in which, in the light of published
expert reports, to develop an equal, fair and workable income
security system for Australia. The review will be conducted by
the Government itself, with Ministers closely directing the work
undertaken and reviewing the progress at regular intervals. / 14
I 
-14-
By the time of the 1976-77 Budget I expect the Government
will be in a position to determine its long term program of reform
in the welfare area and the steps which will need to be
progressively taken to achieve those reforms.
The new Budget attempts to be as relevant to the
implementation of the Labor program as its two predecessors. In
the framing of those Budgets, we were concerned about priorities,
the priorities of meeting needs as we saw them, the priorities
of reaching towards goals as we saw them.
The common ground of economic debate between the parties
today is the need to reduce the rate of growth of government
spending. The present Leader of the Opposition makes no specific
proposals about what cuts should be made, while the Leader of
the other Party proposes only more subsidies and new spending.
The Leader of the Opposition's most recent predecessor did at
least make a specific proposal: it was to make percentage cuts
across the board. We have not taken that course because it
avoids the basic task for a Government the task of determining
priorities. In this Budget you will find that we have been as
much concerned about getting our priorities right in circumstances
of great difficulty and complexity as we tried to do when both
national And international circumstances permitted us a far
wider range of options.
The abiding challenge for statesmanship in a democracy is
to try to get the priorities right and to resolve the conflicting
demands about priorities in the context of the desirable and the
possible, the politically possible, the economically possible.
The nature of our Australian society is such that everyone
in politics or government is faced with an ever-increasing range
of demands from the articulate, from the powerful, and equally
inescapable demands and hopes from the less articulate, the least
powerful, that their priorities are the ones which should be adopted.
A remarkably permanent aspect of our Australian society
and Australian history is that for all our sense of independence,
for all our ability to improvise, to take initiatives, our demands
for action always turn into demands for Government action, for
Government assistance. At this very moment, almost every demand
for the protection of free enterprise, for the enhancement of
business freedom, is couched in terms of Government assistance
a subsidy, a quota, a tariff.
It has ever been thus. From the beginning, when we in
Australia have spoken about national priorities, we have really
meant priorities set for the nation by the Government.
Australian political debate has always been extremely vehement.
The peculiar vehemence of Australian political debate
has always been about priorities set by the Government of the day,
whether elected or appointed. One only needs recall that one of
the principal charges against Macquarie, one of the principal
items used to discredit him in the Bigge Report, was the building
of the Obelisk which still stands in what is now Macquarie Place
as the measure of distance from all places out of Sydney. It was
charged against Macquarie-that he had got his priorities wrong.
Those who govern Australia are still accused of trying to build
monuments, when their real wish is to get Australians priorities
right, right for the present and right for generations ahead. 



C.
I&gt;
PRESS STATE~ MENT NO. 544
August 1975-
APPOINTMENTS
The Prime Minis-ter, Mr Whitlam, announced
today the appointment of Sir Lenox Hewitt, as
Chairman of Qantas Airways Limited.
His appointment is to take effect from
Monday 25 August 1975. Sir Lenox has been Secretary of
the Department of Minerals and Energy since December 1972.
Sir Lenox' s appointment follows -the retirement
of Sir Donald Anderson, from the position of
Chairman of Qantas..
The Prime Minister announced that Mr James
Scully, Deputy Secretary of the Department of Overseas
Trade, will become the Secretary of the Department of
Minerals and Energy.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


Vincent Lingiari and men and women of the Gurindji people.
On this great day, I, Prime Minister of Australia, speak to you on behalf of the Australian people all those who honour and love this land we live in.
For them I want to say to you:
First, that we congratulate you and those who shared your struggle, on the victory you have achieved 9 years after you walked off Wave Hill Station in protest.
I want to acknowledge that we Australians have still much to do to redress the injustice and oppression that has for so long been the loss of Black Australians.
I want to promise you that this act of restitution which we perform today will not stand alone your fight was not for yourselves alone and we are determined that Aboriginal Australians everywhere will be helped by it.
I want to promise that, through their Government, the people of Australia will help you in your plans to use this land fruitfully for the Gurindji.
And I want to give back to you formally in Aboriginal and Australian Law ownership of this land of your fathers.
Vincent Lingiari I solemnly hand to you these deeds as proof, in Australian law, that these lands belong to the Gurindji people and I put into your hands part of the earth itself as a sign that this land will be the possession of you and your children forever.

DAGURAGU, 16 August 1975



RECORDED PMESSGAE FROM THE PRiI" IE MINISTER.
THE HON. I E. G, tlHITLAM, QC, MP.,
FOR THE WIyI1RELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA'S
1975T-REMEMBERANCE DAY CONTEST
16 AUGUST 1975
I AM HONOURED BY YOUR INSTITUTE'S KIND
INVITTATION TO DECLARE OPEN YOUR 1975: RE-PEMBERANCE DAY
CON. TEST, IT IS RIGHT THAT WE SHOULD REMEMBER THE
AMATEUR -RADIO OPERATORS WHO LAID DOWN THEIR LIVES FOR
A us -PIRAL A'D U -IOi. Tl,,' Sf? iCtffY'
THS OCCASION HAS TAUG,+ T ME. A. LITTLE MORE
ABOUT YOUR USEFUL AND REMARKABLE HOBBY. PERHAPS THE
-" HCz~ 3. A iiMER.' FOR. -SUCH A VARIED LEISUR-E.-
A I1V-ITY, ' IUR ' C0TACTS-AS3' RA-D1O-OPERATORS' ARE * TRRJLY
WOR D-, LI fDE As MATEUSS YO' HAVE BEEN EXPERI IMENTING
FOR MANY YEARS WITH YOUR OWNllS ATELLITES AND COMMJ. NICATINGV.
4TH-1 OTHER AATEURS AS FAR AFIELD AS AFRICA AND JAPAN.
WITH THE NEXT GENERATION OF AMIATEUR SATELL. ITES YOU WILL
BE AB-E TO CONTACT YOUR FRIENDS PIUCH FURTHE-R
-AFIELD IIN THE US. A. AND ELSEWHERE. * 1
t 
2.
IN THESE DAYS OF DEVELOPING COMMUNICATIONS
AUSTRALIANS CAN PICK UP THEIR TELEPHONES AND HAVE
DISCUSSIONS WITH PEOPLE AROUND THE GLOBE AT ANY TIME,
BUT THE PROCESS IS EXPENSIVE, IT IS SURPRISING INDEED THAT YOU
IN YOUR ' SHACKS' CAN TALK AT ALMOST NO COST WITH OLD
FRIENDS AND MAKE NEW ONES ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD,
YOU ARE TRULY PRIVATE AMBASSADORS-FOR AUSTRALIA AND
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE WORLD-WIDE NETOWRK OF AMATEUR
RADIO COMMUNCATIONS MAKES A VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION TO
INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING.
I COMMEND YOUR. WORK IN PROVIDING COMMUNICATIONS
WITH STRICKEN AREAS AND YOUR ABILITY TO MOVE INTO
ACTION QUICKLY WHEN A NATURAL EMERGENCY ARISES, MY
COLLEAGUE, SENATOR BISHOP, THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL,
ASSURES ME THAT EVERY POSSIBLE FACILITY IS GIVEN TO
AMATEURS INVOLVED IN EMERGENCY TRAFFIC, I HOPE THE USE
OF AMATEUR. SATELLITES FOR COMMUNICATIONS IN EMERGENCIES
WILL: BE MORE FULLY EXPLOITED,
AT PRESENT YOU HAVE TRAINING SCHEMES FOR YOUR.
MEMBERS, PARTICULARLY IN YOUTH RADIO CLUBS, BUT I HOPE'
YOU WILL TRY TO WIDEN YOUR EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS AND BRING
KNHOWLEDGE AiND EXPERIENCE OF YOUR EXCITING WORK TO THE
W!. DEST POSSrBLE AUDIENCE, YOUNG PEOPLE TODAY, WITH THEIR
NATURAL INTEREST IN SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE AND ADVANCEMENT,
WOULD-WANT TO KNOW MORE OF YOUR -WORK AND HOW THEY MAY
PARTICIPATE IN IT. S,,/ 33 . 
3,
IHAVE MUCH PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN
THE WNIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA'S 1975 REMEIMBERANCE
DAY CONTEST. 



PRIf'IE. PI, 1STER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST HO, -23
ABORIGINALS
SUNDAY 17 AUGUST 1975
THIS WEEKEND I HAVE BEEN IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY, WHERE I ATTENDED A UNIQUE AND HISTORIC
CEREMONY YESTERDAY AFTERNOON. I HANDED TO REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE GURINDJI PEOPLE A LEASE CONFERRING UPON THEM
UNDISPUTED RIGHTS TO THEIR ANCIENT TRIBAL LANDS AT
IWATTIE CREEK. FOR THE FIRST TIME, ABORIGINAL PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN GIVEN RIGHTS TO THEIR OWN LAND LAND WHICH
THEIR ANCESTORS FIRST INHABITED MANY THOUSANDS OF YEARS
AGO, AND WHICH WILL HENCEFORTH BE THEIRS IN PERPETUITY.
YOU CAN IMAGINE WHAT A DEEPLY EMOTIONAL
EXPERIENCE THIS WAS FOR EVERYONE CONCERNED FOR THE
ABORIGINALS THEMSELVES, FOR ME AND MY MINISTERS, FOR
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND FOR REPRESENTATIVES
OF OTHER POLITICAL PARTIES WITH A CONCERN FOR OUR
ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. W'E GATHERED NEAR WAVE HILL STATION,
WEST OF THE VICTORIA RIVER, SOME 200 MILES NORTH-WEST
OF TENNANT CREEK, ALL OF US HAD A VERY KEEN SENSE OF
HISTORY IN THE MAKING, OF SOMETHING CRUCIAL TO OUR
NATIONAL SPIRIT AND IDENTITY, OF A PROCESS WHOSE ORIGINS
STRETCH BACK TO THE VERY BEGINNINGS OF HUMAN SETTLEMENT ON
THIS CONTINENT. I KNOW THAT AS QUEENSLANDERS YOU WILL HAVE
A PARTICULAR INTEREST IN THIS CEREMONY, BECAUSE THERE ARE MORE
ABORIGINALS IN YOUR STATE THAN IN ANY OTHER, AND MORE CONTACT
BETWEEN ABORIGINALS AND OTHER AUSTRALIANS. / 2 
2.
As QUEENSLANDERS YOU WILL UNDERSTAND BETTER
THAN ANYONE ELSE THE DEEP IMPORTANCE OF LAND RIGHTS TO
THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. IT IS ONLY WHEN WE MOVE AMONG
ABORIGINALS, AND LIVE CLOSE TO THE LAND OURSELVES, THAT
WE CAN BEGIN TO FEEL THE ENORMOUS SIGNIFICANCE ALMOST
A SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE OF WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED
THIS WEEKEND. IT ISN'T JUST A MATTER OF ABORIGINES
WANTING LAND FOR PROFIT OR SECURITY OR PASTORAL
DEVELOPMENT THOUGH CERTAINLY THE LAND IN QUESTION,
.1250 SQUARE MILES, WILL BE USED AS A CATTLE STATION.
THEY RECOGNISE AND I THINK MOST AUSTRALIANS HAVE
COME TO RECOGNISE THAT THE WHOLE QUESTION OF LAND
RIGHTS GOES TO THE VERY ROOTS OF THE ABORIGINALS'
RIGHTS AND DIGNITY AS A PEOPLE, THEIR CLAIMS REST ON
A FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN INSTINCT THE YEARNING TO BELONG
TO THE LAND OF THEIR ANCESTORS, TO FEEL PART OF THEIR
TRIBAL AND RACIAL ORIGINS, TO KNOW THEY HAVE A REAL
AND LIVING STAKE IN THE LAND WHICH IS SO IMPORTANT
TO THEIR CULTURE AND MYTHOLOGY. 1 1/ 3 
UNFORTUNATELY IT HAS TAKEN US A VERY LONG TIME
TO RECOGNISE THESE RIGHTS AND BEGIN TO RESTORE THEM
TO THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, IT IS JUST NINE YEARS AGO
THIS MONTH THAT THE GURINDJI ON WAVE HILL STATION
WALKED OFF IN PROTEST AGAINST THEIR LIVING AND
EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS, EXACTLY SEVEN YEARS AGO ON
BUDGET DAY IN AUGUST 1968 I RAISED THE PLIGHT OF
THE GURINDJI AS A MATTER OF URGENCY IN THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT, THEIR CLAIM FOR LAND RIGHTS WAS DEBATED IN
PARLIAMENT FOR THE FIRST TIME ON THE INITIATIVE OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, THERE FOLLOWED YEARS OF
NEGOTIATIONS TO SECURE FOR THE GURINDJI A TITLE
TO THEIR LAND, VESTEYS, THE LONDON GROUP OF
COMPANIES WHICH HELD THE LEASES TO THE LAND, OFFERED
TO SURRENDER SOME OF THE LAND TO THE GURINDJI. THE
PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT DID VERY LITTLE ABOUT IT,
AGREEMENT WAS FINALLY REACHED BETWEEN VESTEYS AND MY
GOVERNMENT LAST DECEMBER, WE ARE PROVIDING MORE THAN
HALF A MILLION DOLLARS TO HELP THE GURINDJIS MOVE THEIR
CATTLE AND IMPROVE FACILITIES ON THEIR LAND, I SHOULD
SAY THAT VESTEYS HAVE COOPERATED FULLY WITH THE
GOVERNMENT AT EVERY STAGE OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, I HOPE
THEIR EXCELLENT EXAMPLE WILL BE FOLLOWED BY OTHER
HOLDERS OF LEASEHOLD LAND TO WHICH REASONABLE CLAIM
BY THE ABORIGINES CAN BE ESTABLISHED, / 4 
QUITE CLEARLY OUR OBLIGATION TO THE ABORIGINAL PEO,.
DOESN'T END WITH THIS ONE GRANT OF LAND AT WIATTIE CREEK,
THE WHOLE ISSUE OF LAND RIGHTS IS VAST AND COMPLEX, AND THERE
ARE NUMEROUS CLAIMS BY ABORIGINALS FOR LAND IN OTHER PARTS
OF AUSTRALIA, ALL THESE CLAIMS WILL HAVE. TO BE EXAMINED,
ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTS AS A GOVERNMENT WAS TO APPOINT A
ROYAL COMMISSION TO ADVISE ON WAYS IN WHICH ABORIGINAL LAND
RIGHTS MIGHT BE RECOGNISED, THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF
MR JUSTICE WOODWARD'S FIRST REPORT IN JULY 1973 WERE ACCEPTED,
IN PRINCIPLE BY THE GOVERNMENT AND TWO REGIONAL LAND COUNCILS
WERE ESTABLISHED, WE HAVE PREPARED LEGISLATION, WHICH
WILL BE INTRODUCED IN THE COMING BUDGET SESSION, TO GIVE
EFFECT TO THE 10OODWARD REPORT AND PREPARE THE WAY FOR THE
JUST AND ORDERLY TRANSFER OF LAND TO ABORIGINALS WHEREVER
THEIR TRIBAL RIGHTS CAN BE PROVED.
I HOPE THERE WILL BE NO RESISTANCE OR OBSTRUCTION
TO THIS PROCESS, WE ARE DOING SOMETHING TO REDRESS THE
LONG HISTORY OF INJUSTICE AND REPRESSION FROM WHICH ABORIGINALS
HAVE SUFFERED, YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT A REFERENDUM WAS
CARRIED IN 1957 TO GIVE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT POWER
TO LEGISLATE FOR THE WELFARE OF ABORIGINALS, QUEENSLANDERS,
LIKE ALL OTHER AUSTRALIANS, VOTED OVERWHELMINGLY FOR THAT
REFERENDUM, THE SAD TRUTH IS THAT FAR TOO LITTLE HAS
BEEN DONE TO IMPLEMENT THE SPIRIT OF THAT DECISION, IT IS
NOT JUST A MATTER OF GIVING MORE MONEY FOR HOUSING, HEALTH
AND EDUCATION THOUGH CERTAINLY WE HAVE GIVEN MORE MONEY,
MUCH MORE MONEY, THAN ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, 
S HE REAL PROBLEM IS TO OVERCOME DEEP-SEATED PREJUDICES,
OLD HABITS OF DISTRUST AND DISCRIMINATION. I'M AFRAID THAT
HERE IN QUEENS_ AND DISCRIMINATORY LAWS REMAIN ON THE STATUTE BOOK,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS PASSED LEGISLATION TO OUTLAW
ALL FORMS OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND LAST YEAR WE BROUGHT
IN FURTHER LEGISLATION IN THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT TO
OVERRIDE SPECIFIC DISCRiMINATORY LAWS IN QUEENSLAND, IWE DON T
GET ANY PARTICULAR PLEASURE FROM ACTING IN THIS WAY, BUT THE
RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE AND
AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION AS A NATION ARE TOO IMPORTANT
FOR THESE OBJECTIONABLE LAWS TO BE TOLERATED, WE MUST USE
OUR POWERS TO OVERRIDE THEM POWERS CONFERRED UPON US
IN THE REFERENDUM, AFTER ALL, VWE ARE NOT THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT TO FIGHT THESE LAWS. MiR GORTON'S GOVERNMENT DID
ITS BEST TO GET THEM REMOVED, AND THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
DEFIED , IR GORTON'S EFFORTS JUST AS IT'S DEFYING MINE,
So THE STRUGGLE IS STILL GOING ON THE STRUGGLE
TO GIVE ABORIGINALS FULL EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW, TO
IMPROVE THEIR RIGHTS AND OPPORTUNITIES, TO RAISE THEIR
STANDARD OF LIVING, TO GIVE THEM TRUE DIGNITY AS A PEOPLE,
TO HELP. THEM RUN THEIR OWN AFFAIRS AND MAKE THEIR OWN
DECISIONS ABOUT THEIR FUTURE AND THE CONDUCT OF THEIR LOCAL
COMMUNITIES. IT'S A TASK FOR WHICH WE ALL HAVE A PARTICULAR
RESPONSIBILITY AS AUSTRALIANS AND IT'S A TASK WHICH
VARIES FROM PLACE TO PLACE, FROM STATE TO STATE, FROM
COMMUNITY TO COMMUNITY, THERE ARE NO SIMPLE, ALL-EMBRACING
POLICIES FOR ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT. 
WE HAVE TO WORK STEADILY AND PATIENTLY AND DO WHAT
WE CAN, AS BEST WE CAN, WHEREVER IT 1S POSSIBLE TO
TAKE ACTION. I AM SURE THAT THE VAST MAJORITY OF
QUEENSADRS WILL SUPPORT OUR EFFORTS AND SHARE
MY PERSONAL SATISFACTION WITH EVERYTHING THAT WAS
ACH IEVED, AND SYMBOLISED, BY YESTERDAY'S CEREMONY
AT WArTIE CREEK, 



17
4) b&gt; USIVL IA. L
PROiME MINISTER Press Statement No. 545
18 August 1975
GOVERNMENT AIR TRAVEL
The Prime Minister announced today the
Government's decision that as a special measure of expenditure
restraint persons travelling at Government expense on internal
domestic airlines will, in future do so at economy class rates.
This decision will apply to Senators and Members of
Parliament, members of the Australian Public Service, members
of Australian Government Statutory and non-Statutory bodies
and members of the Defence Forces. This decision will take
effect from 1 September 1975.
The Prime Minister said that the announcement was
being made at this stage to enable the appropriate
Australian Government bodies and the airlines to make the
required administrative arrangements ahead of the formal
implementation of the Government's decision. The Prime Minister
stressed that until the decision was implemented, the Government
expected all persons covered by the decision to observe its
spirit by travelling economy class.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



19 August 1975
M. I. T. E. R. S. GRANT
Cabramatta will benefit from a $ 41,000 grant for
new traffic signals and modifications to channelisation
at the intersection of the Hume Highway and Cabramatta
Road East. The Prime Minister and Member for Werriwa, Mr Gough
Whitlam, announced that the funds would be made availalbe
through the Minor Traffic Engineering and Road Safety
Improvements category of the Roads Grants Act. He said
that it was known that correction of known hazardous
locations was an effective and low-cost method of
improving road safety, and the Cabramatta grant was part
of the Australian Government's comprehensive policy
for the improvement of all aspects of the road transport system,
especially in relation to road safety.
Mr Whitlam said that the Cabramatta grant was part
of the $ 2,600,000 being made available to New South Wales
under MITERS during the current financial year. The
State will receive a total of $ 8,080,000 for such works
over the period 1974/ 75 to 1976/ 77.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



I PNG Independence Bill
legislation; therefore it should have a speedy
passage. Honourable members might be interested to
know that Australia's sister Commonwealth
country, Canada, sent people to Australia a few
years ago to look at the working of our legislation.
Canada embodied some of our administrative
arrangements, as it saw or interpreted
them, to form part of the law that it has passed in
this area. I suppose both sides of the House can
take credit for what has happened, flimsy though
the arrangements may have been and even
though they were criticised by us when they were
introduced and have since been criticised by
honourable members opposite for not being
further extended by us. Neverteless the legislation
has worked fairly effectively and I think to
the advantage of industry that very vague area
we call the national interest. I commend the Bill
to the House and hope that, as the shadow
Treasurer indicated, there will be no opposition
to it here and therefore presumably no opposition
to it elsewhere.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Elicott) adjourned.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA INDEPENDENCE
BILL 1975
Bill presented by Mr Whitlain and read a first
time. Second Reading
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)
( 3.2 1)-1 move:
That the BUi be now read a second time.
The legislation which I now introduce-this
Bill and the next 4 Bills which I shall move be
read a second time-is historic for Papua New
Guinea, for Australia, and for the European civilisation
from which we Australians spring, for
this is almost the last episode in the great postwar,
post-imperial exercise of European
decolonisation. By an extraordinar twist of history,
Australia-herself once a colony-became
one of the world's last colonial powers. By this
legislation, we not only divest ourselves of the
last significant colony in the world, but we divest
ourselves of our own colonial heritage. It should
never be forgotten that in making our own
former colony independent, we as Australians
enhance our own independence. Australia was
never truly free until Papua New Guinea became
truly free.
Ile purpose of this legislation is to enable
Papua New Guinea to become independent on
16 September 1975, the date nominated by the
Papua New Guinea House of Assembly. The 20 August 1975 REPRESENTATIVES 293
legislation includes 4 Bills which are associated
in various ways with Papua New Guinea's move
to independence. I shalif Ii may, deal with each
of the Bills in turn in this speech.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA INDEPENDENCE
BILL
The proposed Papua New Guinea Constitution
does not depend for its validity on enabling
Australian legislation. The Constitution of
an independent Papua New Guinea is not to be
dependent on an Act by another Parliament in
the way that the Australian Constitution depends
on an Act of the Imperial Parliament-the Parliament
of Wesminster. Consequently the Papua
New Guinea Independence Bill is a short one.
Clause 4 provides that at the expiration of
September Australia will cease to have any sovereignty,
soverign rights or rights of administration
in Papua New Guinea. This will enable the
Papua New Guinea Constitution to come into
effect the next day as the supreme law of Papua
New Guinea.
Clause 5 of the Bill repeals the Papua New
Guinea Act 1949-75 under which Papua and the
Trust Territory of New Guinea have been jointly
administered for the past 26 years. It als ceases
the extension to Papua New Guinea of every Act
and imperial Act which hitherto extended. The
Papua New Guinea Constitution will adopt
those Acts and imperial Acts which Papua New
Guinea wishes to continue as laws of Papua New
Guinea. The Bill represents the culmination of threequarters
of a century of association of the Australian
Parliament with the development of
Papua New Guinea. It is the end of a long
chapter. We believe it is also the beginning of a
new, a better chapter in the continuing story of
the association between our 2 neighbour nations.
That association, as far as this Parliament is concerned,
began on 12 November 1901 with a
resolution that Australia should assume responsibility
for the administration of what was
then British New Guinea. Subsequently, of
course, Australia assumed responsibility for the
administration of what had been German New
Guinea, first, under a League of Nations mandate
and, since 1946, under the present United
Nations Trusteeship Agreement, which Australia
will discharge in full when Papua New Guinea
becomes an independent nation on 16
September. Successive Australian Governments have
given an undertaking to the Trusteeship Council
and to the United Nations General Assembly to
bring a united Papua New Guinea-the whole 
294 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1975
territory over which we assumed or were given
control-not just to independence but to united
independence. We must all be worried at this
moment that it is possible that we have failed to
fulfil completely the mandate to carry out in full
the trust we were given. Should that prove to be
the case, it will be because, perhaps with the best
will in the world, we delayed somewhat too long.
At Goroka in April 1965 I had advocated
independence by 1970.
What is certain, however, is that Australia's
major efforts to carry out the mandate and to
fulfil her trusteeship were well and highl
motivated. It would be impossible in this speech
to pay tribute to all those Australians who have
tried to serve Papua New Guinea well, and in so
doing have tried to serve Australia well. It is best
therefore that I confine myself exclusively to
members of this present Parliament The role of
the honourable member for Kooyong ( Mr
Peacock) when he was Minister for External
Territories was crucial. I frequently-here in
Canberra and in Port Moresby-paid tribute to
it. I do so again. I particularly wish to mention
those who are now Ministers who accompanied
me in my tours of Papua New Guinea in January
1970 and January 1971. They are the present
Treasurer ( Mr Hayden) and the Minister for
Education ( Mr Beazley), who were with me in
1970 and the present Minister for Defence ( Mr
Morrison) and Minister for Science and Consumer
Affairs ( Mr Clyde Cameron), who were
with me in 1971. The Minister for Defence subsequently
fulfilled the ultimate part of us all in
this great work.
It is hard, in retrospect, to understand the obloquy,
the hatred, the contempt, and even worse,
the ridicule, which we brought upon ourselves in
those far off days-a whole 5 years ago-when we
first stated that the independence of Papua New
Guinea was imminent and inevitable. It was not
easy in those days to live with the accusation-as
in particular, the Minister for Education, the
Treasurer and I had to live with it in the early
months of 1970-that we had stirred up and
should be blamed for possible bloodshed. It was
said of me-in the newspapers and in this
Parliament-that by my efforts to point out the
inescapable fact that Papua New Guinea was
already providing more leaders than Australia
could ever impose or be willing to provide, I
would have ' blood on my hands'. The words are
those of the then Prime Minister, the right
honourable member for Higgins ( Mr Gorton). It
was charged then against the present Minister
for Education and myself that, by speaking to the
people of Rabaul about how to achieve the ends they then sought by peaceful means, we were in
fact provoking violence. Those were the charges
made, in the Australian newspapers, in the Australian
Parliament.
Our point then was this, as I said in Port
Moresby in January 1970:
Papua New Guinea is already rich in leadership. The time
when that leadership will assume its full and proper responsibilities
cannot be long delayed.
To put these matters in their full historical
perspective I ask leave to have incorporated in
Hansard 2 documents-the joint statement by
the honourable members for Werriwa, Fremantie
and Oxley at Port Moresby on 12 January
1970 and the joint statement by the honourable
members for Werriwa, Hindmarsh and St
George on 17 January 1971.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER ( Dr Jenkins)-Is
leave granted? There being no objection, leave is
granted. ( The documents read as follows)-
LABOR'S PLAN FOR NEW GUINEA
STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION, MR E. G. WHITLAM, PORT
MORESBY, 12 JANUARY 1970
In the past fortnight Mr Beazley, Mr Hayden and I have
talked to some thousands of New Guineans and talked with
hundreds of elected persons, administrators, teachers and
students who will soon be assuming even more responsibility
for their country's affairs. New Guinea is already rich in
leadership. The time when that leadership will assume its full
and proper responsibilities cannot and must not be long
delayed. 1. We quickly found that our most urgent and difficult task
was to reassure the people and their leaders, and even expatriates,
about Australia's relationship with New Guinea
after self-government and after independence. We have
been appalled to discover how widespread and deeply
rooted is the impression that either independence or even
self-government means the end of Australian concern and
Australian help for this country. I make no comment about
the origins of this falsehood. Any Australian who propagates
it does a grave disservice to the people of Australia and the
people of New Guinea.
The plain fact is that for the rest of this century Australian
governments will be formed by either the Labor Par or the
Lberal Party. All members of the Australian Parliament
have supported the quadrupling of Australian aid in the past
decade. While the consensus which existed on New Guinea
during Sir Paul Hasluck's administration has broken down
under Mr Barnes, there is no diverence between the parties
on this crucial point. It is Labor policy and it is Liberal policy
that aid in finance and advice will continue. It is our firm belief
that it will increase. It is certain that for the rest of this
century at least Australia will be a donor nation to developing
nations. New Guinea will long be a principal recipient.
To emphasise the solemnity and sincerity of this undertaking,
we have suggested that Australian assistance should be
made pan of treaty arrangements between the constitutional
government of an independent New Guinea and the
Government of Australia. PNG Independence Bill 
PNG Independence Bill
2. Our second task has been to dear away fundamental
misunderstanding about the reality of Australia's present
relationship to New Guinea. Australia would not have been
permitted to remain in New Guinea as trustee had she not
promised to prepare New Guinea for independence. The
governments of 112 nations have just called on Australia to
transfer full executive and legislative powers to elected New
Guineans. The fact of independence is just not negotiable.
There is not nearly as much negotiability about the postponement
of independence as some New Guineans and
many Australians seem to assume. Australians who think
that the United Nations need not be taken seriously may be
more respectful of the United States. Anybody who doubts
the seriousness of America's purposes on this matter is fooling
himself.
The Australian Parliament has responsibilities beyond
New Guinea. Its primary responsibility is to the people of
Australia. It has the responsibility of protecting the reputation
and the relations of the nation with all countries. These
are the responsibilities of the elected persons of the Australian
Parliament and the elected government, and of no
others, elected or non-elected. The Australian Parliament
cannot escape or share this responsibility.
Therefore it is either misleading or meaningless to assert
that the decision for independence is one for the people of
New Guinea alone. The form of independence is certainly
for them to decide for themselves. The fact of independence
has already been decided.
STEPS AFTER THE NEXT ELECTIONS
3. These two tasks of reassurance and clarification were
responsibilities we accepted for the Australian people as a
whole. We accepted a third task on behalf of our own party,
the Australian Labor Party.
An Australian election must be held by the end of 1972 at
the latest It may be earlier. It is our belief that a Labor
Government will emerge from those elections. We therefore
felt it obligatory to indicate how a Labor Government would
discharge its responsibilities to the people of Australia and its
obligations to the people of New Guinea, including those
Australians whose families and fortunes are at stake m New
Guinea. New Guineans will have home rule as soon as a Labor
Government can make the necessary arrangements with the
House of Assembly which will also be elected in 1972.
This means that laws made by the Assembly will no longer
be subject to veto by the Australian Government; that all
matters affecting the welfare of New Guincan people except
defence and foreign affairs will be subject to laws made by
the Assembly alone; and that those laws will be administered
by a public service responsible only to the House of
Assembly. Australians who remain in the service of the New Guinea
Government will equally be responsible to the House of
Assembly, but the Australian Government will accept responsibility
for their salaries and the welfare of their
families. The House of Assembly will decide the form of the constitution
New Guinea is to have after independence.
It is certain that the assumption of an increasing measure
of responsibility will accelerate the desire and ability to
accept total responsibility. In this sense it is true that the
people of New Guinea will decide their own time-table for
independence. Elements in the Administration, and in the expatriate
community, are anxious to postpone every delegation of
power to the Papua-New Guinea people into an indefinite
future. Most disturbing is the open hostility in the Administration
to those who have, if perhaps in gravely mistaken 20 August 1975 REPRESENTATIVES 295
ways, attempted to assert their rights. The manner in which
the Department of External Tertories endeavoured to enforce
the sale of Bougainville land disqualifies those responsible
for the policy from any clair" o have the well-being of
the people at heart Batons and tear Oas have no place in
land sales. This incredible exercise in the techniques of
violent expropriation has shaken confidence. It threatens to
create deep and enduring hatred against Australia and Australians.
It is a factor underlying the Mataungan
misunderstandings. IMMEDIATE STEPS
4. Fourthly, we have seen there is a need for a far more
systematic preparation of the country for self-government.
Urgent needs in the Territory which should be the subject of
immediate attention are:
A reasonable minimum wage;
An arbitration system for plantation workers and all
labourers; An end to the shame whereby Australia's name is
associated with plantation wages of $ 5 a month or
less-the worst wages in the Pacific and probably the
worst in the world.
In New Guinea every industrial dispute is automatically a
dispute between an Australian or an Australian company on
one hand and New Guineans on the other. The Territory has
moved to the position where the Workers' Associations
should be treated seriously. We heard from workers'leaders,
engaged in struggles to lift wages as low as $ 6 a week, that
claims to private employers for wage increases simply went
unacknowledged. Even worse, the Administration itself for
months on end ignored wage claims from officially recognised
workers' associations. It needs to be quite clear that
salary and wage discrimination is the basis of every other
form of discrimination.
There has been a dear deterioration in race relations,
reflected in the movement of battalions of police to Bougainville
and Rabaul. There are more police in Rabaul than in
any Australian city except Sydney and Melbourne. Australians
in Papua-New Guinea are not in their own country.
The whole direction of administration needs re-orientation.
The basis of Australian policy should be discrimination in
favour of the people whose country this is. Only discrimination
in favour of the underprivileged can reduce
inequality. The Department of External Territories, which rules,
should become a Department of Pacific Relations, which
advises. Australian officers should not be masters but envoys,
not rulers but helpers. The best of them are. There is cause
for pride in much done in health, education, communications,
agriculture, and public works, and in the defence
services. There is no cause whatever for pride in labour relations.
This is the Achilles heel of the whole Australian position
in New Guinea. It is full of danger for the near and distant
future.
Nor can we have any pride in the fact that in the five
largest towns there is no local government, and no
businesses, factories or even taxis owned by locals. In New
Guinea commercial enterprise has become synonymous with
expatriate enterprise.
We have tried to impart a feeling not only of urgency but
of self-confidence in the ability of New Guineans to make
their own decisions. There are New Guineans who are well
equipped to fill the highest political and administrative positions
n their country. Indeed, no Australian could claim the
contrary without reflecting on Australia's record of administration
at its crucial point
The House of Assembly and its members should now be
taken seriously as the representatives of their people and 
296 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1975
treated by all Australians with proper respect and seriousness.
The only thing in which New Guinea is really unique
among the countries of the world is that alone among significant
populations its people make no final decisions on
any matter affecting their welfare.
It is not unique in its economy, in the difference of economic
standards between sections of the country, its educational
or social standards, its need for economic aid from
abroad, its need for advisers, the diversity of its local customs,
or even the multiplicity of its languages.
All these matters present complex and difficult problems
for any future government of New Guinea.
None of these problems require colonial rule for their solution
or easing. In fact, many of them will worsen if foreign
techniques, methods, laws and customs continue to exclude
local custom, knowledge and experience.
An outside administration cannot teach or impose unity. It
can by errors unite a people against it. This is the very situation
which Australians at home will not permit, and Australians
in New Guinea must most avoid.
STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, MR E. G.
WHITLAM, PORT MORESBY: 17.1.1971
In the past year the political climate of Papua-New
Guinea has been transformed. A year ago proposals for early
self-government were met with official hostility and public
dismay. Some elementary truths about the early and inevitable
end of colonialism in Papua-New Guinea held the terror
of the novel and the unknown. Now the most significant
leaders of Papua-New Guinea and significant sections of the
population accept that they must shortly come to terms with
their own future as a self-governing nation. It has been a
remarkable proof of the power of an idea. There can be no
turning back now.
For the past fortnight my colleagues and I have met and
talked with some hundreds of the present and future leaders
of Papua-New Guinea. Despite the vast improvement in the
level of political debate in every part of the Territory, it is
clear that political education has been woefully deficient.
Again and again we asked the people if they had ever heard
the Administration explain the advantages of self-government.
Invariably, the answer was With the shining
exception of the new Administrator himself, it would seem
that practically nothing has been done to dispel confusion
and fear about the meaning and consequences of selfgovernment.
On the contrary, needless anxiety and false
ears have been planted and nourished. Consequently my
colleagues and I found that in many pans of the Territory
our visit became a mission of reassurance that Australia s
contribution to the welfare of Papua-New Guinea would be
enhanced and expanded after self-government and later
after independence.
There can be no qualification about the depth of the commitment
of the Australian Labor Party in this matter. The
representative nature of the colleagues who have been with
me in the Territory would alone ensure that. Beyond personal
commitment, the Labor Party as a whole finds its most
deeply-held conscientious convictions affronted in Papua-
New Guinea. It would be impossible for a party like ours to
condone or connive at vast inequalities, entrenched privilege,
blatant exploitation and racial discrimination. These
inescapable attributes of colonialism disfigure life in this colony,
as in all other colonies. They debase the dedication,
enterprise and energy devoted over the years by the many
thousands of fine Australians who have worked in this Territory.
Australia's role as a colonial power is a wrong thing in
itself. It would be bad for us as a nation, even if we were able PNG Independence Bill
to isolate ourselves from the pressures and opinions of all
other countries; but we enjoy no such luxury of isolation. In
particular, we live in a region in which every one of our
neighbours for thousands of miles around were former colonies.
Each detests colonialism. To all these neighbours and
all our fellow members of the Commonwealth of Nations
every justification the Australian Government makes for
dragging its feet in Papua-New Guinea, every argument
about the inability of native peoples to govern themselves
smacks of racial superiority.
Australia's major diplomatic effort, not only at the United
Nations but in most world capitals, is devoted to justifying
the official position on Papua-New Guinea. This is a sterile
exercise. It cripples our power for any constructive diplomatic
initiatives. We are needlessly placed on the defensive;
it needlessly complicates our relations with our neighbours
and our friends, including our chief ally, the United States,
which possesses the world's most powerful black community.
All Australians must now realise how damaging and
dangerous a reputation Australia's present policies produce.
We are a European nation on the fringe of the most populous
and deprived coloured nations in the world. What the world
sees about Australia is that we have an Aboriginal population
with the highest infant mortality rate on earth; that we
have eagerly supported the most unpopular war in modem
times on the ground that Asia should be a battle-ground of
our freedom; that we fail to oppose the sale of arms to South
Africa; that the whole world believes that our immigration
policy is based on colour and that we run one of the world's
ast colonies. We may rightly profess our good intentions and
feel that we are merely the victims of special circumstances;
but the combination of such policies leans heavily indeed on
the world's goodwill and on Australia's credibility. The true
patriot therefore will not seek to justify and prolong these
policies but will seek to change them.
In Papua-New Guinea, it will be found increasingly that
the question for the timing of self-government involves a
quibble about the matter of 2 or 3 years. Even if the Gonon
Government were to survive, self-government will come in
the lifetime of the next House of Representatives. The Australian
Government has a clear duty to speed up preparations
for the inevitable day. Target dates for selfgovernment
and independence should be set now, as we are
obliged to do by the unopposed decision of the United
Nations General Assembly. The official members of the
House of Assembly should be removed now. Elected ministers
should be made responsible to the House of Assembly in
fact. Political education should receive top priority. The Australian
Parliament should immediately ratify the International
Labour Organisation conventions on plantation
workers and on race relations; a new set of labour laws and
ordinances should be drafted and approved to make labour
laws and conditions conform with these conventions. Employment
preference should be given to unionists. The Australian
Government should spell out clearly the entitlements
of Australian public servants and should make it plain that it
accepts responsibility for their future welfare, both in the
Territory and in Australia; . only if this is done can localisation
of the public service proceed speedily and smoothly.
There is no need to wait until 1972 for these things to be
done; they constitute in themselves the essence of selfgovernment.
Australian and Australian companies have a particular
interest in the establishment of a self-governing New
Guinea. By its very nature, an Australian Administration committed
to its own eventual abdication cannot guarantee the validity
or permanency of business and investment arrangements
it may make. 
PNG Independence Bill
The best safeguard against expropriation is that an
indigenous independent government should accept responsibiliy
for the laws and arrangements under which property is
held and capital invested.
There are dear risks in the present situation in which all
employers and businessmen are expatriates while New
G uineans are only employees and customers.
In the final analysis the attitudes of the Australian Labor
Party to Papua-New Guinea involve a convinced judgment
about the very nature of man. We cannot accept that nations
should be ruled by other nations; we cannot accept that men
do not wish to be free; we cannot accept that the people of
Papua-New Guinea are some special exception in a world
where millions have died for national independence. It may
he true that men cannot be forced to be free; it is certainly
true that men cannot be forced to rule others. An Australian
Labor Government will not be blackmailed into accepting
an unnatural role as rulers over those who have had no say
and can have no say in electing us. Australia's obli$ ation in
the United Nations is to hand over Papua-New Guinea as a
single entity as soon as possible. Papua-New Guinea has a
chance of remaining united only if self-government comes
quickly. Self-government in itself will be the real unifying
frei. this country. To delay self-government is to promote
separatism. Self-government must be given quickly to the
people as a whole; otherws secio ar section will seize
with anger and bitterness towards us what we should grant
wholly and wholeheartedly.
Mr WH1ITLAM-I thank honourable members.
In these 2 statements the joint and continuing
theme is that Papua New Guinea was
already providing leadership at all levels greater
than that which Australia was able or willing any
longer to provide in Papua New Guinea.
I now come to the other Bills. The Papua New
Guinea Bill 1975 gives effect to an announcement
the then Minister assisting the Minister for
Foreign Affairs in matters relating to Papua New
Guinea made on 16 September 1974 that
Australia would hand over to Papua New
Guinea the administration of the Pocklington
Reef Islands. These islands are a small uninhabited
group 130 kilometres east of the southeastern
tip of Papua New Guinea. The Bill provides
for the islands to be brought within the territorial
scope of Papua New Guinea, so that at
independence that country will exercise full sovereignty
over the islands. The Bill also gives
Papua New Guinea authority to enact off-shore
legislation in the area around the islands. Papua
New Guinea already has authority to enact legislation
dealing with its off-shore adjacent areas as
defined in the Australian Petroleum ( Submerged
Lands) Act, but these adjacent areas do not
include Pocklington Reef Islands. Clause 4 of the
Bill amends the present authorisation and enables
Papua New Guinea to enact legislation
dealing with off-shore areas other than those to
which the Australian Petroleum ( Submerged
Lands) Act applies.
The Papua New Guinea Loans Guarantee Bill
1975 seeks the approval of Parliament to the 20 August 1975 REPRESENTATIVE 297
continuation of the Australian Government
guarantee, provided for in section 75A of the
Papua New Guinea Act 1949-1975, in respect of
loans raised by the Papua New Guinea Government
from Australian and PNG sources prior to
independence until such time as the loans in
question have matured and been repaid. I would
mention that loans Papuia New Guinea has
raised from overseas sources are guaranteed
until final maturity under separate legislation.
The guarantees to be continued by this legislation
and those provided in respect of overseas
borrowings have assisted Papua New Guinea in
undertaking its borrowing programs.
The purpose of Papua New Guinea ( Staffing
Assistance) Bill 1975 is to amend the Papua New
Guinea ( Staffing Assistance) Act 1973 to
introduce the new staffing aid arrangements
which have recently been agreed between the
Australian Government and the Papua New
Guinea Government.
The Papua New Guinea ( Staffing Assistance)
Act 1973 established the Australian staffing assistance
group as the framework under which
former permanent overseas officers and contract
officers from Australia could continue to serve in
Papua New Guinea after self-government. Following
a recent review of the future of these arrangements,
it has been agreed with the Papua
New Guinea Government that the direct employment
by the Australian Government of the
2700 members of the group-some of whom
occupy senior and influential positions in the
Papua New Guinea Public Service-is not in the
immediate or Ion g-term interests of either
Government, and should be discontinued. Accordingly,
the 2 Governments have agreed that
the group be wound up on 30 June next year and
that new arrangements be introduced as from
June this year to encourage those officers in the
group whose services are still required to transfer
over to direct contract employment with the
Papua New Guinea Government as soon as
practicable. The Papua New Guinea ( Staffing Assistance)
Bill 1975 seeks to modify the present employment
security scheme arrangements for those
members of the group who agree to transfer over
to direct contract employment with the Papua
New Guinea Government. Most of the necessary
changes required can and will be made by
amendment of the existing regulations made
under the Act. These will be explained in detail
in due course.
I turn finally to the Social Security Bill ( No. 2)
1975. The object of this Bill is to amend the 
298 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1975
Social Security Act to enable former residents of
external territories, including Papua New
Guinea, to qualify for social services pensions if
they come to Australia to live. It is proposed that
residence in an external territory other than Norfolk
Island will count as residence in Australia
for the purpose of satisfying the residence
qualifications for Australian social service pensions.
Residence in Norfolk Island is excluded
from the ambit of the Bill in view of the recent
appointment of a royal commission into matters,
including social security, relating to Norfolk
Island. Most Australian expatriates living in the Territories
will have already satisfied Australian pensions
residence requirements. There are, however,
many people who have lived in external
territories for many years, sometimes for most of
their lives, and who, if they were to come to live
in Australia, would not be residentially qualified
for Australian pensions under existing legislation.
I am sure honourable members will agree
it is appropriate that the valuable contribution
made by these people to Territory development
should be recognised. The estimated cost of the
proposals in this Bill is $ 750,000 for the balance
of the fiscal year 1975-76 and 1 m in a full year.
These Bills together constitute the final legislative
act-the last legislative instrument-in the
relations between the Australian Parliament and
Papua New Guinea. They constitute a new beginning
in the relations between 2 free and
independent nations. Previously, I had incorporated
in Hansard statements of intent from the
Australian Labor Party, now the Australian
Government, towards a free united independent
Papua New Guinea. Those pledges have been
reinforced by statement after statement since we
became the Government of Australia. They were
pledges made not just for an Australian party,
but for the Australian nation. They hold and
hold firm-for the Australian Labor Party, for
the Australian Government, for the Australian
people. The people of Papua New Guinea know from
their long experience-and let me re-state it-that
Australia keeps her promises. But let this also be
pointed out: A free Papua New Guinea is not a
seventh State of Australia. It is a free and
independent nation. The Chief Minister of
Papua New Guinea is not a premier of a dependent,
a claimant, State. Nationhood is real.
Independence is real. Freedom is real. The
Parliament-the House of Assembly-of Papua
New Guinea is representative of a truly
sovereign nation with true, valid, genuine international
independent standing in the world. The PNG Independence Bill
House of Assembly of Papua New Guinea is the
Parliament of a sovereign nation. Papua New
Guinea must aspire to that true sovereignty
which no State under the Australian Constitution
could ever have, or has ever had. Internationally,
the Australian States do not exist. Papua New
Guinea as a nation does exist. It will be recognised
throughout the world as a new nation on
16 September. All other nations will have to sit
up and take notice of Papua New Guinea from
now on. On 16 September, Papua New Guinea
achieves true and genuine sovereignty which no
Australian State-the 6 former colonies-ever
had, or can ever have.
By these Bills, we give Papua New Guinea its
true international standing. Papua New Guinea
from now on is going to need international aid.
The absolute guarantee we give in this Australian
Parliament is that aid will continue to
come from Australia. But if free Papua New
Guinea chooses in its own wisdom to augment
that international aid from any other source,
there can be, there should be, no complaint from
Australia. Australia's responsibilities towards
Papua New Guinea are inescapable, but Papua
New Guinea has no special responsibilities
towards Australia. Papua New Guinea has no
more responsibilities towards Australia than any
other independent nation has towards Australia.
We have not divested ourselves of political authority
over Papua New Guinea just in order to
keep it in financial bondage. Papua New Guinea
will always have the first call on Australian aid.
For the rest of this century it will be given in the
terms in letter and in spirit which I outlined
years ago and 4 years ago in the statements
which I have incorporated and in my frequent
statements since made.
But Australian aid is given to a free and
independent nation-not to a claimant State of
Australia. It is given to a nation which by its
present leadership and all that we know of its
proud, diverse people, is well able to work out its
own destiny-in its own way. When that nation
seeks assistance from abroad, Australia will
surely be the first to answer that call-as we are
pledged to do. But to confine the limits of assistance
to that which Australia alone shall give
would be to confine the limits of independence of
Papua New Guinea itself.
By these Bills we intend to give Papua New
Guinea genuine independence-not a phoney
independence. These Bills, I know, will pass
unanimously in both our Houses. Let us be sure,
however, exactly what we are trying to achievethe
creation of a truly independent nation. Few
a J 
Loan Bill
legislatures in the history of mankind have been
given a more honourable duty.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Peacock)
adjourned. PAPUA NEW GUINEA DILL 1975
Bill presented by Mr Whitlana, and read a first
time. Second Reading
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)
( 3.4 1)-I move:
That the Bill be now* mad a second time.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Peacock)
adjourned. PAPUA NEW GUINEA LOANS
GUARANTEE BILL 1975
Bill presented by Mr Whitm, and read a first
time. Second Reading
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)
( 3.42)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Peacock)
adjourned. PAPUA NEW GUINEA ( STAFFING
ASSISTANCE) BILL 1975
Bill presented by Mr WIIITLAKt and read a
first time. Second Reading
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)
( 3.43)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Peacock)
adjourned. SOCIAL SERVICES BILL ( No. 2) 1975
Bill presented by Mr Whitlani, and read a first
time. Second Reading
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)
( 3.44)-l move:
That the Bil be now r.-ad a second time.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Peacock)
adjourned. LOAN BILL 1975
Bill presented by Mr Hayden, and read a first
time. 20 August 1975 REPRESENTATIVES 299
Second Reading
Mr HAYDEN ( Oxley-Treasurer) ( 3.45)-l
move: That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is a machinery measure which is
required to secure authority to borrow amounts
for the financing of defence expenditure which
will need to be charged to the Loan Fund during
the financial year 1975.76. The Australian
Government's financial transactions are
recorded in 3 separate funds-the Consolidated
Revenue Fund, the Loan Fund and the Trust
Fund. Honourable members will, however, be
aware from the summaries presented in Budget
Paper No. 4-Estimates of Receipts and Summary
ofEstimated Expenditure-that estimated
expenditures for 1975-76 normally charged to
the Consolidated Revenue Fund substantially
exceed the estimated receipts of that Fund.
The prospectve deficit in the Consolidated
Revenue Fund, which is only part of the
estimated overall deficit which I announced in
my Budget speech, must be met in one way or
another within the total of the financing arrangements
for funding the overall deficit. In this kind
of situation, successive governments have
obtained authority to charge to the Loan Fund
some expenditures which would normally be met
from the Consolidated Revenue Fund. That is
the purpose of this Bill which will authorise borrowings
for defence purposes so that defence
expenditures from appropriations approved by
the Parliament can be charged to the Loan Fund
rather than to the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
The Bill does not authorise additional defence
expenditures. It will simply allow us to reallocate
from the Consolidated Revenue Fund to
the Loan Fund part of the expenditures of the
Department of Defence already authorised in
the Supply Act ( No. 1) 1975-76 and which are
subsequently authorised in the 1975-76 Appropriation
Acts. When this Bill is enacted I shall
move an amendment to Appropriation Bill ( No.
1) 1975-76, to permit defence expenditure
specified in that Bill to be charged to the Loan
Fund. It is not possible at this stage of the financial
year to be at all precise as to the amount of defence
expenditure which will have to be charged
to the Loan Fund. That amount, which can be
expected to be sizable, will be a residual affected
by all other transactions of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund: t is for this reason that the Bill
does not specify a fixed amount of borrowing.
Instead, like similar Bills introduced in recent
years both by this Government and by previous
S 



-1,, AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER
POLITICAL ACTIVITY BY VIETNAMESE REFUGEES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, today described as
false and misleading suggestions made by the opposition
during Question Time that the Australian Government had
proscribed the right of domestic political activity of
Vietnamese refugees who have entered this country.
Mr Whitlam said that only nine of the nearly 1000
Vietnamese who have so far come to Australia had been asked
to provide an undertaking that they would eschew political
activity. These nine persons were all admitted as special
cases because of the high risks to their security caused by
the change of Government. Each had been politically active
and involved in the policies of the previous Government.
Mr Whitlam recalled that such undertakings were
not novel. The policy was first developed by previous
Liberal/ Country Party Governments. He had been informed
that Mr Mikis Theodorakis had been requested to give a similar
undertaking, All Colombo Plan students were required by
previous Governments to sign a guarantee that they would not
engage in political activity during the period of their
residence in this country.
" It is to be expected", said Mr Whitlam, " that
refugees who were forced to leave their homeland will resent
the fact and long remember it. But it cannot be accepted
that this is justification for using Australia as a base
for futile political activity intended to change political
arrangements in their native land", he said. " For too long
now Australians and Australia have had to suffer the violence
and lawlessness of some emigre political groups who, in fantasy
fashion, believe that by their efforts they can alter these
political facts."
Mr Whitlam said that the Australian Government did
not discriminate between refugees in its requirement for such
undertakings. If Australian officials thought it possible
that certain refugees could cause dissension, disruption or
strife within ethnic groups, then they would be asked for such
an undertaking whether, for instance, they were Chilean or
Vietnamese. No discrimination between ethnic groups has been
practised or will be practised. The requirement will continue
to be put whenever it is justified and whatever the ethnic
origin of the refugees. / 2 
-2-
Mr Whitlam said the Opposition charges were
designed to mask its guilt over Australia's intervention
in Vietnam. Mr Whitlam said that, unlike previous
Governments, the present Australian Government granted
citizenship to applicants irrespective of their political
views. Quite obviously, he said, a written undertaking
could not diminish the rights conferred by Australian
citizenship which all of the refugees were now entitled
-to seek under Government policies. The reqUirement . is
justified by the need to maintain peace and order in the
community. It is, he said, clear that upon becoming
citizens they could ignore that undertaking as no such
requirement can be made of an Australian citizen.
Mr Whitlam said no Government could tolerate its
-territory being used as a base for action designed to
overthrow the recognised Government of another country.
Whatever the Australian people or Government might think
of another Government's policies, there is no choice but
to prevent persons in Australia from taking action to
remove such a Government. This is the only reason for
such an undertaking being required. Its need is regrettably
apparent because of events in certain of the migrant
communities. As I have said before about other places, it
is no kindness and in fact a delusion to suggest to refugees
that there is any prospect of altering the political
arrangements in their former homelands. Unfortunately,
as we have seen often, such suggestions are promoted by
the disaffected within ethnic communities, generally to
the detriment of those communities and the wider Australian
community", Mr Whitlam said.
0 Mr Whitlam said that he would like to assure
any person who had been required to give an undertaking by
the present or previous Governments, that, they were entitled
to all rights of political activity in the Australian
community provided by Australian law. He said he regretted
that yet again, by its deliberate tactics, the Opposition
had set out to confuse migrants.
CANBERRA, 21 August 1975 



SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
THlE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL,
NORTH RYDE, N. S. W., 22 AUGUST 1975
1. 1 give full credit to John Gorton for recognising the
needs of the Australian film and television industry.
We agree on the need to develop an industry of world
standard. We agree that a flourishing film and TV
industry is possible only with a pool of expert trained
technicians and craftsmen, of creative producers, directors
and scriptwriters. That is what this school is providingalong
with lectures, seminars, workshops and information
on all aspects of film and TV production for those involved
in the industry.
2. It is seven years since a school such as this was f4 rst
proposed at a UNESCO seminar on film and TV training
at the University of N. S. W. I am proud that my Government
was able to follow up these initiatives and establish
the Film and Television School as an independent statutory
authority in 1973. The School has the same status as a
college of higher education. Eight months ago you invited
me to open the first full-time three-year course of -the
School. 1 regret that I was not able to be with you on
that occasion, but I know that the first courses have
successfully begun. It is a very select group -only 24
stu~ dents a year it's smaller than the Cabinet -but
those men and women have been carefully chosen and will be
trained to the highest standards of excellence, of professionalism.
3. Professor Toeplitz and your Council have recognised the
essential truth that the Australian film and TV industry
can only survive and prosper by producing works of
international quality. There is no room for mediocrity.
Here you have the very finest equipment and technical
facilities; by 1980 you will have a permanent new
building at Macquarie University. But none of these things
will be of" much value if the standards of professional
training are inferior. The success of this School
depends, not only on cultivating a technically stimulating
atmosphere, but on attaining and insisting upon rigorous
professional standards in all your work. Technical
competence in film production is only apparent by its
absence; its presence is taken for granted. Too often in
Australian productions in the past we have been aware of
a certain clumsiness, a certain roughness at the edges.
It is difficult to pin down but we can recognise it.
True excellence of style and technique must be taught and
learnt the hard way. In film and TV productions it involves
collaboration by many different people with many different
skills. Here in this school you will have the benefit
of working together and getting used to the discipline of
working together. That is an essential part of the training
this School provides. ./ 2 
4. Films and television are the authentic art forms of
the 20th century the most popular, and therefore also
the most representative art forms, and those most
closely attuned to the thoughts and feelings of the
people. The problem is that they involve technical
resources and expenditures beyond the reach of individuals
or even of substantial private companies. Writing and
painting and composing were solitary arts and could be
practised in penury, but films and television require
heavy investment and advanced technology. In the days
when the technology was relatively simple and investments
were modest Australia could afford a successful, and
indeed flourishing, film industry. Overseas markets
were limited, but the overheads were such that costs
could be recouped and profits made from local exhibition.
This is no longer the case. For years we heard demands
and appeals for a viable film industry in Australia.
These hopes were not fulfilled because Governments were
never prepared to accept any responsibility for film
production. It is only now that Governments are playing
their part by subsidising film production and supporting
their own production agencies. We now recognise that in
a small or medium-sized country maintaining film
production is like running an orchestra or an art gallery;
it has little chance of succeeding without Government
support. I am not suggesting that a profitable private
industry is impossible. I am suggesting that without
Government support a profitable industry is difficult
tc establish and unlikely to succeed. moreover, it is only
with Government support that films can be produced for
a minority audience. There is less pressure on film
makers to4-c onform to cosmopolitan and frequently debased
standards of popular taste. There is more scope for a
distinctively Australian style.
We can all take satisfaction for the success of many
recent Australian films. We have seen a healthy expansion
of the Australian film industry in recent years. This has
been due in large part to the involvement of governments.
The Australian Government, as you know, has established,
the Australian FiLm Commission as a statutory authority
to Promocte a healthy Australian film industry. The
Commission will incorporate Film Australian ( the Government's
film production unit) and the Australian Film Development
CorporatiLon -another offspring of the Gorton Government.
The Corporation this year committed about $ 1.5 million
to Australian film projects.
6. The Labor Party is committed to a high level of Australian
content in television production. We have established
the Australia Council as an independent authority with its
Film, Radio and Television Board to supervise Australian
Government assistance to film and -television projects. And
now we have a fully-fledged Film and Television School to
produce the qualified men and women that the industry will need.
I am delighted to be with you to perform this opening
ceremony. I congratulate the director, Professor Toeplitz
and the council and staff of the School on the excellent start
it has made. I am confident that it will make an indispensable
contribution to the development of film and -television
in Australia. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR PRIME MINISTER, FOR OPENING OF ST BASIL'S HOMES,
LOURANTOS VILLAGE, LAKENBA, N, S. W,
23 AUGUST 1975
1. IT GIVES ME VERY GREAT PLEASURE INDEED TO BE PRESENT FOR
THE OFFICIAL OPENING AND BLESSING OF THIS MAGNIFICENT
LOURANTOS VILLAGE WHICH OPERATES UNDER THE AUSPICES
OF THE GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH FIFTH LARGEST DENOMINATION
IN AUSTRALIA. YOU HAVE AS YOUR PATRON His EMINENCE
ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS WHO HAS ONLY BEEN IN THIS
COUNTRY SINCE APRIL THIS YEAR, BUT WHO FEELS SO FIRMLY
COMMITTED TO THE PASTORAL NEEDS OF GREEK-BORNUSTRALIANS
THAT HE ! NTENDS TO SEEK AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP.
AUSTRALIA IS HONOURED BY HIS INTENTION. I CAN ASSURE
THE RESIDENTS, THE DIRECTORS, THE SUPPORTERS OF
-ST BASIL'S HOMES THAT YOUR PATRON IS HERE TO STAY.
2. 1 WAS ANXIOUS TO MEET ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE AFTER HIS ARRIVAL, BECAUSE I FELT I HAD SO
MUCH TO TALK TO HIM ABOUT FOLLOWING MY VISIT TO CRETE
IN JANUARY THIS YEAR. QUITE APART FROM ALL THE TIES
OF AUSTRALIA TO GREECE THROUGH OUR IMMIGRATION PROGRAMS,
I HAD LEARNED THIS HIS FATHER HAD SERVED ALONGSIDE
AUSTRALIAN SERVICEMEN IN CRETE DURING THE SECOND WORLD
WAR. WHILE I WAS RETURNING FROM DARWIN, MY WIFE VISITED THE
SITE OF THE BATTLE AND CEMETRY AT RETHYMNON WHERE THE
TOWNSPEOPLE ARE ERECTING A MEMORIAL TO THAT AUSTRALIAN
PRESENCE, AND SHE WAS DEEPLY MOVED BY THE EVIDENCE OF
THE CONTINUING TIES OF FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN OUR PEOPLES./ 2 -ILQ4 
I
3. ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS, ACCOMPANIED BY MR SAMIOS, A DIRECTOR
OF ST BASIL'S HOMES, LUNCHED WITH ME AT THE LODGE AT THE
END OF IT WILL NOT SURPRISE YOU TO LEARN THAT
THEY TALKED AT LENGTH ABOUT THIS GREAT SOCIAL UNDERTAKING
HERE AT LOURANTOS VILLAGE3
I EXPRESSED MY OWN INTEREST IN THE PROJECT, BECAUSE OF
MY OWN CONCERN AT THE NEED TO PROVIDE LOVING CARE AND
ACCOMMODATION FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE WHO HAVE SPENT THEIR
LIVES IN THE SERVICE OF THEIR FAMILIES, OF THEIR
COMMUNITIES, OF THEIR HOMELANDS, AND WHO DESERVE THE
ATTENTION AND CARE OF THE COMMUNITY. I KNEW T-AT THE
AUSTRALIAN ' GOVERNMENT HAD CONTRIBUTED TO THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF LOURANTOS VILLAGE UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOMES AND
HOSTELS ACTS.
BUT I REALISED ESPECIALLY THAT THIS GREAT UNDERTAKING
TO PROVIDE ACCOMMODATION FOR OVER 80 ELDERLY PEOPLE
ø.. UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH
ALTHOUGH IN ITS CHARITY IT IS NON-DENOMINATIONAL REPRESENTS
THE COMMITMENT OF THE GREEK COMMUNITY IN AUSTRALIA TO
ALL THOSE WHO NEED CARE IN OUR COMMUNITY, WHATEVER
THEIR COUNTRY OF ORIGIN OR CHOICE,
4, SO I WAS DELIGHTED TO ACCEPT THE INVITATION EXTENDED
THROUGH YOUR DIRECTOR, MR SAMIOS, AND YOUR PATRON,
ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS, TO SHARE THIS OCCASION WITH YOU.
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT WE ARE HERE TOGETHER, CHURCH AND
STATE, BECAUSE OF THE CO-OPERATION THERE IS BETWEEN
CHURCH AND STATE IN THIS COUNTRY IN ALL AREAS OF SOCIAL...
RESPONSIBILITY BUT ESPECIALLY THAT OF CARE FOR THE3Aft, 
THIS IS THE FOURTH OLD PEOPLES HOME I HAVE OPENED IN
NEW SOUTH ' WALES IN THE LAST THREE MONTHS. ALL HAVE
RECEIVED SUBSTANTIAL GRANTS FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS ANXIOUS TO PROVIDE MAXIMUM ASSISTANCE
TO THOSE PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE ORGANISATIONS BEST
FITTED AND MOST COMPASSIONATELY MOTIVATED IN THIS AREA
OF CARE FOR THE AGED.
I AM SURE THAT LOURANTOS VILLAGE WILL BE A PLACE OF
COMFORTING AND COMFORTABLE INDEPENDENCE FOR ALL THOSE.
'' WHO COME TO LIVE HERE. I KNOW THAT THE PERSONAL
INVOLVEMENT OF THOSE CONNECTED WITH ST BASIL'S HOMES WILL
EASE MANY OF THOSE INITIAL FEELINGS OF ISOLATION WHICH
CAN MAR THIS PARTICULAR KIND OF " MOVING HOUSE", AND
:: LL PROVIDE INTEESTED COMPANIONSHIP IN THE YEARS
AHEAD. CERTAINLY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S GRANT
CF $ 1,234,000 IS JUSTIFIED AND CAN BE SEEN AS AN
INVESTMENT, ' NOT IN MONETARY TERMS, BUT IN THE SERENITY
AND HAPPINESS OF THE RESIDENTS AT THEIR NEW ADDRESS,
IN THEIR NEW HOME.
6. IT MUST BE A GREAT JOY FOR MR NICHOLAS LOURANTOS TO BE
HERE TODAY TO SEE SO MANY OF HIS OWN DREAMSREALISED,
BECAUSE HE HAS BEEN SUCH A GREAT BENEFACTOR TO THIS
CHARITY. AND IT IS FITTING THAT THIS COUNTRY SHOULD
NOW HAVE A LOURANTOS VILLAGE TO COMMEMORATE A MAN
CALLED NICHOLAS LOURANTOS WHO LEFT HIS HOMELAND, THE
ISLAND OF TSIRIGO, TO COME TO A NEW LAND OVER SIXTY-FIVE
YEARS AGO. THAT NEW LAND, AUSTRALIA, HAS BEEN ENRICHED
BY HIS COMING, AND MEMORIES OF HIS HOMELAND LIVE ON 4.. 
-4-
THROUGH HIS PART IN THE ENDOWMENT OF THE CHAIR OF
MODERN GREEK AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY. IT'S A
LITTLE LATE FOR ME OF COURSE; I STILL CLING TO THE
CLASSICS. BUT GENERATIONS OF YOUNGER AS WELL AS
OLDER GREEK-SPEAKING RESIDENTS OF AUSTRALIA WILL
REMEMBER NlICHOLAS LOURANTOS FOR HIS PHILANTHROPY,
FOR HIS CHARITY,
7, IN THIS CONTEXT IT IS INTERESTING TO REFLECT ON THE
TIES BETWEEN THE OLDER GENERATIONS OF OUR HOMELANDS,
IN THE YEAR 1974-75,' 3,334 AGED OR OTHERWISE DEPENDENT
PARENTS WERE NOMINATED FOR ENTRY TO AUSTRALIA, ROM
GREECE, AN" D 4,837 WERE NOMINATED FOR ENTRY AS NONDEPENDENT
PARENTS. THE URGE FOR FAMILY REUNION IS
IMMENSE AND GRATIFYING, IT IS AN INDICATION OF THE
E/ TENT TO HjICH AUSTRALIA HAS BECOME HOME FOR A
YOUNGER GENERATION. BUT ALSO A REMINDER OF THE PHYSICAL
DISTANCE SEPARATING US FROM OUR EUROPEAN HERITAGE.
I WAS ACUTELY CONSCIOUS OF THIS ON MY VISIT TO
GREECE AND OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES EARLIER THIS YEAR.
IT MADE ME ALL THE HAPPIER FOR MY GOVERNMENT'S MOVE
TO INTRODUCE PORTABILITY OF PENSIONS OVERSEAS, AT
PRESENT AUSTRALIAN SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS ARE GOING
TO 571 AGED PENSIONERS LIVING IN GREECE, 316 INVALID
PENSIONERS, 149 WIVES AND 149 WIDOWS AND 7 SUPPORTING
MOTHERS, OF THIS TOTAL OF 1,192, 484 HAD CONNECTIONS
IN NEW SOUTH WALES, MANY OF THOSE PEOPLE-WOULD BE
KNOWN TO THIS AUDIENCE. S 
AND WHO KNOWS HOW MANY OF THESE ELDERLY PEOPLE
DRAWING THE AUSTRALIAN AGE PENSION AT HOME IN GREECE
MIGHT HAVE BEEN TEMPTED TO REMAIN HERE HAD THEY BEEN
ABLE TO LOOK FORWARD TO RETIREMENT IN A PLACE LIKE
LOURANTOS VILLAGE.
I HAVE VERY MUCH PLEASE INDEED IN DECLARING OPEN
THIS LATEST VENTURE OF ST BASIL'S HOMES LOURANTOS
VILLAGE. I'AY ALL WHO COME HERE ENJOY A PEACEFUL AND
HAPPY RETIREMENT, 1
ø y o
: t 



PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST ,3
THE NEW TAX SYSTEM
SUNDAY 24 AUGUST 1975
THE PART OF THE BUDGET THAT NATURALLY INTERESTS
US MOST AS TAXPAYERS IS THAT DEALING WITH INCOME TAX
REFORM, THERE WAS SO MUCH OF IMPORTANCE IN BILL HAYDEN'S
BUDGET LAST TUESDAY NIGHT THAT THE FULL SIGNIFICANCE
OF THE TAX REFORMS MAY EASILY HAVE ESCAPED YOU,
IT'S WORTH REFLECTING FOR A MOMENT ON JUST WHAT THESE
CHANGES MEAN, I HAVE NO HESITATION IN SAYING THAT BY
MEANS OF-THIS BUDGET WE HAVE BROUGHT ABOUT THE MOST
SWEEPING REFORM OF-THE TAX SYSTEM EVER MADE.
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT TAX REFORM COULD PROVE ONE OF
ThE REALLY AACEHAIET-' YEMENTS OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
IN THE LCO'G RUN, AND FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF JUSTICE
AND FAIRNESS FOR THOSE MOST IN NEEDS PERHAPS EVEN MORE
IMPORTANT 7-. AN iEDIBANK, 1,12 I
.1 
2,
PRACTICALLY EVERY TAXPAYER IN AUSTRALIA WILL
BENEFIT FROM THE NEW SYSTEM. FAMILIES AT THE LOWER END
OF THE INCOME SCALE WILL HAVE MOST TO GAIN, BUT EVEN HIGHLY
PAID PEOPLE WILL BENEFIT AS WELL, THOSE WHO WORK HARDER TO
EARN HIGHER SALARIES OR EXTRA OVERTIME WON'T BE PENALISED FOR
THEIR EFFORT, THE MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS WILL PAY LESS TAX;
HALF A MILLION AUSTRALIANS WILL PAY NO INCOME TAX AT ALL.
MANY PEOPLE WON'T HAVE TO BOTHER ABOUT FILLING IN TAX
RETURNS, AND FOR EVERYONE ELSE THE TAX RETURN WILL BE MUCH
SIMPLER AND EASIER TO FILL. IN. THE WHOLE PROCESS WILL BE
FAIR AND JUST TO EVERYONE,
IF ALL THIS SOUNDS TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE, LET
ME EXPLAIN JUST HOW WE HAVE TACKLED THIS PROBLEM AND HOW
WE ARE SOL', : T T HE BASIC TROUBLE WITH THE TAX SYSTEM
IS THIS: 1~ HAS BEEN SEARED MORE OR LESS TO CONDITIONS
APPLYING 3 CR MORE YEARS AGO, IN 1950, SAY, A MAN EARNING
SIX THOUSAD CtLLARS A YEAR 3000 POUNDS WAS VERY HIGHLY
PAID; HE ~ 1 THE TOP INCOME BRACKET, THE TAX HE PAID THEN
WAS APPROPRIATE = CR A HIGH INCOME EARNER, BUT TODAY OF COURSE,
6000 DOLLARS PUTS A NAN IN THE TOP INCOME BRACKET;
YET THE ' AN C'N THAT :. CCME IS STILL BEING TAXED AS IF HE WERE
WEALTHY, . T: E .1 COE TAX SCALES JUST HAVEN'T BEEN ADJUSTED TO
TAKE ACCOUNT THE CHANGE IN MONEY VALUES AND OTHER CIRCUMSTANCES.
PEOPLE ON L3 CR MEDIUM INCOMES WHO WORKED HARDER TO EARN MORE
MONEY FOUND : ICST OF THE EXTRA MONEY GOING IN TAX. / 3 
IT WAS THE SAME WITH REGULAR WAGE INCREASES THROUGH
AWARDS ON BASIC WAGE ADJUSTMENFS, MOST OF THEM
WENT IN TAX. IN FACT, IN ROUND FIGURES, EVERY ONE
PER CENT INCREASE IN EARNINGS LED TO A TWO PER CENT
INCREASE IN TAX RECEIPTS FOR THE GOVERNMENT, THIS
WAS CONVENIENT FOR THE GOVERNMENT BUT IT WAS PRETTY
TOUGH ON THE TAXPAYER, EVEN GOVERNMENTS THAT HAD FAR
LESS NEED OF PUBLIC REVENUE THAN WE DO WERE REMARKABLY
RELUCTANT TO CHANGE. THE SYSTEM,
THE OLD SYSTEM HAS BEEN DREADFULLY UNFAIR IN
ANOTHER W4AY, IT RELIED ON AN UNJUST SYSTEM OF
CONCESSIONAL DEDUCTIONS, -I WONDER HOW MANY OF YOU,
WHEN YOU .' EE CLAIMING YOUR SO-CALLED TAX CONCESSIONS
T-E VERY SJ-G6ES3TS O PATRONISING THE SYSTEM WAS
STOPPED TO T--INK THAT PEOPLE BETTER OFF THAN YOU WERE
GETTING MUC--IGHER CONCESSIONS FOR THE SAME EXPENSE.
PUT IT THIS WE ALL HAVE TO SPEND MONEY ON EDUCATION
EXPENSES, PL? E~ NUAT. I: AND OTHER THINGS; UNTIL
. ED3ANK., WE -AD TO SPEND MONEY ON HEALTH INSURANCE.
SCME OF US ST-' 30 DEPENDING ON WHAT STATE WE LIVE. IN,
BUT DEDUCT:' S FC? T. HESE EXPENSES UNDER THE OLD SYSTEM
, WERE WORTH MORE TO THE WEALTHY MAN THAN PEOPLE ON
LOWER INCOES. 3 QUITE LITERALLY, THE WEALTHY MAN WAS
PAYING LESS FC-THE THINGS WE ALL NEED, I OFTEN QUOTE
THE COMPARISGO BETWEEN ME AND MY CAR DRIVER. I EARN
PERHAPS FIVE TIMES AS MUCH AS MY DRIVER; WE BOTH NEED
INSURANCE AND WE HAVE BOTH HAD TO PAY EDUCATION EXPENSES
FOR OUR CHILDREN, WHY SHOULD I PAY, IN EFFECT, MUCH LESS
FOR THESE THINGS THAN MY DRIVER? / 4 
THE WHOLE SYSTEM WAS GROSSLY UNFAIR, THE
WEALTHIER A MAN BECAME THE MORE HE WAS SUBSIDISED
BY POORER Y-t R TAXPAYERS. THE WEALTHIER A MAN
BECAME. THE ; KQRE HE WAS ABLE) AND THE MORE HE WAS LIKELY,
TO SPEND MONEY ON BIG INSURANCE POLICIES OR EXPENSIVE
EDUCATION FOR HIS CHILDREN, THE LIBERALS ACTUALLY
ENCOURAGED THIS SYSTEM, THEY MADE A VIRTUE OF
INCREASING THE ALLOWABLE CONCESSIONS, KNOWING THAT
THE PEOPLE TO BENEFIT WOULD BE THE RICH, AND THAT
POORER PEOPLE WOULD BE SUBSIDISING THEM, MR FRASER STILL
MOUTHS SLOGANS ABOUT FREEDOM TO SPEND OUR MONEY AS WE WISH,
OF COURSE WE SHOULD BE FREE TO SPEND OUR MONEY AS WE
WISH1 BUT WHAT REAL FREEDOM DOES A MAN HAVE TO SPEND HIS
MONEY WHEN A LOT OF IT HAS TO GO IN HEALTH, SUPERANNUATION,
HIGH TRANSPORT CHARGES AND EDUCATION EXPENSES
BECAUSE THE PU3LIC SERVICES PROVIDED IN THESE AREAS ARE
POOR OR HON-EXISTENT? THE OLD TAX SYSTEM WAS DEVELOPED
AND EXPANDED UNDER LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENTS
THOSE WERE THE DAYS WHEN YEARS OF NEGLECT BY THESE
GOVERNMENTS ENSURED THAT DECENT HEALTH CARE AND EDUCATION
WENT ONLY TO THOSE WHO COULD AFFORD IT, 
OUR SYSTEM WILL BE COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
AND MUCH SIMPLER AND FAIRER, YOU WILL DEDUCT YOUR
UNION DUES AND YOUR INTEREST CHARGES FOR HOME LOANS
FROM YOUR TOTAL INCOME ( AND I REMIND YOU THAT THOSE
HOME LOAN DEDUCTIONS ARE ANOTHER INNOVATION BY THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT)., THEN YOU DEDUCT FROM THE TAX
PAYABLE ON YOUR INCOME A FLAT AMOUNT A REBATE FOR
DEPENDENTS, EDUCATION, INSURANCE AND SO ON,. THE CRUCIAL
POINT IS THAT EVERYBODY'S ALLOWANCE FOR DEPENDENTS AND
EXPENSES WILL HAVE EXACTLY THE SAME-VALUE. THE
DEDUCTIONS FOR A WEALTHY MAN WILL BE WORTH EXACTLY
0 THE SAME AS THE DEDUCTIONS FOR ANYONE ELSE, IN THE
STUDIES EDRTOOK ON THE OLD TAX SYSTEM WE FOUND
THAT . OS~ TAXAY"' ERS WITH DEPENDENTS CLAIMED AROUND
) 150IN . E: LCTIONS, 80 WE HAVE ADOPTED THE SIMPLE
TACTIC OF GI: ING EVERYONE A REBATE EQUIVALENT TO THAT
AVERAGE DEDUCT: ON, THIS MEANS THAT ONLY THOSE PEOPLE
' HO ARE GOING CLAIM DEDUCTIONS WORTH MORE THAN
$ 13550 WILL BE *. SKED TO FILL IN THE DETAILS ON THEIR
TSA X FORMS. 
I
FOR YEARS THE LIBERALS KEPT PROMISING* TO
REFORM THE TAX SYSTEM BUT THEY NEVER DID ANYTHING ABOUT
1T, SiR ROBER-r MENZIES PROMISLED IT IN 194,9 AND
AGAIN IN 1958. THREE WEEKS AGO EVEN MIR FRASER WAS
PROMISING SOME KIND OF REFORM. ALL THE LIBERALS
DID WAS INCREASE ALLOWABLE DEDUCTIONS AND MAKE THE
SYSTEM MORE UNFAIR, IT HAS TAKEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT
TO GET THE SYSTEM CHANGED, IN ONE SWEEP, WE ARE
PUTTING AN EXTRA $ 5 A WEEK AND iNORE IN THE PAY
PACKETS OF AROUND THREE MILLlo . jAL ISTRALIANS ON AVERAGE
INCOMES; WE ARE ELIMINATING TAX ALTOGETHER FOR HALF.
A MILLION AUSTRALIANS ON THE LONEST INCOMES; VIE ARE
GIVING TAX RELIEF TO 100,000 loilli-JOWS AND UNMARRI ED
S LIP? -: iG ' CN, AND Wc: ARE EAS I NG THE
p 7I N G ' TAX 7=_ S ON ililDDLE-INCOME: EARNERS WHICH HAVE
DISCOURAGED ARNING MORE. ' 4E HAVE SIMPLIFIED
THIE ' vIHOLE Clu',' 3ERSCME BUSINESS OF FLLING IN
CO, 1.1 D C A TE_ Di S COUNT IT A GREAT ACHIEVEMENT THAT
IN BRI," IGING JDC". 4-N B U D GET TO TACKLE INFLATION WE HAVE
TO R 5: = 0 D-t 1-H E TA X SYSTEM SO RIADICALLY
NANAGED ND
CR EAT E TH E CC11ND T-ONS FOR A F1A1% IRER AND MORLE JUST SOCIETY. 



SPEECH BY THE HRilf 1EfINIiSTERT
TUE HON, E. G. WHITLAN,
FOR THE ONEThING OF THE 18THl BIENNIAL CONFEREINCE
OF THE LIBRARY ASSOCIATIo~ OF AUISTRALIA
H1E L3 OUIN~ E. 24 AUGUST 1975
ICONGRATUL ATE . THE ORGAN ISERS OF THIS CONFERENJCE O N
BRI-NGING TOGET,-]"-HER SUCH A R EP RE SETAT I~ A ND. D IST INGUISHED
* GATHERING OF LIB3RARIAiNS, ADM' N1STRATORS AIND AL L T HOSE CONCERN'ED
W IT H T iiE 2/ LOPMENTf OF LIBRARIES IN LlUS RA L IA, THE_ SIZE AND
SCOPAES SOCr" IT TY, O U% HCEF RV IGOUNRC P OFA R-EY OUER0V IDENCFES IN0C F THE NS TRETNH'\ EG THP U-OBFL IC'( O'SUR
F TE OLEr Or: IRAV IN A FREE SOCIETY,
I P3i-YEAPS THERE HAS B EN A MIARKED CHANGE IN
CTFH E 1ZEDUi. T2VV3 LrCG I CH PEDCE PTIO TO 0OFP R'OyIVHAIDTE , A LII1NBE RAN RO Y LOSNHGOEURL. D THBEIN KA N" OD F-W LHIABTR ASRO RIETS
AS CQLt rCER3 j5O OOKS, ITI O OUUHTHE t'IATERIAL'
O1R1 C S OF A L T D THAT COUNT 7IMPORTANT AS. THESE. ARE
BU: TH Ci 0UR ESARE USED AND HOGW T HE Y ARE M1ADE AVAILABLE
TO0 THOS E lWHO2-N' ED THEi', THE LIBRARY' S FUNCTION IS TO PROV/ IDE
INFO, A-f I' TB'ARIAN IS FUNCTIONI IS TO ORGANISE THAT
INFORNATIGN AND ENSURE" THAT EVERYONE HAS ACCESS TO IT, 
IHOPE THIS WI LL NOT SOUND TOO ELITIST A V/ I EWf ORA
T HE M E TOO R EMOT E FIROM YOUR P RLES ENT P R EOCC UP AT I OINS TH E
FREEDC; TO DtE iGNORANT MlAY WELL BE -AS PRECIOUS AS* THE RIGHT
TO N~ r4. DO3THOWEVER, IF LIBRARIANS WOULD ACCEPT THAT.
CCE R A' 0h NOT. IMPLY MAKE THE POINT THAT WHEREA
O3, CSRE A FUNCTION OF LITERACY.', THEY ARE RIGHTLY
S . A 3 A FU iC T nIN IF LI1B E RT Y. NOTICED THAT IN YOUR. SUBMISSION
TO THE C OMI 4T T F: G F UIRY INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES AN INQUIRY
ISHt-: AL DEAL 111T! H L'TER YOU QUOTED SOME WORDS OF ONE OF MY
FO3. ADVITSSEL LSY., L YOR OF COURSE, THE DISCIPLES QUOTE THE
:~ SERBUTIN HISCAS IQUOTE THE DISCIPLE JIM SPIGELMAN
u 1972 AT 5O) TH SUMIMER SCHOOL. OF FEASRLA
NS TlTU TE 0OF P OL TIL S C I ENC E
" REE-CM~ OF INFORIMATION IS AS VITAL TO DEMOCRACY
AS FREEDOM OF SPEECH, YET THE ORFHA EER
ATTRACTED THE SAME DEGREE OF ATTENTION OR
E. M'OTIOPN AS THE LATTER," .1/ 3 S 0
THESE FUNCTIONS ARE BASIC TO ANY CONCEPT OF T-RUE
D EOCAY LBARE THAT ARE FREE, OPEN AND ACCESSIBLEAE
JUST MUCH BASTIONS OF FREEDOM AS UNIVERSITIES OR
PARLIAMENTS. FREEDOM OF SPEECH IS A PRECIOUS FREEDOM, BUT
IT HAS A i U1CH HIGHER VALUE,, A MUCH RICHER SIGNIFICANCE, VIHEN
FREEDOil OF INFORMATION GOES WITH IT. EVERYONE HAS TfHE RIGHT
TO AN ILL-INFORM" ED1 OPINION, BUT ONLY THROUGH ACCESS TO
INFORMATION CAIN THE FIR EEDO0M TO EXPRESS OPINIONS HAVE GENUINE
VALUE, ONLY' THROUGH ACCESS TO liNFORMATION C AN FREEDOM OF
C D C f' -0 D H V D1 I % A N rT N1 A T) CM r ' D A T r Q C zTV 
IT IS ONLY LATELY THAT GOVERIiIENTS HAl~ VE COME
TO RECOGNISE THE FORCE OF THIS ARGUMIENT3 MENT1INl 1f
HERE BECAUSE IT IS RELEVANT INOT ONLY TO0 THE WORK OF YOUR
PROFESSION BUT TO ONE OFr TIHE BASIC POLICIES OF NiY
Go0V EE isi'l 1rT. THE RE I S NO0 PART OF OURI) PHILOSOPHY; NlO
PHRASE IN THE CURRENT POLITICAL VOCABULARY, SO POORLY
UNDERSTOOD AS " OPEN GoVERMEii", IT IS REGULARLY QUOTED
BACK TO ' E BY JOURNALISTS 14E.. E MINISTERS REFUSE
TO ANSWER A QUESTION AT A PRESS CONFEER-JCE OR REFUSE
TO DIVULGE THE DETAILS OF A CABINET DECISION. I SUPPOSE
IT CAN BE ARGUED THAT IN AN iD, E' AL SOCIETY THERE W4OULD
BE NO SECRETS OF ANY KIND. FOR ALL THE PROGRESS WIE
H AV. E M ADE SI iC E D EC EM 3ER 1972; 1 CONFESS THFAT THE IDEAL
SOCTY A ETT ATTA INED, SO WE SHALL HAVE TO
~. CETsoMECi= TALT I N PUBLIC AFFAIRS, By
QE G HOW EVER, WE INTEND SOME: THING DEEPER
A iD MNORE IllDPORTANT THAN CON" TEM?"', OR'AiNE'-OUS DISCLOSUREl";
MEAN TIE WIDE . ST_ POSSIBLE ACCESS TO REPORTS, TO
STATI1STICS, TO DC*% Jo=., TS, TO THE RESULTS OF OFFICIAL
CUlU TRIESJ TO FACTS, TO RECORDS OF EVERY KIND, WE PlEAN
SOMEITHING NO R E PEi OUS GOVE~ rNME'l\ lNTS FREQUENTLY AVOIDED
RESPONSI3I1LITY FOR CERTAIN THINGS BY SAYING THEY WERE
3. A T E PMA T TCERD\ S INEVITABLY THIS IMAT1HAT VERY
LI TTLE EXPERT PUBLI C SERV/ ICE ADVICE OR INFORMATOWA
AV. AILA8LE ON THESE SUBJECTS TO THE NATIONAL GOVERNIMENT.
BY BRINGING TOGETHER THE BEST TALENTS IN THESE AREAS.,
B_ 3Y OPEN'IN,\ G U. P THE WIDEST RA NG E OF AD'/ ICE. 1 AND BY MAKING
THAT ADVICE AVAILABLE TO ALL. WE HAVE VASTLY WIDENED
THE VOLUME OF PUBLIC INFORtMATION, LIBRARIES AND
LIBRARIANS HAVE HELPED IN THAT PROCESS, ~ i S I . dll 
3A.
OPEN GO-VERNMENTS t" EANS FREEDOM 0O: INFORMATION. AS
SURELY AS THE PARLIAMENT ENSHRINES., DEFENDS AND
MAINTAINS THE-FREEDOM OF SPEECH.) THE LIBRARY ENSHRINES,
D EFE N DS AND 11A IN TA. NS T HE FREDOM 0OFINFORMATION1 
IN MlY POLICY SPEECH INf, 197 2 1 DEF-INi-D LABOR'S BASIC
O3J'ECTIVES IN THESE TERMS
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY i
TO INVOLVE-THE PEOPLE OF IN THE DECISIONMAKING
PROCESSES
TO LIBERATE THE TALENTS AND UPLIFT THE HORI1ZONS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
QUITE CLEARLY THE FULFILMENT OF THESE OBJECTIVES.
DEPNDSON THE CULTIV'[' ATION OFr A ORE AWARE A" ND BETTERIOME
ELETORTEII~ MLR PPOTUNTIS IN EDUCATION ARE A LONG-TR
A\ SPE-CT OF ' THIS PROCESS, IN TH E SHORT TERM IT IS CLEAR THAT.
BETTE'R LIRrY AND ' INFORMATION SERVICES, PROPERLY ORGAN ISED
; DEQUATEL Y F; ED CN RAISE THE-LEVELS OF-KfNO!' llEDGc
~ IC ANiDL r-SOP H ISTICATION IN SOCIETY, IF PEOPLE ARE
TO 4 E I' LV. L) iU' T&gt; CISION-MAKING PROCESS THEY MUST KiNOWi
L~ 4 ~ CTSIONSARE ANDu HOW POLITICAL ISSUES CAN B3E JUDGED,
LI RE S M-ItU T IN THIS PROCESS, AN INFORMED COMMUNITY
ETTER EQU IPPED TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DEMOCRATIC PROCESS#
T " ILE RA. E~~ TAI EIITS ANT) UPLIFT THE HORIZOS O H
T AN PEO PLE iT S ES SE NT IAL THA T PLE BE AWARE OF. THE*
T~ ORU1II~, THE PO'NS3! 3ILITJES FOR B0ETTERMENT AND PEFOP " MJ
THE FAIITYOF CHNETHAT COMES FROM A GRASP OF CURRENT
A. FAIRS I. N'FOROMED AND ENRICHED BY A KNO' 4' _ EDGE OF HISTORY, HERE
AGA"% il THE LIBRARY, AS TiHE PRIMARY SOURCE OF INFORMATION, HAS A
CENTPAL ROLE TO PLAY, 
FORp A RIEFORMING GoVElINiNENT THEREAi OBSVIOUS
DEFICITENC! VS IN THE LIB3RARY SERVICES POVIDED IN AUSTRALIA,,
THEIil hSoT-OBIOUS DEFICI ENCY LIES IN THEC" IN'EQUALITY OF THEIR
STANDARDS, STANDARDS VARY SIGNIFICANTLY FROM STATE TO STATE
ANDW TI SFA1ES AND WITHIN CITIES, IAM THINKING PARTICULARLY(
HERE OF PUBLIC. LIBRARIES.. WITH NOTABLE EXCEPTIONS PUBLIC.
LIBRARY STANDARDS IN AUSTRALIA ARE LOWER THAN THOSE I1N MAM4Y
OTHER OUTESOF COMPARATIVE ', iEALTH, PUBLIC LIBRARIES R
THE BASIC RESPONSIBSILITY OF LOCAjL GO'IERN IENT AUTHORITIES0
WHC = EC:-' TIVE ASSISTANCE FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS, GENERALLY
SP EAKI fG THAT ASSI1STAN*) CE HAS BENINADEQUATE, LOCAL. AUTHORITIES
HAVE THEIR---T-o 001 4N F INANCI AL PROBE) 13 r-ND THIE RESOURCES ALLOCATED 0
TO DUBLC Ll DRAR ZS HAVE USUALLY HAD A LOW PRITORITY,
ACY.~ D~ ThT HESSTOA TES THE SCALE OF: ASSITACE: TO
_ l ' TD RE C A 3LEi NARKEDLY INCREASED INi RECENT YEARS.,
BU YS CLEr A R&gt; A S7-rRIES OF A" THOR1TATIVE RE P ORT S OVER
YEARS~ A OVERALL STANDARDS IN PUBLIC: LIBRARIES
AR U TOO LO4, CETAINLY THE TASK OF PROVIDING EFFICIENT
? U3L LLI 3DR' SE S i MUCH MOPC) E DIFFICULT IN THINLY
." ATED RURAL AESTHAN IT IS IN COiMlPACT CENTRES OF
9LTI~ oiIN ClUES IANTO) W ! 4S. THERE IS NO REASON WHY THE
CITIZCEF NS~ SOULiS D~ HAVE ACICESS TO BETTER LIBRA! t
S ER V CE S 6G EATFER F EE iDC' 1 OF I IFO0R AT 1IN' THFIANI T HE CITIZENS
oi ECHUCttfA oR GrEELOCNG. 
ONlE OF THE GOV/ ERNMENT'S CENTRAL AMBITIONS HAS BEEN
TO REDRESS I NEQUALIT IES BETWEEN REG IONS, BETWEEN CITY DWELLERS
AND RESIDENTS OF COUNTRY TOWNS, 11WEB 3ELIEVE THAT A PERSON'S~
STANDARD OF LIVING SHOULD NOT DEPEND ON WRE HE LIVES Of!
IS OBLIGED TO LIVE: WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMiBER OF STEPS TO
ALLEVIATE THE FINANCIAL POSITION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES AND PROVIDE MORE ADEQUATE AND UNIFORM PUBLIC
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVICES. FOR EXAMPLE, W/ E HAVE.
AMENDED THE GRANTS COMMISSION LEGISLATION TO ENABLE THE
COINMISSION TO RCOMN;. END-GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT 0444
T 2AT'~ LREDRESS SREGIONAL INEQUALITIES IN THE SAMiWAY THAT
* INEQUALITIES 2ETWEEN STATES HAVE BEEN ALLEVIATED. LAST'
FINANCIA'' L YEA $ 56 i'lILLION W/ AS ALLOCATED TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Bouvs; IN i975-76 ALMOST $ 80 MILLION WILL BE GRANTED
7 ZZE GRANTS S-V. ULD DO MUCH TO IMPROVE LOCAL LIBRARIES:
I~ * ADITIO 1, 7HROUGH THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT, THE GOVERMMENT IS DIRECTLY ASSISTING' SOME
LOCAL AUTHORITIES IN THE PROVIJSION OF LIBRARY SERVICES. 
InM, A. RC H THIS YEAR I ANN-OUNCED THE APPOIN.\ TMENT
OF A WIIDE-RANGING COMMl" 1ITTEE OF INQUWIRY INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
IN AUSTRA LI A. [ HERE HAS BEE. N A FULL NT ENCOURAGING RESPONSIE
TO THIS iNQUIRuuY THE CONITTEEJ UNDER THE CHAIRMAiNSHIP OF
. LA.
HIP. R HORTON, HAS ALREADY HELD 13PUBLIC HEARINGS IN THE
STATE CAPITALS, CANBERRA AND DARWIN AND 11' MOIRE HEARINGS IN
REGONL CNTES. IT HAS RECEIVE~ D SOME 350 WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS,
INCLUDING AN4 EXTENSIV/ E AND VALUABLE SUBM" ISSION FROjM YOUR OW4N
ASSOCIATION, WHTWE. ARE SEEKING ARE NOT JUST MORE BOOKS OR
BETTER BUILDINGS BUT A COMPIREHEINSIVE NAT IONAL I NFORII
POLICY, THi.: E IS A L N-TERiMy il D TO C-ORDINATE ANDj.
RATIONALISE ALL L IB R ARY SERVICES, THE RE I S SOI'ME IRONY I N THE
F A CT T HAT C H LD REN OFTEN HAVE A" CCESS TO BETTER LIBRARY SERVICES
* r:~ THEIR PAREllNTS. IN ANY ARE'S THE ONLY LIBRARIES OP ANY*
DID ARE THOSE IN SCHOliOLS. I SOM AEAS THERE I S INOT E VEIN
A S.-Li" OI_ LIBRA" IRY WfiORTHYi OF THE COINSIDERABLE
AUSTlRALliA_. N GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE H,-AS GOIN'E TO SCHOOL AND
TERTIAIRY EDUCATIONAL LIBRARIES BU. LT VERY LITTLE TO PUBLIC
L 1BRA R I ES C LE-A RL Y THERE IS A NEED TO CO-O1RDINATE THE FUNDING
OF SCHOO-3L A111 ' 3 i~ i:' AL LIB-2RARY SEDVICES 11,1 TlHE PE-ST RESULTS ARE'
To PPE ACHIEVED, AGAIN, THE WORK OF CATALOGUlING LliBRARY
MlATER IAL., COMPI LIN.' G B IBLI OGRAPH IES AND REFERENCE SYSTEMS,'-is
FREQUEINTLY DUI-PLICATED IN MIANY LIBRARIESI THERE IS A NEED TO
EXAMINE 1WHETHER A CENTRAL CATALOGUING AND IN1DEXING SERVICE IS'
cEOFR IIN8 TEEAE THE SORT OF QUESTIONS THAT NUST BE
ANSWERED IN EVALUATING THE EFFrECTI'/ ENESS OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES3
AND DETERMINING THE B'EST M" IETHOD OF FUNDING THEM, 
_ 78-* ISHOUL D MENTION A FURTHER INITIATIVE INi THE
DIEVELOPMEN-r OF" A NATIOiNAL INFORH1ATION SERVICE, EARLY LAST
YEAR rH~ E GOVEiRNMEiNT APIPOINTED AN INTER-DEPART'MENTAL COMMITTEE
TO CONSIDER THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN AUSTRALIAN LIBRARY BASED
INFORMATION SERVICES THIS AROSE FROM A PROPOSAL MADE BY ' THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY. IN THE BUDGET SPEECH LAST YEAR THE THEN
TREASURER ANNOUNCED AN ALLOCATIO'N OF-MORE THAN $ 1MILLION
FOR A FEASI3ALITY. STUDY INTO THE ESALSHETOFSC
S ERIIC E A STAND ING I NTER-DEPARTMENTAL CO" M I TTEE HAS BEEN
A PPOINTED TO SUPERVISE THE SE STUDI ES, ITS INQUIRIES ARE
PROCEEDING. ~ ONE EXAiMIN ES THE RECORD OF TH Is GOVERNMENT ONE_
WILL SEE A BiROAD AND COSSETTEE-AN EMPHASIS ON THE
S F&gt; RED OF ICATOON WIDER ACrCE SS TO INFORMATION), AND
W IT HIN THIS CONTEXNT), A GIENERAL CULTIVATION OF LITERACY AND
C ULT UR E. DO NOT P. REI-TEND, 4. THAT EV/ ERYTHINIG IN THIS AREA
BEARS DIRECTLY CN TWHE WOR. K OF LIBRARIANS) BUT OUR SUPPORT
FOR LIBRARIES -A SUPPORT SPECIFICALLY PROCLAIMED IN MY
POLICY SPE EC H IN, 1,97 2 IS-P ART OF THIS PROCESS. [ HERE IS.)
FFO R EX A MP A CLEAR LINK TO BE SEENl BETWEEN OUR CONCERN FOR
THE MEDIA AND CUP, CONCERN FOR FREEDOM OtF INFORMATIO'N. a89/ 
IEVIDENCE OUR INITIAT IVES IN ACCCESS RADIO AND ETHN IC RADIO
STATIONS, INi OUR EXPANSION OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES AT
ALL LEVELS, IN THPE PRIMACY WE GIVE? TO PARLIAM~ ENT AS THE
HIHST FOGRUPI OF OPEN POLITICAL DEPBATEJ NTH STBISMN
OFITE AUSTRALIA CONCIL WITH ITS LITERATURE BOARD
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ENCOURAGEMT o F /-USTRALIAN W'RITING,
IN OUR SUPPORT FOR AUTHORS THROUGH THME GRANTING OF A PUBLIC
LEIND ING RI GHT, IN THE LIBERALISATION OF CIENSORSHIP, IN OURGENERIFAL
FUlP DIN.' G OF THE ARTS IOUCONCERNl FOR THE
PRESERVATION OF NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND THE NATIONAL ESTATE-,
ISUG-GEST TH7A 1T THRO0U GH AL TH'E SE POLICY INITIATIVES THERE
RUNS A CONSI STEN T THR" AD OF ENL IGHTENMENT, IT IS CERTAINLY
M'Y HOPE THA. T GOV/ ERMMEN-TS OF WVHATEVER POLITICAL COLOUR WILL
BE JUDGED AS. &gt; IUCHL BY TEIlR PO L ICrIES I N THESE AREAS AS BY
THI PCITs 7\ -': IrCE PRACTICAL-A-ND CONIVEflTIONAL-FIEL DS,
IT1 HR HA U C-PAiMN T TH HIGHEST V'ALUES OF
D -RACY AjND CIVIIZATION IS REVEALED, las/ lu hf 
10
THE FUTURE OF YOUR PROFESSION IS FULL OF PROMISE
OF CHANGE AND INNOVATION. MODERN COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY AND
METHODS OF DATA PROCESSING OFFER REMARKABLE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR MORE EFFICIENT LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVICES,
THERE IS A MUCH GREATER AWARENESS AMONG GOVERNMENTS AND
AMONG THE PUBLIC OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LIBRARY IN
BROADENING OUR KNOWLEDGE, ELEVATING OUR STANDARDS OF TASTE
AND CULTURE AND SAFEGUARDING OUR DEMOCRATIC VALUES, THE
LIBRARY ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA HAS A GREAT ROLE TO PLAY
IN FURTHERING THIS PROCESS, IN IMPROVING THE STATUS OF
YOUR PROFESSION, IN PROMOTING, ESTABLISHING AND IMPROVING
LIBRARY SERVICES IN SHORT, IN FULFILLING THE NOBLE
OBJECTIVES OF YOUR CHARTER. w 



Press Statement No. 547
August 1975
NAMIBIA DAY
Acting Foreign Minister, Mr Whitlam, reiterated
today Australia's moral and material support to the people
of Namibia. In a statement to mark Namibia Day on 26 August the
Acting Minister said that Namibia Day had been designatdd by
the United Nations at the General Assembly session in 1973 as
an annual reminder of the illegal jurisdiction of South Africa
over the territory. The Australian Government, he said, was particularly
concerned about the deprivation of basic human rights and the
exte-iision of the policy of apartheid and the homelands ( Bantustans)
policy into the territory by South Africa.
The Minister recalled that in 1966 Australia had
supported a resolution by the United Nations General Assembly
terminating South-Africa's mandate, and in 1972, 1973 and 1974
had supported resolutions of the General Assembly and Security
Council reaffirming the decision of the International Court of
Justice that South Africa should withdraw from Namibia.
In May 1974 the Australian Government had protested to
South Africa over the mass arrests of members and supporters of
the indigenous political organisation, SWAPO ( South West African
Peoples Organisation), which it regarded as a denial of legitimate
political rights.
Australia's concern for the people of Namibia was
further demonstrated on 1 January 1975 when it became a member
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, a body established by
the United Nations General Assembly to administer the territory
until it achieves independence. / 2 
2.
The Australian Government had given material assistance
to Namibia by contributing $ 10,000 to the United Nations Fund
for Namibia in 1974/ 75 and would be contributing $ 25,000 in
1975/ 76. Mr Whitlam said that the swiftly changing situation
in Africa, due to the independence of former colonial territories,
as well as the increasing activity of various national liberation
groups, had given new impetus to the struggle by the peoples of
southern Africa for self-determination and independence.
The Australian Government called on the Government of
South Africa to recognise its international obligations, to
relinquish its illegal jurisdiction over Namibia and to facilitate
the transition to majority rule and independence.
The longer the problem of Namibia remained unsolved,
said Mr Whitlam, the less was the chance that the final solution
would be achieved peacefully.
CA-~~ 3RR, A. C. T. r 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON E. G. WHITLAM4, M. P.,
AT THE WOMEN AND HEALTH CONFERENCE,.
BRISBANE, 25 August 1975
one of the regular activities of the United
Nations is to designate a" Ayear to focus attention upon
a particular topic, to create an awareness of a*
particular problem. With this end in view the United
Nations proclaimed 1975 as International Wlomens Year
in order to recognise the important contribution which
women have made to the social, political, economic and
cultural life of their countries and to intensify the
action required to advance the status of women.
For the first time an Australian government
has * committed itself to an extensive program designed
to achieve the aims of the year. Our reasons for so*
doing are two-fold. First, the government recognises
the importance of the United Nations and its activities,'
in the area of human-rights as well as in other areas.
Secondly, the government has shown its awareness of
the problems which face women in our society today and
its commitment to attempting to overcome them.
Within the context of the United Nations
objectives for the year equality, development and
peace Australia has formulated three overall objectives
for our International Women's Year program. The most
important of these objectives is the need to reassess
and change those attitudes towards women which are
harmful and limiting. Together with this, the areas of
discrimination against women in our society must be
identified and a concerted att-empt made to overcome them.
It is also intended that the year be a joyous one emphasising
the creative and positive in women.
It has been of basic concern to us that in " the
course of this year we reach most if not all women in
Australia. There are certain areas which affect, or
potentially affect, every girl and woman in our society,.
whatever her education, her cultural background, her
economic status, her beliefs, her occupation or her way
of life. The health of women is clearly one of the most
impbortant of these areas and the Australian National
Advisory Committee for the year has given it high priority.
Primary emphasis has been-placed on the need to give
women a better understanding of their bodies and of the
many diseases and disorders from which women suffer at one
time or another in their lives. Research in this area
is quite inadequate and until recently no attempt had
been made by governments to provide for these needs. 
-2-
A' great deal more needs to be known about the health
of women, the causes of their health problems, and the
correct treatment for them.
Health conferences are a regular feature of
the Australian scene but this is the first conference in
Australia, and probably in the world, which has dealt
exclusively with women's health.
Health conferences are normally restricted to
professional people and when they do involve " nonprofessiondls"
they are restricted to one particular
aspect of health. This conference is being attendedby
people with widely varying backgrounds who have
themselves decided the program's contents. This is
yet another innovative and most important feature of
the conference. It is obvious from the response to this
conference that many people are concerned about women' s
health needs in our changing society and many women
are themselves becoming increasingly concerned that
these needs be seriously and adequately considered.
There is much to be learnt.
It is appropriate for me to pay tribute to the
Department of Health which in conjunction with the
National Advisory Committee has organized this conference
as its special project for the year. Each government
department and agency was asked to develop a program and
initiate special activities during 1975. The Institute
of Criminology, for example, also in'conjunction with.
the National Advisory Committee has already held two
seminars, one on women as victims of crime, and one on
the participation of women in the criminal justice system..
Further, this conference is the first of three
extremely important conferences each of which is concerned
with issues of fundamental irnoortance to each woman
and man in our society. The next conference, which
begins next week in Canberra, is on Women and Politics.
Its-aim is to create an increasing political awareness
amongst women and to give women the knowledge necessary
for them to bring about the policies, programs and other.
changes which they so justly are demanding and so truly
need. Australia is also to host a United Nations
interregional conference in November on Women, the Media
and the Arts: the Communication ofL Attitudles. This.
conrerence will loo at tne way women are portrayed .1in all..
forms of communication, be it advertising, daily papers,
art, pop songs, Jokes, or literature. We are all well
aware that too often quite unrealistic and even damaging
images of women are communicated to us through these
media and these images in turn reinforce already existing
assemptions which limit and distort the capacities,
potential and life patterns of women and girls.
In the field of women's health the most significant
initiative taken by the g-overnment has been the funding
* of the Leichhardt Women's Community Health Centre. The
aim of this centre is to meet a need expressed by women
for a health service staffed by women and directed solely
towards the special health needs of women. The proposal 
3-
put to the Minister for Health by a group of Sydney women
received immediate attention. It was endorsed by the Hospitals
and Health Services Commission and an initial grant of $ 33,000
to establish the health centre was announced by the Minister.
The centre makes an annual application for funds to continue
and expand its operations. So far it has received a total
of $ 285,735. Since then the government has funded a number of
further such centres under the Community Health Program.
Submissions for women's comtmunity health centres have been
put before the Hospitals and Health Services Commission.
The Commission has supported the establishment of
women's health centres in the belief that such action is not
only necessary in itself but would help to influence the traditi(
health care system to cope more adequately and effectively with
women's health problems. The Australian government is, as far
as I know, the only government in the world that has listened
and responded to such requests from women.
Four centres are fully operational ( Leichhardt,
Liverpool, Melbourne Perth); two centres are part-operational
( Adelaide and Newcastle) and one, the Brisbane Women's
Community Aid Association, has still to find premises.
We are also funding women's refuges and'shelters. The
concept of the refuge has grown out of a response to the
desperate plight of many women. A women's refuge is a place
for a woman, with or without children,. to go when she has nowherE
else; she may be destitute or confused or needing to escape
her existing situation.
On 19 June, the Australian Minister for Health, Dr
Everinghamn, announced a national plan aimed at helping women in
social and domestic crisis situations. Through the Community
Health Program, women's refuges in all states will receive
Australian government funds to pay-for staff, rent, renovation
of premises, equipment, food and other operating costs. Dr
Everingham said 11 organisations would receive a total of
$ 211,885 under the plan.
Refuges have been approved for immediate assistance
in Brisbane, Townsville, Glebe, Marrickville, Liverpool,
Ringwood/ Croydon, Hobart, Launceston, Adelaide and Perth.'
There are now women's refuges in every state and in
the Australian Capital Territory. Perhaps the best known in the
Sydney refuge, Elsie, the first women's refuge to open in
Australia, which has been operating since March 1974.
Many projects relating to the health and welfare of
women have also been funded by the government on the advice
of the National AdvisoryCommittee for International
Women's Year. These have included the production of a
film on cystitis, a conference on Women and Madness. a
counselling service for parents who have feelings of
violence towards their children, a research project on
the difficulties encountered by women who have responsibility
for aged parents or other dependents, a project into the 
-4-
incidence and seriousness of violence to women, the
publication of a booklet giving accurate information on the
availability of and techniques used for legal abortions
and associated contraceptive matters, research on the
particular problems of disabled women and the publication
of research into women medical graduates. We have also
invested in a television series on human reproduction
in the belief that no area of human behaviour is more
private and more sacred whilst at the same time having
ineluctable public consequences. The. insights to be gained
from such a series are not only important globally, a
. necessary precondition to a rational understanding of issues
relating to population and the future development of
societies, but are of deep importance to every individual,
for it is a woman's reproductive capacity which basically
distinguishes her from man. All funding relating to the
health of women, as in all other areas, has been within
the guidelines which I tabled in Parliament in December
last year. It is the government's policy that all persons
should have ready access to family planning advice so
that they may achieve the number and spacing of children
they desire. It is also our policy that women should
have access to all the knowledge required to enable them
to make informed decisions in this area. The broad
objective is improvement of the quality of life for both
parents and children.
The Australian government has taken steps towards
the evolution of a national policy on family planning.
In 1973/ 74 $ 300,000 was expended and in 1974/ 75 well over
million was allocated to this program. We also appointed
a consultant in family planning, Dr Stephania Seidlecky, who
had previously been on the staff of the Leichhardt Women's
Community Health Centre. Dr Seidlecky has already made
many valuable contributions to the family planning program.
There is at present no separate policy on women's
health in Australia. Women's health needs are subsumed
under policies relting to community and mental health,
rural health, aboriginal health, rehabilitation and
hospitals. There is, however, an historical exception,
namely hospitals run by women for women as well as the
more recent evolution of women's health centres and refuges.
It was an understanding of the pressing need for
health services relating directly to the health problems
of women which gave birth in 1899 to the Queen Victoria
Hospital in Melbourne and in 1922 the Rachel Forster
Hospital in Sydney, hospitals staffed by and run for
women. In recent years dissatisfaction with prevalent
attitudes to women's health problems and the paucity of
research into their causes and into their correct treatment
have led to the establishment of womens community health
centres. These centres have invariably been established
by groups of women who, having seen a desperate need
amongst women, be it for health care, shelter or rape crisis
counselling, have voluntarily set about to find a solution.
As well as helping to identify the health needs of 
of women, there is one very important question which this
conference should discuss. This is whether or not
women's health needs should be integrated -throughout the
various components of the health service system, as is
at present proposed, or whether they should be separately
considered, as is, for example, aboriginal health.
The very concept of women's health is a troublesom'e
one. it brings to mind those problems or illnesses that
are associated with women: reproduction, suburban
neurosis, valium-dependency, psychotic, disorders and so on.
The concept of men's health jars for noL only does it
not evoke any similar associations with men's illnesses,
but it is no more and no less than the concept of health
itself. In this time of change and of questioning it is
more and more frequently poiLnted out that the seemingly
infinite range of women's skills, abilities and interests
are channelled into too few and limiting roles and that
this causes a great deal of human unhappiness, misery and
distress. This is a difficult claim to gauge but some light
can be thrown on it by looking at phenomena such as
successful and attempted suicide, psychiatric conditions
and drug dependencies. Male suicide rates in Australia have remained
remarkably constant since the 1870' s, as did female rates
from 1870 to 1950, but since then the rate amongst. women
has doubled. This increase has produced an overall suicide
rate in Australia that is one of the highest in the world.
This substantial increase in the suicide rate, particularly
* amongst women over the age of 25, is linked with increased
availability of sedative preparations and subsequent
overdose. There has also been a two-or three-fold increase
in attempted suicides, with twice as many women as men
being treated for this.
Further, there is an increasing incidence of
psychiatric illness amongst women, with the two most common
psychiatric diagnoses depressive states and psychiatric.
neuroses being more common in women than men. Depressive
states are most. co-mmon in women in their thirties, and
psychiatric neuroses most co: mmron in women in their f ' ifties.
More significantly they are twice as common in marri-id as
in single women. Almost three timres as many married'as
single women show severe neurotic symptoms, twice as many
married women as married men have felt that a nervous
breakdown was impending, and many mo e women than men
experience psychological anxiety.
over 10% of women in Australia are dependent on
headache or sleeping pills. About 4 million prescriptions
for valium. are made out each year, the majority of these
prescriptions being written out for women. The abuse of
pain killers can be blamed for about 20% of kidney breakdowns
and again more women than men are so affected. 
-6-
These survey results taken together seem to indicate
clearly an increasing distress in Australian women. They
must however be interpreted cautiously for there is another
phenomenon which could well have affected these results.
It is also true in our society that men's lives are
harmed by the limited range of roles and behaviour patterns
which they are allowed. Many of these findings could be
inaccurate because men are less likely than women to admit
to psychological symptoms or to seek help from doctors,
for this could well be seen as weak or' dependent
behaviour and these are the characteristics that our
society allows to women but not to men. Men suffer from
what could well be called the Colonel Glenn syndrome.
It is clear that ours is'a society in which the
quite different expectations about what each sex should
be like and how it should behave or think have become
deeply embodied in its total culture. Anatomy has
become destiny just because anatomical differences at
birth determine which way we are taught to think or behave.
Women are assumed to be naturally emotional, dependent,
easily influenced, cunning s! nsitive, submissive, indecisive
and lacking ambition; men to be naturally logical,
aggressive, independent, objective, direct, decisive,
self confident, and unemotional. These images of women
and men are constantly, daily, reinforced within our
society. Indeed they are constantly and daily reinforced
in medical text books, health professional journals, and
the promotional materials sent by drug companies. It
has been pointed out to me that a recent English study
* of drug advertisements showed basically only two images
of women: the demure in ads for the Pill, and the harrassed
in ads for tranquillisers.
Ads for the Pill showed no women working whether
in the house or in paid employment and little indication
of their social background. Most of the women were
affluent and young ( though not too young), sensible
rather than flighty, demure rather than openly sexual.
In marked contrast the women in the ads for
tranquillisers and anti-depressants are usually older,
with children, more dishevelled and less fashionable than
in those for the Pill and mostly surrounded by piles of
dirty crockery, children, and washing. The message.. in
these ads range from: " lack of space and lack of privacy
spawn unhappy people" ( the suggested solution to this being
to prescribe a tranquilliser to remove the unhappiness)
through to: " the ulcer prone businessman is a cliche of
competitive society. Less recognised as such is the tired
and tearful housewife, resentful of her role, subject
to pressures virtually unknown in former generations"
( the suggested solution being to restore perspective by
tranquillising the disturbed brain chemistry).
Health personnel, like the rest of us, usually
deny that advertisements have any influence on their
behaviour. It may well be true that such advertisements 
do not lead these people to administer or prescribe a
particular product but none of us can fail to be
influenced by the overall message. These advertisements
reveal a consistently limited image of women. Women are
not portrayed as independent individuals, each with a
place of her own in society.
It is clear that there are limits to what governments
alone can achieve in this area. Responsibility for change
lies with all concerned. The basic problem, some of whose
manifestations I have briefly touched upon, resides in
the attitudes which individuals and institutions within our
society have towards women, their health, and their bodies
attitudes which women also have towards themselves and
their bodies. The aim of this conference must be to understand,
challenge and change these attitudes. * To do thissuccessfully
all t--hose concerned in this area must listen
and learn how women perceive the world, must understand what
forces shape their experiences both in their formative and
their more mature years, must question why the fullness
of their experiences is so difficult to accept. Wle must
cease to limit their potential, their potential to develop
into diverse human beings.
Good health care for women and effectLive delivery
of family planning and related services must be based
on adequate and sensitive research into causes and methods
o-f treatment but ultimately it can only come -from a.
correct understanding of how,, women feel about their bodies
and a correct understanding of the lives they live.
It gives me great pleasure then to welcome the
participants to this conference, both Australian and
overseas, and to declare this conference open. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA
TUESDAY, 26 AUGUST 1975
PRIME MINISTER: I thought I might say a few things about the
Budget at the outset. Tonight the Leader of the Opposition will
have an opportunity to be precise in his criticisms of the Budget.
He has made some general criticisms thatit'sa bad Budget and so
on. He has also lamented many of the changes'brought about,
particularly in the tax system. This seems to strike home very
grievously to him, but anyrate he will be able to be precise. tonight,
he will be expected to be precise.
There is another thing however that I would like to say
about the Opposition's approach to the Budget in general. Its been
entirely destructive criticismt there have been no proposals
from the Opposition, what they would have done if they were
bringing down a budget in the present domestic or international
situation; what deficit they would have had; what bounties or
subsidies or remissions or concessions they would have made;
what expenditures they would have initiated, what expenditures
they would have retrenched. It is I believe a damaging thing
in general that criticism should be'entirely negative this way.
It just doesn't help business confidence, which is quite necessary
to restore health to our economy, just to make generalised cries
of doom and criticism. At least an alternative government ought
to be precise, it should be constructive at least to that extent.
Now I should say something about one of the features
of this Budget which is quite epoch-making. It represents the
biggest change in the taxation system which has ever been made
in Aus-tralia. The present tax scales, of course, were introduced
in 1954. Particularly the general approach of the
taxation system as a result of this Budget's proposals will be
very much more just. The people who will benefit from the tax
changes are, overwhelmingly. those who have dependents~ and those
who worki. harder, or longer will not be deterred by the very
high rate of taxation which as applied to marginal incomes in
their bracketc. This will have beneficial effect in industrial
relations. People work be wanting to ask for too much from their
employers or from the Arbitration system so as tb'. overcome the
additional tax which they will have to pay. But there will be
a very great number of Australians who will pay less tax airi
there will be in fact, the number of taxpayers will be halt a
million less than is at presentthe case. A lot of people won't
have to fill in tax forms at all. And for everyone the tax forms
will be simpler So the taxation system,. particularly in substituting
rebates for concessions is a very equitable thing and very much
more efficient. Now there is an addition or two of course. The
concessions which the Budget has made for companies, in
particular the rate of company tax will be lower than it has
been for very many years and the double rates of depreciation,
which were to cut out at the end of last June, wiIl be continued
indefinitely. So, while no Budget, of course, would please
everyone, no Budget would have applied the prescriptions of all
the expertswin fact the experts don't agree among themselves,...
but this Budget does recognise/ that there are basic irreconcilables
and accept 
2.
but it makes the most of that contraint by a balanced and
imaginative combination of measures.
The next thing I wanted to say to you was to correct
quite a spate of misrepresentations that some. of your
newspapers have made. I want to make it quite plain that
none of these misrepresentations have been signed by any of
you or any of your colleagues. They seem to have come from
the top of the management in each case. I give three
instances: One was the Mirror last Wednesday in its editorial.
It responded to the Treasurer, Bill Hayden's request
that critics should be specific. And this comment was made:
" We will be specific, Uthe editor says " While we don't question
the( eventual need for an A. B. C. network of stereo FM
stations, is it really necessary for the Government to spend
a massive $ 132 million on it in this economically ailing year?"
Now the sum of $ 132 million is the sum total in the Budget
for every activity of the ABC. The amount which will be
spent on stereo FM stations: is $ 616,000 and there will be also
be $ 254,000 for the PMG. So it is rather an exaggeration.
That is it willbe$ 870,000 will be spent this financial year,
not $ 132 million. Now the next one is a relatively simpler misrepresentation.
I noticed on Friday the Melbourne Truth said: " The Prime Minister
Mr Whitlam, had a face-to-face showdown with his stormy Minister
for Minerals and Energy, Mr Rex Connor, in his office at Parliament
House yesterday." Then it says: " The Deputy Prime Minister,
Mr Crean, the Treasurer, Mr Hayden, and the Senate Leader, Senator
Wriedt, were present with Mr Whitlam during yesterdayt meeting.
Then on the basis of that story, presumably, last Friday's
Mirror said: " The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, had a face-to-face
showdown with his Minister for Minerals and Energy, Mr Connor,
at Parliament House, it was reported in Melbourne today." And
that was from the Mirror's Melbourne office.
Now in fact Mr Connor wasn't in my office at any time
last Thursday. Senator Wriedt wasn't in my office at any time
last Thursday. I don't recall having spoken to Senator Wriedt at
any time last Thursday or having written to him. And I might
easily have said hello to Rex Connor at Question Time on Tltursday
ut I didn't write to him or speak to him anywhere on Thursday
at all. The story is a complete fabrication.
And the third thing is the" Australian On Saturday it
lists a great number of projects for Chanceries and residences
in other countries which the Government is includingamong its
$ 53 million for those purposes!' And on Monday there was an
editorial in the Australian on the same subject.
Now it all flowed, I take it from an answer which I
gave as representing the Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee last
Thursday on these projects. It happens that all the expensive ones
all the big ones, were approved by our predecessors.
I 
Now to be quite precise let me go through them. The cost
of the Bangkok Chancery and Residence will be $ 5.8 million, approved
by our predecessors. The renovat~ on] s and-electrical w7orksj'at:
Australia House in London will be $ 477,400, approved by our
predecessors. The Chancery and accommodation in Paris will be
$ 18 and a half million, approved by our predecessors. The Chancery
in Port Moresby will be $ 2 million, approved by our predecessors.
The Chancery in Singapore will be $ 4.4 million, approved by our
predecessors. And the extensions to the Chancery in Washington
will be $ 4.6 million, approved by our predecetsors. And lastly
the construction of the Chancery in Kuala Lumpur will be $ 4.2
million approved by our predecessors.
Now admittedly the question didn't ask when these projects
were approved. It was assumed that we had approved them all.
This year as anybody can see from the Budget we will be spending
$ 3 million on overseas construction for Chanceries and Residences
for our High Commissioners and our Ambassadors. But the whole
of that amount that I read, that is all the big amounts were
approved by our predecessors.
It grieves me very much that Mr Peacock should have been
reported in Saturday's Australian as saying: " Mr Whitlam's concept
of open Government doesn't seem to extend to Opposition front-benchers.
I haven't had a chance to see the figures yet but when I do so I
may make some comment on them." That's the Australian of Saturday.
Presumably Mr Peacock's comments were made on Friday. He got the
answer on Thursday afternoon, b ecause no questions are printed
in Hansard unless they are r , eceived by 5.30 in the afternoon. ' But
in all events the editorial and the original story w~ ere grossly
misplaced. / 4 
-4
QUESTION: On the question of Timor. In your Statement
about Timor today you mentioned the Government welcoming the
outcome of talks in Dili and Macao.
PRIME MINISTER: I will say no more on the subject of Timor.
I said that I would be reporting to the Parliament probably
if there were other developments. I'll leave it at that.
QUESTION: Well can I ask you about...?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no I will not elaborate on the statement
I made.
QUESTION: Well there is a bit of ambiguity about
PRIME MINISTER: No I don't believe so. Please I will not
elaborate on the statement.
QUESTION: No funds were allocated in the Budget for
the Westwood extension of the Transcontinental Pipeline for
the Northwest shelf. Is this project defunct or only
postponed? And may I also enquire why no Chairman has been
appointed to the Pipeline Authority as required by Section
61( a) of the Pipeline Authority Act which was proclaimed more
than 2 years ago?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, the Gover-nment's obviously very
satisfied with the Budget. Do you think that it will show its
sati~ sfaction by ensuring that the Secretary of the Treasury,
Sir Frederick Wheeler, has a long tenure of office?
PRIME MINISTER: That will depend on his health and his conduct.
QUESTION: What effect will the Government's entry into the
manufacture of car engines, in Adelaide, have on the private
sector? Referring to G. M. H. and Ford who claim that this will
lead to unemployment in the industry?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that the public is so readily
moved by G. M. H. and Ford as they were last year. I trust that
the Party isn't so readily moved by G. M. H. and Ford as it was at
the end of last year. The proposal that the Government h'as made
is that it should participate with the two Japanese col.-ipanies,
Nissan and Toyota, and Chrysler, in setting up a four cylinder
engine plant in Chrysler's premises in Adelaide Each party
to take a quarter share in that enterprise. The overall interest
that the Government has is that Australians should have a
choice of Australian motorcars which is more consonant with what
the consumers want. There can be no doubt that Australians would
like more four cylinder motorcars. They're more manouverable,
they're more economical, they are cleaner, and the difficulty
up until now has been that if you wanted four cylinder motorcars
they usually had to be imported and usually imported from Japan.
So accordingly we are wanting to encourage the Japanese manufacturers
to make the engine, which is the biggest component"' getting the
Australian content, made in Australia. Australians shouldn't
be forced if they want an Australian motorcar to choose between / 2 
those that the American subsidiaries have hitherto compelled
them to make.
QUESTION: Does the Government intend to introduce a Supply Bill
before the passage of the Budget? And if so could you say for
-what purposesthe money will be used?
PRIME MINISTER: No decision has been made on this.
QUESTION: Are you planning a trip abroad for December/ January?
And if so what stage have you reached regarding details?
PRIME MINISTER: No stage has been reached in any such plan.
Quite obviously if I went away it would be over Christmas. I
never miss any of the Parliamentary Session. No arrangements
have been made for any overseas visit.
QUESTION: I believe it was Sunday, you intimated that the
Government hadn't quite reached full Open Government. How
long do you expect this to take and under what circumstances
would we arrive at a situation under which we could have Open
Government? PRIME MINISTER: I haven't got the speech that I made on Sunday
with me. I don't accept your summary of it. I did make a passing
reference to the very glib questions and comments that so many
of you put, that you-Lre entitled to know every item and detail
of the decision-making process. I pointed out that Open Government
means rather the fact that the public should know the options which
the-decision-makers have, and that is something which the present
Government has implemented very greatly indeed. The public knows
to an exceptional extent, completely unprecedented extent, the
advice which the Government receive I've been asked a question
already about motorcars. The reports of the Industries Assistance
Commission are published much more promptly than ever was the
case with the old Tariff Board. But you go through the whole
range of initiatives that my Government has taken and you will
see that most of them have been based on reports-compiled by
experts who' ye sought views and the experts~ views have been
published. That is people now know what the options are. There
is Open Government, particularly to that extent. The Government
mightn't necessarily accept the advice that it receives but the
public knows what the advice is. 1
QUESTION: In the event of any of our nearneighbours finding
themselves in the unfortunate circumstances of being involved in
1. civil war, will Australia consider providing humanitarian aid
to them?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Will it do so in terms of Portuguese East. Timor?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not elaborating on the statement. ./ 3 
6
QUESTION: Prime Minister, why won't you answer questions in
relation to what's going on up there?
PRIME MINISTER: I've made a statement in the Parliament,
3 hours ago, and I'm not going to elaborate on that statement.
The situation is quite sensitive and I'm not going to respond
to particular slants that you might want to give it.
QUESTION: In April last year, you said that the Government
would not extend agreements on foreign bases in Australia.
Last Wednesday and again today you indicated that's changed,
in the case of Pine Gapand some other bases. Can you tell us
when the Government changed its mind and why?
PRIME MINISTER: The position hasn't changed. I gave an answer
to a written question, a question on notice on this matter,
last Thursday and the question stands.
QUESTION: It's different from your attitude in April last year.
PRIME MINISTER: No it's not.
QUESTION: Why has Australia dumped Papua New Guinea-if we are
to believe Mr Somare?
PRIME MINISTER: We haven't dumped Papua New Guinea. We are
in fact assisting Papua New Guinea to the extent of some hundreds
of millions of dollars every year. I promised early last year,
I think it was, that in the course of last financial year, this
and next, we would be contributing $ 500 million -to the P. N. G.
Budget and we shall be. That incidentally is completely apart
from any Defence expenditure.
QUESTION: What bases were you talking about in April last year
when you said that the Government would not extend agreements?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't got, you're referring to a question
that I answered without notice, I think about the 3rd April last
year, wasn't that it? And I gave an answer last Thursday.
I think you're referring to some comments which you very easily
elicited from one of my colleagues who was never briefed on the
purposes. I have stated all along that these facilities are not
parts of any weapons system.
QUESTION: When can we expect some clarification of the Government's
joint venture with the Ranger Uranium parties../. for nearly a year?
Peko/ E. Z.
-PRIME MINISTER: Within the next couple of months I would expect.
I would hope less time than that.
QUESTION: Does the Government intend to press on with the
establishment of the Australian Government Insurance Corporation?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, of course. There is a gap in the insurance
available to a very great number of Australians and furthermore
the insurance available to a great number of other Australians
is only available on terms which are too onerous. It'll be
remembered that in the-election campaign in May last year, I
stressed that the Australian Government Insurance Corporation / 11 
7.-
would be set up to meet, for instance, the situation which
was found to apply in Brisbane at the beginning of last year,
and in Ipswich. There were a very great number of people who
were not insured against the disasters which overwhelmed them.
It was not possible for them to get that insurance from any of
the normal companies or institutions. The only institution,
I think, from which you were able to get fl ' ood insurance on
reasonable terms, was the War Service Homes Insurance. -The
other point I made was that insurance has been available very
much more cheaply, not only from the War Service Homes Scheme,
but also from the Commonwealth Savings Bank Scheme. So the
Australian Government Insurance Corporation will give insurance
where none is available at the moment and furthermore it will
give insurance where it is at present available but on much more
reasonable terms. I point out that despite all the propaganda
that's been brought about the A. G. I. C. it wil. l have to pay its
way; it will be subject to all Federal and State legislation.
QUESTION: Are you considering using Mr Connor' s considerable
talents in another area?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't answer questions concerning the future
of my colleagues. I never have and I won't this time.
QUESTION: The Adelaide family of Dr -Grady, a Geologist, somewhere
in Timor. has * expressed concern about his safety. one report says that
he is now in the hands of Fretilin supporters. What efforts, if
any,. are being made to find out about this man?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember all the details. Every
Australian known to be in Timor was contacted with the offer
to be taken out, and I'm told that the only ones who didn't
come out declined to do so of their own free will. There was
a plane went in and got some other people out who had previously
declined but these ones were able to be contacted after they
had second thoughts. NoI forget the names.
QUESTION: The Chairmanship of the Film, Radio and Television
Board of the Australia Council has been vacant since the beginning
of July and is apparently causing some problems in the operation
of that Board. I was wondering, is any announcement imminent of a.
replacement Chairman.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes it is.
QUESTION: You can't say now who it will be?
PRIME MINISTER: No I will put it in the whole context. I
approved it all last week, I think.
QUESTION: It's been reported that a large number of the evacuees
who arrived in Darwin on the Lloyd Bakke want to stay in Australia.
What is the Government's attitude
PRIME MINISTER: If there are sponsors, if there are relatives
who have sponsors here well they're staying on the usual condition. 
QUESTION: Could you tell us when the Government decided that
it would renew the Pine Gap and also Northwest Cape and who
made the decision Agreement
PRIME MINISTER: The question to renew, it doesn't take that
form. The facility continues unless steps are taken to end it.
The situation to end it can't arise until the 9th December next
that's the earliest date at which notice, a years notice, could
be given to end the agreement. No such notice will be given,
as I stated last Thursday.
QUESTION: The Government's Uranium Policy Statement of the
31 October 1974 said that the Government would consider
separately the question of some earlier return for the shareholders
of Queensland mines, Naranda and Pancontinental, they
have had a rather hard trot from the Government's Uranium Policy.
Has this question
PRIME MINISTER: Wait a bit, wait a bit. You know what was said
about Queensland Mines, by Mr Justice E. A. Woodward. You know
that don't you?
ANSWER: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: He recoimmended that no uranium lease should be
granted to Queensland Mines. We accepted his recommendation.
QUESTION: We've still got N~ anda and Pancontinental Sir.
PRIMJE MINSITER: I forget the details there.
QUESTION: But has the Government considered some earlier return
PRIME MINISTER: I told you that this will be considered. I
think I said within two months, I hoped earlier. And, of course,
I would expect there will be a statement made then. I forget the
details, but you mention Queensland Mines, you sought to cast
the Government in a wrong light. The Queensland Mines was dealt
with by the Rae Committee arnd was dealt: with by Mr Justice
E. A. Woodward. The Government agrees with what they found.
QUESTION: You have no doubt noted Mr Somare' s statementg that
he might perhaps go elsewhere because of Australia' s reluiIctance
to give it more money. Does that concern you and have ycu
spoken to Mr Somare since he made those statements?
PRIME MINISTER: It doesn't concern me. I haven't spoken to
Mr Somare. I have written to him since we had a discussion on
Monday week. But this question was dealt with in my Second
Reading speech on the Papua New Guinea Independence Bill and
the related legislation last Wednesday. Papua New Guinea will
be independent on the 16th of next month. It is entitled, it
is welcome to receive assistance from any country in the world.
It would be compeltely inappropriate for us to look as if we
resented that. There are other countries which are assisting
P. N. G. as it is. There are some international financial
institutions; there is New Zealand; and there are one or two
other countries as well. It is perfectly natural for Papua 
9
New Guinea to get assistance wherever it can. I notice there
was some suggestion that it was Mr Peacock made it
that the Russians had promised some assistance. That matter
was disposed of by Sir Maori Kiki, the P. N. G. Foreign Minister
and by the Soviet Ambassador.
QUESTION: On the night of the Budget, Mr Hawke said that he
agreed that those people making projections of half a million
unemployed by next year. Do you agree with Mr Hawke?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: What information do you have concerning this?
PRIME MINISTER: The information that the Treasurer has. He
was asked a question about this last Wednesday; he gave an
answer; his answer was correct. I support it.
QUESTION: Why is the Government refusing an export permit
for Utah, the development of Norwich Park Coal Mines, as it's
now going to get $ 6 a ton off it. And under what conditions
would the Government give an export permit to the Norwich
Park Coal Fields?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you'd better put that on notice. I-



SECOND READING SPEECH BY
HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. lP.
TASMAN BRIDGE RESTORATION BILL ( NO, 2) 1975
HONOURABLE MEMBERS WILL RECALL THAT ON
APRIL 1975 I INTRODUCED A BILL TO PROVIDE FOR THE
RESTORATION OF THE TASMAN BRIDGE FOLLOWING ITS COLLAPSE
INTO THE DERWENT RIVER AFTER THE S. S, " LAKE ILLAWARRA"
HAD COLLIDED WITH IT, THE BILL WAS PASSED BY BOTH
HousEs OF THE PARLIAMENT AND RECEIVED THE ROYAL ASSENT
ON 19 MAY 1975. THE TASMAN BRIDGE RESTORATION ACT 1975
PROVIDED FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A JOINT TASMAN BRIDGE
RESTORATION COMMISSION TO SUPERINTEND AND DIRECT THE
COMBINED SALVAGE AND REBUILDING OPERATIONS.
HONOURABLE MEMBERS WILL-ALSO RECALL THAT
SHORTLY AFTER THE DISASTER THE AUSTRALIAN AND TASMANIAN
CJVERNMENTS AGREED TO ESTABLISH A JOINT EXPERT ADVISORY
COMMITTEE ON A SECOND DERWENT CROSSING. THIS COMMITTEE
HAS SUGGESTED THAT CONCURRENTLY WITH REPAIRS TO THE TASMAN
BRIDGE, PROVIS-GN COULD BE MADE FOR IT TO BE WIDENED TO
PROVIDE A FIFTH TRAFFIC LANE,
IT IS PROPOSED TO MAKE USE OF THE ROADWAY
BOTH ON THE EASTERN AND WESTERN SIDE OF THE GAP FOR
FABRICATION OF SOME ELEMENTS OF THE NEW SUPERSTRUCTURE AND
FOR ERECTION WORK. IT IS THEREFORE NECESSARY FOR THE
WIDENING AND RECONSTRUCTION WORK TO BE CLOSELY CO-ORDINATED
AND IT IS CONSIDERED ESSENTIAL FOR BOTH PROJECTS TO BE* UNDER
THE CONTROL OF THE ONE AUTHORITY IN ORDER TO AVOID DTFFICULTIES
WHICH COULD ARISE IF TWO AUTHORITIES WERE TO BE OPERATING IN
THE SAME AREA AT THE SAME TIME.
ACCORDINGLY, I AGREED WITH THE PREMIER OF
TASMANIA THAT THE WORK INVOLVED IN WIDENING THE BRIDGE SHOULD
BE UNDERTAKEN BY THE TASMAN BRIDGE RESTORATION COMMISSION AND
THAT THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA WOULD MEET THE COST OF THIS
WORK ESTIMATED TO BE $ 3 M. / 2 
-2
THE BILL NOW BEFORE THE HOUSE PROVIDES FOR
APPROVAL OF A SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT BETWEEN AUSTRALIA
AND TASMANIA TO STRUCTURALLY MODIFY THE'TASMAN BRIDGE TO
ACCOMMODATE FIVE LINES OF TRAFFIC CONCURRENTLY WITH THE
RESTORATION OF THE BRIDGE TO FULL OPERATIONAL CONDITION,
THE AGREEMENT EMPOWERS THE COMMISSION TO
PERFORM ANY FUNCTIONS ADDITIONAL TO ITS PRESENT ROLE
TO ENABLE IT TO COMPLETE ITS TASK, SUBJECT TO THE
SAME CONDITIONS AND POWERS IT EXERCISES UNDER THE TASMAN
BRIDGE RESTORATION ACT .1975. I SHOULD POINT OUT TO
HONOURABLE 7iMBERS THAT FUNDS FOR THIS WORK ARE PROVIDED
IN ApRoPR:. ATION L! LL ( No, 2) 1975/ 1976 UNDER DIVISION 964
iHE WORKS PROPOSED WILL GREATLY ENHANCE THE
CARRYING CAPACITY OF THE TASMAN BRIDGE WHEN RECONSTRUCTION
COMPLETED AND WILL DO MUCH TO REDUCE TRAFFIC CONGESTION IN
THE PERIOD BETWEEN RECONSTRUCTION OF THE TASMAN BRIDGE AND
COMPL , TION OF CONSTRUCTION OF A SECOND CROSSING,
I COMMEND THE BILL TO THE HOUSE, ITEM 03,
IS 



Personal Explanation
Medibank is not available in the or that
the patient cannot have the doctor of his choice
in the hospitals of the which of course is
quite false. There is no financial disadvantage to
either of them, if they want private hospital treatment,
in having it in the A. C. T.
I suggest to patients in the A. C. T. that, if at any
time a doctor says that there is no way that they
can get free hospital treatment in the A. C. T. and
then come back to him as private patients after
hospital treatment, they should ask that doctor
what his object is. Is he saying this for medical
reasons and saying that it is in the medical
interests of the patient that he is doing this, or is
he saying it for a political reason? If there is a
political reason he can only say. ' The political
reason is to save you, my patient, the freedom of
choice'. The patient then only has to say: ' I exercise
my freedom of choice by choosing to be a
hospital patient. I choose to be treated by doctors
who co-operate with Medibank'. If the doctor
objects to that, then he is not fair dinkum in his
political objections.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Dr JENKINS ( Scullin)-Mr Speaker, I seek
leave to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member
claim to have been misrepresented?
Dr JENKINS-I do. The misrepresentation
occurred in a paragraph written by Cassandra in
the Sunday Telegraph of Sunday, 24 August. The
main points are covered by the following quotation
from that paragraph:
Hawke will stand for the blue-ribbon Melbourne industrial
suburbs seat ofScullin held by old-time Victorian Labor
stalwart-I do not object to that description-
Dr Harry Jenkins. Dr Jenkins is reported to be in bad health
and to have agreed to stand down.
Normally I would disregard such reports, but
these reports are being persistently floated about
myself and other Victorian members. The report
from which I have quoted requires denial and
causes concern in the Scullin electorate and in the
Australian Labor Party itself. To answer the misrepresentation
I point out that when nominations
were called for ALP preselection for Scullin for
the next election mine was the only nomination
received. No requests were received from the
local electorate organisation for preselection
proceedings; so I am endorsed.
At no time has Bob Hawke, any Party official,
or indeed any individual either in or out of the
Labor Party, suggested that I should forgo the
seat in favour of any other person. I have not 26 August 1975 REPRESENTATIVES 491
agreed to stand down. This must be made quite
clear. On a previous occasion when this rumour
circulated Bob Hawke took the trouble to contact
me to assure me that he had had no discussions
on this subject with any person.
Mention of bad health is made in the article.
Many honourable members in this House have
health problems. Here it would be a matter of
definition whether there is misrepresentation.
Industrially I would be classified as physically
handicapped. I suffer a painful condition affecting
the muscles which prevents me from walking
long distances and causes difficulty in climbing
stairs or carrying heavy objects. This has been so
for some 4 years. I have not talked about it. Obviously
with the honour which the House paid me
last week my colleagues consider me capable of
carrying out the arduous duties of a federal
member of Parliament and are willing to entrust
me with further duties. I hope this will give
physically handicapped persons incentive to continue
with their personal endeavours and cause
employers to accept that being physically handicapped
does not consign one to the scrap heap.
Might I add that this building has no facilities
whatever to assist physically handicapped
persons. Mr SPEAKER-It has no facilities, full stop.
PORTUGUESE TIMOR
Ministerial Statement
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)-
by leave-The Government welcomed the
outcome of the talks last May and June in Dili
and Macao between the Portuguese Government
and the principal parties in Portuguese Timor. In
our view, the program mapped out at Macao,
providing for steady forward movement towards
decolonisation and free elections for a constituent
assembly, went a long way towards the
objectives we support for the territory. It also follows,
however, that the Government is most concerned
by the present situation in Portuguese
Timor. What began as a show of force by the
UDT party on 10 August has deteriorated into
virtual civil war with widespread loss of life. The
UDT and the rival Fretilin party are struggling
for power in Dili and in many parts of the
interior. The Timorese police appear to have
sided with UDT, while the much more numerous
military is predominantly for Fretilin.
The polarisation between the 2 groups now
seems to be complete. Both groups are armed
with Portuguese weapons captured at the time of
the initial UDT show of force or having been
taken over to Fretilin or UDT with the defecting 
492 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1975
troops and police. Apodeti, the party favouring
integration with Indonesia, is not a major participant
in the struggle, although there are some
reports of attacks on its members.
As a result of the evacuation of most of the
Portuguese administration and military, the
Governor now remains in Dill with only a very
small staff and with no chance of exerting control
over more than a small section of Dill The
Governor thus retains no more than the formal
trappings of office. The Portuguese authorities in
a communication to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations have acknowledged that it is
impossible for them to control the situation.
Several days ago the Governor issued an
appeal for international forces to be sent to
Timor to control the situation and to bring an
end to the bloodshed. The Portuguese Government
has also issued appeals for international assistance,
including suggestions that Indonesia
and Australia might help, especially with the
evacuation of Portuguese and foreign nationals
from Timor. Australia has extended considerable
support in various evacuation operations. We
stand ready to take part in any humanitarian
action that may be practicable.
We have been, however, and remain opposed
to Australian military involvement. One of the
first policy decisions of the Government, on
assuming office in December 1972, was to determine
that Australia would not intervene again in
land wars in South East Asia. This applies as
much to the civil war in Portuguese Timor as to
the earlier civil war in Vietnam.
On political aspects of the situation, the
Government has been in close touch with the
other governments most concerned, namely, the
Government of Portugal and the Government of
Indonesia. The Australian Government, however,
does not regard itself as a party principal in
Portuguese Timor. We continue to hold that the
future of the territory is a matter for resolution by
Portugal and the Timorese people themselves
with Indonesia also occupying an important
place because of its predominant interest.
The Government recognises that there are
some who believe that Australia should accept
some political obligation in regard to Portuguese
Timor, and even that Australia should step in
and attempt to arbitrate between the competing
political factions. The Government acknowledges
that those who have put forward these
views have been motivated by genuine feelings
of concern for the welfare of the Timorese. But
the Government does not itself think these views
reflect the best approach forAustralia. It believes Portuguese Timor
that acceptance of these views could lead to a
situation where Australia was exercising a quasicolonial
role in Portuguese Timor, and might
lead to the point where we were assuming some
de facto responsibility for the territory.
But the Government does view with serious
concern the recent turn of events in Portuguese
Timor. The immediate need, of course, is to
bring the fighting to an end. This is both a
necessary pre-condition to any political settlement
as well as an urgent need if the bloodshed
is to stop and relief work is to begin. I take this
opportunity to appeal on behalf of the Australian
Government to all parties engaged in the fighting
to lay down their arms and to end the bloodshed.
I have said that it is not possible to carry
forward relief or rehabilitation without restoration
of order in the territory. The immediate responsibility
for bringing an end to the fighting
must continue to rest with Portugal. In the
Government's view, Portugual cannot simply
wash its hands of Portuguese Timor.
The present situation, of course, may have
passed the point of no-return. In the absence of
firm policies in Lisbon, defections of local
officials and local military forces may now be
complete. Nonetheless, the Government understands
that Portugal is to make an attempt to
retrieve some lost ground by sending a negotiating
team with a view to persuading Fretilin and
UDT to stop fighting and to agree to negotiate
new arrangements among the Timorese parties
for orderly decolonisation. The Portuguese
Government, through Dr Santos, the former
Minister for Interterritorial Co-ordination has
approached the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. The results of this approach are not yet
clear. There have been suggestions that a good
offices committee might be proposed to help mediate
a settlement in Portuguese Timor. But none
of this has gone very far and without some restoration
of basic order in the territory it is not
easy to see how a UN good offices committee,
whose role would be essentially political in
character, could function on the ground. The
same consideration applies to various ideas for
an international humanitarian relief effort.
I return, therefore, to the conclusion that the
first priority is to put an end to the killing and
fighting and to restore order. This objective
requires the active intervention of Portugal itself.
It is a responsibility that cannot be shrugged off
on to others such as Australia. We have no
national obligations or interest in getting reinvolved
in colonial or post-colonial affairs in Portuguese
Timor at the very time when Papua New
Guinea's imminent independence is leading to 
Portuguese Timor
the ending of our colonial role there. We have no
ethnic or cultural ties with the Timorese which
would suggest a role for Australia in substitution
for Portugal in Portuguese Timor.
The other interested country in all this is, of
course, Indonesia, with which we have been in
very close touch on developments in Portuguese
Timor in recent days. Indonesia has shared the
Australian concern about the evident drift in
Portuguese policies and, like us, has urged on the
Portuguese the need to reassert Portuguese control
in Portuguese Timor. We, for our part,
understand Indonesia's concern that the territory
should not be allowed to become a source of
instability on Indonesia's border. Portuguese
Timor is in many ways part of the Indonesian
world and its future is obviously a matter of great
importance to Indonesia.
Indonesian policy is to respect the right of the
people of Portuguese Timor to self-determination
and Indonesian leaders have often denied
that Indonesia has any territorial ambitions
towards Portuguese Timor. Nevertheless,
Indonesia's concern about the situation in the
territory has now led her to offer, if Portugal so
requests, to assist in restoring order there. President
Suharto has made it clear that Indonesia
would only wish to act at Portugal's bidding and
that the objective would be the limited one of
restoring conditions which would allow orderly
self-determination to proceed. The Australian
Government has frequently stated its concern
that the people of the territory should be able to
decide their own future.
Whatever external efforts might accomplish,
the hostility, and mistrust between Fretilin and
UDT remain the main threat to future stability in
the territory. This hostility and mistrust indeed
form one of the most disappointing aspects of the
situation in Portuguese Timor. The events of the
last few weeks have dashed the hopes for Portuguese
Timor which followed the change of
government and Portuguese colonial policy in
Lisbon. In a little over a year, the situation in
Portuguese Timor has become a very dangerous
one, mainly-it must be said-because of the
shortsi~ htedness of some of the territory's aspiring
political leaders. It is a matter of record that
none of the three major political groups in the
territory has shown any genuine willingnuess to
work with the others. Each demands that it alone
be recognised as the sole legitimate nationalist
group. None seems prepared to test its claims to
lead the country through any conventional form
of democratic process. 26 August 1975 REPRESENTATIVES 493
At the moment, it is not possible to predict
how events will move or what constructive contribution
Australia may be able to make. Our first
task will be to be alert to opportunities for humanitarian
assistance, but here there are real
questions of practicability. We shall give what
practical help we can to the Portuguese in their
efforts to mediate and to bring an end to the
fightng Irepeat my call to the parties for a
cease-fire and the ending of the bloodshed. As
events develop it may be necessary for me to
keep the House further informed.
Motion ( by Mr Daly) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Peacock)
adjourned. DEPARTMAENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY
Mr DALY ( Grayndler-Minister for Services
and Property)-For the information of honourable
members I present the annual report of the
Australian Department of Social Security for the
financial year ended 30 June 1975.
DARWIN CYCLONE TRACY RELIEF
TRUST FUND
Dr PATTERSON ( Dawson-Minister for
Northern Australia)-For the information of
honourable members I present the report on the
Darwin Cyclone Tracy Relief Trust Fund for
May 1975.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
Mr BEAZLEY ( Fremantle-Minister for
Education)-Pursuant to section 33 of the
Australian National University Act 1946-1973 1
present the report of the Council of the Australian
National University for the calendar year
1974. AUSTRALIAN POVERN1WENT
ASSISTANCE: TO LOCAL PROJECTS
Mr UREN ( Reid-Minister for Urban and
Regional Development)-For the information of
honourable members I present a report titled:
' Australian Government Assistance to Local
Projects'. HANDBOOK ON HEALTH MIANPOWER
Dr EVERINGHAM ( Capricornia-Minister
for Health)-For the information of honourable
members I present the first edition of a ' Handbook
on Health Manpower' prepared by the
Australian Department of Health. 



1, A UST ItA LAI( A
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 550
27 August 1975
TIMOR EVACUEES
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced tonight
that the Australian Government would take immediate action
to help evacuees from Timor.
He said he had approved a series of charter flights
to bring evacuees from Timor landed in Darwin from the
" Lloyd Bakke" and the " Macdili" to proper facilities in
southern Australia. Darwin does not have facilities to accommodate
those evacuees who do not wish to return immediately to
Portugal. Temporary residence will be granted to those refugees
electing to remain in Australia and those wishing to apply for
permanent residence will have their applications processed in
the normal way.
The Department of Labor and Immigration will be
responsible for chartering civil and R. A. A. F. aircraft to move
the evacuees south and for accommodating them in migrant hostels.
Flights are expected to begin within a few days.
There were 862 evacuees still in Darwin today. The
' Macdili", which is expected to arrive in Darwin on Friday, is
carrying about 800 evacuees. Most of the evacuees are
Portuguese citizens and the Portuguese Government will pay their
transport costs to southern Australia.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



JJJA T LA
PROAE MINSTE~ R
Press Statement No. 548
27 August 1975
NEW MEMBERS OF* THE AU'STRAL'IA COUNCIL AND * ITS'CONSTITUENT BOARDS
The Prime Minister today announced the names of
new members orf the Australia Council and its constituent boards.
Mr r/, Iitam said that on 30 June 1974 he had
implemented the principle of an annual rotation of membership
for the new orcanization and normally one third of the membership
positions would have been filled now. When the Australia-Council
Act was proclaimed in March last, however, it was necessary for
the members to be appointed immediately to the Council and
Boards. Because of the need to preserve some continuity of
experience in the Council and Boards at that time the Prime Minister
had invited those members who were due to retire on 30 June 1975
to accept re-appointment to 30 June 1976. However, some members
had been unable to continue and a number of vacancies had occurred
in the Council and on the Boards.
The Prime Minister said the new appointments included
people who had put their names forward in response to a public
request by the Council for people wishing to serve in this way.
He expressed his thanks to the many hundreds of people who had
offered their services and said these names would be kept on a
permanent register f or future reference when new vacancies occurred.
Mr Whitlam said that he wished to express his gratitude
to the retiring members. " Without the generosity and enth'usiasm
of these people we would not have succeeded in generating-the I.
degree of activity and wide interest in the arts which have become
apparent over the last two-and-a-half years."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
MEMBERS APPOINTED FOR A THREE-YEAR PERIOD TO 30 JUNE 1978
COUNCIL Professor C. Manning Clark
Mr William Ferris
Mr Jim Spigelman
BOARDS
VISUAL ARTS BOARD
Mr Michael Shannon A. C. T. Historian, Writer
N. S. W. . Managing Director,
International
Venture Corporation
N. S. W. Secretary,
Department of the Media
Vic.
MUSIC BOARD
Mr John FalkVic. Painter Manager, Planningand
Evaluation, Conzine
Riotinto of Aust Ltd.
Dr ? Martin Wesley-Smith
LITEPATURE BOARD
Mr Michael Wilding
Mr John N. Bryson N. S. W. Composer; conductor;
lecturer in e-lectronic
music
N. S. W. Reader in English,
University of Sydney;
author and publisher
Vic. Managing Director,
Bryson Industries Ltd.
FILM, RADIO AND TELEVISION BOARD
Mr Tom Jeffrey ( Chairman)
Mr George Klein
Mr Brian White N. S. W. Television producer;
former member of the Board
Tas. President, Hobart Film.
Society; Audio-Visual
Resources; Registrar,
Tasmanian College of
Advanced Education
N. S. W. Radio journalist;
filmscript writer.
Mr Michael WilliamsQLD. Film-maker / 3
3 
ABORIGINAL ARTS BOARD
Mr Bobby Ngajmirra
Mr Walter Pukutiwara
Mr Billy Stockman N. T.
S. A.
N. T. Traditional bark
painter; Elder of the
Oenpelli community
Accomplished Pitjantjatjara craftsman; member of
Amata community
Traditional painter;
Chairman of Papunya
Community Council. 



' 2f~
US1' AL PRESS STATEMENT No, 549
27 August 1975
Medibank MEDIBANK HOSPITALS AGREEMENT, QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister today signed the Queensland
Hospitals Agreement.
It is expected that the Queensland Premier,
Mr Bjelke Petersen, will sign the agreement on behalf of his
Government by the end of this week.
The signing of the agreement will mean that the
Medibank Hospital Arrangements will be operative in Queensland
as from 1 September. Queensland's public hospitals already
provide free standard ward treatment, including medical services
provided by salaried and sessionally paid doctors.
The funds that Queensland will receive under the
agreement will materially assist the Queensland Government in
upgrading its hospitals and health services generally.
Under the Medibank Agreement the cost of operating
Queensland's public hospitals system will be shared on a 50/ 50
basis between the Australian and Queensland Governments.
Australian Government expenditure under the
agreement with Queensland is estimated at $ 90 million for the
period 1 September 1975 to 30 June 1976.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
OPENING ADDRESS TO CONFERENCE OF THE CENTRE FOR RESEARCH ON
FEDERAL FINANCIAL RELATIONS, AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
27 August 1975
THE NEW FEDERALISM:
A REVIEW OF LABOR'S PROGRAMS AND POLICIES
The title given to this Conference itself illustrates
a basic characteristic of Australian federalism and the
approach which Australians have usually taken towards their
federal system. The general title is: " Making Federalism
Work Towards a More Efficient, Equitable and Responsive
Federal System". We Australians have always tended towards
a pragmatic and practical approach without concerning ourselves
overmuch with deep questionings about the philosophical nature
and purposes of federalism. Significantly this conference
does not ask the question, what is Australian federalism?
It asks, is federalism working, or can it be made to work better?
One might draw a contrast with America. A similar
conference in the United States would, in all probability,
be as concerned with first principles about the nature and
purpose of the American Constitution as about its practical
operation. For a variety of reasons, the Americans have
always tended to be more reverential towards their Constitution
than Australians, though curiously, much more ready to amend it.
whatever one's opinion about the excellence of the
Australian Constitution, one would not, I think, readily
apply to it Gladstone's description of the American Constitution
as " the most majestic single work ever struck off by the
brain of man". However high our regard for our own founding
fathers, it lies this side of idolatry.
The practical and political preoccupations of our
Constitution-makers at the conventions of the 1890' s still
dominate our approach today. We are still preoccupied with
practical and political questions of how to make the Federal
system work. In particular, we have been concerned almost exclusively
with financial relations, as the name of the Australian National
University Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations
itself bears out. Up to 1972 this question was invariably
referred to as Commonwealth/ State financial relations and usually
meant Commonwealth versus State financial relations. To the
extent that Australian federalism has been limited to the
concept of Commonwealth/ State financial relations the debate has
tended to be cast in terms of confrontation between the States
and Canberra.' This has occurred whatever the Party affiliation
of the State Premiers, whatever the ideological stance of
the Prime Minister of the day a conservative federalist
like Menzies, a conservative centralist like Gorton, or a
reform regionalist like the present incumbent. 
-2-
My first involvement with this Centre when its
establishment was proposed by Mr McMahon in 1972 was to urge
successfully that local government should be included within
its research charter. One hopes that the continuing work of
this Centre and conferences like this may help broaden the
debate and lift it beyond the slogans of centralism versus
States' rights. I believe they are concepts which little
accord with the needs or ideas of the Australian people and are
even less in accord with the reality of what the Australian
Government is trying to achieve.
I accepted the suggestion that the them of my own
address should be: " The new Federalism: A Review of Labor's
Programs and Policies". I thought that appropriate not
least because I used this expression towards a new
federalism in the last major address I made on this general
subject within this University to the Academy of Social Sciencc
at the Australian National University Seminar on Intergovernmenti,
Relations on 8 November 1971. 1 meant then and mean now nothing
especially grandiose about the term. I do not pretend to
have invented a new philosophy of government. My Federalist
Papers, if ever honoured by publication by the A. N. U. are
not intended to be a new testament to replace Hamilton,
Madison and Jay.
I was concerned then as I am now that our institution.,
and administrative system should provide a proper balance
b etween finances and functions, that each of our three levels
of government should be able to carry out the functions which
it is best able to perform. As I said here in November 1971:
" Each of our three levels of government has functions
which it is best able to perform. The key to
effective performance is not domination but
consultation, not centralisation but co-ordination.
An Australian Schools Commission would no more
deprive the States of their schools, nor an
Australian Hospitals Commission deprive the States
of their hospitals, than the present Universities
Commission has deprived them of their universities.
Failing such commissions I see no way of determining
the objective priorities for those Commonwealth
grants without which neither schools nor hospitals
can improve. Again, we will not return power to
the people simply by concentrating assistance on
the existing States. A meaningful devolution of
power will be effected in this country only when
we provide local authorities with the means and
incefttives to associate freely on the basis of
shared urban and regional interests. The new
federalism will rest on a national framework for
the establishment of investment priorities and a
regional framework for participation in all those
decisions which most directly determine the quality
of our lives." ./ 3 
-3-
You will see that that statement addressed itself
to the three criteria implied in the theme of this conference
as the benchmarks by which we may measure how well federalism
is working first more efficient, secondly more equitable
and thirdly more responsive. But there is a question within
the question posed in each case. More efficient, yes but
for what purpose? It is possible to create a system which
may be quite efficient for the administrators but not very
efficient in the delivery of the benefits it is designed to
give. More equitable for whom? It is possible to make
arrangements which are seen as equitable as between the levels
of government concerned in those arrangements but which impose
continuing inequalities as between States and regions.
More responsive to whom? It may be possible to have a
national government which seems to respond readily to demands
and pressures from State Premiers but which is not really
responsive to the needs or wishes of the people.
oversimplified concepts such as centralism or States'
rights, particularly if they are thought of as mutually
hostile, mutually exclusive concepts, would have very little
to do with the promotion of efficiency, equity or responsiveness.
And of course it is a gross oversimplification to depict the
actions of the present Australian Government in centralist
terms. It is a grotesque caricature to depict the program of
the Australian Government in centralist terms.
It is not perhaps sufficiently recognised how much
the program I set out on behalf of the Australian Labor Party
in 1972 was about federalism. Indeed in its totality, in
terms of the initiatives and innovations proposed and the
means by which they were to be implemented, the policy
speech of 1972 could well justify the description of being a
document for a new federalism.
It is true that these programs specified new initiatives
and called for vigorous action by the national Government.
The programs assert the principle that unless the national
Government becomes involved in a major function or costly servicE
that function or service will either not be financed fairly
or not financed adequately or not financed at all. it should
be equally recognised that those national initiatives and
actions required co-operation with the States and the involvement
of the States and local government. Action, reform, involvement
by the national Government are not necessarily centralism.
The program of 1972 was not framed by doctrinaire centralists.
It was not framed as a statement of centralism. Nor, significant
was it interpreted as such when it was presented and argued
not, to the best of my recollection, by those who criticised it,
and certainly not by those who supported it. It was never
depicted in those terms. / 14 
For example, there would be no Australian newspaper
more apt to detect the centralist heresy than the Sydney
Morning Herald. As the thinking behind the Labor Party's
program for national involvement developed and matured, so did
the views of the Sydney Morning Herald. I raised some eyebrows
and some horse laughs when I first urged national assistance
for sewerage works. On 24 October 1969, the eve of that year's
House of Representatives elections, the Sydney Morning Herald
had climaxed its editorial campaign against the A. L. P. with a
crunch line on I quote " Mr Whitlam's dizzy vision of
Canberra deciding the correct line of a sewer in Bankstown."
By 23 January 1970 it was saying surely the Commonwealth
Government will heed the plea of the Premier, Mr Askin for
special assistance on such a basic problem as additional funds
for the Water Board's sewage treatment plans". On 6 August 1970,
it again gave the Water Board's sewerage backlogs as " surely
an unanswerable instance of the need for the Commonwealth to
accept greater responsibility for urban requirements."
On 26 December 1970: " If problems such as pollution are not
to grow much worse, governments, and especially the Commonwealth
Government, must show a deeper appreciation of city needs".
On 7 April 1971: " More than 500,000 homes in the Sydney
metropolitan area are still unsewered. These basic problems
can be overcome only by a reappraisal of priorities at the
Federal level." I've never seen such intelligent, fair-minded,
responsible, judicious editorials in the Sydney Morning Herald
until last week's Budget!
At the heart of the program for national involvement
lay a view about modern, more contemporary, more rational
relations between the three levels of government and more modern,
more contemporary, more rational arrangements for the financing
and discharge of functions which modern communities now require
their elected representatives to fulfil.
Just how much our program was a statement about
tederalism a partnership between the three levels of
government is evident by recalling very briefly its key
proposals. The Schools Commission was designed to examine and
determine the needs of students in government and non-government,
primary, secondary, and technical schools. Quite apart from
the objective of making vastly more money available for education,
w e intended the Commission to -help the States with the greatest
burden upon their Budgets schools.
The Pre-School Commission was designed to enable the
children in the-States to enjoy at least equal opportunities
for pre-school care and education then enjoyed only by children
in Canberra, where the Commonwealth could not escape responsibilit
The abolition of fees at tertiary institutions and the
assumption by the Commonwealth of full responsibility for
financing tertiary education fulfilled an agreement made by all
the Labor leaders, federal and State, in 1967. 
So similarly did our undertaking to make the full range
of Commonwealth assistance available for buildings and
equipment for staff and students at all teacher colleges.
The proposal for a Hospitals Commission meant that the
States would be helped with what was then the heaviest burden
on t1-ir budgets after education.
The program for urban and regional development represente.
an altogether new approach to the idea of national involvement
in the places where most Australians live. It envisaged an
altogether new approach in the relations between the three levels
of government. The specific proposals included the creation
of land commissions, a new Commonwealth/ State housing agreement,
a national sewerage plan and national aid for urban transport.
We proposed to require the Grants Commission to promote equality
between regions as it had formerly promoted equality between
the States. We undertook to accept the offers as they then
were of the New South Wales and Victorian Premiers as they th.
were for the transfer of their State railways systems and to
accept such an offer from any other State.
We undertook to revive the Inter-State Commission to
enable it to achieve the purpose envisaged by the Constitution
of ending the centralism fostered by the State Governments
within their borders through their transport systems. We
undertook co-operation with the States in supporting the
, regional development plans they had already announced. We
undertook assistance to the States and to local commurities for
the preservation of the national estate.
In order to make local government a genuine partner
in the federal system we undertook to make direct representation
of local government a condition of the Australian Government's
participation in the Constitutional Convention pr9posed for 1973.-
Further, we proposed anzamennmntofthe-Financial Agreefl
to give semi-and local government authoriti-. a voice and a
vote at the Loan Council.
It is impossible to say which parts of the program
presented in 1972 were most important in shezr terms of winning
the necessary votes to change the balance of political power.
Certainly, issues like conscription and Vietnam-were charged
with more emotion. But the ongoing issues, the ones that had to
be developed most thoroughly, to be explained most frequently,
to be expatiated upon at greatest length and in greatest detail
were those that come under the three broad headings of education,
health and urban and regional development schools, hospitals,
cities. They might not always have raised the loudest cheers,
but they certainly sustained the longest interest. They may not
have been gut issues, but they were the guts of the program.
And the great relevance of this basic political fact in my
present context is that these programs had to be defined within
a reasoned framework of national-state-local relations, financial,
functional and administrative. 
-6-
They had to be relevant and shown to be relevant to the
systems within which they would update the Australian federal
system. The program for schools, hospitals and cities would
never have made sense had it been conceived just as an exercise
in centralism; it would never have been endorsed if it had
been perceived as such.
It is important to remember that the essence of these
programs is not just increases in government spending. We
sought new techniques, not new taxes. we sought to improve
the machinery by which Australians govern themselves, not
just to outlay more of their money on national programs which
might hold electoral appeal for them.
The program was, particularly in its earliest stages
of implementation, admittedly expensive. It was avowedly
expansive. We sought to do two things. We sought to catch
up a backlog over a whole range of social matters created by
twenty-three years of conservative government and we sought
to make a breakthrough over a whole range of national issues
to make Australian government more efficient, more equitable,
more responsive. We make no apologies for being an activist Government.
But there is nothing necessarily centralist or anti-Federalist
about action by the national government. More action by
Canberra need not be equated with more power for Canberra.
National involvement in the planning and financing is not
incompatible with co-operative planning. Rather it is essential
to successful co-operative planning under the Australian
system. This holds true even in cases where the very greatest
of new outlays have been involved. In what sense can it be
rationally argued that the vastly increased sums made available
to the State Education Departments and the non-government
schools through the Schools Commission is a victory for
centralism? Who could now dismantle the Schools Commission in
the name of State rights? Again in what sense can it be
rationally argued that the redundancy of the private health
bureaucracies through Medibank is a triumph for the central
bureaucracy? But the long rearguard action by four of the StateE
against Medibank was presumably fought on just that ground.
I can best illustrate the approach of the Australian
Government by referring to the actions we took at the three
Premiers' Conferences of 1973, 1974 and 1975.
At the 1973 Premiers' Conference I put the view that in
the fields of welfare housing and tertiary education, Australian
Government spending had grown so much in the 30 years since
the Commonwealth first became involved that the Australian
Government should now accept full financial responsibility
for them. The States accepted the view; the Australian
Government now accepts that responsibility. 
-7-
At the 1974 Premiers' Conference we adopted a new roads
program. I put the view that there was no hope of our having
satisfactory inter-State highways under the existing
arrangements and that acting under Section 51( i) of the
Constitution the Australian Government was prepared to accept
not just 80 per cent of the financial burden, but 100 per cent.
At the 1975 Premiers' Conference I stressed that the
Australian Government was not prepared to carry the States'
deficit where it is growing most rapidly on railways and
hospitals other than on the basis of the agreement which
we had already achieved with South Australia. That is, we
are prepared to acquire the State railways and to share
hospital costs fifty-fifty.
In other words, at these three conferences, we have
shown our readiness to adopt a constructive approach to the
financial problems of the States. It seems to me ludicrous
to suggest that the provision of basic physical services like
inter-State roads and railways should be submerged in debate
over questions of political power or political rights. In
other federal systems such matters are planned on a national
basis. I must emphasise, however, that our approach to the
States' financial problems has by no means been limited to
a willingness to accept responsibility for some of their more
burdensome and costly services. We have not only freed them
of some of their burdens, but have given them the financial
means towards greater freedom in pursuing their own pi: poses.
There has been a very large increase in general purpose funds,
even given the constraints all governments are now under.
The figures are instructive: improved financial
assistance grants to the States, accepted at the June Premiers'
Conference, will provide a total of about $ 3,185 million in
1975/ 76, an increase of $ 811 million or 34.2 per cent over
the grants paid in 1974/ 75. The States are free to determine
how these funds are spent. The increase of 34.2 per cent is
very significantly greater than the increase in total Australian
Government outlays estimated at 22.9 per cent.
There is the additional freedom which Medibank funding
will provide to the States in 1975/ 76 relief of the order
of $ 300 million. The Australian Government has undertaken that
such relief will not be the subject of " offsets" to general
revenue grants. Unconditional funds available to the States
will thus be very significantly increased.
The Budget itself reflects an important change of
emphasis in our future approach. In the first two years of
office we relied heavily on grants under Section 96 of the
Constitution to break through in key areas which had been badly
neglected by our predecessors. Under Section 96 we involved
the national Government directly in new initiatives at the
local level. In the new Budget we have increased emphasis on
untied grants to the States through general revenue assistance
and to local government through the Grants Commission. / 8 
-8-
The June Premiers' Conference was also notable for a
significant-move towards co-operative planning with the
States. Premiers' Conferences themselves are obviously unable
to act effectively to co-ordinate policies and determine
priorities. Before the June Conference Australian Government
officials conferred with State officials on the development
of co-operative planning. Those discussions were taken further
at the Premiers' Conference itself and the Premiers agreed
that the officers should develop more specific proposals and
report back to us.
As I told the Premiers:
" The Australian Government will be seeking in
the longer term a more rational and co-ordinated
system of assessing needs, setting priorities and
allocating resources in the public sector one
based on co-operation between Governments. it
may take years to develop a new approach of the
kind we have in mind, of the kind discussed among
our officials. But we believe a start should be
made now."
We have already taken steps towards co-operative
planning, for example in the fields of transport, health
and urban development.
Transport systems should be planned on an integrated
basis, the right balance needs to be struck between land, sea
and air transport so that the resulting total system satisfies
our nation's needs and priorities.
The Transport Advisory Council has become the major
forum for discussion and consultation on the problems of
public transport services and main railway lines and is now
concerned also with road matters. Moreover, the Australian
Government has recently taken the initiative in bringing
aviation matters before the Council.
In the health field, two major new programs have been
developed by the Hospitals and Health Services Commission in
close co-operation with the States the Community Health
Program and the Hospitals Development Program.
In the latter case, formal provision has been made
for co-operative planning the hospitals buildings program
for each State is considered jointly and formally by equal
numbers of Australian and State Government officers who
recommend to'their respective Governments the total program
of hospital development within the particular State.
In the case of the community health program, there is
a process of consultation, somewhat short of co-operative
planning, which recognises that individual health services
must be seen as part of an integrated and co-ordinated system. 
There is growing support for the development of a
regional approach to the planning of health services. New
South Wales has formally regionalised its health services
planning and administration, and other States are examining
such an approach.
It is hoped that as regional planning and administration
of health services are developed-the Australian and State
Governments will be able to divest themselves of unnecessary
detail and devote their energies to co-operative planning
and evaluation at the broad level, while responding to and
promoting detailed planning and administrative responsibility
at the regional level.
There has been considerable progress recently in the
development of co-operative planning arrangements in the field
of urban development.
Perhaps the most complete example is the arrangements
for Ministerial Councils to oversee the development of each
of the designated growth centres. These Ministerial Councils
require the State and Australian Ministers working jointly to
determine the overall development strategy for each growth
centre-and the forward financial plan associated with that
strategy on a rolling basis five years ahead.
The Australian Government's intentions for co-operative
planning are that it be a process by which national priorities
are identified and harmonised with the priorities of other
levels of governments; by which CO&gt;-ordinated forward planning
i's developed in pursuit of agreed ' priorities and by which functior
and finances of the Australian, State and local gover~ nents
are better balanced.
In February this year I announced the establishment
of a small committee of Ministers to be concerned primarily
with the Australian Government's relations with the States.
The Ministers are the Treasurer, the Minister for Social Security,
the, Minister for Urban and Regional Development, and myself.
This Committee is also undertaking examination of programs of
direct assistance to regions, to local government and to local
communities. This Australian Government has stressed a regional
approach to planning and decision-making.
Agreement has been reached with all States on the
regional borders used for Grants Commission purposes. In most
cases. these boundaries have been defined by the States
themselves. Our purpose in developing a regional policy, in
identifying logical regions and hopefully, contributing to
the growth of a sense of regional identity among Australian
communities, is not to out-flank the States or to replace local
government. But it is a fact that there are a wide range of
community programs and services which are most efficiently and
equitably planned, co-ordinated and delivered at a level
intermediary to those of State and local governments. There are
many examples electricityj reticulation, water and sewerage,
hospitals, libraries, some forms of public transport and some
welfare services. 
The Australian Government has been encouraged by
the degree of acceptance of the concept of regionalism by local
government and the widespread recognition that regionalism
is not a threat but rather a stimulus to local government.
For our part, we see regionalism as crucial to our efforts to
make local government a genuine partner in the federal system.
The work of the Grants Commission has been the most important
step to that end that we have so far achieved. Following
the Governments acceptance of the Commission's Second Report
million will be provided without conditions this year
a 42 per cent increase on last year. Despite our efforts
at the 1973 Constitutional Convention and at a special
Premiers' Conference in October 1973 and at the May 1974
referendum, we have not yet been able to fulfil our promise
of 1972 and our hope of 1974 to give local government a voice
and a vote in the Loan Council and reasonable direct access
to the nation's finances.
Central to our concepts of regionalism are devolution
of decision-making and public participation at the regional
and local levels to give the people a say in matters
affecting them directly. The Coombs Royal Commission is
examining the regionalisation of Australian Government
administration with the aim of improving the delivery of
government services to the citizen and of giving the citizen
easier access to the array of services provided by different
levels of government.
At the Constitutional Convention on 3 September 1973
I put it that regionalism was a logical and necessar-extension
of the federal system. I said:
" Why did we create this Federation? The answer
is partly to alleviate inequalities between
regions, between colonies. Why did we accept
the Financial Agreement of 1928? The answer
is to alleviate inequalities between the States.
Why did we establish the Grants Commission? To
reduce even further inequalities between the States.
Much of the object of our history, the thrust of
our traditions, a deep part of the purpose of our
being one nation, is to alleviate inequalities. The
task now is to alleviate inequalities between regions;
our new regions, our new pattern of development know
little of the borders and boundaries established in
Whitehall last century."
It is ironic indeed that some of the Constitution's
clearest intentions and the clearest intentions of the
Constitution-makers in the 1890' s are still so strongly resisteC~
in the 1970' s.
A striking example is the resistance to the reconstitut'
of the Inter-State Commission. Section 101 requires the
appointment of the Commission . The section reads:
" 1101. There shall be an inter-State Commission,
with such powers of adjudication and administration
as the Parliament deems necessary for the execution
and maintenance, within the Commonwealth, of the
provisions of this Constitution relating to trade
and commerce, and of all laws made thereunder." 
-11-
The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review, to
which I was appointed in 1956, unanimously recommended in 1959
the reconstitution of the Commission. It was, as I mentioned
earlier, one of the undertakings I gave in 1972 and repeated
in 1974. I don't recall in all those years any suggestion
that the Commission or the proposal to reconstitute it was in
any way sinister. Yet our intention and more our positive
undertaking to re-establish the Commission has been stalled
in the Senate and you may have noticed some of the denuciations.
For example, the New South Wales Minister for Federal
Affairs, Mr Hewitt was reported on 26 August in Tuesday's
Sydney Morning Herald as saying:
" The bill is more in keeping with the practices
of Nazi Germany than a federal democracy such
as Australia".
The-fact is that the Commission would do the job
intended by the Constitution to help solve the problems,
particularly transport problems, inherent in a federal system,
inherent in the continental nature of Australia herself.
There are the current examples of Bass Strait freight rates,
Victorian transport costs to the Riverina and the cancellation
of shipping services operated by Associated Steamships
from Fremantle to the eastern States. As I wrote on this last
matter to the Premier of Western Australia, Sir Charles Court,
on 13 August: " The Australian. Government's intention to
re-establish the Inter-State Commission, which
has been delayed by the Opposition in the
Senate, is designed to examine and seek solutions
to problems of this nature involving competing
modes of transport. In the absence of legislation
re-constituting the Commission, Government
intervention in matters of this kind is beyond
power under the Constitution." m
To sum up the approach of the Australian Labor GovernmE
to the federal system:
the national Government has involved itself
directly in financing and planning of a wide
range of new functions, particularly where
national involvement is crucial to the
achievement of equality of opportunity and
equality of services,
in its relations with the States, the national
Government has accepted or is willing to accept
financial responsibility for services, the
provision of which has hitherto imposed the
heaviest burdens on State budgets. Yet at the
same time we have increased general purpose
grants at a significantly increased level. / 12 
-12-
* We have embarked upon co-operative planning
at both the Ministerial and official level
on a continuing basis in those areas where
national and State responsibilities overlap
or dovetail.
* We have developed a regional policy to provide
community services which cannot be as well
provided by any of the existing levels of
government acting alone.
* Local government is becoming a genuine partner
in the federal system and is securing direct
access to the nation's financial resources.
In contemporary Australia, the questions about
structures, systems and powers the sort of concern expressed
in the old slogans about centralism or States' rights are
more likely to be the preoccupation of politicians, public
officials, the press and, perhaps, academics, rather than
the general public. The people's concern will not be so much
who performs a function, but how well it is performed in
terms of their needs and wishes and hopes.
The program of the Australian Labor Party, as developed
in Opposition, as implemented in Government, has been very
much about an attempt to bring our federal system and our
federal machinery up to date, at least to a degree already
achieved by comparable federal systems, particularly those
of Canada, West Germany and the United States.
For more than a generation, the old approach to the
Australian federal system the buck-passing of responsibility
between governments, the crude confrontation at the annual
charade of the Premiers' Conference exploited the federal
system at the expense of the Australian people. The limitations
of the Constitution were used by all governments of all
parties Federal and State as an alibi. Canberra exploited
the system to justify indifference; the States used it to
justify inertia. I might say in passing, that Liberal
Premiers sometimes think that I am abrasive about their
unwillingness to come to terms with new realities; let me
say at least that I am even sharper with any Labor leader
or State branch who uses the alibi of the federal system to
justify their failure to develop policies either relevant to
that system or particularly relevant to the needs of the people
of their States.
Be that as it may, the fact is that for a generation and
more, other federal systems were attempting to move ahead, to
grapple with the new problems created by the New Society these
highly urban, highly mobile, highly technological civilisations.
We lagged behind.
In very many important respects urban development,
transport, health, welfare, education our program was developed
and designed to match these new realities and to match what was
already being done in modern comparable federal systems. 
-13-
It is interesting some may say ironic that just
when the Australian Government and the Australian system began
to catch up in terms of what had been done abroad in Federal
systems long ago, the results achieved in other systems should
come under a new and searching and critical scrutiny, indeed
a fundamental reappraisal. The new concern is whether the
objectives sought by the range of new federal programs are
actually being met. Are they delivering the goods to the
people they are designed to benefit? Are the expectations raise,-,
by the promise fulfilled in the reality? Have they produced
benefits proportionate to their cost? Have they created
welfare or merely a welfare bureaucracy? These are proper
questions already being asked, particularly in the United
States. We should certainly be asking them here about our
own programs. I should be the last to suggest that--there are
no lessons to be learnt from overseas experience, from the
experience of comparable federal systems, except those that
were to be learnt up to December 1972.
It is further interesting to note that, in the
United States, the new questioning about the efficiency,
equity and responsiveness of federal programs comes especially
from concerned liberals, from Democrats, from the heirs of
the New Deal and the authors of the Great Society.
But this new scrutiny would miss its mark if it mistook
failures in specific methods for failures of ideals and objectives.
It would be a travesty and a tragedy it trie onjectives
of welfare, of equality, of civil liberties, were to
be discredited simply because of flaws in the means by which
governments, here or abroad, were attempting to achieve them.
Knowing how quickly we imitate trends of discussion
in the United States, I think it very likely that it will
become fashionable here quite soon to decry and deride and
strive to discredit the great post-War effort towards
collective and community social welfare and social equality
made in the United States, as well as in Europe, in Britain
and in Australia herself.
From those who seek to enshrine inequality, there is
going to be a great deal of talk about " enforced equality".
Such arguments will miss the point entirely. President Johnson
proclaimed the Great Society. The ends which were sought have
not been achieved. The expectations aroused have not been met.
All sorts of reasons are given and there is truth in them.
But if the vision splendid has dimmed, let us remember that
beyond the actual shortcomings of the programs, in both
conception and execution there was a fundamental contradiction
which lies at the root of the failure of the Great Society.
The contradiction was that even the United States, for all its
unparalleldd wealth and power, could finance both the Great
Society and the war in Indo-China without damage to herself
and all of us. And just as that fallacy is at the root of the
failure of the vision of the Great Society, it is at the root
of half the economic problems we all face today. Let us bear
that in mind, before we pass judgement on the success or failure
of federal government-sponsored welfare programs, either in
the United States or in Australia. / 14 
-14-
Nonetheless, the scrutiny of such programs must be
undertaken are they efficient, are they equitable, are they
really responding to the needs and wishes of the people.
That scrutiny is being undertaken by this Government. The
Budget itself was part of that process as the Treasurer
put it: " A time to pause and take stock, a time to
consolidate".
We want a continuing scrutiny to go on in co-operation with
the other Australian governments at all levels at the
federal, State and local levels, at the political and
administrative levels.
I believe the record of the past two and a half years
justifies the assertion that the Australian Government has
tried to inject a new life into the Australian federal system
and a new meaning into Australian federalism.
It has not been done through any mindless, centralist
doctrine, but by a genuine effort to build more modern,
efficient machinery at all levels of government. It has
been a genuine, creative, constructive, co-operative effort
to make Australian federalism more efficient, more equitable
and, above all, more responsive to the people of Australia
wherever they live. 



IA L
. I US ' ALA.
J 4
PR8SVE S~ S Press Statement No. 548
27 August 1975
NEW MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL AND ITS CONSTITUENT BOARDS
The Prime Minister today announced the names of
new members of the Australia Council and its constituent boards.
Mr Whitlam said that on 30 June 1974 he had
implemented the principle of an annual rotation of membership
for the new organization and normally one third of the membership
positions would have been filled now. When the Australia Council
Act was proclaimed in March last, however,, it was necessary for
the members to be appointed immediately to the Council and
Boards. Because of the need to preserve some continuity of
experience in the Council and Boards at that time the Prime Minister
had invited those members-who were due to retire on 30 June-1975
to accept re-appointment to 30 June 1976. However, some members
had been unable to continue and a number of vacancies had occurred
in the Council and on the Boards.
The Prime Minister said the new appointments included
people who had put their names forward in response to a public
request by the Council for people wishing to serve in this way.
He expressed his thanks to the many hundreds of people who had
offered their services and said these names would be kept on a
permanent register for future reference when new vacancies occurred.
Mr Whitlam said that he wished to express his gratitude
to the retiring members. " Without the generosity and enthusiasm
of these people we would not have succeeded in generating : the
degree of activity and wide interest in the arts which have become
apparent over the last two-and-a-half years."
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 
MEMBERS APPOINTED FOR A THREE-YEAR PERIOD TO 30 JUNE 1978
COUNCIL Professor C. Manning Clark
Mr William Ferris
Mr Jim Spigelman
BOARDS VISUAL ARTS BOARD
Mr Michael Shan-non
MUSIC BOARD A. C. T. Historian, Writer
N. S. W. Managing Director,
International
Venture Corporation
N. S. W. Secretary,
Department of the Media
Vic.
Mr John FalkVic. Painter
Manager, Planning and
Evaluation, Conzine
Riotinto of Aust Ltd.
Dr Martin Wesley-Smith
LITEPATURE BOARD
Mr Michael Wilding
Mr John N. Bryson N. S. W. Composer; conductor;
lecturer in electronic
music
N. S. W. Reader in English,
University of Sydney;
author and publisher
Vic. Managing Director,
Bryson Industries Ltd.
FILM, RADIO AND TELEVISION BOARD
Mr Tom Jeffrey ( Chairman)
Mr George Klein
Mr Brian White
Mr Michael Williaems N. S. W. Television producer;
former member of the Board
Tas. President, Hobart Film-
Society; Audio-Visual
Resources; Registrar,
Tasmanian College of
Advanced Education
N. S. W. Radio journalist;
filmscript writer.
QLD. Film-maker ./ 3 
33..
ABORIGINAL ARTS BOARD
Mr Bobby NgajmirraN. T.
Mr Walter PukutiwaraS. A.
Mr Billy StockmanN. T. Traditional bark
painter; Elder of the
Oenpelli community
Accomplished
' Pitjantjatjara
craftsman; member of
Amata community
Traditional painter;
Chairman of Papunya
Community Council. 



INTERVIEW BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER AND RICHARD CARLETON
STATE OF THE NATION -28 AUGUST 1975
Q. Well, Mr Whitlam how's it affected your running of this
country having as you do the threat of an election hanging
over your head every day?
Prime Minister: I've got used to it. A year ago it would have been
very oppressive to me now we just go on regardless. And
you know we haven't been frozen in our tracks by this
constant threat, for instance, I think we are still a
very active, I think, creative Government... you know,
all these tax reforms, doesn't look as though we're just
looking for next month or next year.
Q. But if you were confident that you had two years ahead of
you would last-Tuesday's Budget have been the same paper?
Prime Minister: Yes, yes, it is on that basis because there can
be no swift change brought about in six months or twelve
months.
Q. Would you not last Tuesday week have brought in more
adventureous, less politically attractive tax proposals if
you could have been sure that you had two years before
the next poll?
Prime Minister: No, no. We wanted to bring in the tax changes
we did partly because we thought they were fair. Partly
because we thought that they would encourage people who
needed encouragement.
0. Do you think the uncertainty of the threat of an election
hanging over you all the time is causing the Westminster
system and our two party or three party system to be a
little less suitable for our day and age now?
Prime Minister: That may well be. There's no question, it is an
aberration to have a Government which is elected for three
years under our system under threat of having to face the
people every six months. This is an aberration and of
course it did last year hinder us quite a lot, but I think
we have got used to it and we are going on as if we have
until the middle of ' 77.
Q. How should the system be changed now in the long term so that
this shouldn't happen again?
Prime Minister: Well, one thing is, of course, that the Constitution
should be changed to requirethat whenever there is an
election for the House of Repyesentatives, there is also an
election for half the Senate. Thereby you bring home to the
Senators, a sense of responsibility. If they decide there is
to be an election for the other House then half of them have
to face an election themselves too. The evil of the present
System is that you can have people deciding there's an election 
even although the people making that decision don't have
to face the people themselves. If you synchronise the
elections for the two Houses that will be a very great
improvement a great safeguard.
Q. Mr Whitlam, when things go wrong in the Labor Party and
goodness knows you've had your fair share of troubles
since you've been Prime Minister. When they go wrong,
do you sometimes despair and wonder whether it's worth
all the effort you're putting into it?
Prime Minister: of course.
Q. When was the last time that you've had one of these'downs'?
Prime Minister: I don't know. I'm pretty resilient. I recouperate
fairly quickly. But of course, I and my wife too
sometimes wonder ' is it worth it' but we always decide it is.
Q. Are you a moody person? Some of your colleagues one talks
to around the Parliament say oh, don't go near him
today, he's in such a damn bad mood, sort of thing..... he'll
bite your head off.
Prime Minister: I will bite peoples heads off that's true.
But I get over it very quickly. I'm not a brooding or
vindictive person. I will flare up, sure, but it's soon
over.
Q. But what about moody for a week....
Prime Minister: No, I don't think I'm moody. I sometimes maybe
pensive.
Q. Pensive?... Is the Cabinet system as you've got it now, is it working
well? I mean in those Cabinet meetings that you've had
there are you getting an exchange of views amongst your
Ministers now-a-days?
Prime Minister: It is improving. Obviously they are better than
when they first came in. The Ministry is very much better
as a result of the changes that I made the first
significant changes I made since we got in a thousand
days ago. The 4-hanges I made in July. Now the Minist . y
is very much better as a result of that. We wouldn't have
been able to get so good a Budget as we'vye produced but for
those changes.
Q. But though, you would like this Parliament to run another
two years, three years from...
Prime Minister: Of course it should*.
Q. But in terms of real -pol-itik to use that hackneyed phrase
that it is turning out to be, how long do you really think
the Parliament will run? 
3.
Prime Minister: I think it will probably run, I think the chances
are better that it will run till the middle of ' 77 than it
will run only to the middle of ' 76.
Q. Why, do you think Mr Fraser won't have the guts to pull it
on next year?
Prime Minister: No, I don't put it in that way, I'm-not wanting to
have any of that sort of confrontation or brinkmanship.
Malc olm Fraser has got, I think, a better sense of propriety
than his predecessors as leader of the Liberal Party
I think that he looks a bit further ahead because he would
hope to be a Prime Minister himself someday and he would
know that two can play at this game and things can be bad
politically or economically as they have been economically
since we've come in everywhere in the world and a Government
can be deterred from doing the right thing by the fear
that it may have to face the people in the next few months.
I think we've got over that fear a year ago, it's true
enough that we were oppressed by this idea that there might
be an election again at the end of ' 74, there might be in
the middle of ' 75, but we got over that and I think we now
think that the better, the more successful course is to
go for the long haul, you just can't get a quick solution,
you won't get support for trying for a quick solution.
Q. You said two can play at this game does that mean that
you've gone back on your earlier undertaking that you'd
never knock back supply...
Prime Minister: No I haven't, I haven't, that is very strongly
my riew I would still say that if for instance the Labor
Party was in Opposition and I was in the Parliament, I
would still think it improper to use a majority you had in
the Senate or half the numibers because that's all you needhalf
the numbers in the Senate to refuse supply. I had
a big battle in Caucus on that in 1967 I won it and it
is till my view but quite frankly, if Supply was refused
by the Senate a second time, it would obviously be very
much more difficult to keep one's colleagues to the proper*
course thereafter.
0. Your expectations a probability I'm putting words intov your
mouth, I suppose, but the probability is in your mind th't
Supply next year will go through.
Prime Minister: I believe that is probabi x
Q. Sir, with hindsight, Mr Barnard's resignation was that a
mistake politically.
Prime Minister: Ah oh yes, it was obviously in the light
of the result yes.
Q. What about your going overseas last Christmas again with
the benefit of hindsight, was that a mistake politically?
Prime Minister: No, I would do it again, it was time that a Prime
Minister visited countries which-are so economically important 
4.9 9,
to us and from which so many migrants have come. I know I
had a terrible blast and the polls were bad but look after
the Terrigal conference, look after the deposition of
Mr Snedden we soared the electorate is very volatile
and I will do what I think is the right thing and one of
the things that a Prime Minister has to do is from time to
time, make overseas visits nobody can represent his
country as effectively as a Prime Minister.
Q. Can. I suggest to you, though, Sir, that because you went on
that trip and the tag is now attached to you -Whitlam
the tripper overseas and that sort of thing -are you
going to have to wear that and wear the effect of it
electorally.
Prime Minister: Maybe I will, and I shall and I don't mind it was
my duty to go. It was time that a Prime minister did visit
some of those countries I mean, we had got on the wrong
foot throughout the 1960s with every member of the Common
Market it was about time that somebody went from Australia
and showed a cooperative attitude.
Q. You haven't committed yourself as to whether or not you'll
be going away this Christmas.
Prime Minister: No, but if I do go, obviously it has to be at a
time when Parliament is not sitting which means one goes at
Christmas or in mid winter.
Q. Would you like to go away again this Christmas?
Prime Minihter: I'd like to, of course, but no arrangements have
been made. If I think I should I shall.
Q. No one would accuse you of being lazy in the job but can
I ask you to ponder on the question of whether or not
you spend your time efficiently, spending as you do,
so much time tripping around Australia giving these
learned discussions and learned papers to these miniscule
audiences in such out of the way places -there's
tomorrow er, where are you going, up to the north coast
of New South Wales, Murwillumbah?
Prime Minister: Yes I am, but I'm not giving a lecture and it won't
be a miniscule audience what happened is, I've been
asked months ago, I was asked if I'd open the new Civic
Centre in Murwillumbah well why not I don't suppose
a lot of people are yet accustomed to the idea of a Prime
Minister arousing interest in local government circles well
my Government has shown a very great interest in local
government, so I've been asked and I'm free to go, and I'll
get pleasure out of it and I would guess that the public
around there will show some interest in it, or even pleasure.
Q. Surely there's more electoral kickback for you that's the
business you're in, of winning votes there's more kickback
for you if you get out on the stump in Sydney or Melbourne
to a big crowd. 
Prime Minister: But I do constantly it's true that I would have
been to the outback to remote places, not that Murwillunibah's
terribly remote it's only about an hour and a quarter from
here by air, but it's true that I would have been to
these places more than any other person who's had this
job but after all most of my engagements of course are in
Sydney and Melbourne. And if I give a learned address
as I did last night in Canberra or as I did a fortnight
ago, in Melbourne there'd been hundreds in Canberralast
night a thousand in Melbourne. Sure I put quite a lot
of Work into it but they were important occasions, important
subjects and I'll use the research that I put into it on
these two occasions to other purposes. I know, but you can't
be on the job the whole time, and I can't get any great
relaxation going to a bowling club or that because people
will always say I don't want to talk shop, BUT now I
might as well go where I enjoy it, to some of these
country towns and I've had some excellent days there and I
enjoy it and they seem to.
Q. In politics as in everything else, everyone loves a winner
but do you feel in your own Caucus now that there's a
fair bit of criticism of you in the way you're handling
the job.
Prime Minister: Oh I suppose there is but they seem to be fairly
satisfied that I'm a satisfactory person to lead them.
Q. Only fairly satisfied you're not...
Prime Minitter: Well, you'll think I'm terribly egocentric if I
exgressed the view which I believe they hold of me.
Q. What are your relationships with...
Prime Minister: After all a great number of them wouldn't be there
but for me and they think the best chance of augmenting their
numbers is with me now does that satisfy you?
Q. How does it satisfy the Caucus might be another question.
Prime Minister: Well they've wt shown any dissatisfaction.
. Mml'
Prime Minister: But they're entitled to I welcome, I mean if anybody's
got a complaint about me I'd rather them tell me even in a
Caucus meeting than to bottle up about it.
Q. What are your relationships now like with Mr Rupert Murdoch?
Prime Minister: I haven't seen him for a couple of months actually.
0. Last time you saw him was it-a friendly meeting or...
Prime Minister: Yes, yes always, yes.
Oh, he's a would be politician so like all politicians, we
learn to dissemble. 
6.
Q. A would be politician...
Prime Minister: Well, I think that one of the shortcomings of
the media in Australia is that people that run the newspapers
would in fact like to run the country I mean there's
some sad desicated characters like Warwick Fairfax
there are some thrusting ones so far frustrated like
Rupert Murdoch.
Q. What, frustrated because he's not running the country?
Prime Minister: Yes.
0. I see. Sir, you've often expressed your admiration
of the Public Service in many speeches but are some areas
of the Public Service letting your Government down?
Prime Minister: Oh, I wouldn't say that the Public Service is
a superbly competent dedicated lot of people I mean I
know I see the permanent heads and the second division
people and the hours they work and the ideas they come
up with, the way they'll respond to a lead is remarkable.
I think we have done a very good job as a Government a
whole range of issues right basic changes and reformswe
couldn't have done any of them without the assistance
of Public Servants.
Q. Sir, would you rate the State Premiers on a scale between
more uncooperate and the most cooperative.
Prime Min~ ster: Oh, all of them are uncooperative when they beli eve
it suits them.. every one of them. Now I haven't graded
them all I must confess I've got through a few since I
was there.
Since I came in there's been a change of Premier in Western
Australia and in Tasmania and in New South Wales.
Q. Sir, what are the expectations...
Prime Minister: I mean you want me to give a gquite obviously
ah, Mr Dunstan and I have achieved most in cooperation
because Mr Dunstan saw the wisdom and he has benefited
from it in cooperating promptly with the initiatives th'at my
Government has taken in the whole range of activities. 2.-'
Q. Sir, one of the expectations I suggest that a lot of people
placed in you when you came into Government was that you do
away with a lot of the featherbedding and the sectional
interest influence over the process of Government. Things
that came up in the Combes' report the superphosphate
bounty things like that. Now, has the actual system of
Government the two party system and your Caucus system
prevented you from being as thorough in this area as you
would have like to have beeun?
Prime Minister: Oh, of course, it has oh yes, we haven't been
as thorough and as fully rational as we wanted to, and
particularly a year ago there was a loss of morale and
People started handing out hundreds of thousands or in some 
cases millions, to prop up industries or particular
companies which had, without justification as it turned
out. At least we did it openly when we gave money
to A. P. P. M., I said well at least put it in an Act of
Parliament don't conceal it. I'm not particularly keen
about it, but if the Opposition is against it, make them
stand up and defeat it well of course they didn't.
Q. We'll just end now, but just to end on, how's Mr Fraser
been going as Opposition leader?
Prime Minister: Magnificently in the media.
Q. How do you think you'll go against him in the...
Prime Minister: I mean in the newspapers in the newspapers
I'm not suggesting in the electronic media Oh, I think
he'll be pretty heavy going in an election you know,
I think it's been shown since the Budget you know, his
first reactions were quite off key to the Taxation reforms
which are the biggest things which have happened in this
field for a quarter of a century he got off on the wrong
foot completely he showed his hand -he showed that
he was still the elitist and still the dyed-in-the-wool
conservative.
Q. Do you think you can beat him?
Prime Minister: Yes give me a campaign and I'll beat him or anybody
else the Liberals put up.
Q. Wall, Mr Whitlam, thank you for appearing on STATE OF THE
NATION tonight.
Prime Minister: Thank you. 



INTERVIEW BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER AND RICHARD CARLETON 31
" THIS DAY TONIGHT" 28 AUGUST, 1975
CARLETON: Good evening and welcome to This Day Tonight from Canberra.
If there was an election tomorrow then few would give Labor any
chance at all of being returned to power. But of course there's
not going to be an election tomorrow and if Mr Fraser is as good
as his word, there won't be an election at all this year, and
that's possibly just as well for the man who tomorrow celebrates
his 1,000th day as Prime Minister of Australia.
CARLETON: Mr Whitlam, do you think its possible to pinpoint any
particular reason or group of events that'll explain that great
turnaround from the euphoria of Decemuber 1972 when you swept into
power, to the doldrums that you're in now?
PRIME MINISTER: I think there are two matters, both continuing
matters, not sudden matters: one is economic and is universal;
one is political and is peculiar to Australia alone.
CARLETON: Well, explain the political one first.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, the process of obstruction that my Government
has been subjected to in the Parliament. This is a process of
obstruction which no previous Australian Government has ever
endured and also it is a process which was never forecast at the
1972 and the 1974 elections. Now this is, of course, a very great
difficulty for government and for business. They're always kept
in a state of uncertainty.
CARLETON: But how does that obstruction explain your low standing,
or your Government's low standing in the community. Because you
can't-. get those particular Bills through the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh yes, well there's almost a score of them.
Also, of course, there's not only the obstruction of the Senate,
there's obstruction by State Governments which have challenged
legislation which has gone through the Parliament in the High
Court and then there has been a general obstruction by all the
parliamentary devices which have been discovered in the last two
and a half years.
CARLETON: Well you seem to be suggesting, Sir, that if you could
have got those Bills through that are under challenge in the Courts
or by the States or in the Upper house, then you would be less
unpopular than you are at present
PRIME MINISTER: of course, a very great amount of the legislation
which we have got through is obviously beneficial but it's taken a
dickens of a time to get it through. Take the Trade Practices
legislation; everybody now applauds it. It took a year and a
half to get it through. Then look at the various Securities
legislation which has been foreshadowed for about four years.
It's still stalled. There's no doubt that the people would benefit
from it if it had gone through in the normal process. There's
legislation like the offshore resources. It was brought in by
our predecessors five and a half years ago and it's still under
challenge in the courts. Now there's no doubt that we'd benefit
if this matter had been resolved years ago. 
-2-
CARLETON: You'd be more popular if those...
PRIME MINISTER: Well, there's no question that these pieces of
legislation are inTportant. They were put to the people and presumably
endorsed by them at successive elections and they're been stalled
by one means and another.
CARLETON: Now on the other side, the economic side, universal as
the problem might be, why can't Labor, Labor of all parties, cure
unemplo yment and cure inflation?
PRIME MINISTER: Well you can ask why can't Governments of both
sides of politics cure unemployment at the moment. Wherever you
go, in North America, Western Europe and Australia, you get the
worst unemployment for 30 or 40 years. Now we may be responsible,
some people would think, for the position in Australia. We
obviously aren't responsible for the position in North America,
where it is worse, and in Western Europe, where it is just as
bad. Some countries are worse, some countries not as bad.
CARLETON: How do you look back to that 1972 campaign though, where
you berated Mr McMahon right round the country when unemployment
then was approaching two per cent?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, its twice as bad now, of course it is, but it's
at least twice as bad in every other country too.
CARLETON: Sir, if things look....
PRIME MINISTER: There's no country in the world that's anything
like Australia where unemployment is not worse than it was 2h-3 years
ago. CARLETON: Sir, since the Budget of last Tuesday, I think politically
things have been looking up for the Labor Party.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh undoubtedly, undoubtedly.
CARLETON: It's only ten days admittedly...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
CARLETON: . but nevertheless...
PRIME MINISTER: But things change very quickly in politics.
Your original statement of course overlooks, I would suggest, the
fact that politics everywhere in the world is very volatile at
the moment, and during the course of an election campAign things can
do change quite remarkably. If you look back 2 years ago,
most of the people who were heads of government then, no longer are.
In the present circumstances I've been remarkably durable.
CARLETON: You've done well to survive do you think?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes indeed.
CARLETON: You have done well to survive?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you look around how many people who were
Presidents or Prime Ministers in December 1972, in comparable
countries, still are? 
-3-
CARLETON: Let's go back to the Budget then of last Tuesday, sir,
and I'll suggest that your stocks are looking higher over the
last ten days.
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly.
CARLETON: Now every armchair economist and yourself also, talking
of about this...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I'm an armchair economist!
CARLETON:., Talking about business confidence, now how do you
measure this ephemeral thing how do you know when your Government
has got the confidence of business?
PRIME MINISTER: When business is making decisions to employ more
people or buy more equipment.
CARLETON: It's as simple as that?
PRIME MINISTER: They're the principal things.
CARLETON: Sir you've got to hold a half-Senate election before...
PRIME MINISTER: Before the end of June next year.
CARLETON: Yes. When are you going to hold it?
PRIME MINISTER: May or June.
CARLETON: It certainly won't be the end of this year?
PRIME M4INISTER: Oh no. I wouldn't be thinking so. I know there
has been a practice to hold elections for half the Senate in
the preceding December. My own view always has been that you
should have the Senate representing the people's view as close
to the time they take office as possible. I think May or June.
CARLETON: Sir, what chance do you -think that your Government has
got of persuading the unions to accept that very special form of
indexation that you are asking them to accept now, namely that
the tax increases that came from last Tuesday week's Budget, are
not included in the indexation calculation for the next quarter?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh we've got a reasonable chance of persuading
the unions to it, but of course where we have to persuade is before
the Arbitration Commission, and every State Government has been
persuaded by us to support our general approach in these National
Wage Cases. This has been a remarkable achievement. After all what
a government does is not merely what is done fiscally, its also
what is done monetarily, and what is done in respect to incomes
and we have a remarkable success in putting our point of view to
the Arbitration Commission in respect of incomes and I hope we
will continue to.
CARLETON: Why did you finally 5ack Mr Cameron?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that Senate James McClelland could do
the job better. I transferred Mr Cameron; I didn't sack him.
I've sacked one man. But obviously the changes that have been made
in the Ministry have strengthened the Ministry. We couldn't have
got as good a Budget as we have, had I not made those changes a couple
of months ago: the first significant changes, incidentally, for 2 years. 
-4-
CARLETON: Sir, have the farmers the beef industry aside have
the farmers still never had it so good?
PRIME MINISTER: Well in some cases obviously in the sugar.
industry that would be the case.
CARLETON: You're being very specific there. What about the
wo6l industry itself?
PRIME MINISTER: Well you can't say primary production as a whole,
because obviously primary production varies according to weather
and according to overseas markets. Overseas markets for sugarhave
never been so good. Overseas markets for beef have never
been so bad. But you can't blame us for the beef markets.
After all, if Japan or Werstern Europe cut down entirely and if
America compells us to make voluntary restraints, you're left
in the lurch, and this has been a very cruel thing for them to do.
CARLETON: Has Mr Connor lived up to your expectations as Minister
for Minerals and Energy?
PRIME MINISTER: In many respects, more respects, yes. In some
other respects, of course, he's had disappointments because, for
instance, of the delays in the courts, or by the States. Obviously,
when it comes to coal markets or arrangements of iron ore or for
pipelines, he's overcome all the resistance overseas and at home.
On things like offshore matters or uranium, there have been
difficulties. CARLETON: What about relations with the business community?
PRIME-eMINISTER: Well, the coal producers swear by him. They've
never had it so good.
CARLETON: What about Mr Hawke? Do you think he'll succeed you
as Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. He has to get into Parliament.
Look, for the last 12 years for the last 12 years I have been urging
Mr Hawke to go into Parliament. I still do, but I think he ought
to get a move on. He has to make the decision.
CARLETON: Sir, on a program like this it's obligatory really to
ask you what's been your greatest success in this 1,000 days,
and what's been your greatest failure?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose the greatest successes have been in
the fields of education, hospitals, now taxation reform those
would be the big ones.
CARLETON: And on the other side?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh well, we are victims, of course, of this
general economic malaise and we've had to learn the hard way to
cope with it.
CARLETON: Yes, but what have you done that has been an actual
failure that you shouldn't have done?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don't want to be specific you can discover
those things. It's too close to me. 
CARLETON: Mr Whitlam, we'll leave it there for now if we may,
but point out to the audience that you've agreed to appear on State
of The Nation later tonight where we'll look at some of the more
philosophical aspects of your Government and your own very
particular style of leadership.
PRIME MINISTER: Is this just a commercial?
CARLETON: A commercial for later tonight.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh.
CARLETON: Thank you so much for now. 



2
SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER AT THE OPENING OF
MURWILLUMBAH CIVIC A ND CULTURAL CENTRE, 29 AUGUST, 1975,
1. IT GIVES ME VERY GREAT PLEASURE TO BE WITH YOU
TODAY FOR THE OPENING OF THIS MAGNIFICENT CIVIC AND CULTURAL*
CENTRE FOR MURWILLUMBAH. IT'S MY SECOND VISIT To DOUG'. ANTHONY'S
ELECTORATE IN TWO MONTHS, SO YOU COULD BE FORGIVEN FOR
THINKING THERE'IS A NEW COALITION IN THE OFFING. WE ARE
CERTAINLY UNITED IN OUR CONCERN FOR THE WELFARE AND PROGRESS
OF COUNTRY REGIONS LIKE THIS NORTHERN RIVERS AREA OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
2. WHEN I WAS IN LiSMORE EARLY IN JUNE FOR THE
OPENING OF OZANAM VILLA HOSTEL FOR THE AGED, DOUG ANTHONY
TOLD ME THAT THIS CENTRE IN MURWILLUMBAH WAS CLOSE TO
COMPLETION AND THAT I REALLY SHOULD ACCEPT ANY INVITATION
TO COME AND SEE IT FOR MYSELF. IAM DELIGHTED TO OBSERVE
THAT THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MEMBER FOR RICHMOND DIDN'T
EXAGGERATE ITS VIRTUES. 
0
21
3. MIND YOU1 I HAVE A SNEAKING SUSPICION THAT HE
WANTED ME TO NOTE THE PROGRESS WHICH HAD BEEN MADE AND THE
SPENDID RESULTS ACHIEVED BY THE TWEED SHIRE COUNCIL IN
SUCH A SHORT TIMES BELIEVE THAT THE ARCHITECT WAS APPOINTED
IN' 1973 AND TODAY WE HAVE THIS SUPERB COMPLEX SO ATTUNED
TO THE NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY OF MURWILLUMBAH AND SO
COMPLEMENTARY TO THE TWEED HEADS CIVIC AND CULTURAL CENTRE
OPENED A FEW MONTHS AGO,
4. THE DEBATE -NON-PARTY, OF COURSE -ON A NEW AND
PERMANENT PARLIAMENT HOUSE IN CANBERRA HAS TAKEN MUCH LONGER.
MANY A FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARIAN WOULD HAVE TO SMILE WANLY
ON READING ABOUT THE PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED BY LOCAL COUNCILLORS
BEFORE THIS NEW EDIFICE CAME INTO BEING:
" THE LARGEST SINGLE ENTERPRISE-IN THE SHIRE AND
THE BIGGEST EMPLOYER OF LABOUR, NAMELY THE SHIRE COUNCIL,
HAS CONDUCTED ITS BUSINESS IN A CHAMBER THAT IS NOISY AND
ALMOST DEVOID OF COMFORT FOR THOSE WHO MAKE DECISIONS
INVOLVING MILLIONS OF DOLLARS EVERY YEAR, AND WHICH AFFECT
EVERY MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD IN THE DISTRICTS MOREOVER THE
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF, WHICH HAS INCREASED IN NUMBERS TCf
MEET THE COMPLEXITY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN A DEVELOPMENT
AREA, HAS BEEN WORKING UNDER CONDITIONS WHICH MITIGATED AGAINST
A HIGH STANDARD OF SERVICE," s''/ 3 
I THINK YOU SHOULD PREPARE FOR A LARGE INFLUX FROM
CANBERRA AS NEWS OF THIS CENTRE GETS AROUND,
BUT THE BEAUTY OF THIS CENTRE LIES NOT ONLY IN
THE ELEGANCE OF THE FORMAL MEETING ROOMS AND THE EXCELLENCE
OF THE FACILITIES PROVIDED FOR ELECTED COUNCILLORS AND
COUNCIL OFFICERS IN DEALING WITH THEIR BUSINESS OF SERVING
THE COMMUNITY, BUT ALSO IN THE BREADTH OF CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
ENVISAGED IN THE TOTAL CONCEPT OF THE CENTRE.
LIKE THE IPSWICH CIVIC CENTRE WHICH I HAD THE
PLEASURE OF OPENING LAST MONTH, THIS CENTRE INCORPORATES A
SPENDID AUDITORIUM SUITABLE FOR ALL KINDS OF MUSICAL OR
THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES AND EXHIBITIONS, AND IS ABLE TO
DOUBLE AS A VENUE SUITABLE FOR BALLS, CABARETS, SCHOOL
DANCES AND THE LIKE, IN OTHER WORDS, THE WHOLE COMMUNITY
WILL BE SERVED BY THIS CENTRE, THE LIFE OF THE WHOLE
COMMUNITY, FROM SCHOOL CHILDREN TO ELDERLY CITIZENS, WILL
BE IMPROVED THROUGH ACCESS TO THIS CENTRE.
6. IT SPEAKS VOLUMES FOR THE INITIATIVE OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT BODIES THAT SO MANY OF THEM HAVE SEEN THE NEED
TO CATER FOR CULTURAL PURSUITS WHEN PLANNING NEW CIVIC
BUILDINGS. 
SINCE LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT
CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE, IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT THIS CULTURAL
INITIATIVE SHOULD STEM FROM THIS GRASS ROOTS LEVEL.
I CONGRATULATE PAST AND PRESENT COUNCILLORS AND
THEIR ADVISERS ON THEIR VISION AND PERSISTENCE IN GETTING
THIS PROJECT OFF THE GROUND. GENERATIONS OF MURWILLUMBAH
RESIDENTS, NOT TO MENTION VISITORS, WILL HAVE CAUSE TO BE
GRATEFUL TO YOU FOR GIVING THEM THE OPPORTUNITY OF DEVELOPING
THEIR OWN TALENTS AND TO APPRECIATE THE TALENT OF OTHERS.
7, I FEEL SURE THAT THE AUSTRALIA' COUNCIL, WHICH
ADMINISTERS THE ARTS PROGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
WILL DO WHAT IT CAN TO HELP DEVELOP STANDARDS AND NURTURE
TALENT IN THIS AREA. ALREADY A SUBSTANTIAL GRANT HAS BEEN
MADE TO THE ART CENTRE IN MURWILLUMBAH FOR DEVELOPING
PROGRAMS INVOLVING BOTH YOUNG PEOPLE AND ADULTS IN THE
ARTS, WITH EMPHASIS ON SMALL GROUP ACTIVITIES IN LITERATURE,
FILM AND DRAMA, AS WELL AS A SMALL ORCHESTRAL ENSEMBLE.
ANOTHER GRANT WILL ENABLE THE CURIOUSLY TITLED YELLOW BRICK
ROADSHOW TO TOUR THE NORTHERN RIVERS AREA, SO YOU CAN SEE
THAT ALL TASTES ARE CATERED FOR. S, 
8, IN THE END, HOWEVER, THE MOST IMPORTANT SINGLE
ELEMENT OF THIS NEW CENTRE MAY PROVE TO BE THE NEW
REGIONAL LIBRARY, WHOSE ESTABLISHMENT WILL FILL AN
IMMENSE GAP IN THE CULTURAL LIFE OF MURWILLUMBAH FOR
YOUNG AND OLD ALIKE,
IT IS SOBERING TO REALISE THAT BEFORE THIS,
MURWILLUMBAH NEVER HAD THE BENEFIT AND STIMULUS OF A
FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY, DESPITE THE FACT THAT AS SEAT OF
GOVERNMENT FOR THE TWEED SHIRE, IT WAS THE CENTRE OF THE
MOST DENSELY POPULATED RURAL SHIRE IN AUSTRALIA, WHAT A
SAD REFLECTION ON THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS WHICH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO SEE RECTIFIED,
I AM GLAD TO SAY THAT IN THIS, AS IN SO MANY
OTHER QUALITY OF LIFE AREAS, THERE IS A BELATED RECOGNITION
OF THE INJUSTICE INHERENT IN THOSE PREVIOUSLY ACCEPTED
INEQUALITIES, ONLY LAST WEEKEND I OPENED THE BIENNIAL
CONFERENCE OF THE LIBRARY ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA, WHICH
WAS BEING HELD IN MELBOURNE, AND THERE WAS A GREAT DEAL
OF DISCUSSION ABOUT HOW LIBRARY SERVICES COULD BE BEST
UTILISED IN RURAL AREAS IN ORDER TO REDRESS THIS OBVIOU.' J
INJUSTICE, / 6
L 
-6-
As I SAID IN MY SPEECH TO THAT CONFERENCE,
" CERTAINLY THE TASK OF PROVIDING EFFICIENT PUBLIC LIBRARY
SERVICES IS MUCH MORE DIFFICULT IN THINLY POPULATED
RURAL AREAS THAN IT IS IN COMPACT CENTRES OF POPULATION
IN CITIES AND TOWNS, BUT THERE IS NO REASON WHY THE
CITIZENS OF MELBOURNE SHOULD HAVE ACCESS TO BETTER
LIBRARY SERVICES GREATER FREEDOM OF INFORMATION THAN
THE CITIZENS OF ECHUCA OR GEELONG." I COULD AS EASILY
HAVE SAID SYDNEY AND ORANGE OR MURWILLUMBAHI
1 WENT ON TO SAY THAT THERE IS A LONG TERM NEED
TO CO-ORDINATE AND RATIONALISE ALL LIBRARY SERVICES: AND
THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT IS HAPPENING HERE. THE RICHMOND TWEED
REGIONAL LIBRARY WAS FORMED IN 197' 4 BY THE TWEED SHIRE
COMBINING WITH LISMORE CITY AND BALLINA MUNICIPAL COUNCILS,
THUS ENSURING THE CIRCULATION OF BOOKS BETWEEN LIBRARIES
AT LiSMORE, BALLINA, TWEED HEADS, AND NOW MURWILLUMBAH.
AND THAT HAS THE EFFECT OF VASTLY INCREASING YOUR INITIAL
BOOK STOCK OF 8,000 VOLUMES TO BETTER SERVE ALL YOUR
BORROWERS. IMPROVED SCHOOL LIBRARY SERVICES IN THE SHIRE
WILL BE A FURTHER ADJUNCT TO THIS EXCITING DEVELOPMENT.,
11. FINALLY I PAY TRIBUTE TO EVERYONE ASSOCIATED
WITH THIS PROJECT, FROM THE TWEED SHIRE COUNCILLORS AND
EMPLOYEES THROUGH TO THE ARCHITECT AND BUILDERS AND SUPPLIERS
AND EVERYONE WHO HAS HAD A HAND IN THE PREPARATIONS FOR
TODAY'IS OFFICIAL OPENING. IPAY PARTICULAR TRIBUTE TO THE
CRAFTSMEN RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EXQUISITE TIMBER PANELLING
AND COPPER INLAYS THAT ARE SUCH AN ATTRACTIVE FEATURE OF THE
COUNCIL CHAMBER ITSELF. at17 
-7-
IMUST SAY THAT WHEN JOHN GORTON ONCE ACCUSED
ME OF SOUNDING LIKE A SHIRE PRESIDENT, THERE WERE THOSE WHO
CHOSE TO CONSIDER IT AN INSULT. I CONSIDE-RED IT A
COMPLIMENT AT THE TIME. AND I WOULD FIND IT A PRIVILEGE
INDEED TO BE PRESIDENT OF THE TWEED SHIRE COUNCIL ON A
DAY LIKE TODAY WITH THIS MAGNIFICENT PROJECT A REALI. TY.
I HAVE VERY MUCH PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN
THE MURWILLUMBAH CIVIC AND CULTURAL CENTRE. TO BORROW
YOUR OWN WORDS " MAY IT SERVE THE CITIZENS OF THE TWEED
SHIRE UNTIL WELL INTO THE 21ST CENTURY. MAY IT ENCOURAGE
THEIR INVOLVEMENT IN CULTURAL PURSUITS AND ADD TO THEIR
ENJOYMENT OF LIFE. cI I'
CIL, I
A l Q
4 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER Emag8.0pm C
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE
WOMEN AND POLITICS CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, 31 AUGUST 1975
For most of this country's history women have
lived without visible political power; they have been excluded
from almost all levels of government in our society. The
momentous decisions of war and peace, of finance and technology,
as well as the everyday decisions which affect how all people live,
have been made by a minority of individuals who happen to be
born white and male. Women whether they be conservative, liberal
or radical should be fully represented in the political power
structure simply as a matter of right: not just because they are
women, but because they are capable human beings with skills,
aiities and creativity from whom the world has much to gain.
We all of us live in this man-made, man-defined
and man-controlled world. But if women are to change it they
need to understand the complex processes of this world. They
need to understand how economic, political, educational and
organisational power interacts with and affects their daily lives.
Determination to have a say in matters affecting the lives of
women is not sufficient. Women must learn how to make their words
effective. Women must learn how to bring about those changes they
want, be it in their own lives or in the institutions in our
society that affect them.
It was a genuine determination to bring true
representative government to all levels of government in Australian
society and to allow women full access to all those institutions
whose decisions are of as much concern to them as to men that
prompted the Australian Government to hold this conference. The
aim of the conference is to understand the lessons that the past
can teach us in this area, to bring about a greater awareness of
the political processes and to increase the participation of
women in political activities. It is, in other words, our
intention to bring about, in the course of this conference, a
greater understanding of the means by which women can participate
in the making of political decisions and the difficulties that
will confront them in so doing.
Many of the women who have fought and worked so
hard in the past, in the parliament, in the parties, in the
trade unions and outside in the community are here with us tonight
and during this conference. We have much to learn from them and
are deeply grateful to them for being prepared to share their
wisdom with us. We have also invited women from other countries to
help us in this task that we have set ourselves. I take this
opportunity to welcome these distinguished and outstanding guests
both to this conference and to our country. It is a pleasure
and an honour for us that you have accepted our invitation to
attend. The claim that the rights of men and the rights of
women are one and the same, particularly in the political arena,
is a time-honoured one though, sadly, too often either disputed
or dismissed. 
one of its outstanding defenders was Mary
Wolistonecraft who in 1792, 3 years after the outbreak of the
French Revolution and 4 years after the establishment of the
British colony in Australia, published her Vindication of the
Rights of Women. Her theme is that women are first and foremost
human beings, that the mind has no sex, and that society is
wasting its assets if it retains women in the role of convenient
domestic slaves and alluring mistresses, denies them economic
independence and encourages them to be docile and attentive to
their looks to the exclusion of all else.
She claims that the full achievement of social
equality will not come about until women begin to take an interest
in politics and in particular in parliamentary representation.
The Sydney suburb of Wollstonecraft is named after
her nephew, Edward, who fled to Australia from the notoriety of
his aunt, an unrepentant and outspoken unmarried mother.
The fight for the right to vote and the right to
sit in parliament left Australian women relatively untouched
and unaware. In England the King and the Prime Minister could
not even go to the races without facing a demonstration by
suffragettes. In 1908 in Hyde Park, London, women gathered from
all over the United Kingdom to listen to the preachers of the
cause. the Times next day estimated that there were half a
million people there. ( For comparison, even the great civil rights
demonstration in Washington in the summer of 1963 at which Martin
Luther King made his " I have a dream speech attracted fewer
peo~ ple than this.) There was nothing like this in Australia although
in Victoria a suffrage petition one mile long was collected by the
women and refused lodgement by the parliament.
The issue in Australia which in fact brought women
into the political and social arena and forced them to become
politically active was the anti-conscription campaign during the
First World War. Adela Pankhurst, who had migrated to Australia
some years earlier, fought, marched, and was imprisoned along
with our own women over this issue. For the first time women
were seen by governments, political parties, and trade unions,
as a force to be contended with rather than mere political domestics:
brewers of tea, bakers of cakes and very efficient raisF-rs of money.
The dilemma is that women have actively sought
election to our parliaments and have actively fought to have
women's issues seriously discussed within them. Yet over the
decades success at either of these endeavours has been at best
only sporadic. The political activity of women began first with the
establishment of women's unions in the 1880' s and 1890' s, in
Victoria in the clothing trades, in Queensland amongst the women
shearers and in South Australia as a direct protest against the
sweatshop working conditions-of the majority of women workers.
The first woman trade union organiser, Emma Miller, was appointed
in Queensland in the 1890' s. Women's unions were seen as a
necessary step in the fight to win economic equality and 
3.
subsequently political equality.
Women were on the whole agreed, as Vida Goldstein
herself said, that through not having women in parliament the
energy and valuable time of individual women and women's organisation
had to be spent on the often herculean task of educating members
up to a point of seeing the injustices affecting women.
Groups formed with the aim of increasing the
poli , tical representation of women. At times these were affiliated
to a political party as, for example, were the Women's Central
Organisat * ing Committees of the A. L. P. and the Australian Women's
National League, but time and time again women's groups such as
the Australian Women's Party, the Women for Canberra Movement, the
Women's non-Party League, the Women's Political Association and
the Women's Electoral League prided themselves on their
independence from the existing political parties.
These groups supported women candidates in spite
of the overwhelming historical evidence that few independents
are ever elected to parliament and despite the knowledge that in
the practical conduct of political life there is on the whole
a limit to what an indpeendent parliamentarian can achieve. Doris
Blackburn, the second woman to be elected to the House of
Representatives, was one of the few independents to have ever
sat in it. This is not to say that women have not stood for
the Federal and State Parliaments. Indeed up until 1943 when
the first women were elected to the Federal Parliament Dame Enid
Lyons to the House of Representatives and Senator Dorothy Tangney to
the! Senate at least 53 women had stood for the Federal Parliament.
Of these, 33 stood as independents and 2 were sponsored by the
Australian Women's Party. But during these 42 years only 7 women
were pre-selected by a major party. The story was much the same
or worse in the state parliaments. The first woman to be elected
to any parliament in Australia was the Honourable Edith Cowan,
who was elected to the Western Australian Legislative Assembly in
1921, the year after women were first given this right in Western
Australia. She, along with Catherine Spence, who was one of
Australia's greatest champions of the cause of proportional
representation, has been honoured in our recently released set
of stamps of famous women.
Within the ranks of those women who havEi worked
throughout the decades to bring about the, changes needed by
women there was a similar division between those women who felt
that women's issues were best served by remaining outside of party
politics and those who insisted on the necessity of working from
within the political parties. The first stance has been best articulated,
perhaps, by Rose Scott, whose retirement message was: " Have
friends in all parties, that is the only way to win anything..
Once women go into party politics they become the catspaws of men.
The women's and children's cause should stand alone until absolute
equality is obtained." 
As, however~ the women around Rose Scott increasingly
involved themselves in issues relating to women and children they
became more and more caught up in party politics. The Women's
Labour Leagues and the Women's Liberal Leagues were formed. The
same thing happened to Vida Goldstein in Victoria when, in 1903,
Lilian Locke and many other women withdrew from-the Women's
Political Association to organise the women's vote for the Labour
Party. Once pre-selected or elected there still remains
a host of problems which women face and which they no doubt will
continue to face until a woman politician is as everyday a
phenomenon as a man politician.
Women campaigning for election in Australia have
often found their male opponents only too willing to use slogans
such as, " Do we have to suffer another term of ineffectual prattle,
or do you want a strong man in Parliament?", or " I am just your
man, and will answer you man to man." These examples are not drawn
from the 1900' s but from the 1960' s.
In 1959 when the first women were nominated for the
South Australian Legislative Council, a writ was taken out to
restrain the returning officer from accepting their nominations
on the ground that the South Australian Constitution Act used male
pronouns. Of course, it's only in 1975 that that particular legislative
body has accepted " one man, one vote".
Another insight can be gained from Dame Enid Lyons'
autobiography: " Two months before the new baby was born I was
asked to speak at the opening of the Federal election
campaign. At five o'clock on the day of the meeting
I was totally unprepared. I had had a particularly trying
day, with no time to make a note or even to collect my
thoughts. " And now, it was nearly the children's bedtime.
I felt desperate. With the bath water running and the
milk for the children's tea heating on the stove I
sat down at the dining table with pencil and paper.
" I was tired to death. The baby on my knee was
crying with fatigue, the other children were quarrelling
noisily. Suddenly I burst into tears. This was hot
fair. No man was expected to endure such things. When
Joe prepared a speech I silenced the whole house so that
he could concentrate on his * task."
It cannot be said, however, that women in politics
have no sense of humour. In 1943 Mrs Jessie Street stood for
the Labor Party against Mr Eric Harrison and Mr William Charles
Wentworth IV. She deciddd to take advantage of her name: strips
of paper were printed and pasted on the walls, coping stones and
street signs throughout the electorate. Soon the most prestigious
roads, avenues, lanes and cul-de-sacs in Australia all bore the
name Jessie Street. But from the lessons and the fascination of the past
we must turn to the present. 
My government has long recognised that discrimination
against women is incompatible with human dignity and the wellbeing
of society. our policies and programs in this area have, to date,
been based on two basic principles: justice and humaneness.
The aim of these policies and programs has been to give women the
pre-conditions necessary for them to be able freely to choose the
lives they want to lead. To do this women must have the possibility
of a-little peace of mind as well as the possibility of financial
and emotional independence. It is only just and fair that women enjoy equal
pay for work of equal value, access to training and retraining
schemes, equal opportunities in recruitment and promotion and decent
working places. It is also only just that women should not be
expected to bear full responsibility for the rearing and care of
our future generations. Many women will, of course, choose to
accept the-brunt of this responsibility but for these women, as
well as for those women who cannot or who are contributing to our
society in other ways, there still remains the need for access
to a wide range of services for their children.
in order to correct these past injustices, to
respond to the demand for equality, the government's actions
have included the establishment of anti-discrimination committees
in each State as well as at the national level, ratification of
the 1953 United Nations Convention on the Political Rights of
Women and the I. L. O. Equal Remune-ration Convention, 1951, and
Discrimination ( Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958,
submissions to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission for
equal pay for work of equal value and an adult minimum wage and
the establishment of a sub-committee of the Schools Commission to
investigate and make recommendations on the education of girls
and women. We have introduced a program of childhood services
designed to respond to the needs of young children and their parents
whether these needs are for occasional care, regular care,
education, counselling, creative development, emergency care,
before or after school care: or holiday care. For this financial
year $ 74 million has been allocated to this program.
In Australia more than in most countries decisions
and advice on political matters have been made and given by statutory
bodies and royal commissions. In 1948 the last Labor government
amended the Broadcasting Act to require that at least one of the
Australian Broadcasting Commissioners shall be a woman. My
government has deliberately sought talented and qualified.
women for appointment to such entities. For the first time, for
example, women have been appointed to the Arbitration Commission,
the Industries Assistance Commission formerly the Tariff Board),
the National Health and Medical Research Council and the Wool
Corporation, and women have been appointed from the outset to the new
education commissions, Hospitals and Health Services commission,
Children's Commission and Australia Council, Justice Elizabeth
Evatt, who has been chairman of the Royal Commission into Human
Relations, was last week appointed Chief Judge of the new
Family Court of Australia. A woman is expected to be appointed as
chairman of the Consumer Protection Authority which is about to be 
-6
established. In the 1940' s the Foreign Minister, Dr Evatt,
ordained that one third of the diplomatic cadets should be
recruited from women but that requirement was revoked by his
successors. My government appointed the first career diplomatist
as an ambassador and has permitted women diplomatists who marry to
pursue their careers These posts are within the-gift of the government.
The government, however, cannot appoint public servants other than
heads of departments. Accordingly, the Royal Commission on
Australian Government Administration, which includes a woman, is
inquiring into the opportunities which must be given to women
in the Public Service. It has also been of deep concern to us that we
lessen the distress and suffering that women face and respond
sensitively to social problems affecting them. We are concerned
about the problems facing all women in Australia, be they young
or old, Aboriginal or newcomers, married or unmarried, English
speaking or non-English speaking.
It is the second principle, that of humaneness,
that has prompted us to fund women's refuges, women's health
centres, rape crisis counselling centres, family planning centres
and multi-purpose centres where the health, welfare, educational,
training, workforce, legal, recreational and child-care needs of women
can be met. We have removed the sales tax from the pill and for
the first time in the history of Australia have recognised that
supporting mothers form one of the largest groups below the
poverty line and introduced a supporting mothers' benefit.
The Royal Commission into Human Relationships has
the task of informing and educating us about the extent and
the effects of these social problems. It is an overwhelming task
for ours is a society which is loath to admit that problems such
as these even exist. Marriages do break up; women do die at the
hands of back-yard abortionists; children are battered; people;
particularly women, do live in extreme poverty; unwanted children
are born; men and women do commit suicide; women are raped;
children are homeless. Before we can act in this area we must
know why all this is so and what can be done to change it.
We have removed many areas of discrimination and
injustice, but we feel very deeply that governments must take
some responsibility in removing the cause of this discrimination,
of these injustices, the Cause lies invariably in the deeply
ingrained cultural assumption that every woman's primary role is
that of daughter, wife, mother, mother-in-law, or grandmother;
nurse, secretary, teacher or shop assistant: the deeply ingrainea
assumption that women are here to serve or assist. The
well-being of men and children within our society must not be
at the expense of the wellbeing of their wives and mothers.
For this is too high a price to pay. 
-7
Women are as diverse, as different from each
other, as are men. We must create a society which acknowledges
this. This is not to say that within that society women may not
freely choose to be wives and mothers and teachers. It is
impossible for us to foresee what such a society would look like.
But it is to say that women must be allowed to develop their
diverse and multi-faceted potential.
International Women's Year has-~ given us an opportunity
to focus on this aspect of our society. It is an opportunity to
make explicit the attitudes which our society has about women,
an opportunity to question and re-think the assumptions, beliefs,
prejudices and opinions about women, their so-called " proper"
roles and their capacities. Each woman and man in our society must
become aware of these attitudes and myths, for it is these that are
the root cause of s-o much of the distress and suffering
experienced by women in our society today. To change these
attitudes, to offer women new possibilities and new life patterns
is our task for International Women's Year and beyond.
To take just one area of concern to this conference there
is a wealth of cliches oft repeated by politicians and researchers
as to why women vote the way they do. Women, they say, are
personality voters, that is they vote for the candidate with the
sexy smile or the fatherly air. Women, they say, vote as their
men tell them. Women, they say, are mindless voters. Women, they
say, do not vote for women. Women, they say, are innately
conservative voters. It is obvious that these " truisms" cannot
all be true, and it may well be that none are. But it certainly
is true that it is time that these assumptions and myths were
questioned. The claim, for example, that women are conservative
voters is often interpreted to mean that they are more likely
than men to be conservative on policy issues. But gallup polls
taken in Australia over the last couple of decades show that
this is not true. Women hold much less conservative views on,
for example, capital punishment or conscription, though they often
hold more conservative views on issues such as legal reform,
prostitution and the permissive society. Hence women's voting
patterns cannot be the result of a general conservatism.
It could rather be seen as a reaction to the sort of
life that women lead, to their day to day experiences. The
permissive society has not benefited women at all. Womien are
all too often exploited in sexual relationships, women all too
often find themselves taking second place to their husband's
mates. If women are conservative voters, this could well be a
response to a society that they do not particularly like and
within which they all too often come of f second best.
Women lack a sense of political efficacy. Playing the
role of voter does not in itself give rise to political awareness.
It hardly suffices to bring'politics to the centre of the voter's
consciousness. More voters-are influenced or changed by personal
discussion than any other means, and women lack such opportunities. ./ 8 
8
It is often said, and truly, that the home limits
women's exposure to political experience and information. But
one of the most enlightening changes that has recently occurred
is that women are insisting more and more that concerns of the
home be the concerns of politics, that the personal be the
political. Child care, family planning, housework and so on
are now becoming issues for the political arena. To this extent
women are in the process of trying to re-define and to re-describe,
the political. I am not here however to lecture women about the
responsibilities of citizenship or the need to join political
movements or to be politically active. Women are in politics.
They know how to organise. They recognise their needs. But
now is the time to define and formulate their demands and to
seek a full share in political power and leadership. It is my
deep belief that what is good for women will in turn be good for
the entire society.
4 



PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST
RELBUDGiET
SUNDAY 31 . AUGUST -1975
I WANT TO DISCUSS WITH YOU SOME ASPECTS OF THE
BUDGET WHICH THE PARLIAMENT HAS BEEN DEBATING DURING
THE PAST WEEK., YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT THE BUDGET MADE A
SWEEPING REFORM OF THE INCOME TAX SYSTEMx IT'S BEEN
PERFECTLY CLEAR FROM THIS WEEK'S DEBATE THAT THE OPPOSITION
HAS NO CREDIBLE ALTERNATIVE TO OUR ECONOMIC STRATEGY AND
CERTAINLY NOTHING TO COMPARE WITH OUR TAX REFORMS
MR FRASER'S PROPOSALS OFFER NOTHING WHATEVER TO THE PEOPLE
MOST IN NEEDx THE GREAT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN US IS THIS:
WE ARE REFORMING THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX SYSTEM TO GIVE
RELIEF TO THE MAJORITY OF TAXPAYERS AND MAKE THE SYSTEM FAIR
TO ALLx THE BEST THAT MR FRASER COULD PROPOSE IS SOME
TINKERING WITH THE EXISTING TAX SCALESx UNDER THE OLD SYSTEM
DEDUCTIONS FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES, EDUCATION, SUPERANNUATION
AND OTHER EXPENSES WERE WORTH MYCH MORE TO THE WEALTHY MAN
THAN TO PEOPLE ON LOWER INCOMESx THE WEALTHY MAN PAID LESS
FOR THE THINGS WE ALL NEEDx UNDER OUR NEW SYSTEM, NOT ONLY
WILL MOST PEOPLE HAVE MORE MONEY TO SPEND AFTER TAX IS
DEDUCTED; BUT EVERYONE'S DEDUCTIONS FOR EXPENSES WILL BE
WORTH EXACTLY THE SAME" 
2,
HERE'S A FIGURE TO REMEMBER: OVER THE NEXT
TWO FINANCIAL YEARS THE AMOUNT COLLECTED IN PERSONAL
INCOME TAX WILL BE NEARLY ONE BILLION DOLLARS LESS
THAN IT WOULD HAVE BEEN UNDER THE OLD LIBERAL
SYSTEMX THAT'S A MASSIVE SAVING TO THE TAXPAYERX
AND DON'T FORGET THAT OUR TAX CUTS AREN'T SOME VAGUE
PROMISE: THEY ARE ALREADY IN OPERATIONA BECAUSE
THEY INVOLVE SUCH EXTENSIVE AND COMPLEX CHANGES IT
WON'T BE POSSIBLE TO GET THE EXTRA MONEY INTO YOUR
PAY PACKETS UNTIL THE BEGINNING OF THE NEW YEARX
BUT IN FACT YOUR TAX SAVINGS ACTUALLY STARTED TO
ACCRUE ON THE FIRST OF JULY LASTx ,/ 3 
APART FROM ANYTHING ELSE, THE DEBATE THIS
WEEK HAS SHOWN JUST HOW JUDDLED AND EVASIVE ARE THE
OPPOSITION'S ECONOMIC POLICIES, BECAUSE-WE HAD TO
TACKLE INFLATION THERE WERE SOME THINGS IN THE BUDGET
THAT NONE OF US LIKE, WE ANNOUNCED HIGHER CHARGES ON
CIGARETTES, BEER, SPIRITS, PETROL AND RATES FOR POSTAGE
AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS, WE SAW THESE AS AN ESSENTIAL
PART OF OUR PLAN TO RAISE REVENUE AND REDUCE THE
BUDGET DEFICIT. AS SOON AS THESE CHANGES WERE ANNOUNCED
THEY WERE ATTACKED BY THE OPPOSITION. MR FRASER HIMSELF
ATTACKED THEM IN HIS SPEECH ON TUESDAY NIGHT. YET
WITHIN 24 HOURS MR LYNCH, THEIR DEPUTY LEADER, WAS
FORCED TO ADMIT THAT EVERY ONE OF THESE HIGHER CHARGES
WOULD BE SUPPORTED BY THE OPPOSITION, IN OTHER WORDS,
AS SOON AS THE OPPOSITION WERE FORCED TO DO THEIR SUMS,
THE MOMENT THEY HAD TO JUSTIFY AND EXPLAIN THEIR
POLICIES, THEY ADMITTED THAT OUR ECONOMIC MEASURES
WERE . SOUND AND JUSTIFIED. WE HAD THE EXTRAORDINARY
SPECTACLE OF THE OPPOSITION LEADER IN THE SENATE,
SENATOR WITHERS, ATTACKING THE NEW CHARGES AT THE VERY
MOMENT MR LYNCH WAS SUPPORTING THEM. 
YOU'LL NOTICE THAT THE OPPOSITION ARE
ALWAYS TALKING ABOUT CUTTING GOVERNMENT TEXPENDITURE.
MR FRASER SAID HE WOULD SAVE $ 1000 MILLION IN EXPENDITURE
CUTS. YET HE AND HIS COLLEAGUES KEEP ON PROPOSING
MEASURES WHICH WOULD PUSH EXPENDITURE FURTHER AHEADMORE
FOR DEFENCE, MORE FOR THE SCHOOL, WITH THE HIGHEST
FEES, MORE FOR CADET CORPS, MORE FOR CERTAIN INDUSTRIES. 1
THEY NEVER SPELL OUT CLEARLY WHERE THEIR CUTS IN EXPENDITURE
WOULD COME FROM. MR FRASER GAVE A LIST OF SO-CALLED
SAVINGS IN HIS SPEECH THIS WEEK, IT SIMPLY DOESN'T
BEAR EXAMINATION. HE TALKED OF SUSPENDING OUR GROWTH
CENTRE PROGRAM, OF CUTTING BACK LOANS FOR NEW HOUSING,
OF SCRAPPING OUR LEGAL AID SERVICE, OF ABANDONING URANIUM
EXPLORATION, OF DISPOSING OF OUR GAS PIPELINES,
* THESE PROPOSALS WOULD BE DISASTROUS ENOUGH IN THEMSELVES,
BUT THEY STILL WOULDN'IT LEAD TO SIGNIFICANT ECONOMIES.
TRY AS HE MIGHT, MR ERASER COULDN'T MAKE HIS SAVINGS ADD
UP TO ANYTHING LIKE $ 1000 MILLION. MR LYNCH HAD TO
EXPLAIN LATER THAT MR FRASER WAS ONLY GIVING EXAMPLES
OF THE CUTS THE OPPOSITION WOULD MAKE. IN OTHER WORDS0,
MR FRASER IS HOLDING OUT ON US. IT DOESN'T TAKE MUCH
IMAGINATION TO SEE WHERE THE REAL CUTS WOULD COME FR . M
IF THE LIBERALS HAD THEIR WAY. THEY WOULD COME FROM
OUR PROGRAMS FOR THE CITIES, FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT*
FOR BETTER PUBLIC TRANSPORT, FOR DECENT SCHOOLS, FOR
BETTER HEALTH SERVICES AND HOSPITALS, FOR ADEQUATE SOCIAL
SECURITY. THE PEOPLE WHO-WJOULD PAY FOR MR FRASER'S
ECONOMIC POLICIES ARE THE POOR, THE NEEDY, THE SICK,
THE CHILDREN, THE AGED, THE PEOPLE WHO LIVER IN NEWER
SUBURBS AND COUNTRY TOWNS.
.1 
MR FRASER'S POLICIES WOULD MEAN A SAVAGE ATTACK -ON
THE LIVING STANDARDS OF THE VAST MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS, IT IS EASY TO SEE MR FRASER'S DILEMMA.
WHILE HE APPROVES OF THE SIZE OF OUR DEFICIT AND
HAS SAID AS MUCH HE STILL ADVOCATES FURTHER
CUTS IN TAXES MAINLY TO BENEFIT THE WEALTHY AND
MORE EXPENDITURE ON SUCH THINGS AS THE SUPERPHOSPHATE
BOUNTY MAINLY TO BENEFIT WEALTHY FARMERS LIKE
MR FRASER HIMSELF, WELL, HE CAN'T HAVE IT BOTH
WAYS, THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD NO FRIEND OF
THE GOVERNMENT SUMMED IT UP THIS WAY:
" IT WOULD SIMPLY NOT BE POSSIBLE TO STEP INTO
-GOVERNMENT AND IMMEDIATELY KNOCK A FURTHER $ 1000
' MILLION OFF GOVERNMENT SPENDING OVERNIGHT,,, UNTIL
THE NECESSARY SPENDING CUTS HAVE BEEN MADE MR FRASER
COULD NOT RESPONSIBLY INTRODUCE HIS TAX CUTS, FOR TO
DO SO WOULD BE TO RUN THE RISK OF EXPANDING THE DEFICIT,
AND MR FRASER RECOGNISES THAT THE DEFICIT MUST, IF
ANYTHING, BE REDUCED," 
64
IN OTHER WORDS, THE OPPOSITION'S REMEDIES
JUST DON'T MAKE SENSEx THEY IGNORE REALITIESx THEY
CONCEAL THEIR TRUE PURPOSESx OUR BUDGET IS THE ONLY
SERIOUS AND PRACTICAL WAY TO TACKLE INFLA'TION, ONLY BY
TACKLING INFLATION CAN WE REDUCE UNEMPLOYMENT. ONLY BY
TACKLING INFLATION CAN WE BOOST BUSINESS CONFIDENCE AND
GET INDUSTRIES TO INVEST IN MORE PLANT AND MORE JOBSA
THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION MUST COME FIRST, MR FRASER'S
ANSWER TO INFLATION IS TO PROMISE INDEXATION OF TAXESX
THAT IS, HE WANTS TO GEAR TAXES TO INFLATION,, THAT'S
NOT A REMEDY FOR INFLATION; IT'S A WAY OF SAYING THAT
INFLATION IS INEVITABLE, THAT WE SHOULD BUILD IT INTO THE
SYSTEM) THAT WON'T GIVE MUCH CONFIDENCE TO THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITYX IF I WERE A BUSINESSMAN I'D RATHER HAVE A
GOVERNMENT PREPARED TO TACKLE INFLATION THAN A GOVERNMENT
THAT SIMPLY ACCEPTS IT AND TRIES TO CONCEAL ITS EFFECTSA
IN THE LONG TERM THERE IS A CASE FOR TAX INDEXATION AND WE
CERTAINLY HAVEN T RULED IT OUT, BUT IT S A VERY POOR
SUBSTITUTE FOR GENUINE TAX REFORM, IT DOESN'T CHANGE
THE EXISTING TAX SCALES, IT DOESN'T GIVE TAX RELIEF TO
THOSE WHO NEED ITx 
IT'S AN INTERESTING COINCIDENCE THAT OUR
TAX REFORMS THE GREAT AND ENDURING THEME OF OUR BUDGET*-
HAVE COME AT A TIME WHEN THE GOVERNMENT IS COMPLETIN G ITS
FIRST 1000 DAYS IN OFFICE,, THOS. E 1000 DAYS CERTAINLY
HAVEN'IT BEEN EASY, WE'VE HAD TO CONTEND ' WITH A WORLDWIDE
ECONOMIC RECESSION, WHEN UNEMPLOYMENT IN EVERY COMPARABLE
COUNTRY HAS REACHED ITS HIGHEST LEVEL SINCE THE DEPRESSIONX
WE'VE HAD TO CONTEND WITH A WORLDWIDE UPSUR GE OF INFLATIONx
WE'VE HAD TO CONTEND WITH WILFUL OBSTRUCTION OF OUR POLICIES
IN THE SENATE AND BY THE STATES. YET DESPITE ALL THIS WE
HAVE MANAGED TO HOLD OUR OWN,. THE RECESSION. IN AUSTRALIA
HAS BEEN MUCH LESS SEVERE THAN IT HAS BEEN IN OTHER
COUNTRIESx AND THROUGH ALL THIS WE HAVE BROUGHT INREFORMS
AND ACHIEVEMENTS OF LASTING BENEFIT TO ALL
AUSTRALIANS., WE HAVE WIDENED THE EDUCATIONAL HORIZONS OF
EM ERY AUSTRALIAN CHILD, WE HAVE FREE UNIVERSITIES, WE HAVE
INTRODUCED MEDIBANK AND THE LEGAL AID SERVICE, WE HAVE LAID
THE FOUNDATIONS FOR BETTER TRANSPORT AND HOUSING AND DECENT
CITIES, WE HAVE GIVEN A NEW DEAL TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
BROUGHT NEW AND PERMANENT STANDARDS OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND
SECURITY. WE HAVE ABOLISHED CONSCRIPTION AND ENDED OUR
TRAGIC INVOLVEMENT IN VIETNAM,, WE HAVE REVITALIZED THE ARTSx
WE HAVE BROUGHT NEW HOPE TO THE ABORIGINES, THE MIGRANI'S
THE UNDERPRIVILEGED IN THE COMMUNITY&gt;, AND NOW, WITH OUR
LATEST BUDGET, WE HAVE BROU GHT RADICAL REFORM TO THE
TAXATION SYSTEM x THOSE 1000 DAYS HAVE BEEN STRENUOUS AND
DIFFICULT AND SOMETIMES PAINFUL BUT LOOKING BACK, THEY'IVE
BEEN WELL WORTH ITA 



QU&gt; S&gt; W( 22
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 551
2 September 1975
VIETNAMESE REFUGEES
The Australian Government has approved the entry
into Australia of 8 South Vietnamese refugees who are on
board a Japanese ship, the Kenkai Maru, which is due to
reach Brisbane tomorrow.
The decision was taken in response to a request
from the Australian representative of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR).
The refugees 3 soldiers and 5 students were
rescued by the Kenkai Maru off the coast of Vietnam. They
were apparently refused permission to land in Bangkok when
the ship called there. The ship's next port of call after
Brisbane will be the North Vietnamese port of Haiphong.
The 8 Vietnamese have been granted temporary
residence in Australia. It is expected that eventually some
of them,. may choose to travel to other countries for
resettlement. CANBERR. A. C. T. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE GERMAN-AUSTRIAN
CLUB JAHRESBALL, CABRAMATTA, 6 SEPTEMBER 1975
1. I AM DELIGHTED TO BE WITH YOU HERE TONIGHT WITH
MY WIFE, BACK IN MY OWN ELECTORATE, BACK AT THE GERMAN
AUSTRIAN CLUB FOR THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY YEAR OF YOUR CLUB
BUILDING. I WAS PROUD TO BE INVITED TO LAY THE FOUNDATION
STONE BACK IN 1965, WHEN I WAS THE DEPUTYLEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION AS WELL AS YOUR LOCAL MEMBER. I THOUGHT THEN
THAT YOU SHOWED GREAT FAITH, GREAT POLITICAL ACUMEN,
I. KNEW THAT YOU COULDN'T BE ACCUSED OF PLAYING REALPOLITIK,
BECAUSE A DEPUTY LEADER OF AN OPPOSITION CAN BE AS FAR
AWAY FROM LEADERSHIP AS THE LEADER OF AN OPPOSITION IS
FROM LEADING THE COUNTRY. BUT I LIKE TO THINK THAT SOME
OF YOU BACK IN 1965 BELIEVED THAT IN YEARS TO COME,
GOUGH WHITLAM MIGHT RETURN AS PRIME MINISTER, AND I DID, IN 1972.
2. IT WASN'T SO APPARENT IN MARCH 1965, WHEN I LAID
THE FOUNDATION STONE, THAT 1965 WAS TO BECOME A WATERSHED
IN GERMANY'S MODERN POLITICAL HISTORY. IN SEPTEMBER THAT
YEAR, 1965, JUST TEN YEARS AGO THIS MONTH, A MAN CALLED
WILLI BRANDT WAS ELECTED TO THE BUNDESTAG. BUT ALTHOUGH
HE WAS CHAIRMAN OF THE SOCIAL DEMOCRATS, HE CHOSE NOT TO
TAKE HIS SEAT IMMEDIATELY BECAUSE HE WANTED TO REMAIN AS
GOVERNING BURGERMEISTER OF WEST BERLIN. ER WAR BERLINER,
TO RECALL THAT GREAT PHRASE OF JOHN F. KENNEDY. I HAVE NO
DOUBT THAT YOU ALL KNOW OF MY OWN GREAT ADMIRATION FOR
WILLI BRANDT. I WAS ONCE ASKED TO NOMINATE THE GREAT WORLD
LEADERS AND STATESMEN OF OUR TIME. a/ 2 
-2]
IHAD NO HESITATION IN NOMINATING WILLI BRANDT; I HAVE NO
HESITATION IN NOMINATING WILLI BRANDT. MY INVITATION TO
HIM TO VISIT THIS COUNTRY STANDS, WHATEVER HIS POLITICAL
FORTUNES. AND AS IT HAPPENS HE IS NOW AGAIN CHAIRMAN OF THE
SOCIAL DEMOCRATS, JUST AS HE WAS IN 1965.
3. BUT ANOTHER EVENT OF GREAT GERMAN POLITICAL SIGNIFICANCE
WAS TO HAPPEN BY THE END OF 1965, AND I DON'T MEAN THE
OPENING OF YOUR CLUBHOUSE BY THE AUSTRIAN CONSUL GENERAL,
THEN AND NOW PROFESSOR FELSER.
IREFER TO THE RESIGNATION, ON CHRISTMAS DAY 1965,
OF KONRAD ADENDUER AS HEAD OF THE CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATICUNION,
A POSITION HE HAD HELD SINCE 1946. HE WAS TWO WEEKS OFF
BIRTHDAY. CHRISTMAS DAY 1965 MARKED THE END OF AN
ERA IN GERMANY.
4. BUT THE LAST DECADE HAS SEEN UNIMAGINED CHANGES IN THE
WORLD, NOT JUST IN GERMANY. THE POST-WAR LEADERS WERE
ALREADY CHANGING IN 1965; SOME INDEED HAD ALREADY GONE.
HOW MANY OF THE WORLD'S LEADERS AND STATESMEN WHO WERE IN
POWER IN 1965 ARE STILL THERE TODAY? THINK OF CHARLES DE GAULLE*
LYNDON JOHNSON, SUKARNO, Ho CHI MINH.-U THANTo
EVEN OF COURSE SIR ROBERT MENZIES. IT IS SOBERING TO CONTEMPLATE.-
BUT WE CAN ALL TAKE HEART FROM THE FACT THAT THE AGELESS
MARLENE DIETRICH ! S STILL WITH US, AND MOREOVER, WITH US IN
AUSTRALIA, TONIGHT, " FALLING IN LOVE AGAIN" 
-3-
OF COURSE, I HAVEN'T HEARD HER SING ADVANCE AUSTRALIA
FAIR YET, BUT I RECALL BEING QUITE ENCHANTED, MANY YEARS AGO,
ON HEARING THE VIENNA Boys CHOIR SINGING VALZING MATILDA AND
GOD SAVE YOUR GRACIOUS QUEEN$ IN THESE DAYS OF FREQUENT
REFUGEE CRISES IT IS WORTH RECALLING THAT AUSTRALIA BENEFITED
IMMEASURABLY BY TAKING CARE OF AN EARLIER TOURING VIENNA
Boys CHOIR, STRANDED HERE AS A RESULT OF THE WAR.
BUT TO RETURN TO ANTHEMS, I MUST TELL YOU OF THE THRILL MY
WIFE AND IFELT WHEN WE ARRIVED IN KO-LN IN JANUARY THIS
YEAR, TO BE GREETED BY A SUPERBLY STIRRING RENDITION OF
BOTH THE AUSTRALIAN AND GERMAN NATIONAL ANTHEMS.
6. WE HAD ONLY TWO DAYS IN GERMANY DURING OUR EUROPEAN
VISIT, BUT VERY FULL AND PRODUCTIVE DAYS THEY WERE, IN
BONN, K6LN AND HAMBURG. RECALLING THE OUTSTANDING CONTRIBUTION
MADE TO AUSTRALIA'S DEVELOPMENT BY MANY THOUSANDS OF GERMAN
SETTLERS AND THEIR DESCENDANTS, IT IS HARD TO BELIEVE THAT
MY VISIT To GERMANY WAS ONLY THE SECOND BY AN AUSTRALIAN
PRIME MINISTER. THE PREVIOUS VISIT HAD BEEN BY SIR ROBERT
C MENZIES 16 YEARS EARLIER. IBELIEVED IT WAS HIGH TIME TO
RECTIFY THAT STATE OF AFFAIRS. Now, MORE THAN EVER, WE NEED
TO RECOGNISE THE IMPORTANCE, THE VALUE OF OUR LINKS WITH
EUROPE. 7. WHILE'I WAS IN GERMANY;' I NOT ONLY HAD THE PLEASURE OF
MEETING FORMALLY WITH THE CHANCELLOR HELMUT SCHMIDT, AND
WITH THE PRESIDENT, HERR SCHEEL, IN BONN, BUT I ALSO HAD
INFORMAL AND VERY FRUITFUL DI-SCUSSIONS WITH THE PRESIDENT
OF THE FEDERATION OF GERMANY INDUSTRY ( THE [ N K6' LNI
a 14 
-4-
IN EACH CASE I WAS ABLE TO REMIND MY HOSTS OF THE GREAT
CONTRIBUTION MADE By GERMAN'Y MIGRANTS To AUSTRALIA, AND OF
THE FLOURISHING CLUBS YOU HAVE ESTABLISHED TO KEEP ALIVE
CUSTOMS AND TRADITIONS OF WHICH YOU ARE JUSTLY PROUD.
8. IN MAY WE RECEIVED A GERMAN TRADE AND INVESTMENT MISSION
LED By HERR GRUENER, PARLIAMENTARY STATE SECRETARY, AND
INCLUDING SENIOR GOVERNMENT OFFICERS AND REPRESENTATIVES
OF PRIVATE INDUSTRY. THIS VISIT AROSE DIRECTLY FROM THE
SUGGESTION MADE BY THE GERMAN FOREIGN MINISTER, HERR GENSCHER
DURING MY VISIT, THAT SUCH A VISIT WOULD BE ESPECIALLY
VALUABLE IN PROVIDING A COMPREHENSIVE UNDERSTANDING OF)
AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN INVESTMENT POLICY. I READILY AGREED.
IN NOVEMBER WE WILL HAVE THE PLEASURE OF THE COMPANY OF
PARLIAMENTARY UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE, HERR MOERSCH WHO
WILL BE VISITING AUSTRALIA AS PART OF A TOUR OF SOUTH EAST
ASIA DESIGNED TO PUT HIM IN TOUCH WITH THE LATEST POST
VIETNAM DEVELOPMENTS IN OUR REGION, ONE THING WHICH WILL
BE OF OBVIOUS INTEREST IS THE PROGRESS MADE BY PAPUA NEW
GUINEA, WHICH BECOMES INDEPENDENT ON 16 SEPTEMBER. SINCE
NEW GUINEA WAS ONCE A GERMAN MANDATED TERRITORY, AND SINCE
AUSTRALIA HAS HAD THE MOST RECENT TRUSTEEESHIP TASK, OUR
INTEREST IS MUTUAL,
ANOTHER VERY IMPORTANT VISITOR SCHEDULED TO COME TO
AUSTRALIA IN FEBRUARY OR MARCH NEXT YEAR IS THE MAYOR OF
WEST BERLIN, HERR KLAUS SCH'UTZ... As I MENTIONED BEFORE THERE
IS A STANDING INVITATION TO -ONE OF HIS PREDECESSORS, WILLI
BRANDT, JUST AS THERE IS FOR CHANCELLOR SCHMIDT AND
FOREIGN MINISTER GENSCHER. s v 
9, FIND IT GRATIFYING THAT TOP LEVEL VISITS OF THIS
NATURE BETWEEN OUR COUNTRIES ARE BECOMING THE RULE RATHER
. THAN THE EXCEPTION, IT IS ONLY PROPER THAT THERE SHOULD BE
MORE REGULAR CONTACT BETWEEN THE LEADERS AND THE PEOPLE OF
GERMANY AND AUSTRIA AND AUSTRALIA. CERTAINLY MANY MORE
AUSTRALIANS ARE TRAVELLING To GERMANY AND AUSTRIA THAN WAS
THE CASE TEN YEARS AGO, NOT LEAST BECAUSE INCREASING NUMBERS
OF AUSTRALIANS ARE WANTING TO SEEK THE SNOW RATHER THAN THE
SUNSHINE DURING THE AUSTRALIAN SUMMER MONTHS.
AND TOURISTS COMING TO AND TRAVELLING ROUND AUSTRALIA
CAN BE IN NO DOUBT AS TO THE CULTURAL CONTRIBUTION MADE BY
AUSTRIAN AND GERMAN SETTLERS IN AUSTRALIA, THE
AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION PRODUCES A
PUBLICATION, N~ OW IN ITS SECOND EDITION, CALLED " AUSTRALIAA
LAND OF THINGS To THIS DEALS WITH THE ATTRACTIONS,
SCENIC, CULTURAL, CULINARY, SPORTING AND RECREATIONAL OF
EACH STATE IN TURN. IT ALSO LISTS THE FESTIVALS WHICH TAKE
PLACE IN OUR MAIN CITIES. THERE AREN'T THAT MANY, AS IT
HAPPENS, BUT THERE IS ALWAYS EITHER AN OKTOBERFEST OR A
SCHUTZENFEST, FROM DARWIN TO SYDNEY. FROM HAHNDORF TO HOBART.
AND WHENEVER I POSSIBLY CAN, I MAKE IT MY BUSINESS TO PROCURE
AN INVITATION WHICH IS VERY EASY -AND TO ATTEND -WHICH
IS OFTEN QUITE HARD.
NOW THIS YEAR I HAVE BEEN INVITED TO BOTH BRISBANE'S
OKTOBERFEST, AND TO YOUR OKTOBERFEST. AND SINCE THIS YEAR
YOUR OKTOBERFEST, OUR OKTOBEFkFEST, IS COMING-HOME To FAIRFIELDAFTER
BEING HELD IN ANOTHER PLACE YOU WILL KNOW WHICH
OKTOBERFEST I WILL ATTEND. I'LL TRY TO GET To BRISBANE AS
WELL, BUT I HAVE A FIRM ENGAGEMENT TO Al [ END OUR OKTOBERFEST 
-6-
ON 4j OCTOBER, AND I LOOK FORWARD VERY MUCH TO SEEING YOU
ALL AGAIN FOR THAT ANNUAL FESTIVAL, HAVE THE FONDEST
MEMORIES OF THE MANY O. KTOBERFESTS I HAVE ATTENDED OVER
THE YEARS., AM SURE THIS WILL BE NO EXCEPTION,
11 IPAY TRIBUTE TO EVERYONE CONNECTED WITH THIS EVENING'S
JAHRESBALL, AS WELL AS THE OKTOBERFEST, AND TO ALL THOSE OF
GERMAN AND AUSTRIAN DESCENT WHO HAVE DONE SO MUCH TO MAKE
AUSTRALIA A MORE DIVERSE, A MORE STIMULATING, A MORE ENJOYABLE
PLACE TO LIVE. AT THE LAST CENSUS IN 1971, THERE WERE 23,941
PEOPLE IN' AUSTRALIA WHO WERE BORN IN AUSTRIA AND 110,811
WHO WERE BORN IN GERMANY. THIS COMPARES WITH 1902 FROM
AUSTRIA AND 38,352 FROM GERMANY WHO WERE HERE IN 1901, THE
YEAR OF FEDERATION.
' THEY AND THEIR DESCENDANTS HAVE GIVEN SO MUCH OF
THEMSELVES AND OF THEIR HERITAGE TO EACH OF THE AUSTRALIAN
STATES AND TERRITORIES IN THE YEARS SINCE FEDERATION,
THAT AUSTRALIA SHOULD BE, AND IS GRATEFUL TO THEM. YOU CAN
BE SURE THAT I STRESSED THIS ON MY VISIT To GERMANY EARLIER
THIS YEAR. THANK YOU FOR WHAT YOU HAVE ALL DONE FOR MY
HEIMATLAND, AND THANK YOU FOR MAKING ME SO WELCOME HERE AND
IN GERMAN AND AUSTRIAN COMMUNITIES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. 
CURRENT PENSION/ BENEFITS
PAID TO PEOPLE RESIDING IN
AUSTRIA AND GERLMANY
Social Welfare Branch
3 September 1975
Pension/ Benefit N. S. W. Total Australian Total
Austria W. Germanv Austria W. Germany
Age 13 23 33 105
Invalid 6 5 14 16
Wives 2 1 4 8
Widows 0 4 3 22
Supporting Mothers 0 1 1 2
Total 21 34 55 153 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR THE OPENING OF EBER BUNKER'S HOUSE, COLLINGWOOD,
LIVERPOOL, 6 SEPTEMBER 1975
1. I IMAGINE IN MELBOURNE TODAY THERE WOULD BE
A MUCH BIGGER CROWD TO SEE COLLINGWOOD THAN
THERE IS HERE IN LIVERPOOL. IN MELBOURNE
THEY HAVE A MUCH GREATER SENSE OF HISTORY.
COLLINGWOOD FANS ARE NUMBERED IN THEIR
THOUSANDS-ESPECIALLY ON SATURDAY AFTERNOONS,
2. COLLINGWOOD WAS THE HOME OF CAPTAIN EBER BUNKER,
THE FOUNDER OF THE AUSTRALIAN WHALING INDUSTRY.
I HOPE NO ONE WILL CONFUSE EBER BUNKER
WITH CLEAVER BUNTON. ONE LIVED IN A HOUSE IN
LIVERPOOL AND THE OTHER SITS IN A HOUSE IN
CANBERRA. BOTH HOUSES HAVE 19TH CENTURY
ASSOCIATIONS AND ARE BADLY IN NEED OF REPAIR.
3. LOOKING BACK THROUGH THE LIST OF FORMER OWNERS
OF COLLINGWOOD, AFTER EBER BUNKER, I FIND THERE
WERE INDUSTRIALISTS, PASTORALISTS, MEAT TYCOONS,
LANDOWNERS AND DEVELOPERS, A FORMER TREASURER
OF SIR SAUL SAMUEL, AND A SECRETARY OF
THE AUSTRALIAN JOCKEY CLUB, GEORGE ROWE. THEY
WERE ALL ADMIRABLE CITIZENS BUT NOT THE SORT OF
PEOPLE WHO NORMALLY SUPPORT MY GOVERNMENT.
WERRIWA WASN'T SUCH A SAFE LABOR SEAT IN THE OLD
DAYS. SO IT'S AN UNEXPECTED HONOUR TO BE ASKED
TO PERFORM THIS OPENING. ,/ 2 
14. WHENEVER I AM GIVEN THE KEYS TO A HOUSE, THE
P-RESS AND THE OPPOSITION ACCUSE ME OF ACQUIRING
ANOTHER OFFICIAL RESIDENCE. THE LODGE,
KIRRIBILLI, AND NOW COLLINGWOOD, I WANT IT TO
BE CLEARLY UNDERSTOOD THAT WHILE COLLINGWOOD
IS IN MY ELECTORATE, IT IS NOT FOR MY PERSONAL
USE. IHAVE TO MAKE THAT CLEAR BECAUSE WE
ARE SPENDING A LOT OF PUBLIC MONEY ON THE
RESTORATION. MANY PEOPLE AND ORGANISATIONS HAVE BEEN0
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS SPLENDID PROJECT. THE
FIRM OF STOCKS AND HOLDINGS HAVE COLLABORATED
WITH LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL IN THE
RESTORATION. STOCKS AND HOLDINGS HAVE GIVEN
$ 10,000 AND CARRIED OUT RESTORATION WORK TO
THE VALUE OF $ 3,000. My GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
GRANTS TOTALLING $ 35,000 THROUGH THE NATIONAL
ESTATE PROGRAM. THE FINAL COST OF THE0
RESTORATION WILL BE ABOUT $ 110,000.
6. WE HAVE BEEN SLOW TO GRASP THE IMPORTANCE OF
OUR HISTORIC HOUSES AND BUILDINGS. ALL TOO FEW
OF THEM HAVE BEEN PRESERVED OR RESTORED,
IAM DELIGHTED THAT ONE OF THE MOST BEAUTIFUL
AND FAMOUS OF OUR OLD BUILDINGS IS BEING
PRESERVED HERE IN LIVERPOOL, A PART OF SYDNEY
WHICH FOR ALL ITS HISTORIC ASSOCIATIONS Is
LACKING IN EXAMPLES OF HISTORIC ARCHITECTURED s / 3 
7,
89 -3-1
IAM HOPEFUL THAT FURTHER FUNDS WILL BE X/' j) Q "
AVAILABLE FROM THE NATIONAL ESTATE PROGRAPI.
THE COUNCIL'S REQUEST FOR A FURTHER GRANT
' OF $ 15,000 HAS 8EEN REFERRED TO THE INTERIM
COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL ESTATE, WHO WILL
SHORTLY BE FORMULATING THEIR RECOMMENDATIONS
TO MR UREN ON TH E 1975/ 76 FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE PROGR AM. AN ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE
NEXT NATIONAL ESTATE PROGRAM IS NOT EXPECTED
BEFORE NOVEMBER,. AFTER THE APPROPRIATION
BILLS HAVE BEEN PASSED AND PROGRAMS APPROVED
BY STATE AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MINISTERS.
My GOVERNMENT FROM THE BEGINNING HAS GIVEN
STAUNCH SUPPORV-TO THE PRESERVATION OF THE
NATIONAL ESTATE -THE UNIQUE AND BEAUTIFUL
THINGS, THE THINGS WORTH KEEPING IN OUR
COUNTRY IN OUR FIRST FULL FINANCIAL YEAR,
1973-74, NO FEWER THAN 101 NATIONAL ESTATE
PROJECTS WERE APPROVED AT A COST OF $ 2.5 MILLION.
LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WE PROVIDED $ 8 MILLION
FOR NATIONAL ESTATE PROJECTS, ( I17576 ( hAd 3e7 a// a cqe
ILOOK FORWARD TO THE DAY WHEN THE RESTORATION OF
THIS BUILDING IS COMPLETED AND IT CAN BE SEEN
IN ALL ITS FORMER DETAIL AND PAST GLORY. IT
WILL DRAW VISITORS To LIVERPOOL FROM ALL OVER
AUSTRALIA. IT WILL BE A FITTING REMINDER OF
ONE OF OUR GREAT PIONEERS AND THE SUPERB
ARCHITECTURE OF A PAST AGE.-I CONGRATULATE
ALL THOSE WHO HAVE MADE POSSIBLE THIS PROJECT. 



EMBARGO: 5PM UDAY
PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST L
THE REAL THREAT TO MEDIBANK
SUNDAY 7 SEPTEMBER 1975
IN MY BROADCAST LAST WEEK I MADE THE POINT THAT
WHILE MR FRASER KEEPS TALKING ABOUT THE NEED TO CUT
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE, HE NEVER SPELLS OUT CONVINCINGLY
O WHERE THE CUTS WOULD COME FROM IF THE LIBERALS HAD THEIR
WAY) I SAID LAST WEEK: " IT DOESN'T TAKE MUCH IMAGINATION
TO SEE W ERE THE REAL CUTS WOULD BE MADE... THEY WOULD COME
__.-FROM OUR PROGRAMS FOR BETTER HEALTH SERVICES AND HOSPITALS,
FOR ADEQUATE SOCIAL SECURITY) THE PEOPLE WHO WOULD PAY
FOR MR FRASER'S ECONOMIC POLICIES ARE THE POOR, THE NEEDY,
THE SICK11 I SUPPOSE I SHOULD HAVE GIVEN THE LIBERALS MORE
CREDIT FOR FRANKNESSy AT THE VERY MOMENT I WAS ISSUING
THIS WARNING MR CHIPP LET THE CAT OUT OF THE BAGk. HE SPELT
O OUT QUITE CLEARLY AND UNMISTAKABLY IN BRUTAL AND
UNEQUIVOCAL TERMS THAT IF THE LIBERALS GOT BACK INTO
OFFICE THE FIRST THING THEY WOULD DO WOULD BE TO KILL
MEDIBANKk THERE WAS NO HEDGING OR QUALIFICATION ABOUT IT..
I'*
MEDIBANK WAS A " MONSTER'.. MEDIBANK WOULD BE DISMANTLED)
THE OPPOSITION WOULD RETURN TO A SYSTEM OF PRIVATE
HEALTH INSURANCE" THOSE WERE MR CHIPP'S OWN WORDS AND
THEY WERE QUOTED IN ALL THE PAPERS LAST WEEKEND. ./ 2 
NOW MR CHIPP IS NOT JUST AN OPPOSITION
BACKBENCHER AIRING HIS PRIVATE THEORIES.-HE IS THE
OPPOSITION'S OFFICIAL SPOKESMAN ON SOCIAL SECURITY
WE MUST ASSUME THAT IN SOME THINGS AT LEAST HE KNOWS.
WHAT HE'S TALKING ABOUT. WE MUST ASSUME THAT WHEN HE
TALKS ABOUT MEDIBANK HE IS EXPRESSING THE OFFICIAL
POLICY OF THE OPPOSITION,-AND IN FACT HE IS STILL
THEIR OFFICIAL SPOKESMAN ON THESE MATTERSk. IT IS
TRUE THAT HIS OPPOSITION COLLEAGUES ISSUED ALL SORTS OF
QUALIFYING STATEMENTS AND DENIALSX) MR FRASER DID
HIS BEST TO COVER UP AND TALKED ABOUT WAYS OF " AMENDING"
MEDIBANK " AT THE APPROPRIATE TIME" K IT IS TRUE
THAT MR CHIPP WAS HUMILIATED AT HIS PARTY MEETING ON
TUESDAY AND FORCED TO DENY WHAT HE'D SAID ON SATURDAY.,
BUT THE DAMAGE HAD BEEN DONEr-WE WERE GIVEN THE CLEAREST
INDICATION YET OF THE OPPOSITION'S INTENTIONS, THEIR
HATRED OF MEDIBANK, AND THE SORT OF " ECONOMIES" THEY
WOULD MAKE IF GIVEN HALF A CHANCE. / 3 i 
31
IT IS SIMPLY NOT GOOD ENOUGH FOR MR FRASER TO
DENY WHAT HIS COLLEAGUE SAID AND HOPE THE WHOLE ISSUE WILL
BLOW OVER) WHEN IT COMES TO MEDIBANK THE LIBERALS
JUST CANNOT BE TRUSTED) Y YOU ONLY HAVE TO LOOK AT THEIR.
RECORD IN THE LATE 1940s AS A RESULT OF THE CHIFLEY
LABOR GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES, EVERY STATE IN AUSTRALIA HAD
A FREE HOSPITAL SCHEME. WHEN THE LIBERALS GOT IN, THEY
BROKE OFF THESE AGREEMENTS WITH THE STATES IN THE EARLY
1950S AND MADE PEOPLE PAY FOR THEIR HOSPITAL TREATMENT
IN STANDARD WARDS). THE ONLY STATE THAT KEPT ITS FREE
HOSPITALS GOING WAS QUEENSLAND AND THAT WAS DUE TO A
STATE LABOR GOVERNMENT NOW, OF COURSE, EVEN THE PRESENT
DISCREDITED QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS ACCEPTED THE
MEDIBANK SCHEMEk( THEY HAVE FALLEN INTO LINE WITH ALL
THE OTHBR STATES WHO FOUGHT MEDIBANK FOR SO LONG) BUT
WHATEVER THE STATES MAY SAY OR DO, WE CAN BE SURE THAT IF
THE LIBERALS IN CANBERRA GOT A CHANCE TO DESTROY MEDIBANK
THEY WOULD DO SO, THEY HAVE DONE IT BEFORE; THEY
WOULD DO IT AGAIN, ./ 4 
THE OPPOSITION AND THE PRESS TALK BLITHELY
ABOUT MEDIBANK BEING A FACT OF LIFE, THE SAME
POLITICIANS AND NEWSPAPERS THAT KEPT ON DENOUNCING
MEDIBANK WHEN WE WERE TRYING TO SET IT UP NOW
POINT UNASHAMEDLY TO ITS VIRTUES* DOES ANYONE
SERIOUSLY BELIEVE THAT THE OPPOSITION, WHICH FOUGHT
MEDIBANK TOOTH AND NAIL FOR SO LONG* COULD SUDDENLY
BE TRUSTED TO KEEP IT GOING? THEIR STATEMENTS
ARE A TISSUE OF CONTRADICTIONSk AT FIRST MR CHIPP
S. DENIED THAT HE HAD THREATENED MEDIBANK AT ALLk THEN
HE MODIFIED THIS TO SAY THAT ONLY THE HOSPITAL
O SIDE WOULD BE DROPPED( So FIRST WE HAD THE IMPRESSION
THAT IT WOULD ALL BE DROPPED, THEN THAT NONE OF IT WOULD
BE DROPPED, AND NOW THAT ONLY THE HOSPITAL SIDE WOULD
BE. DROPPED)( ONLY A WEEK BEFORE HE WAS CONTRADICTING HIS
SHADOW MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, ONLY A WEEK BEFORE
MR CHIPP WAS FORCED TO RECANT, MR FRASER HIMSELF REACTED
TO OUR BUDGET PROPOSALS WITH THE OBSERVATION
A STUPIDLY. INACCURATE OBSERVATION, AS IT
O HAPPENS THAT IF IT WEREN'T FOR MEDIBANK, THE BUDGET
DEFICIT WOULD BE ONLY HALF AS GREAT), CAN ANY RATIONAL
PERSON DOUBT THAT THE DESTRUCTION OF MEDIBANK IS VERY MUCH
IN THE MINDS OF THE OPPOSITION? WHENEVER THEIR GUARD
IS DOWN THEY MAKE THEIR INTENTIONS CLEAR. m 
THE RECORD OF LIBERAL OBSTRUCTION AND HYPOCRISY
OVER MEDIBANK HAS BEEN UNBELIEVABLEA THEY FOUGHT IT
AT EVERY STAGE WHEN THE LEGISLATION WAS GOING THROUGH
PARLIAMENTK( THE PEOPLE HAD TWICE ENDORSED THE PROPOSALS
AT THE ELECTIONS IN 1972 AND 1974, YET THE OPPOSITION
VOTED AGAINST THE BILLS, EVEN AT THE SPECIAL JOINT
SITTING OF PARLIAMENT WHICH WAS HELD AFTER THE DOUBLE
DISSOLUTION-NOW THEY TALK ABOUT MEDIBANK BEING A FACT
OF LIFEk, EVEN AFTER THE MEDIBANK BILLS WERE PASSED
THE OPPOSITION BLOCKED A BILL FOR A SPECIAL LEVY TO
HELP FINANCE THE SCHEMEK YET NOW THEY GO ON ABOUT THE COST
O THE GENERAL BUDGET) NOW THEY SAY THAT AFTER ALL
THEY MIGHT JUST MIGHT LET THE LEVY PASS IF WE
PUT IT UP AGAINX THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY WANTe
BUT ONE THING IS CERTAIN: IF THE LIBERALS GOT
BACK INTO OFFICE MEDIBANK WOULD BE DEMOLISHEDK
ONE OF THE GREATEST SOCIAL REFORMS IN AUSTRALIAN HISTORY
WOULD BE DISMANTLED) HEALTH CARE, THE RIGHT OF ALL
AUSTRALIANS, WOULD AGAIN BE A SOURCE OF WORRY AND EXPENSE
AND INCONVENIENCE A BURDEN TO THE NEEDY AND
A PRIVILEGE TO THE WEALTHYX 
ONE WAY AND ANOTHER IT'S BEEN A REVEALING WEEK
IN POLITICSX EVEN IN LITTLE THINGS WE'VE SEEN THE OPPOSITION
PARTIES IN THEIR TRUE COLOURS)( THE SAME MR-CHIPP, FOR
EXAMPLE, WAS REFUSING A WOMAN SENATOR THE RIGHT TO PLAY IN A
PARLIAMENTARY CRICKET TEAM, OTHER LIBERALS WERE BUSY ATTACKING
ANOTHER WOMAN IN CANBERRA A WOMAN APPOINTED ON HER MERITS
BY THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD TO A NEWWIDELY ADVERTISED POSITION
ON THE BOARD'S STAFF) HER CRIME WAS THAT HER HUSBAND ALREADY
HAD A SENIOR PUBLIC SERVICE POSITION, SO APPARENTLY SHE
WASN'T ENTITLED TO A JOB OF HER OWNX THEY'VE BEEN WHINGEING
ABOUT A WOMEN'S CONVENTION IN CANBERRAX THEY'VE BEEN SABLERATTLING
OVER TIMOR,, K IN QUEENSLAND WE'VE SEEN THE UTTERLY
DEGRADING PERFORMANCE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT AND PREMIER
OVER THE SENATE VACANCY BLACKENING THE NAME OF A RESPECTED
CITIZEN UNDER PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGE, DESTROYING DEMOCRATIC
CONVENTIONS, DEFYIN6 THE WISHES OF THE LIBERALSIN CANBERRA7
AND SPLITTING THEIR OWN DISCREDITED COALITION IN THE PROCESS)(
IN NEW SOUTH WALES WE'VE SEEN THE LEWIS GOVERNMENT PLANNING
DRASTIC CUTS IN SUBURBAN TRANSPORT SERVICES AND EDUCATION)(
THERE IS NO ECONOMIC JUSTIFICATION FOR THESE CUTSX MY
GOVERNMENT HAS REPEATEDLY OFFERED TO ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY
FOR NEW SOUTH WALES RAILWAYS AND HAS MADE AVAILABLE UNPRECEDENTED
SUMS FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND EDUCATION) ,/ 7 
I LEAVE YOU WITH IEE* THOUGHT: IF THE
LIBERALS ARE PREPARED TO SLASH THESE ESSENTIAL
SERVICES WHEN THEY HAVE THE MONEY FOR THEM, IMAGINE
WHAT MR FRASER AND MR ANTHONY WOULD DO IN THE SACRED.
NAME OF CUTTING GOVERNMENT EXPENDITUREX THERE'D
BE NO END TO THE SLAUGHTER OF ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES.-
HEALTHEDUCATION, HOUSING, TRANSPORT, WELFAREX THE
DESTRUCTION OF MEDIBANK WOULD BE ONLY PART OF THE STORY(
WE SHOULD KEEP THESE THREATS IN MIND WHEN THE LIBERALS
ASSURE US THAT MEDIBANK IS A " FACT OF LIFE." 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No.
8 September 1975
INCOME SECURITY REVIEW
The Prime minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam, today
announced the terms of reference and the administrative
arrangements for the Income Security Review. Mr Whitlam first
mentioned that the Review would be undertaken in the course of
his Chifley Memorial Lecture which he delivered in Melbourne
on 14 August 1975. The terms of reference for the Review, which
have been agreed to by the Government, are attached.
The Prime Minister said that it had been decided that
the Review would be monitored by a Cabinet Committee of Ministers
comprising himself, the Treasurer, the Minister for Social
Security and minister for Repatriation and Compensation and the
Minister for Labor and Immigration.
Cabinet had agreed that a Committee of officials ( Review
Group) should be drawn from the Department of Social Security, the
Taxation Office, Treasury, the Departments of Repatriation and
Compensation and of Labor and Immigration, the Social Welfare
Commission, and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
with assistance from other Departments and authorities as
required. Mr Whitlam said that the Government had decided that
until the Review is completed there should be no new initiatives
or extension of existing policies in the income security area.
Progress of the review will be closely examined at
regular intervals by the Cabinet Committee. By the time of the
1976/ 77 Budget the Government expects to determine its long term
program of reforms and the steps which will need to be progressively
taken to achieve those reforms. ./ 2 
When the Government came to power in 1972 there was
need for immediate improvement in the income security and social
welfare area. Considerable progress has been made to effect that
improvement. Further improvements of a more fundamental kind are
needed. The review process now started will take into consideration
the independent reports already commissioned by the Government.
The Prime Minister said the Review would have regard to
the Government's policies for the abolition of the means test on
age pensions and for the introduction of the National Rehabilitation
and Compensation Scheme covering injuries. In respect of the
latter aspect Mr Whitlam said that the Government was concerned
at the high cost to employers and car-owners of the existing
compulsory schemes for Workers Compensation and Third Party
Insurance and the incomplete, uncertain and time-consuming
remedies for the victims of industrial and highway accidents.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 
ATTACHMENTI
INCOME SECURITY REVIEW
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The Terms of Reference of the Income Security Review are
A. To examine the present income securtity system in
Australia with the objects of determining the
effectiveness of programs now undertaken at all levels
of government and in the private and voluntary sectors,
and of identifying inadequacies, overlaps and inefficiencies.
B. To examine options and make recommendations for
policy change with respect to income security
having regard to:
costs, appropriate methods of financing and
economic implications;
administration, including legislative and
staffing implications, ( noting that aspects
of this are being considered by the Royal
Commission on Australian Government Administration);
and transitional arrangements associated with any change.
2. In the course of its work the Committee will seek
Ministerial guidance on specific objectives for income
security and related welfare programs.
3. The Committee shall have regard to the Government's
policies for abolition of the means test on age pensions and for
the introduction of the National Rehabilitation and Compensation
Scheme covering injuries.
4. In carrying out its task the Committee shall include a
consideration of: the reports that the Government has received
or commissioned relating to income security
( including in particular the Woodhouse,
Henderson, Hancock and Toose Reports and the
Priorities Review Staff's Report on Social Welfare
Possibilities for Australia) and other relevant
information, ' including that from overseas;
the relative merits of providing benefits through
cash payments, services or a combination thereof;
the relationship and interaction between the
income tax and the income security systems;
the roles of other Government policies, including
employment and wages policies, in the provision
of income security; / 2 
2.
the roles of Australian, State and Local
Governments and of private and voluntary
organisations, having regard for constitutional
aspects and any co-operative planning arrangements;
and the views expressed by consumer groups, voluntary
agencies and other interested parties. 



PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 553
8 September 1975
LOCATION OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT
The Australian Government has decided to transfer a
number of units of Australian Government employment to the
regional growth centres of Albury-Wodonga, Bathurst-Orange and
Geelong. The transfers will commence during 1975/ 76 and continue
to 1978/ 79, and will involve up to 1,200 Public Servants.
The Units to be transferred to regional growth
centres are
TO ALBURY-WODONGA
The Health Insurance Commission, Central Office
The Schools Commission, Central Administration
The Children's Commission
TO BATHURST-ORANGE
The Division of National Mapping
The Australia. Police College
TO GEELONG The National Biological Standards Laboratory
The Government has previously announced decisions to
establish the National Authority on Road Safety and Standards
and the Australian Heritage Commission in Albury-Wodonga and
the National Animal Health Laboratory in Geelong.
The Government has also decided that certain Central
Office staff will transfer from Melbourne to Canberra. During
1975/ 76, some 50 positions will' be transferred, and studies
are being undertaken in connection with the possible transfer
to Canberra of other Government units in policy areas. It is
expected that these studies will be completed in the near future.
/ 2 
The departments chiefly involved in the moves from
Melbourne to Canberra in 1975/ 76 are Housing and Construction
and Transport, both of which currently have their Central
Administrations split between the two cities.
In reaching decisions about transfers to the regional
growth centres of Albury-Wodonga, Bathurst-Orange and Geelong,
the Government was fully conscious of the significance of such
moves for the people who will be concerned. It has not taken
its decisions lightly but has also had in mind furthering its
objectives in regional development.
The effect of the decisions will be to provide a
major stimulus to the development of growth centres, which are
an important part of the Government's urban and regional
development policy, and at the same time to ensure that Public
Service units which have critical functional linkages to
Parliament and major national institutions are located in
Canberra. Details of transfer time-tables and the conditions
under which the transfers will take place have yet to be
determined, pending the outcome of discussions with the
development corporations concerned and with interested staff
groups. Staff associations have already been assured that
a minimum of 12 months notice will be given to'staff when the
compulsory transfer of positions is involved.
Details of new criteria for the location of
Australian Government employment in Canberra and other growth
centres, which were the basis for these decisions, were
announced in a Prime Ministerial press statement of
14 April 1975.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 


Press Statement No. 55511 September 1975
&nbsp;The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced tonight that in response to a request by BH South Limited the Government had agreed to allow the Company to export rock phosphate from its deposits at Duchess in Queensland. Initially exports would be up to two million tonnes per annum. over &nbsp;the next ten years.
In order to develop these deposits which were of national importance, the Company needed to secure long term export markets as there was no immediate local market for its product. There was a proven 2,000 million tonnes in the deposits held by BH South Limited.
Before making its decision the Government gave consideration to the needs of the Australian fertilizer industry for supplies of phosphate rock from the Duchess deposits. The approval to export was given subject to the Company's undertaking to give priority to making up shortfalls in supplies for the local market if that situation should arise in the future. The Company would also be expected to meet the requirements of the Environment Protection ( Impact of Proposals) Act. Environmental impact statements on the project would be made available for public comment.
The Australian and Queensland Governments were currently undertaking a major developmental study of northwest Queensland and it was expected that the region's huge phosphate deposits would provide an important cornerstone in this development. The export approval could help BH South to establish itself on a commercial basis in the region and take the first steps towards the large scale development of its deposits.
The development of the Duchess deposits would bring early benefits to Queensland. The project would provide employment opportunities at Duchess and there would be employment and revenue gains for the Queensland railways and the port of Townsville.
The Prime Minister said that BH South expected to achieve a level of production of one million tonnes during 1976/ 77 and two million tonnes by 1977/ 78. The capital investment that was required to achieve this level of production would exceed $80 million, and expenditure at this level would give, a useful stimulus to various Australian manufacturing industries.
Several Asian countries have expressed considerable interest in securing supplies of phosphate rock from the Queensland deposits. The Prime Minister said it was necessary that-these countries have some assurance of supplies of phosphate rock for the development of their fertilizer industries. The Queensland deposits were so large that these exports would not prejudice any future plans for treatment of the rock locally.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
&nbsp;



' s I SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIMNE MINISTER.
THE HON,. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
FOR THE GOULBURN COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
12 SEPTEMBER 1975
1. IT WAS A PLEASURE TO BE INVITED TO ADDRESS THIS
STUDENT BODY AND SEE YOUR NEW COLLEGE. THE COLLEGE WAS
ESTABLISHED IN 1970 AS THE GOULBURN TEACHERS' COLLEGE.
A MONTH AGO ON 8 AUGUST--IT BECAME THE GOULBURN
COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION. IT IS ALREADY PLAYING AN
ACTIVE, LIVELY ROLE IN THE COMMUNITY. IT HAS* ALREADY
MADE ITS MARK AS A VIGOROUS AND EFFICIENT INSTITUTION.
2. NOTHING SO ENRICHES AND INVIGORATES THE
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL LIFE OF A CITY, A TOWN, OR A REGION
AS THE ESTABLISHMENT OF TERTIARY EDUCATION FACILITIES.
N~ E OF THE STRONGEST FORCES FOR DECENTRALISATION, FOR
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, FOR COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT HAS BEEN
THE SPREAD OF COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES TO REGIONAL
CENTRES. THIS IS ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT WHEN YOU LIVE
CLOSE TO A CITY AS LARGE AS CANBERRA. THIS COLLEGE
REINFORCES THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER AND IDENTITY OF
GOULBURN. 3. THE ARGUMENT iS OFTEN HEARD THAT AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FUNDING OF TERTIARY EDUCATION OR OUR FUNDING
OF ANYTHING, FOR THAT MATTER MEANS SOME KIND OF CENTRALIST
OR BUREAUCRATIC CONTROL. TH~ ERE COULD BE NO BETTER
REPUTATION OF THIS THEORY THAN THE SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT
OF THIS COLLEGE. 
-2-
I HAVE DRIVEN HERE THIS MORNING FROM CANBERRA IN LESS
THAN AN HOUR. WE ARE GEOGRAPHICALLY CLOSE, BUT NO ONE
SERIOUSLY BELIEVES THAT YOUR PROXIMITY TO CANBERRA, OR
YOUR RELIANCE ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FUNDS, LIMITS YOUR
AUTONOMY OR YOUR POWER TO MAKE LOCAL DECISIONS AT THE
LOCAL LEVEL. YET THE IDEA PERSISTS THAT BECAUSE
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS AND ASSERTS A PROPER
RESPONSIBILITY IN SUCH FIELDS AS EDUCATION, IT IS
. IMPOSING SOME CENTRALIST, BUREAUCRATIC CONTROL.
4, ø L3ET ME DEVELOP THIS POINT FOR A MOMENT. TTHE
BEST RESPONSE TO THIS TALK ABOUT THE PERNICIOUS INFLUENCE
OF THE CANBERRA CENTRALISTS IS TO LOOK AT THE MAP OF
NEW SOUTH WALES, WE FIND THAT MOST OF THE IMPORTANT
RURAL POPULATION CENTRES, THE BIG COUNTRY TOWNS, ARE
CLOSER TO CANBERRA THAN THEY ARE TO SYDNEY. FOR THE
PEOPLE HERE IN GOULBURN, CANBERRA IS PROBABLY A MORE
NATURAL CAPITALS, A CLOSER AND MORE ACCESSIBLE URBAN
AND ADMINISTRATIVE CENTRE, THAN SYDNEY. APART FROM
WOLLONGONG AND THE NORTHERN CITIES THIS IS TRUE FOR MOST
OF THE POPULATION OF NEW SOUTH WALES. WITHIN 150 MILES OF
CANBERRA WE FIND DOZENS OF CITIES AND TOWNS, LIKE
GOULBURN, CLOSER TO CANBERRA THAN THEY ARE TO SYDNEY. I
LIST THE PRINCIPAL ONES: " COWRA, PARKES, FORBES, WEST WYALONG,
CROOKWELL, YOUNG, GRENFELL, TEMORA, NARRANDERA, JUNEE,
WAGGA, GUNDAGAI, ALBURY, COOMA, QUEANBEYAN, TUMUT, MORUYA,
BEGA. IT IS DIFFICULT TO ARGUE THAT GOULBURN, OR ANY OTHER
PROVINCIAL CENTRE, SHOULD FEEL A CLOSER KINSHIP TO THE
STATE GOVERNMENT THAN IT DOES TO THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. 
-3-
W4HAT WE ARE SEEKING -IN CITIES AND TOWNS LIKE
YOURS -IS NOT . STATE CENTRALISM OR CANBERRA CENTRALISM BUT
TRUE REGIONALISM. THE PROGRAM UNDERTAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS MEANT A GREATER DEGREE OF INVOLVEMENT BY
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN MATTERS LIKE SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS1
WELFARE AND CITIES THAN HAD HITHERTO BEEN ACCEPTED IN
AUSTRALIA. THE UNDERLYING PH) ILOSOPHY IS THIS: IN MODERN
COMMUNITIES, EVEN THE WEALTHIEST FAMILY CANNOT PROVIDE ITS
MEMBERS' WITH THE BEST EDUCATION, WITH THE BEST MEDICAL
TREATM , NT, THE BEST ENVIRONMENT, UNAIDED BY THE COMMUNITY,
INCREASINGLY, THE BASIC SERVI. CES AND OPPORTUNITIES WHICH
DETERMINE THE REAL STANDARD OF LIFE OF A FAMILY OR AN
INDIVIDUAL CAN ONLY BE PROVIDED BY THE COMMUNITY AND ONLY
TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE COMMUNITY IS WILLING TO PROVIDE
THEM. EITHER THE COMMUNITY PROVIDES THEM OR THE Y WILL NOT
BE PROVIDED AT ALL. IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONTEXT, THIS MEANS
THAT-THE COMMUNITY, THROUGH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, MUST
FINANCE THEM OR THEY WILL NOT BE FINANCED AT ALL. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED THAT THESE SERVICES
AND OPPORTUNITIES WILL BE PROVIDED AND THAT THEY WILL
BE FINANCED.
6. OUR NATIONAL COMMUNITY PROGRAMS ARE INTENDED TO
REPLACE THE EXISTING STATE CENTRALISM WITH GENUINE REGIONAL
INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION. THE PROGRAMS PROVIDE FOR,
OR RATHER, POSITIVELY REQUIRE A LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT AND
INITIATIVE BY GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE COMMUNITY.
WE ARE SEEKING THIS PARTICIPATION PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELDS
OF SOCIAL WELFARE, CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND
THE ENHANCEMENT OF THE CITIES AND TOWNS IN WHICH WE LIVE. 
-4-
7, LET ME ILLUSTRATE SOME OF THESE PROGRAMS WITH
PARTICULAR REFERENCE To GOULBURN. THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLAN IS A PIONEERING EXPERIMENT IN COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT.
ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE IS TO'SEEK OUT AND MEET AREAS OF
SOCIAL NEED HITHERTO EITHER IGNORED OR UN'IDENTIFIED BY
THE EXISTING WELFARE AGENCIES NATIONAL, STATE, LOCAL OR
VOLUNTARY. ITS ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTIC IS THAT ITS WORK
IS BASED ON REGIONS, ON REGIONAL COMMUNITIES AND THAT ITS
WORK AND PLANNING IS TO BE DONE BY GENUINELY INDEPENDENT,
GENUINELY , COMMUNITY BASED GROUPS OF CONCERNED CITIZENS WHOKNOW
THE 3EPCIAL NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY OF WHICH THEY ARE
A PART. REGIONAL COUNCILS HAVE ALREADY BEEN SET UP IN
THIRTY-SIX REGIONS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, INCLUDING THE
SOUTH EAST REGION OF NEW SOUTH WALES. THE COUNCILS
ACT AS A COMMUNITY FORUM FOR DISCUSSION AND A COMMUNITY
INSTRUMENT FOR ACTION IN IMPROVING EXISTING WELFARE SERVICES
AND PERHAPS MORE. IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN, EXPERIMENTING
IN NEW FORMS OF WELFARE.
8. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO ESTABLISH
A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION. AGAIN, WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE
PRINCIPLE OF INVOLVING THE COMMUNITY IN THE PLANNING AND
MANAGEMENT OF PROGRAMS SPONSORED BY THE COMMISSION. THE
CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WILL PROVIDE HELP FOR A WIDE RANGE
OF IMAGINATIVE AND FLEXIBLE PROGRAMS DEVOTED TO LOOKING
AFTER CHILDREN BEFORE THEY REACH SCHOOL AND CARING FOR
OLDER CHILDREN OUTSIDE SCHOOL HOURS. A NUMBER OF PILOT'
PROGRAMS ARE ALREADY BEING SET UP AND WILL BE FUNDED BY
THE COMMISSION. AMONG THEM IS A COMMUNITY CARE PROJECT
SPONSORED BY THE CHURCHES IN GOULBURNI as a 
THE IDEA IS TO MAINTAIN FAMILY GROUPS IN THEIR OWN HOMES
WITH DAY CARE, CRISIS AND EMERGENCY SERVICES. THE PROGRAM
WILL COST AN ESTIMATED $ 60,000 A YEAR AND WILL-COMMENCE
NEXT FEBRUARY WITH A THREE-YEAR FUNDING PROGRAM. THROUGH
THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
PROVIDING RECURRENT ASSISTANCE TO THE LADY MCKELL CHILD CARE
CENTRE AT GOULBURN. THE CENTRE HAS RECEIVED OVER $ 27,000
TO DATE. ', THE AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM IS INTENDED TO
IMPROVE THlE QUALITY OF LIFE IN NOMINATED REGIONS THROUGH
PROJECTS DETERMINED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE REGION. A
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT IS THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY
!' PARTICIPATION IN MAKING DECISIONS THAT AFFECT THEIR REGION
AND THEIR WAY OF LIFE.
THE AIP HAS BEEN OR EXERCISE IN CO-OPERATIVE
FEDERALISM WITH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BEING INVOLVED
CLOSELY IN ALL ASPECTS OF THE PROGRAM. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS PROVIDING $ 14.1 MILLION IN 1974-75 FOR AREA
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS. THE SOUTH EAST REGIONAL OF NEW SOUTH
WALES RECEIVED GRANTS TOTALLING $ 750,000 IN 1974--75 AND
WILL RECEIVE A SIMILAR AMOUNT IN 1975-76. THE GOULBURN
CITY COUNCIL RECEIVED $ 8,000 IN 1974-75.
THROUGH THE GRANTS COMMISSION, THE GOULBURN CITY
COUNCIL RECEIVED $ 150,000 LAST FINANCIAL YEAR AND WILL
RECEIVED $ 200,000 THIS FINANCIAL YEAR AN INCREASE OF
33 PER CENT. THESE GRANTS COME WITHOUT STRINGS. THE COUNCIL
IS FREE TO SPEND THEM AS IT WISHES. THEY DO NOT REDUCE
ANY NORMAL INCOME THE COUNCIL MAY RECEIVE FROM TRADITIONAL SOURCES. 
-6-
11, THE COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM PROVIDES HEALTH
SERVICES IN THE COMMUNITY WHERE PEOPLE LIVE OR WORK
AS DISTINCT FROM THOSE AVAILABLE IN HOSPITALS AND
SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS. COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES HELP
PEOPLE MEET THEIR HEALTH AND WELFARE NEEDS AT
CONVENIENT LOCATIONS AND TO RETURN HOME AFTER ATTENDENCES.
THIS LESSENS DEPENDENCE ON INSTITUTIONS AND FREQUENTLY
PRESENTS AN ALTERNATIVE TO GOING TO HOSPITAL.
THE GOULBURN COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE IN
MONTAGUE" STREET WAS OPENED IN APRIL LAST YEAR, IT IS
READY TO HELP EVERYONE WITHOUT. RESTRICTION OR COST.
IT COOPERATES WITH, BUT DOESN'T DUPLICATE, OTHER
HEALTH AND WELFARE AGENCIES. IT SEEKS TO INVOLVE
THE PEOPLE-IN MAINTAINING GOOD HEALTH AND HYGIENE,
THE CENTRE COST $ 57,000 LAST YEAR. WE HAVE $ 65 MILLION
IN THIS YEAR'S BUDGET FOR OUR COMMUNITY HEALTH AND
MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.
12. THERE ARE OTHER PROGRAMS HELPING GOULBURN
AND THIS DISTRICT. UNDER THE NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM
WE PROVIDED $ 100,000 LAST FINANCIAL YEAR FOR THE
GOULBURN TREATMENT WORKS. THE RED SCHEME, WHICH WE ARE
NOW SCALING DOWN, HAS . HELPED 16 LOCAL PROJECTS. WE
HOPE TO EXTEND THE AUSTRALIAN LEGAL AID OFFICE TO
GOULBURN BY USING THE SERVICES OF A LAWYER FROM CANBERRA,
,/ 7 
13. 1 PASS NOW TO SOME COMMENTS ON EDUCATION
BECAUSE IT IS YOUR CHIEF CONCERN AS STUDENTS AND IN MANY
WAYS IT HAS BEEN OUR CHIEF'CONCERN AS A GOVERNMENT.
SINCE MAY 1973 WE HAVE HAD FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE FUNDING OF ALL COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND
TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS, MANY PEOPLE HAVE THE IMPRESSION
THAT THE GOVERNMENT' S REFORMS , IN EDUCATION HAVE BEEN
CONFINED. TO PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ALONE:
THAT IS NJOT SO. IT IS TRUE THAT OUR FIR ST PRIORITY WAS
IN THESE,-AREAS BECAUSE THESE WERE THE AREAS OF GREATEST
NEED. OUR PLANS, HOWEVER, ARE . DIRECTED ACROSS THE
WHOLE SPECTRUM OF EDUCATION. WE REGARD ALL LEVELS
AND SEGMENTS OF EDUCATION AS PARTS OF A CONTINUING
AND ALL-EMBRACING PROCESS. MOREOVER, THERE HAS BEEN NO
SLACKENING IN OUR EFFORTS. WE HAVE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS.
OUR BUDGET IS REDUCING THE GROWTH OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE.
BUT OUR COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION IS UNIMPAIRED AND UNDIMINISHED.
WE ARE KEEPING FAITH WITH THE TEACHERS, THE STUDENTS.-
THE CHILDREN, THE EDUCATORS WHO LOOKED TO THIS GOVERNMENT
FOR GREAT AND PERMANENT REFORMS I-N AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION.
OUR TOTAL OUTLAYS FOR EDUCATION IN THIS BUDGET ARE
$ 1908 MILLION AN INCREASE OF $ 237 MILLION OVER LAST YEAR. 
i14, I QUOTE FROM THE TREASURER'S BUDGET SPEECH:
IN THE FIRST FULL YEAR OF OFFICE OF THIS GOVERNMENT,*
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION ALMOST
DOUBLED. LAST YEAR, IT ALMOST DOUBLED AGAIN,
WE HAVE THEREFORE ALMOST QUADRUPLED EXPENDITURE
ON EDUCATION IN THESE TWO YEARS, AND WE ARE MAINTAINING
IN 1975-76 THE HIGH LEVEL OF EXPENDITURE NOW REACHED.
THIS ADVA~ NCE SINCE 1972-73 REFLECTS OUR DETERMINATION
TO MAKE OOD THE RELATIVE NEGLECT OF EARLIER YEARS.
OUR INITIATIVES INCLUDE PRONOUNCED INCREASES
IN EXPENDITURE ON SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS COLLEGES;
EXPANSION OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION; ACCEPTANCE.
QF FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION
THROUGHOUT . AUSTRALIA; ABOLITION OF FEES FOR TERTIARY
AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND THE INTRODUCTION OF NEW
STUDENT ASSISTANCE MEASURES; AND ! NCREASED ACADEMIC SALARIES
ADOPTED ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE ACADEMIC SALARIES
TRIBUNAL, WITH EFFECT FROM OCTOBER 1974."
IN OUR APPROACH TO EDUCATION WE ARE TREATING
COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND INSTITUTES OF'
TECHNOLOGY IN A MORE ENLIGHTENED WAY RECOGNISING THEIR
UNIQUE AND INDISPENSABLE PLACE IN THE EDUCATIONAL
CONTINUUM AND DISPELLING FOREVER THE IGNORANT IMPRESSION
THAT THEY WERE POOR RELATIONS OF UNIVERSITIES.-a I / 9 
16. WE BELIEVE THAT THE ESSENTIAL QUALITY OF A
DYNAMIC AND. DEMOCRATIC EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM IS DIVERSITYBUT
A DIVERSITY OF EQUAL AND RELATED PARTS, EVERYONE
SHOULD HAVE THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE TO THE FULL IN THE
TYPE OF EDUCATION THAT'SUITS HIM BEST. EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
IN EDUCATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE
THE SAME EDUCATION OR THAT EVERYONE SHOULD WANT THE
SAME EDUCATION.' ONE OF OUR MISTAKES IN THE PAST WAS
TO PLACE TOO HIGH A SOCIAL PREMIUM ON CERTAIN KINDS
OF EDUcA-lriON AT THE EXPENSE OF THE COMMUNITY' S NEEDS.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY MEANS THAT THE SAME STANDARDS OF
EXCELLENCE, OF PROFESSIONAL DEDICATION, OF MATERIAL
ENDOWMENT, OF TEACHING SKILLS SHOULD APPLY IN WHATEVER
INSTITUTION AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSES. OF COURSE PEOPLE
6HOULD BE FREE TO CHOOSE THE KIND OF EDUCA TION THEY
WANT, BUT THIS CHOICE MUST BE ONE BETWEEN SYSTEMS AND
COURSES; BUT BETWEEN STANDARDS, NOT BETWEEN A GOOD
EDUCATION AND A BAD ONE, AN EXPENSIVE EDUCATION OR A
POOR ONE, A SOCIALLY ESTEEMED EDUCATION OR ONE THAT IS
SOCIALLY DOWNGRADED. THE PURPOSE OF my GOVERNMENT'S
REFORMS HAS BEEN TO ENTRENCH THIS GENIUNE PRINCIPLE OF
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, NOT IN A NARROW FINANCIAL SENSE,
BUT AS A BROAD PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLE BINDING ON US
AND ON ALL FUTURE GOVERNMENTS. / 8.10. 
17. OUR OPPONENTS GIVE A SPECIAL, NARROW
DEFINITION TO " EQUAL OPPORTUNITY" EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
-IN EDUCATION FOR THEM MEANS THAT EVERYONE HAS AN EQUAL
OPPORTUNITY TO GO TO PRIVATE SCHOOLS OR UNIVERSITIES
IF THEY CAN AFFORD IT. OUR OPPONENTS HAVE SAID THAT THE
BUDGET PENALISES THOSE WHO WANT TO PROVIDE A DIFFERENT
KIND OF EDUCATION FOR THEIR CHILDREN. WHAT IN FACT THE
BUDGET DOES IS REMOVE A TOTALLY UNJUSTIFIED SUBSIDY FROM
THE WHOLE COMMUNITY FOR A MINORITY WHO ARE WEALTHY ENOUGH)
TO ATTRACT THE SUBSIDY. EQUAL OPPORTUNITY FOR US MEANS
JUST THAT: EVERYONE HAS A RIGHT TO THE BEST SECONDARY
EDUCATION AND THE BEST TERTIARY EDUCATION, WHATEVER HIS
FINANCIAL MEANS. My GOVERNMENT HAS ABOLISHED FEES FOR
TERTIARY EDUCATION OF ALL KINDS AND HAS PROVIDED MUCH*
MORE GENEROUS'STUDENT ALLOWANCES, UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT
THERE WILL NEVER BE ANY RESTRICTION ON ANYONE SEEKING
TERTIARY. EDUCATION WHOSE ABILITIES EQUIP HIM FOR SUCH A COURSE.
18. IT IS NOT ONLY IN EDUCATION THAT THE WHOLE
PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE
BEHIND ALL my GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS IS UNDER THREAT.
MEDIBANK IS THREATENED. A FAIR AND EQUITABLE TAX SYSTEM
GIVING REBATES OF EQUAL VALUE TO EVERY TAXPAYER, IS THREATENED.
THE COMMUNITY AID PROGRAMS I HAVE ALREADY DESCRIBED TO YOU
ARE THREATENED. THE AUSTRALIAN LEGAL AID OFFICE IS THREATENED.
MANY OF OUR PROGRAMS FOR SPECIAL REGIONAL ASSISTANCE FOR
GRANTS TO SPORT, RECREATION, THE ENVIRONMENT, THE
NATIONAL ESTATE, FOR CHILD CARE, FOR A HOST OF PROJECTS ARE
UNDER CHALLENGE IN THE COURTS BY THE ANTI-LABOR STATES.. ./ 11 
11.,
THE STATES CHALLENGED THE REDS SCHEME IN THE COURTS.
WE HAD THE ' FARCIAL SITUATION THE OTHER DAY OF PREMIERS
COMPLAINING AT THE SCALING DOWN OF THE REDS PROGRAM
WHICH THEY THEMSELVES HAVE SOUGHT TO DEMOLISH BY A
COURT CHALLENGE, THEY WANT US TO CONTINUE A SCHEME
WHICH THEY HAVE TRIED TO DESTROY.
19.* AS A GOVERNMENT WE OWE A DEBT TO THE STUDENTS
OF THIS COUNTRY. STUDENTS AND THE LABOR PARTY HAVE LONG
BEEN IN THE FOREFRONT OF POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS, IT WAS
STUDENT CONCERN, STUDENT ACTIVfSM, STUDENT PROTEST, THAT
HELPED DRAMATISE MANY GREAT POLITICAL ISSUES AND BRING
THEM TO PUBLIC ATTENTION. MY. GOVERNMENT'S VICTORIES
IN 1972 AND 19714 WERE DUE IN LARGE PART TO THE SUPPORT
OF STUDENTS AND YOUNG PEOPLE. WE HAVE ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT SUPPORT. No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THE YOUTH
OF THIS COUNTRY IN GIVING THE VOTE TO 18-YEAR-OLDS,
IN ABOLISHING CONSCRIPTION, IN SUPPORTING THE ARTS, IN
REMOVING ALL FEES FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, IN UPGRADING
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES OF EVERY KIND. THESE WERE THE
ACHIEVEMENTS OF A VIGOROUS GOVERNMENT. A GOVERNMENT OF ACTION
AND IDEALISM. WE NEED THE SAME VIGOUR AND IDEALISM AMONG
STUDENTS OF TODAY8 THE GREAT ISSUES OF CONSCIENCE ARE BY
NO MEANS ALL BEH . IND US. ONE VERY GREAT ISSUE REMAINS:
IT IS NOTHING LESS THAT THE SURVIVAL OF OUR DEMOCRATIC
INSTITUTIONS, THE THREAT TO-THESE INSTITUTIONS FROM CONSTANT
ATTACKS ON CONSTITUTIONAL PRACTICE AND DEMOCRATIC CONVENTIONS,
THE CONSCIENCE OF AN ALERT STUDENT COMMUNITY MUST RE69L
THESE THREATS TO DEMOCRACY. / 12 
12.
I HOPE STUDENTS EVERYWHERE WILL REMEMBER THEIR GREAT
TRADITIONS OF DISSENT AND JOIN US IN RESISTING THREATS
TO DEMOCRACY FROM WHATEVER SOURCE, IN WHATEVER GUISE,
THEY MIGHT COME. 



EMBARGO: 5 pm S
PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST A FAIR GO FOR INDEXATION
Sunday 14 September 1975
The vast majority of us earn our living as employeesas
wage and salary earners. So we have a natural concern to see 0
that our wages keep pace with movements in the cost of living.
No Government has done more than mine to protect and indeed,
improve the real value of workers' incomes. With the support
of the trade union movement we have fought a long, successful
battle to bring in wage indexation. If it succeeds wage
indexation will be counted among our principal achievements.
It not only safeguards employees' living standards; it is an
essential part of the Government's battle against inflation.
I want every Australian worker to understand the
real benefits of wage indexation. Indexation is a new word:
some people may not be quite sure what it means. It means that
if the cost of living goes up by a certain percentage, wages
and salarieslare increased by the same percentage. So it's
basically a very simple idea; but it took us a great deal of
argument and persuasion to get the Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission to'agree to it. Indexation is not something we can
introduce on our own, though certainly we have done what we
can for our own employees in the public service. We had to
convince the Commission that indexation would work. We had
to convince the Commission that it wouldn't push wages ahead too
fast and add to inflationary pressures in the economy. We had
to show that by safeguarding workers' living standards, indexation
would discourage excessive wage claims by unions at a time when
the nation couldn't afford them.
6 The Coamission accepted our arguments. It decided
to give indexation a try. It insisted that if indexation were
granted, unions should not claim wage rises in excess of the
cost-of-living adjustments and the increases that flow to all
workers from national wage cases based on national productivity.
This doesn't mean that workers' living standards are frozen.
It means that, so long as inflation remains a serious problem any
rises apart from those for cost-of-living or productivity should
be granted only on the basis of changing work values. The
Commission also agreed that some rises may be needed to help
certain unions catch up with other workers if their members were
seriously disadvantaged. This seemed to us like a pretty fair arrangement.
It meant that all workers would be protected against inflation,
no matter how strong or weak their unions were, no matter what
their bargaining power. We are the first Government to give
this real protection to the wage earner. You may remember that
there was a system of quarterly adjustments for workers in the
late 1940s and early 1950s. The Liberals abolished these
adjustments and left workers completely at the mercy of cost
of living rises. Mind you, the old system wasn't anything like
as good as the present system of indexation. Adjustments were
applied to the basic wage only;-our system applies to the total
award wage and we have asked the Commission to apply it to
over-award payments as well. It gives genuine, total protection
to the worker. Together with the tax reforms announced in our
Budget last month, Australian workers will be better off than
ever before better off in their take-home pay, better off in their
protection against inflation, better off in their real living standards. 
-2-
I make the point strongly that we don't regard
indexation on its own as an adequate protection for the worker.
It must be ta: ken in conjunction with our new tax system a
system that is fair to all, and will put another $ 5 a week and
more in the pay packets of the average wage earner. And remember
this: under-the Labor Government the wage earner is benefiting
in other important ways. He is saving on his mortgage payments,
he is saving on his health insurance. Medibank alone saves the
family man $ 2 to $ 3 a week in medical benefit payments..
Still, indexation is the basic protection for the
wage earner and his family; his key to security in difficult
times. With indexation, no worker need fear the effects of
inflation. OfL course the fight against inflation will continueit
must continue. Our whole Budget has been framed for that
purpose, and indexation itself willehelp keep inflation down.
There are signs that it is doing so already. Certainly the
number of industrial disputes has fallen dramatically since
indexation was introduced. So we're building up a new climate
of stability and security for the worker secure wages, stable
industrial coi~ ditions. We have to work hard to ensure that this
climate is maintained.
S I have to say frankly -that despite all our efforts
indexation is under attack. Not surprisingly, it's under attack
from some employers. These employers don't like the idea of
regular increases in their wages bill, even when these increases
discourage much bigger and more costly rises. But there is
a much more dangerous attack on indexation from another quarter.-
It comes from a handful of powerful unions. These unions are
seeking rises from their members far above the indexation
formula. If these rises are granted rises of $ 35 a week in
some cases the whole indexation system will be in jeopardy.
All our efforts to protect the worker from inflation, to establish
secure and stable industrial conditions, to create the right
climate for a national anti-inflation drive, will be destroyed.
That must not happen. You may say that it's the job of any union to secure
the-highest possible wages for its members. That's certainly
been the rule in the past, but in today's conditions it ignores
two things. It ignores the fact that some unions are much
stronger than others, and can win bigger rises for their members
where other unions can't. It leaves the weak and unorganised
worker at a disadvantage. And it ignores the fact that unions
in key industries, by using any tactic they choose to win higher
wages, will force employers to sack workers so they can meet
the higher wages bill. In other words, any increase in wages
outside the indexation system must be gained at.. the expense of
fellow workers, and ultimately at the cost of their jobs. Workers
who accept indexation are inevitably the victims of those who won't.
Their jobs are threatened by a minority of workers in key industries.
We can see examples of these tactics right now in the oil and
petrochemical industries in New'South Wales and Victoria. / 3 
-3-
I want to make it quite clear that the Australian
Government will stand firm on indexation. We don't regard
the present system as perfect; we'll keep looking for ways to
improve it. We'll do everything to see that the ordinary worker
gets the protection and security he needs. I ask every wage
and salary earner to play his part in making indexation work.
It's a struggle for the entire trade union movement. Decent
and responsible unions must not be cheated out of the benefits
of indexation by the selfish actions of a minority.
Indexation has been given a trial by the Commission
but the battle is far from won. The Commission still has to decide
whether indexation should continue. Everything will depend on
the willingness of unions to co-operate. The alternative to
indexation is not just higher pay for some workers and lower pay
for others. The alternative is industrial chaos and inflation
on a scale that we have never seen before. 


Press Statement No. 556
14 September 1975
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam announced today a radical new -approach to pricing of Australian crude oil as from 18 September 1975.
Mr Whitlam said the new policy had a two-fold objective. The Government wished to provide the maximum practicable incentive for exploration of new oil fields and at the same time wanted to give existing producers from known discoveries a fair return on their investment which would ensure that all economically recoverable oil is produced from known oil fields.
This policy means that there will be different prices for oil from different fields. Although the Government's proposals are generous to oil producers the overall effect on prices should mean that petrol will not rise by more than I cent per gallon.
The new policy differentiates between oil produced from fields discovered in the future and oil produced from fields already discovered.
Oil from newly discovered fields will attract a price at the nearest refinery port equivalent to the landed cost of imported crude oil from time to time. On the basis of the present landed cost this would mean, after allowance for the $ 2.00 per barrel excise on oil Production, a return of around $ 6.90 per barrel to producers of new oil.. This should provide a major incentive for exploration.
The prices for oil produced from the following fields will be:
Gippsland/ Bass StraitIncrease of 23 cents per barrel to $ 2.33 for all production as from 18 September 1975.
Barrow Increase of 50 cents per barrel to $2.73 as from 18 September 1975, then further increases to $ 2.88 as from 18 September 1976 and $3.17 as from 18 September 1977
Moonie Increase of 85 cents per barrdi to $ 3.00 as from 18 September 1975, then further increase to $ 4.35 as from 18 September 1976 and $ 5.25 as from 18 September 1977.
The varying prices have regard to the varying costs of the respective producers.
The &nbsp;pricing levels indicated above for oil from fields already discovered will apply for 3 years. It is not possible at this stage to determine prices beyond 3 years for existing producing fields. Before September 1978 the pricing levels to apply after then and up to September 1980 will be reviewed by the Industries Assistance Commission.
The Industries Assistance Commission will also be asked to make recommendations on all aspects of Australian crude oil policy after 1980, when the present indigenous crude oil absorption arrangements expire.
For this purpose the I. A. C. will have particular regard to the desirable allocation of resources as between oil and other energy sources.
The Department of Minerals and Energy will be discussing the detailed application of the new pricing arrangements with the companies at an early date.
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
&nbsp;



PROME Press Statement No. 557
September 1975
CHAIRMAN INCOME SECURITY REVIEW
The Prime minister announced today that the Chairman of the
Review Group for the Income Security Review would be
Mr I. Castles, Deputy Secretary, Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet.
On .8 September 1975 the Prime Minister announced the
decision to undertake the Income Security Review, and
thb terms of reference for it. The Review Group will
consist of officials from the Departments of Social Security,
Repatriation and Compensation, Labor and Immigration,
Prime Minister and Cabinet, Treasury, the Taxation Office
and the Social Welfare Commission.
The Group will be monitored by a Cabinet Committee of
Ministers comprising the Prime Minister, the Treasurer,
the Minister for Social Security and Minister for
Repatriation and Compensation and the Minister for Labor
and Immigration.
The-. terms of reference embrace a comprehensive review of
Government policy in the welfare area, including
consideration of important reports that the Government
has received or commissioned relating to income security.
Mr Whitlam, said today that Mr Castles has had excellent
experience in rendering service to Australian Governments
in economic policy formulation, including key participation
in the formulation of the policy for the income tax system
announced in the recent Budget speech.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 



EMpmBTAuGeOda: y6P RESS STATEMENT NO. 559
EMpmBTAuGedOa: y616 September 1975
AUSTRALIAN INDEPENDENCE GIFT TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA
* The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced this
evening that the gift from the Australian Government and
people to ma'rk the occasion of Papua New Guinea'ss
independence would take the form of a national library
building and~ associated books and equipment. Mr Whitlam,
who formally conveyed advice to this effect to the Papua
New Guinea Government at a ceremony in Port Moresby this
afternoon said that the gift accrn~ ded with the wishes of
the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Mr Somare, and his
Government. The gift was estimated to cost up to $ 2 million.
A site for the building had already been allocated
in Port Moresby and Mr Whitlam said that he had proposed
to Mr Somare that the development of the project proceed
on 1 he basis of co-operation and joint consultation in such
matters as design, structure and library content, so that
when completed it would truly reflect the wishes of the two
countries and their people.
Mr Whitlam said he understood it was Papua
New Guinea's intention that the library would serve the
residents of other areas of Papua New Guinea as well as the
capital and he expressed the hope that in this way the gift
would benefit large numbers of people throughout Papua
New Guinea.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.,
PORT MORESBY 



EMBARGO LEm ue
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P
AT THE PAPUA NEW GUINEA INDEPENDENCE CELEBRATIONS,
PORT MORESBY, 16 SEPTEMBER 1975
This is a day that will live in history.
There can never be a more important day in a
nation's history, than its birthday. But the significance
of this day in the broad sweep of history goes beyond even
that for Papua New Guinea, for Australia, for our region
and for the Commonwealth of Nations around the world.
Today Australia, herself once a group of colonies,
has ended the role as a colonial power imposed upon her
by an irony of history. Australid could never be truly
free until Papua New Guinea was truly free. In a very real
sense, this is a day of liberation for Australia as much
as for Papua New Guinea.
iFurther, Australia has today finally discharged
her mandate from the old League of Nations and her
trusteeship to the United Nations.
The presence of the heir to the Crown reminds
us that Papua New Guinea is the last of the significant
nations to be newly created under the authority of that
crown the final act in that remarkable process so
brilliantly inaugurated by his great-uncle Lord Mountbatten,
28 years ago. Nothing became the life of that Empire more
than the manner of their -leaving it.
I came here two days ago as the last Australian
Prime Minister to visit a Papua New Guinea constitutionally
linked to Australia. At midnight last night I became
the first Australian Prime Minister to visit the new nation
of Papua New Guinea. I accept the change of status with
complete equanimity. It is good for the soul, in these
, times which try men's souls.
Let me congratulate your Government, Mr Prime
Minister, on the excellent arrangements made to allow us
all to take part in your indepe ' ndence celebrations. The
ceremonies, the feastivities, the displays all quite
. splendid. And I noticed the excellent security arrangements.
In fact, I haven't felt so well protected since our first
meeting five and a half years ago January 1970 in the
lounge of the Sepik Motel in Wewak. The Australian security
eavesdropped on our subversive talk and well they might,
for we were talking about early self-government and early
independence for Papua New Guinea. We brought great
criticism, even ridicule and contempt, upon us in those far
off days a whole five and ahYalf years ago when together
we first stated that the independence of Papua New Guinea
was imminent and inevitable. / 12 
I said then that independence for Papua New
Guinea was an idea whose time had come and nothing could
resist the power of that idea. In you, Mr Prime Minister,
Papua New Guinea found a man whose time.. has come.
In the event, Papua New Guinea's independence
was her own deicsion and this day for independence was
decided by her own House of Assembly a modern, single
chamber parliament with equal electorates indeed,. an
example for other parliaments. Her Constitution, was not
devised in another land or imposed by foreigners.
It emerged from her own democratic processes, from within
her own democratic institutions, from her own people and
their elected representatives. It has been a remarkable
demonstration of political maturity.
Mr Prime Minister, our two nations cannot ignore
and escape our historical links, our geographic proximity,
the past we share, the future we share. I am convinced
neither of ups wish or will ever wish to do so. At yesterday's
flag lowerii~ g ceremony, Sir John Guise stressed that the
Australia flag was being lowered, not torn down. This
spirit, the strength of which comes from a shared past in
peace, in war, is a firm foundation for our future relationship.
Australia wants the closest possible relationship
with her nearest neighbour, the new nation of Papua New
Guinea. A relationship of equals, based on mutual respect,
understanding and trust. That trust, that understanding
and that respect, is necessary for us to develop a
rela~ tionship which will go well beyond normal diplomatic ties.
This does not mean that we seek an exclusive
relationship with Papua New Guinea. On the contrary, we
recognise and appreciate that you will want to find your own
place in the international community, based on your
own independent assessment. The independence which we
celebrate today is a genuine independence not a phoney
independence. The Australian Government has stressed that a
united and independent Papua New Guinea will continue to
have first call on Australia'expanding aid program.
I re-affirm that pledge in the strongest possible terms;
te-af firm it with the full support of the Australian Government,
the full support of the Australian political parties, the
full support of the Australian people. I give a categorical
and unequivocal assurance to the Government and people of
Papua New Guinea that this nation will continue to have first
call on our expanding aid program.
Mr Prime Minister, tonight, I also want to
re-affirm. the Australian Government's absolute, unqualified
support for a united Papua New Guinea. Even when there was
disagreement in Australia about the time-table for independence
there was never any disagreement on this fundamental objective.
Australia's policy over the years of bringing a united Papua
New Guinea to independence has been supported by the overwhelming
majority of your elected representative. It is a policy which 
has been endorsed by the United Nations many times as
recently as three weeks ago by the Trusteeship Council. Indeed,
it was the fun ' damental condition of Australia's trusteeship.
Representatives of the Trusteeship Council, of the Committee
of Twenty Four and of the United Nations Secretary-General
are here for the celebrations. It is more than the hope of
Australia, the hope of Papua New Guinea it is the world's
hope for Papua New Guinea and, one might pray, the hope of
the universal church.
On an occasion like this its hard to avoid
euphoria, the feeling of unqualified optimism, particularly
when so much of all that we hoped for, worked for, fought
for, has been achieved is now a, living fact. It seems
almost churlish to remind ourselves that there are
difficulties, dangers, pitfalls ahead. But, of course,
that is alsq a fact. It is in the nature of things.
In particular Papua New Guinea * is embarking on that most
difficult of all courses that effort to make democracy
work. Nowh~ re in the world is this man's noblest experimentaltogether
beyond challenge, beyond the possibility of failure.
The particular forms, the techniques, the institutions
by which democracy can prevail are always subject to development
and change. Each nation will make its own experiment, its
own choices. The substance of democracy, however, can be
achieved if we keep in mind its basic aim the aim set out
by the first group of colonies to achieve independence, 199
years ago, now the United States of America that all men are
born equal and have equal rights to life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. In the great task ahead Papua New Guinea will
have many friends. Australia, of course; Australia firm and
unswerving in her friendship. But the representative presence
in this room of so many of the nations of the world is a sure
sign. that of all the great strengths which this nation enjoysthe
strength of her people, the strengths of their diverse and
rich cultures, the strength of her leaders not least is3
the strength of the friendship she has throughout the region
and the world. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 558
16 September 1975
AUSTRALIAN INCOME TAX DEDUCTIONS FOR MINERAL EXPLORATION
EXPENDITURE IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, announced today
that transitional provisions in the Income Tax Assessment
Act 1975 relating to the allowance of deduction, for
Australian income tax purposes, of mineral exploration
expenditure incurred by Australian companies in Papua New
Guinea would be extended.
Amendments to the Australian income tax law
effected by the Income Tax Assessment Act 1975 provide that,
subject to transitional provisions, deductions will not be
allowed in Australia for mineral exploration expenditure
incurred by Australian companies in Papua New Guinea after
Papua New Guinea attains independence. When the amending
legislation was being considered by the Australian
P arliament the Australian Government indicated that it
0 would be giving sympathetic consideration to a request
for extension of these transitional provisions that the Papua
New Guinea Government has foreshadowed it would make.
Extended transitional provisions now agreed
would apply to Australian companies which, at 16 September
1975, held prospecting authorities issued by the Papua
New Guinea Government. The extended provisions would also
apply to Australian companies which at that date had entered
into farm-in arrangements with holiders of such authorities
or had made arrangements with the Papua New Guinea Government
giving them rights in respect of such authorities.
These companies will be allowed deductions in
Australia for mineral exploration expenditure incurred by
them up to 30 June 1978 in the areas covered by those authorities,
on the same basis as applied to such expenditure incurred in
Australia. Legislation to give effect to this extension
would be introduced in the Australian Parliament as soon
as practicable. There will be no cost to the Australian
Government revenue in 1975-76 because of this extension.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


Press Statement No. 560
The Prime Minister and Acting Minister for Foreign Affiars, Mr E. G. Whitlam, announced today that the Australian Government will make a cash contribution of $ 100,000 to the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC) appeal forhumanitarian assistance to the victims of the recent fighting in Portuguese Timor.
The Acting Minister said that the Australian Government has great confidence in the ICRC's capacity to assess relief requirements and to~ provide humanitarian assistance quickly and effectively. Accordingly the Australian Government willrely on the ICRC's decisions with regard to which essential supplies for Portuguese Timor would be purchased with the $100,000.
The Acting Minister said that this contribution was additional to the assistance already being provided by Australia to the ICRC for relief operations in Timor: a RAAF Caribou aircraft and a medical team.
The Acting Minister said that the Australian Government, together with the Australian people, was concerned for the well being of the people who were suffering because of the present disturbances in Timor. He added that the Government would continue to give its close attention to the humanitarian aspects of the problem.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 18 September 1975&nbsp;



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 561
EMBARGO: 12 midnight 19 September 1975
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF MALAYSIA
Th%, Prime Minister announced today that the Right
Honourable Tun Haji Abdul Razak bin Datuk Hussein, Prime
Minister of Malaysia, is to visit Australia from Wednesday
October to Wednesday 22 October 1975. He will be
accompanied by his wife, Toh Puan Hajjah Rahah.
Tun Razak and his wife are due to arrive at
Canberra from Sydne9 at 12 noon on 15 October and to
leave for Adelaide at 00 p. m. on Friday 17 October.
They propose remaining in South Australia until Tuesday
21 October when they will travel to Sydney to stay overnight
befdre leaving Australia on Wednesday 22 October 1975.
An outline of the engagements in Canberra for
Tun Razak is attached.
The Prime Minister said that Tun Razak's visit would
underline the close and friendly traditional ties between
Australians and Malaysians in all walks of life. Tun Razak's
visit would reciprocate his own official visit to Malaysia
in January 1974.
Mr Whitlam said he felt sure that Tun Razak would
be warmly welcomed by the Australian people and hoped that
the informal part of his program, in particular, would
enable Tun Razak to learn more of the Australian way of life.
/ 2 
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF MALAYSIA
OUTLINE PROGRAM FOR CANBERRA
WEDNESDAY 15 OCTOBER 1975
12.00 noon Ceremonial arrival at RAAP Base Fairbairn
Received by
The Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam
Stay at the Lakeside Hotel
Afternoon Calls on the Priime Minister at Parliament House
Official discussions
Evening Dinner at The Lodge
THUR1SDAY 16 OCTOBER 1975
Morning Lays wreath at Australian War Memorial
Visits Mt Ainslie Lookout
Visits Planning Exhibition at Regatta Point
Lunch At Parliament House with Senators and Members
( Hosts: The Prime Minister and Ministers of
State)
Late Afternoon Reception given by the Malaysian High Commissioner
Evening Dinner at Government House
FRIDAY 17 OCTOBER 1975
Morning Meets Malaysian students at Malaysia House
Lunch As guest of National Press Club
3.00 p. m. Ceremonial departure from RAAF Base Fairbairn
for Adelaide
Farewelled by-
The Prime Minister and Mrs Whitlam.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



) 4WUtRLIA PRESS STATEMENT NO. 562
19 September 1975
OFFICIAL CAR TRANSPORT
The Prime Minister has announced that as part of
its deliberations on the Budget and in keeping with its
desire to cut costs wherever practical, the Government
has decided to restrict the use of official bar transport.
A number of measures have already been taken and
further measures are in hand to achieve this objective.
Rules governing the use of official transport
were last reviewed by the Rt. Hon. J. McEwen as Acting
Prime Minister in April 1966.
New rules designed to curtail the use of cars have
been approved and will apply to all Australian Government
employees and to members of the Armed Forces.
The Australian Government transport authorities will
maintain only skeleton staff on weekends and public holidays.
Weekday services will also be closely examinedtto see whether
further cost savings can be achieve whilst maintaining a
reasonable level of service.
Ways and means of rationalising official transport
to and from Canberra Airport and of extending the existing
inter-departmental passenger bus service between major
work locations in Canberra are under consideration.
Departments and other Australian Government
instrumentalities are to be requested to review urgently
all cars owned or on hire, in conjunction with the appropriate
Australian Government transport authority, to ensure that
their use is economic.
Whilst it is not possible to estimate precisely the
full effect of these measures, it is considered that they
will involve substantial savings in official transport costs.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Embargo: 5 pmS1
PRIME MINISTER's WEEKLY BROADCAST
THE RIGHT TO GOVERN
Sunday 21 September 1975
Once again the press has been full of noisy
speculation about the Opposition rejecting the Budget and
somehow forcing another election. It is important to put
an end to this talk because it is ill-founded and damaging
damaging to the whole process of good government and
administration, damaging to the stability and confidence
of the entire community. I noti'ce Mr Fraser was quoted as
the other day that a bit of uncertainty about elections
helped boost business confidence. You can draw your own
conclusions from that sort of reasoning, but at least
it helps to explain Mr Fraser's shameful silence on the
basic issu&amp; k. saying
First let me make the Government's position
perfectly clear. I've spelt it out before. We were
elected last year for a three-year term. We intend to
serve out that term. Everything we have done, all our
policies and decisions have been based on the assumption
that the Government would complete the normal term allowed
by the Constitution. So it's not the Government that is
causing this uncertainty it's the Opposition and its
supporters. From the way the press carry on you would think
that Mr Fraser only had to snap his fingers and an election
would follow, That's by no means certain for a number of
reasons. For a start, it's not clear whether the Opposition
senators would all do as Mr Fraser tells them. Only this
week Senator Jessop, a Liberal senator from South Australia
stated publicly that he wouldn't have anything to do with
blocking the Budget in the Senate. The independent senators,
Senator Hall and Senator Bunton, have said the same thing.
They have all taken the honourable and proper view that
this isn'It the Senate's f unction. But let's assume f or the
moment that the Opposition could force an election in this
way. Let's consider how thoroughly destructive that would
be to our whole system of government.
Once we accept the idea that the Senate can
force a Government to an early election, the whole system
breaks down. Once the precedent is established any future
Government not just this Government would be at the
mercy of vindictive senators, of a chance majority in a
hostile Upper House. Mr Fraser knows this perfectly well.
Every Government has its ups and downs its spells of
popularity and unpopularity.-That' s inevitable in politics.
The Liberals went through these ups and downs when they were
in office, and we've had more than our share of them ourselves.
A Government contending with difficult economic conditionswith
problems of inflation and unemployment shared by every
other comparable country -a Government forced to take 
2.
difficult and sometimes tough decisions in the national
interest -will be especially vulnerable to shifts of
fortune and chan-ging moods in the electorate. It would
be monstrous to suggest that a Government in these
circumstances should be forced to the polls whenever
it suited the Opposition. No Government would be free
t ' o plan ahead, to take decisions for the future, to
take tough measures when necessary.
I can best illustrate'this point by reference
to the Budget. The Budget we brought down last month was
framed in the ccntext of long-term planning, as the
second of the t-hree annual Budgets in the term for which
this Government was elected. It iwas framed in the context
of present economic problems, national and international.
It is part of a steady, long-term attack on inflation.
The essential point is this: the Budget must
be given a chance to work. No one pretends that it will
work overntght. No Budget works overnight. Mr Fraser
himself has said that there is no quick, easy solution
to our economic problems. The overriding need is for a period
of steady, stable government while the Budget takes effect.
The next few months are crucial. Any interruption to the Budget
strategy, any disruption to the process of recovery, any
attempt to bring ab~ out a wholly unnecessary political crisis,
would have disastrous effects on public confidence and
economic planning.
0 The real question of course quite apart
from anything the opposition might like to do is what
they could do. The Constitution says-nothing on this
point and there are absolutely no conventions or precedents
to guide us. ' The Senate has never rejected a money bill or
a Budget in its whole 75-year history that alone will
give you some idea of how irregular, how monstrous, the
idea is. There is actually no provision in the Constitution
or any precedent to suggest that an election must follow
the rejection of a Budget at all. In fact there are good
grounds for believing that the Senate's rejection of a
Budget would be in itself unconstitutional. After all,
the Constitution specifically-plays down that the Senate may
neither originate nor amend a money bill. It hardly seems
likely that the found ' ing fathers intended that the Senate
should reject bills which they are forbidden even to amend.
Mr Fraser seems to be falling into exactly
the same trap as Mr Snedden on this issue. Three weeks ago
he said the Budget would be passed. He has more than once
expressed the view that an elected Government must be allowed
to govern. He stated this principle on the very day he was
elected as Leader of the Opposition. Indeed, one of the
reasons his colleagues elected him was to put an end to the
constant speculation, the damage done to his party and the
country by Mr Snedden's endless and irresponsible threats of
an election. People were sick and tired of Mr Snedden
harping on the subject. We saw what happened last year when
/ 3 
the Liberals knuckled under to Country Party pressure and the
Senate threatened to reject supply. The people wouldn't wear
it. I called an election myself on that occasion so that
our Medibank bills and other important measures could get
through Parliament afterwards. The people re-elected the
Government. The Liberals turned to a new leader who
professed some respect for constitutional principles,
for political decency, for the rules of the game.
People shouldn't assume that just because there
was an election last time the Senate abused its powers,
there would necessarily be an election if they did it again.
It's obvious that Mr Fraser is under exactly the same
pressures as Mr Snedden. He's looking more like another
Snedden every day. He knows the proper course; the
question is whether he will stick to his guns. It takes
a special sort ofE courage real political guts to
stand up to the jackals in the Opposition and resist their
demands. If Mr Fraser has-any self-respect, if he has any
shred of honour, he will make it clear, once and for all,
that an election is just not on. He will show his party
and the country that he really is the Leader of the Opposition
and not a stooge of the Anthonys, the Courts, the Lynches,
the Bjelke-Petersens and the various unscrupulous
pressure groups that surround them. Every day he dithers
on this issue adds to the nation's uncertainty, weakens our
democratic system, jand reinforces the impression that when
the heat is really on, Malcolm Fraser is just as weak and
compromising as his unfortunate predecessor. 



a EMBARGO: AS DELIVERED ON
' THIS WEEK'
21 SEPTEMBER 1975
INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER ON HSV7' s
" THIS WEEK" PROGRAM. RE-PLAY SUNDAY
21 SEPTEMBER 1975
QUESTION: A lot of speculation about whether there's going to
be an election before the Labor Government ends its term in
1977. If an election is held bef9re May next year, what would
your reaction be to that? Would you welcome it?
PRIME MINISTER: I think there ought to be an election for the
House of Representatives at the end of the proper term, that is~,
in the middle of 1977. There must be an election for half the
Senate befo3 e the middle of next year.
QUESTION: Would you welcome an election if the opposition saw
fit to refuse Supply? How do you think the Labor Government would
go in that case?
PRIME MINISTER: We2? l, obviously the polls show that we would be
in great difficulty. But it has to be remembered that this would
only come about,. an election for the House of Representatives, if
the Opposition were again to do what it threatened to do in April
last year, '-that ispto reject funds to carry on the business of
of Government. If that was the issue I believe there would be
an immense increase in support for the Labor Party as there was
in May last year. Furthermore, if the Opposition objected to the
Budget, refused to pass the Budgetjthe election would be on the
propriet~ y . the merits of our-Budget. And accordingly, the
Opposition would have to give up mere negative criticism. It
would have to propose a Budget of its own. And I'm certain that
in any contest between our Budget, which is there , and any
Budget which they then produced, we would win.
QUESTION: ' Prime Minister, you seem to be taking a softer lineif
I may say so. You were quoted the other day as saying,
" If Mr Fraser refused to pass, approves the Budget in the Senate,,
then you would tough it out."
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think I ever used the word'tough it out'.
What I did say was this, -That there is no law on this subject,
there is no rule on this subject, there is no precedent on this
subject and since there had never been any discussions on the
possibility of the Australian Senate rejecting a Budget from the
House of Representatives there wasn't even a convention. A
great number of people assume that if the Senate were to reject
a Budget or to refuse Supply then the Prime Minister would have
to advise the Governor General to dissolve the House of Represent-
* atives. There is no such law, rule, precedent, or in fact,
convention. QUESTION: And if Mr Fraser does decide to reject the Budget in 
the Senate., then you would not advise the Governor-General, you
would tough it out.
PRIME MINISTER: That's one of the options. I'm not using the
words'tough it out'. That's your words. But I want to point
out that the holding of a House of Representatives election under
the Constitution is decided by the Governor-General-in-Council,
those are the words of the Constitution. That means the Governor
General can only dissolve the House of Representatives if he is
advised to do so'by his Government. The Government is composed
of that party which has a majority in the House of Representatives
My Party has that majority.
QUESTION: It is the apparent indecision of Mr Fraser to make up
his mind one way or the other, which is causing all the speculation
at the moment and an editorial says, " that Mr Fraser should
come out once and for all and say is he going to accept the
Budget or not". Do you agree with that?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh yes. I think that is very clearly the case.
I-to
Mr Fraser hides behind the formula 1 Well I'm not promoting
speculation on this; I've never said, as Bill Snedden was always
saying, that, ' we will refuse Supply in the Senate-. But of course
he is well aware that everybodyp including Mr Anthony his
Opposition colleague, Mr Lynch his Deputy and a very great
number of other people are saying things like that. They always
say, " But, of coursd, this is finally a decision for Mr Fraser
himself". Now if Mr Fraser wants to kill this speculation heq
only has to say~~ no, there will be no rejection of the Budget.
That is, he knows the speculation is going on, he refuses to
do anything to kill it. He's apparently thinking that this must
be to his advantage to appear to be driven to this course which
he's always said up till now, when he's been cornered, would
be an improper course.
QUESTION: Do you think he's lost his opportunity for forcing
an election?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't know whether I'd put it in exactly
those terms. As I say., there is no certainty that there would
be an election if the Senate were to reject the Budget. But
I think Mr* Fraser must now be'oning to realise that he'll have
to'put up or shut up'. If there is an election on the Budget
then there has to be an alternative Budget. He has to say in
any election what expenditures he would increase or reduce;
what taxes he would increase or reduce. And he's never been
specific. QUESTION: Do you think it's his inability to come up with agood
alternative Budget that's holding him back?
PRIME MINISTER: I think that he's being very coy about it.
He's enjoying the speculation ' and in a negative wqay he's encouraging
the speculation. I think it may be that., cynically, he believes
that all such speculation undermines confidence in the business
community. And it impedes the processes the Budget. People"
feel uncertain. / 3 
QUESTION: This might be hypothetical, it's looking a long
way into the future, but say the Labor Government does survive
till 1977?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: Can you say now what you think your chances would
be ' in 1977 of being returned?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh~ well,, obviously we think-and Mr Fraser, those
around him and behind him, must also think. that with the passage
of time our chances improve. This was a very good Budget, it is
bound to bring about an improvement in Australia's economy.
QUESTION: There's no doubt in your mind that you'd win in 1977?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh yes, that would be my expectation. Admittedly
the polls show thatwef1do very badly at the moment. I believe
that in an election campaign where people were voting for real,
where they 4eren't just making criticisms of the Government
and where they had to choose whether they wanted the present
Government and the present Budget or an alternative hypothetical
and, obviously in many cases, unpalatable Budget, they'd choose
the one that there is there now.
QUESTION: There is ~ a lot of popularity obviously to be gained
from the business co'mmunity as a whole and a poll conducted by
the Age newspaper in Melbourne a short time-ago, showed that
something like 90% of the chief executives of a cross section
of Australia's biggest companies believe that the Government
must' change if business conditions are to improve. So obviously
business confidence is still down despite all..( interjection)
PRIME MINISTER: I think a poll conducted among business leaders
at any time,.. this year, five years ago, five years to come... would
tend to favour the Liberals. But you noticed that poll, although
it wasn't in the Age heading, was that 60% of those people said
that the Budget, Bill Hayden's Budget, was a responsible one.
So when it comes to the.. ( interjection)
QUESTION:. But they still predict a gloomy future., these same
business people. What do you say to them about the future?
PRIME MINISTER: That things will steadily, but not quickly,
improve. So what I think we've got to realise is that every
country, like Australia~ is having bad economic conditions
every countryplike Australia, has far too high unemployment and
far too high inflation.
QUESTION: Isn't that just too easy~ to pass it off on to what's
happening in the rest of the world when we perhaps could be finding
some solution. to the problems, here?
PRIME MINISTER: Well~ none of-us have been able to find a solution.
I mean none of the other countries have been able to find a quick
or an easy solution. If there was one it's certain that such
a solution would have been tried, because there is a difference
of political philosophy in all those countries, North America and
Europe and Japan, Australia, New Zealand. And there's no easy
solution. 
QUESTION: Slowing down inflationdo you agree ) would be the
key to electoral success at the next election?
PRIME MINISTER: I think this is the biggest component in
electoral success. Yes.
QUESTION: And if you've admitted that you can't do that, that
Australial can't find the answer, how does that leave you when
the next election comes up?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you will find that inflation is steadily
declining. It won't decline rapidly. But our inflation is
not very much out of gear with the inflation in comparable
countries. We all have much worse inflation than any of us
would have thought possible or tolerable back in the ' 60' s
all of us.
QUESTION: Can we just come down to the'State of the Nation'.
And I'd like to quote Mrs Margaret Thatcher, of all people.
She said thi other day that " the persistent( interjection, P. M.
" You don't hear much of her now, No but she
has just been to America and there she said, " the persistent
expansion of the role of the State and the relentless pursuit
of.-equality has caused and is causing damage to our economy in.
a number of ways". Now isn't this exactly the situation that
we've got in Australia at the moment?
PRIME MINISTER: It's one of the criticisms which is made of us.
But we make no apologies for wanting to give everybody equal
opportunities. It's true enough that if you have the traditional
inequalities which there have been in Australia, then Governments
don't have to spend so much. If you accept inequalities then
obviously Governments can save money. But we don't accept
inequalities ybu must give people more access to good schools,
hospitals, transport etc.
QUESTION: Yes, but many of the valuable social reforms that
your Government has introduced are being grossly misused by
bludgers, . let's face it; what comment do you have about these
bludgers? PRIME MINISTER: There are some-bludgers. Obviously private
bodies like St. Vincent De Paul, Red Cross, Salvation Army,
will tell you that there is an irreducible minimum of bludgers.
And I suppose this is the experience of all Government welfare
agencies too. It becomes finally a choice between employing
a very great number of public servants to weed all the bludgers Outor
accepting the universal experience of private as well as
Government welfare agencies that there are a number of immoral
types who pole on charitable people and on taxpayers.
QUESTION: The public is saying though that there are so many
of these bludgers around and the'ym paying their taxes to keep
them having a pleasant time. Do you see... 
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it would cost an immense amount, let's
face it to expand the public service to detect or punish all
the bludgers there are. Mind you I do think this can be
exaggerated. Clearly there are some people in the hinterland
of Cairns or on the Gold Coast who are bludging but I don't
believe that most people willingly or knowingly bludge on the
community. but I d6n't'believe that most peoplo are like that
QUESTION. Would you agree that there are people who have taKen
advantage of the iTEAT scheme, there are people who have taken
advantage of the RED scheme, there are people who have taken
advantage of various schemes that you have introduced, Medibank
is the latest one I see that it...
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not sure about the Medibank thing
but there again in the NEAT scheme and the RED scheme overwhelmingly
there has been merit and virtue in them. There's been a very
great number of individuals and families who've benefited and
communities. The RED scheme is supported by a great number of
people, such as the N. S. W. and Victorian Governments, who are
challenging. itinthd High Court. You've got the extraordinary
position, they're challenging our right to have the RED scheme
but at the same time they want in -to be expanded.
QUESTION: The Victorians are challenging your right to administer
money. They say they can administer the money better and this is
one of the big thinigs in Victoria, I think that has Mr Hamer upset.
He says. under section No. 96 that the Commonwealth is going
too far under these tied grants ; you're trying to insist that
you tell the States how to spend the money. Why can't the States
decide for themselves?
PRIME MINISTER: I think Mr Hamer's objection and the objection
of a very great number of other State parliamentarians is to the
fact that my Government has had direct relationships with local
Government bodies in Australia.. The State Governments want to
centralise relations with the local government bodies in the
State capitals, and they don't like direct...
QUESTION: Mr Hamer accuses you of centralisation and you are
accusing him of centralisation.
PRIME MINISTER: Well the States are much more centralised in
their administration than my Government or any previous
federal Government. That's a fact.
QUESTION: But isn't it true that one of the things that has
cost the country a fortune is the establishment of a new army
of public servants in Canberra to administer State functions.
And we already have those public servants here in the State.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, if you look at the figures the increase
in the numbers of public servahts in the time I've been Prime
Minister has been much smalle: federally than in the State
administrations or in local government. -The federal public
service has expanded much less than any of the State
public services or than local government employment. That's
the figures, there's no question of that. / 6 
QUESTION: What gives you the impression that Mr Bjelke-Petersen
is a'Bible bashing bastard'?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I used that in the context of saying that
he'd acted in his unprincipled immoral-way in stacking the
Senate and I said it was all the more nausaating since he was
a Bible bashing bastard. That is, I didn't use it in isolation,
I wanted to highlight the fact that he is a hypocrite. Which,
of course, he is.
QUESTION: Bible bashing hardly seems a term that one would expect
a Prime Minister to use though in referring to a State Premier
bastard eitherI suppose.
PRIME MINISTER: I would have thought that any of us would use
those words about a blatant hypocriteas Mr Bjelke-Petersen is.
Nobody will support, I don't think anybody would come on your
program and support what Mr Bjelke-Petersen did. Now they
mightn't use the words that I used when some of your people
asked me foi an opinion on the kerbside andso on. But they
would all agree that it was nauseating hypocricy.
QUESTION: It was on the kerb; was it just a slip? Did you
regret the statement?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, it was a bit strong I suppose but he is a
hypocriteand I'm entitled to say it.
QUESTION: Do you regret it now, saying that?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose it'd be better if I hadn't because
it distracts attention from the rest of what I said.
QUESTION: In relation to Senator Field and the bluff and
counter bluff about elections and also the Senator Gair aff ir
and Mr Bunton: What's happening to the ethic of Parliament. Is
good Government in jeopardy because of the politickingf
PRIME MINISTER: Yes obviously. The things that Mr Bjelke-Petersen
has now done and which Mr Lewis did earlier are quite
unconscionable. That is, they're gone against the principles
which had been followed by every State parliament under governments
of both sides of politics without deviation throughout the 1950' s
and the 1960' s. Until this year there had been a quarter of a
century of obedience toacceptance of~ the convention, that
if a Senator's position became vacant he'd be replaced by a
Senator of the same Party.
QUESTION: But how is it affecting good government? What
effect is it having in the running of the country?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, the whole of the political basis of
Government in Britain and accordingly in Australia, which has
adopted British practices, depends overwhelmingly on conventions.
In Britain totally on conventions. In Australia on conventions
except where the Constitution makes some specific provision.
And you know, there's no provision in the Constitution for
things which we all accep such as, Cabinet Government and
so on / 7 
QUESTION: Can we talk about Mr Hawke for a moment? He says
that the Labor Party is facing its gravest, crisis and you
bear him out on that. Has the ACTU contributed to this crisis
by its failure to control union wage demands?
PRIME MINISTER:. Well the ACTU, one has to realise is a body
to which well over a hundred separate unions belong. And those
unions all have a separate legal identity when it comes to
proceedings before arbitration tribunals. So it's quite wrong
to suggest that the ACTU, whoever is the President of it, can
have a monolithic-attitude to every possible subject and you
can't expect it.
QUESTION: But surely the ACTU has a duty to control union wage
demands?
PRIME MINISTER: No I don't think you should -it's always
assumed that, employee organisations are there to discipline
their members. Well we don't seem to accept the same thing
when it comes to employers, -disciplining their associates
when it com~ s to when it comes to pricing of goods and services.
There's always a balance in these things. Clearly the amount
of wage increases last financial year was excessive and it
could not be allowed to continue that was quite obvious.
You can't just blame the ACTU only., because under the laws as
they are-and the States have resisted the Arbitration Commission's
pleas.. six or more Years ago to coordinate and standardise their
laws-under these State laws, Every union is a separate legal
body and you can have the same union which is a separate legal
identity in the four States which have compulsory Arbitration
as well as federally. And it makes an extraordinarily difficult
situation in which to deal with wages or conditions of any sort.
QUESTION: Well at this week's Congress the ACTU has accepted
the principle of wage indexation, they've also lef t themselves
a loophole for collective bargaining. But the ACTU has also
urged the Government to adopt tax indexation and your Treasurer
has successfully avoided this; why?
PRIME MINISTER: ' Well, I don't think you'. re correctly putting what
the Treasurer has said. Bill Hayden has brought in the most
sweeping tax reform, income tax reform, that's ever been brought
in the federal parliament.
QUESTION: In place of iridexation?
PRIME MINISTER: No, as a matter of fact, it's better than
indexation. What Bill Hayden has done in this year's Budget
will produce a much better deal for income tax payers than
would have been produced by applying indexation to the present
tax scales. My Government has reduced income tax on three
occasions and the percentage of income that people have to pay
in income tax is lower now than it was. And what we've done
makes it lower still. 
QUESTION: Prime Minister could just comment quickly on the
fact that the Opposition parties have apparently accepted XV
the proposition that if returned to power some personal
~ income taxation powers may be handed back to the States. r
" Wh-at do-y-ou think this would do to the Australian economy?
PRIME MINISTER: It just wouldn't work. The simple fact is that
there are some States which would be able to get as much income
as they get now, through arrangements with the Federal Governmenteven
if they were to raise income tax themselves -that applies
to Victoria certainly and New South Wales is 50
But the other 4 states, if they were to raise income tax
themselves would have to levy the tax at a much higher rate
than it is at present levied. This is because the taxability
of the 4. smaller. States is much less than the taxability of
Victoria and New South Wales. Now I thought we all accepted
that the Sta * tes which are richer, longer settled, more
industrialised, like Victoria and New South Wales should help
to pay for services provided by the other States. That's
what uniforrr taxation does. But it's inevitable that you have
uniform taxation and that should be raised by the Federal
Government alone, in Australia. And a lot of Liberals accept
that situation.
QUESTION! But a lot of Liberals don't accept the way that
your Government makes the grants to the States and then wants
to control the way those grants are spent.
PRIME MINISTER: Well that's not completely true. The States
this. year will be receiving 34%, I think it is, more money
from the Federal Government than they received last year. And
they can spend that as they see fit.
QUESTION:' But-the conditions have changed.
PRIME MINISTER: No, No, this is as,' they see fit.
QUESTION: Our education Minister, Mr Thompson, is very upset
because against the recommendations of the Schools Commission,
which suggested that there should be a triennial payout in
education_, Mr Hayden is now giving grants on a six-monthly
basis. PRIME MINISTER: No, No, that's not true. Every educational
grant by the Federal Government to the State Governments is
indexed. That is, if there is inflation the value of the grant
is adjusted to maintain its value. We are committed to the
triennial business; we haven't been able to bring in as many
new programs as we were hoping this financial year. But we
are committed to the triennial concept and what the States get
this year will in every respect be of the same value as or
greater value than they got last year for education. Now you
mention Mr Thompson, but Mr Beazley has exposed,.. in the Parliament,
I need'-t repeat it,.. the Vict~ orian Government's failure
to maintain it's share of educational expenditure. A lot of
the State Governments are saying that, where as in schools and
in hospitals and public transport, my Government has stepped in
to raise the standards, because the States were obviously allowing
them to decline, that for some reason we should then 19 
do the lot. Now we don't believe that we should run the
schools or the hospitals or the public transport, but we
do believe that each of those should be improved. We are
helping to improve them but we do say the States at least
should maintain the commitment that they had always had.
Wd don't mind topping them up, but we don't think that
when we come in they should then be able to. relax and diminish
their contributions.
QUESTION: What is Australia's current position in regard to
Portuguese Timor? Are we merely following Indonesia ' s
wishes in our behaviour towards this part of our hear North,
or what is our policyexactly now?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, we say it i's a Portuguese colony and
the Portuguese Government ought to accept responsibility instead
of just clearing out and dropping their bundle. Secondly,...
QUESTION: What happens if they do clear out?
PRIME MINISTER: Well then we're saying-and we've provided
a very great afnount of transport and communications to help.
that the contending forces in Timor should get together and
settle their differences.
QUESTION: Would we , be prepared to recognise a Fretelin-controlled
East Timor?
PRIME MINISTER: Fretelin hasn't got to its. present position
as any result of self-determination. They got the Portuguese
Army's weapons, and they then tried to clean up their opponents.
That's not an act of self-determination.
QUESTION: ' If they did take control, and in
fact were-running the country, would we recognise them?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, are they in control? Our position is
quite clear., that there are three contending parties, they've
all emerged in less than 2 years. They ought to get together.
We have supported all along the idea of self-determination,
that Portuguese ought to help in that process and the Timorese
parties ought to get together and help it.
QUESTION: But currently we support the pro-Indonesian party,
Do we?
PRIME MINISTER: No, we don't support any of the parties. there.
We never have and I don't think that has been alleged. We don't
support any of the parties. We think that the parties ought
to get together. That's why we spent a lot of time, a fair
amount of money, a lot of effort, Air Force and communications
equipment to help the Portuguese envoy get the parties together.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlam a lot of people have asked me to ask you
this one. Why does Australia want to take over the Cocoa Island~
why can't you leave those people alone? 
PRIME MINISTER: Well we took them over from Britain. We took
the islands over from Britain in the 1950' s and they are living
in conditions which the rest of the world will not accept.
QUESTION: Some parts of the world envy their conditions.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, maybe they do, but these people haven't
got any choice. That is~ they're all employed by the one man,
who.--pays them in tokens and they can cash those tokens only in
his stores. Now it might look idyllic from our distance but
it's a very paternal attitude for us to say that that's good
enough for them. Nobody else in the world would accept it.
And Cocos is important to us; if we are to retain jurisdictionwhich
we-sou'ght 20 years ago, and, this is a territory a fair
distance from us,.. then obviously we have to see t hat I
acceptable standards apply; they're entitled to education,
they're entitled to proper employment conditions and they
haven't been getting them.
QUESTION: hey won't inherit inflation?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know how you inflate tokens at the
Clunies-Ross store. He prints them, he cashes them~ he sells
things for them, you've got no option. 



QUESTIONS. FROM TH. E. HOBART PRESS. CLUB LUNCHEON
22 SEPTEMBER 1975
Bowers Mr Fraser's been maindenishly coy about whether or not
he intended to catch you with your trousers down as he
so charmingly put it. Can you say with precision what
you'd do if the Opposition blocks Supply in the
Senate next month?
P. M. Well, there are various options and I wouldn't at this
stage specify which one I at this stage find most
attractive. But all I need to say is it's been
assumed that if an Upper House rejects a Budget or
refuses Supply, the head of the-Government -which of
course has a majority in the Lower House -must then
ask the Governor-General to dissolve the Lower House.
p There is no law which says that; there is no precedent
for it happening, and because nobody ever thought it
could ha~ pen, there has been no discussion about it.
There is no convention about it. Now one of the things
which one bears in mind is that the Senate now is
considerably different from the Senate which was
elected in May last year. I would recall that in May
last year at the Double Dissolution which I advised the
Governor-General at that time to grant because the two
Houses were unworiable there was a threat of refusal
of Supply but in fact there had been no refusal of Supply;
there was the situation where they could be a Double
Dissolution I advised the Governor-General to dissolve
both Houses and he did. And in the election for the House
of Representatives which was supposed to be elected for
three years nobody ever disputed that at the time; the
then Liberal Leader never suggested that the House of
Representatives being elected should not be elected for
three years at that time the candidates of my Party
got a very considerable majority of votes for the House
of Representatives and also of course a comfortable majority
of seats in the House of Representatives and the candidates for the
Senate got more votes than the candidates of all other
Parties contesting the Senate, including one Party which
is no longer there.
Since then there have been two Labor vacancies and
in an utterly unprecedented and, I believe, unprincipled
move, the Premiers of New South Wales and now Queensland
have substituted non-Labor people for the former Labor
Senators. It is possible, it's easier, therefore, for an
Opposition to get half the votes which is all you need;
you don't need a majority to reject these things: the Bill's
not passed unless it gets a majority so it is possible
maybe in these circumstances. But of course it's really for
Dir Fraser to make up his mind on this; he always says
himself that he thinks it's improper to do it; but he
tolerates a degree of speculation which is very unsettling
for business and administration and some people think it's
unsettling for the Government. Well my withers are unwrung ./ 2 
on this business. We've been through it before and on this
matter we wouldn't be caught with our pants down or one leg in
and one leg out.
QUESTION Prime Minister, I'm sure that we're very thankful to your
government for the assistance towards the restoration of
the Bridge: at least our grandchildren are, anyway. I
noticed that you said that you were under no obligation to
do anything towards that Bridge. Would you not agree that
if one of your ships has knockea the bridge down you are
morally, if not legally, bound to restore the Bridge.
P. M. Well my views on what happened about the vessel concerned
are well known. But legally you would be liable for whatever
you can prove against the ship. And the law in this respect
is quite vague. But I would concede that the owner of the
ship and that happens to be, the Australian Government:
Tasmania would be in a pretty poor position but for Australian
Government ships that it should make the contribution.
But there's no legal or moral obligation for us to provide
a fifth lane. There is no legal or moral obligation for us
to provide another bridge, four lane, Dowsings Point.
S Whatever may be the legal or moral obligation there could
be no doubt that the Australian Government has been generous
and not just I don't know about your grandchildren I would
have thought you look admirably hale and hearty and you will
see it in very few years. But the transport across the
Derwent will be very much better than it has ever been
before. The City of Hobart will be very much better planned
and very much better equipped and serviced as a result of
my government's response and its initiatives and the tumbling
of the Bridge has had a golden lining and the taxpayers of
all Australia,.-thanks to the initiative of my Government,
are providing the lining.
QUESTION You mentioned the Antarctic research base being shifted to
Hobart. How soon are we likely to see it shifted to Hobart?
LP0O I wouldn't-. lay down a timetable in these matters because
neither Bridges nor scientific establishments are done in the
course of any one financial year. But there is that commitment.
And if you don't mind me making the political point too, it
will be noticed that our opponents' Shadow Minister or
spokesman for Science, objected to it leaving Melbourne.
Now whatever you do even some of the things I have said
about your ports will prod * uce adverse comments elsewhere.
Now my Government has made the decision that the Australian
Antarctic activities will be centred in Hobart. We think
there are very good reasons for doing it, for making that
commitment. I don't know how soon they'll come about;
there are of course buildings to be designed, there's also
certain notice which we aren't compelled to give, but which
we as a matter of factus do give to Government employees
concerning their movements because they have families and
of course they have to make arrangements for education and
accommodation and that sort of thing. But the commitment
has been made. / 3 
QUESTION P. M.
QUE STI ON
P. M.
QUE ST ION During the Bass By-election campaign you mentioned that funds
were specifically being allocated for the Launceston Eastern
by-pass road. There seems a certain amount of uncertainty
amongst the State Labor Government whether these funds have
actually been allocated or whether they will be allocated.
Could you clarify this matter?
I've been asked this in Parliament quite recently, too, and
I said then, as I said during the by-election campaign, that
during the next triennium for which the funds are being
discussed by the Australian and all the State transport
Ministers this was announced, you know, that there would be
these triennial arrangements made when the legislation was
introduced in about September last year, I think. In those
discussions the arrangements will be made. As I said before,
the Australian Government, the Australian Parliament has
always had the responsibility before my Government had
ever exercised it to make roads to promote trade and
commerce with other countries and among the States and in
pursuance to that arrangement we have decided to finance
the road, the national highway, between Hobart to the outskirts
of Launceston over the Burnie and similarly from the
outskirts of Launceston up to Bell Bay. And the by-pass
you mentioned is to connect the national road and the export
roads concerned and that will be discussed I think it has
already been discussed in the context of the next triennium,
that is, the next program of allocations which the Australian
Government will finance directly itself and by grants to the
States.
One very general question on the Harradine affair, if I could.
No you can't.
I'm just wondering if you will answer the question, do you
think the A. L. P. has overreacted, was a bit oversensitive
to Mr Harradine's comments in the past?
No. I/ rn not answering the question.
* STION Ycorui tmiecnitsimo niend otah elri ttpllea cewsh ilfeo r agsoo met haotf tyhoeu tehxipnegcst edy ous o'myee
said today, particularly your reference to the ports.
Reading the speech it appears that we have arrived at a
situation where by the take-, over of the railways in Tasmania
you set Tasmania's port system's future quite considerably
in advance of the report of the Nimmo Commission which you
expect to get. In fact has Mr Nimmo now been wasting his
time because it looks as if you have decided in advance
that there will be one major port and in fact you have lined
it up with the railways? 
P. M. Well, of course, Mr Nimrno is not wasting his time. Mr Nimmo
is securing information and seeking information which has
never been collected or sought before. The Australian Government
and the Tasmanian Government will be very much better informed
as a result of Mr Nimmo's report than they could otherwise
have been. If we'd had the Interstate Commission over all these
years that information would have been available to people.
As it is the Tasmanian Government, I think ' it was the previous
one, the Bingham one, got the report from the Pak Poy people
and of course, we have had to get the information from the
ANL. And the advice that both have given is that there needs
to be some port which can take a bulk ship, and there isn't
in Tasmania at the moment. There are probably more ports
per head of population in Tasmania than in any other State
but I hope I don't give any impression that I am preempting Mr
Nimmo's report; I don't know what' he will advise in this
respect and if, of course, he advised something else I would
probably heed what he said rather than what I've ventured to say
at the moment. But there is a suitably sited port at Bell Bay,
there is industry at Bell Bay and there has been by agreement
with Tasmanian Governments successive governments and it
couldn't have been done without their consent there has
been a largely Australian Government-financed railway up to
Bell Bay. That's been completed, it's the best track in the
State. Some people say it's the only really good track in the
State. Now in those circumstances it does seem reasonable
to bring together tije road, , the rail the export road I
was describing the new rail and bulk port facilities at
Bell Bay. But the port facilities are not primarily a federal'
responsibility. It may be that an Australian Government could
build a port or wharves, because obviously a port one way or
anot~ her relates to trade and commerce with other countries
and among the States. But there has been no arrangement to
this stage about that port. But we're obviously committed
to the road, we have been overwhelmingly committed to the railway
and we do need a new ship for the wheat trade for Tasmania.
So we ought, in the next few months be able to make some plans
for that purpose, but I want to discount immediately the
suggestion that comes from the Mercury that chap looked
more like Jupiter than Mercury that Mr Nimmo is wasting
his time. He's doing a job that ought to have been done years ago. 
QAKES Prime Minister, a question on the controversial and crucial
issue of metric pronunciation. I noticed in your speech
you referred again to kilometres.
P. M. Of course.
QA. KES Can I ask you are you not inclined to accept the advice of
your minister for Science that the word should be pronounced
kilometres, and in view of this serious disagreement, do you
think a Cabinet and Caucus decision is required?
P. M. Well, as a matter of fact, I was drafting a response to him
this morning during some of the lulls. I've always said
myself kilometre or centimetre or millimetre or those sort
of things and I don't want to pre-empt the letter which
I'm sending to the Minister fo; Science whose qualifications
of course were of my ordaining: I gave him his scientific
qualifications. But since this is, of course, a very serious
enquiry, I would point out that all scientific terms are
Vaccented in that way. You have thermometers and barometers
and altimeters and spectrophotometers and for those people
that can go the distance required, speedometers or for
earth-bound people you have pedometers and the versifiers among
you have always used pentameters and tetrameters. And
you've got a pretty fair diameter and perimeter yourself.
I believe that Mr Cameron has been influenced by his
departmental advisers and they thought they were being
very gallic. Ever since these urban guerillas in Paris
190 years ago brought in the metric system, they thought
it would sound nicer if you said kilometre or kilometre.
But the migrants who come to Australia usually put it
back where we would orginarily put it, that is the Italians
all say kilometre; the Spaniards, the people from Timor,
all say kilometre. It's easier to say kilometre. I mean
the technical ones among you, the people from the Mercury
would know ABC too possibly, the older ones that you
only put the accent on the second last syllable if it's
a long syllable and the words ending in metre all come from
a Greek word where there's a short it's epsilon not
0 eta; it's metron not metron. ABC please follow. 



S HOBART PRESS CLUB
22 SEPTEMBER 19751
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER N C
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you for giving me an opportunity again, directly
and personally, and in these hospitable surroundings, to speak
to the representatives of the Tasmanian Press. There's
one particular point I want to make to you today: that is
that the Australian Government is determined to remove the
handicap of isolation which Tasmania suffers as Australia's
only island State. Of necessity this is a long-term aim. it
will not be achieved by temporary measures. Our policies
are therefore designed to redress the basic handicap of
separation from the mainland by attacking the fundamental
problem on the basis of the best available advice and
information. This has been a difficult year economically as you
all know. Our economic problems the problems which Australia
shares with every comparable country have not made our task
in Tasmania any easier. our Budget last month recognised
the need for a steady, continuing attack on inflation. We
therefore decided that a sharp reduction in the growth of
Government expenditure was needed. I emphasise, however,
that in cutting back this rate of growth the Australian
Government has bden generous, and will remain generous, in its
outlays to the States. While we have imposed restraints on
our own spending we have been reluctant to compel the States
to do likewise, though naturally we expect that the same
spirit of restraint will be observed by them. In point of
fact, as Mr Hayden said in his Budget speech last month,
we estimate that the financial assistance grants payable to
the States this financial year will total about $ 3,185 million,
an increase' of $ 811 million, an increase of 34.2 per cent
over the grants paid by the Australian Government to the
State Governments last financial year. This is on the basis
of the improvements in financial arrangements which we
undertook at'-the Premiers' Conference in June. So while no
State Government may get as much from the Australian
Government to spend as it would like they will all enjoy
a much bigger increase in their expenditure than the
Australian Government has so'ught or allowed for itself.
Now to come back to Tasmania. We recognise that the
chief problem is in transport. I undertook in November 1972
that an Australian Labor Government would ensure that surface
freight between Hobart and Melbourne would cost no more per
ton mile, no more per tonne per kilometre than the surface
freight between Melbourne and her other neighbouring capitals
on the mainland, Sydney and Adelaide. Because previous
Australian Governments had allowed the Inter-State Commission
ordained in the Constitution to expire and had not persevered
with proposals to reestabli~ sh it, the Government didn't have
the necessary information available to it. We accordingly
appointed Mr Nimmo as a Royal Commissioner to inquire into
and report upon the whole subject. We expect his report
in December or January. He commenced writing it earlier
this month. The Commissioner has indicated that the issues 
are so complex and inter-related that an interim report on
any one aspect of his inquiries would serve little purpose.
It's an enormous inquiry. Mr Nimmo has collected information
from more than 140 firms, he has received 84 written
submissions, he has interviewed 185 individuals and representatives
of organisations. Evidence was given by 87 witnesses
at the public hearing. He has inspected ferry services
between the Eastern provinces of Canada-to Prince Edward
Island and Newfoundland from the mainland-and also ferry
services across the North Sea and the Baltic Sea. The
Government will be considering his report as soon as it is
received. Meantime , the Australian Government has made and will
make no increases in northbouna AWL freight rates. This
policy and the subsidy on ANL passenger services across
Bass Strait will cost Australian taxpayers $ 6 to $ 7 million
this financial year. Now, I know people constantly say, not
enough. Therefore allow me to make at least this political
point. The previous Liberal Federal Governments gave no
financial assistance to these services at all. My Government
is levying from Australian taxpayers as a whole $ 6 to $ 7
million this year for this purpose.
Incidentally, nobody prevents other lines providing a
service. It's completely legal to do so. But it's increasingly
being left to the ANL.
In one respect, the price of wheat, Tasmania has for
long been placed on the same footing as the mainland States.
' the taxpayers, however, are paying more than they should to
support this policy because no Tasmanian port is equ pped
to service an adequate ship for the wheat trade. The
matter has now come to a head. The ship hitherto used to
deliver the wheat to Tasmania, the North Esk, has reached
the end of its life. It is coming up for its survey and all
the indications are that the survey will disclose so much
would have to be done to it that it wouldn't be an economic
proposition. The Tasmanian Government has been advised by
Pak Poy and the Australian Government has been advised by
AWL that a bulk ship is the proper ship for this trade.
The ANL has several suitable, bulk ships already. There is
however, no Tasmanian port w; hich can so far handle such a
bulk ship. It's urgent to equip one of the Tasmanian ports
to handle a wheat ship, a bulk ship, a modern ship; presumably* it'd be
Bell Bay. In fact, Bell Bay should logically be the focus
of Tasmania's sea, rail and road links with the mainland.
The real significance of the acquisition of the
Tasmanian Government Railways by the Australian National
Railways lies in this context of better transport links with
the mainland. With the res. ponsibility for rail services
within the State and the responsibility for most sea services
across the Strait reposing-in the national Government there
will for the first time be a real effort to coordinate and
dovetail these two essential modes of transport. With the
national Government also accepting its constitutional
responsibility to upgrade roads to the ports what the
Constitution says is, that the Federal Parliament can pass 
with respect to trade and commerce including trade and
commerce by road, with other countries and among the;
States. Accordingly the national Government has always
had the responsibility, although mine is the first
Government to accept the responsibility, to upgrade roads
between States and the ports. Now with us accepting that
responsibility Tasmanians can at last expect their basic
handicap of isolation to be removed. I-' d better say
something about the railways in another context, the
financial context.
The transfer of financial responsibility for your
railways to the Australian Government came into effect
last July on the basis of agreements between Mr Neilson and
myself. In addition to getting a more modern and efficient
railway service and better standards of track and rolling
stock and signaling equipment there will be significant
fianncial advantages for Tasmania. The State will be relieve
of the burden of losses-and inevitably with the equipment
which State Governments seem to be able to get for their
rail ser" Yices, Those losses will mount every year. In
New South Wales the losses are well over $ 200 million this
year and in Victoria they're approaching $ 200. million.
Now with the State being relieved of those losses, it will
also receive an additional $ 3.3 million in financial assistance
and on top of that we pay $ 5 million as a first contribution
in consideration~ of assets.
Another area where the Australian Government can give
particular and much needed help to Tasmania is in urban and
regional development. In the current financial year $ 1.8
million has been provided to Tasmania, if I may mention it
here, for sewerage programs; $ 840Y000 has been provided for
the North-West Tasmanian Water Supply Scheme the first
allocation ' of funds for this purpose. We have allocated
the maximum possible amount of $ 500,000 to set up the
Tasmanian Urban Land Council. And this Council will
administer the land acquisition and development programs
for which generous Australian Government funds will be
available. As you already know well, the Australian Government
is concentrating all its Ant'arctic Activities in Hobart and
is establishing the Australian Maritime College on the Tamar;
the legislation for that will be introduced next month.
The apply and pear industry one of the pillars of-
Tasmania's economy hitherto has received assistance on an
unprecedented scale. You don't know how lucky you are havinq
Senator Wriedt as the minister for Agriculture. We have
continued the fruitgrowing reconstruction scheme and the
stabilisation scheme for growers' returns on exported apples
and pears. The Australian ' and Tasmanian Governments have
agreed jointly to provide supplementary support for apples
exported on an " at risk" basis to the United Kingdom and other
European markets. The purpose is to sustain the viable sector
of the export industry until the Australian Apple and Pear
Corporation established by my Government can develop
alternative markets. I am confident that the Corporation / 4 
will bring new drive and expertise to the promotion of
this industry. In addition, $ 950,000 has been paid so far
to Tasmanian fruitgrowers in post-revaluation adjustment
assistance. The Industries Assistance Commission will be
reporting later this year on apple and pear and other
fruitgrowing reconstruction schemes.
Finally I want to give you some-account of our response
to the Tasman Bridge disaster. The social dislocation caused
by the disaster was so great that remedial measures will
necessarily take longer than at first seemed likely. Our
response has been prompt and generous. The Australian
Government was in no way obliged to rectify the destruction
of the bridge but that hasn't stopped us from doing everything
in our power to do so. People, take all these things for
granted now. No suggestion was ever made under previous
Federal Governments that there should be assistance for
the West Gate Bridge for instance in Melbourne. Now the
Australian Government a joint Tasman Bridge Restoration
Commission has been established by the Australian and
Tasmanian Governments. A very great Tasmanian, Sir Roland
Wilson,-. you remember him as Secretary to the Treasury, and
then chairman of Qantas and of the Commonwealth Bank he
acts as my personal adviser on this matter. A sum of $ 6
million was appropriated by the Australian Parliament for the
period up to. the end of last June; a further $ 13.9 million
has been appropriated for reconstruction, restoration and
ancillary works in the present financial year. The Australian
Government will finance the widening of the bridge during
restoration to provide for five traffic lanes. You will get
a very much better Bridge than you had before.
The Australian Government has undertaken to meet all
the costs of designting and constructing a second bridge and
its approaches over the Derwent River between Dowsings Point
and Cleburne Point. This bridge is estimated to cost $ 21 million
and will have 4 traffic lanes. It will have a vertical
clearance above the river of 15 metres.
In the meantime we have undertaken a range of relief
measures such as the financing of a permanent community
health centre at Bellerive,. assistance with additional ambulance,
fire-fighting, road safety, flaw enforcement and judicial
services on the eastern shore, and assistance with emergency
river crossing facilities. There has been virtually no limit
to our readiness to cooperate with the Tasmanian Government
and that cooperation will continue until community life in
Hobart on both shores is restored to normal. From the ruins
of the Tasman Bridge incomparably better metropolitan
communications will arise. The capital of Tasmania will obtain
better town planning and better civic services because for the
first time there is a national Government which is involved
in urban affairs. 



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 563
23 September 1975
CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
The non-Labor parties are demonstrating once
again their 4contempt for the democratic system by boycotting
the Constitutional Convention which opens in Melbourne
tomorrow. The cynicism and hypocrisy of the Opposition is
all the more extraordinary because they have chosen the
opening day of the Convention to release details of their
so-called policy on federalism. The Liberal and National
Country Party leaders, Federal and State, will be in
Melbourne tomorrow for that purpose. By boycotting the
Convention they are doing their best to frustrate the
one ' procedure by which a truly modern and creative federal
system can be evolved.
The boycott is another example of the Opposition's
abuse of political proprieties. Not content with blocking
Government legislation in the Senate, not content with
threateneing to block supply, not content with flouting
the rules on Senate vacancies, not content with abusing
these constitutional conventions, the Opposition and the
non-Labor States are now denouncing the Constitutional
Convention itself. They are serving notice that under no
circumstances will they even discuss changes in a
Constitution which their own spokesmen have acknowledged is in
need of reform. They are not only sabotaging the Convention;
they are thumbing their noses at the Constitution.
The Convention has never been solely a Labor
Party concern. The initiative for it came from the Victorian
Parliament. The Australian Labor Government to k up the
suggestion and organised the first meeting of ( he Convention
two years ago in Sydney. Its purpose w~ as to examine self-evident
deficiencies in the Australian., federal system. Every State,
as well as opposition delegates from the Australian Parliament,
attended the Convention. Useftil progress was made. The
Convention established machinery for continuing work on the
Convention with the apparent support of all delegates. / 2 
Until a few weeks ago all States and our
opponents in the Australian Parliament were pressing for the
Convention to be reconvened. Senator Greenwood said in a
press statement on 24 March 1975:
" The Federal Opposition wants the Constitutional
Convention to continue its work. The immense amnount
of research, deliberations and really worthwhile
ef fort already contributed should not be wasted...
The Opposition parties accept that there is a
need for constitutional change. Experience
has shown that changes will more readily be
accepted if a consensus can be arrived at as to the
particular changes needed. This is what the
Convention can achieve."
The Leader of the Opposition said in the House of
Representatives only a month ago, on 21 August:
" It is our hope that this Convention will be a
useful forum in which State and Federal
representatives may constructively consider
constitutional reform in a way which will advance
the good government of Australia...
The Constitutional Convention does present an
opportuiiity to identify areas where change is
needed. It will ascertain what sort of consensus
exists for change. It will provide a place where
constructive efforts may be made to work out
constitutional reform. For all of these-reasons,
the Opposition is glad that the Constitutional
Convention will be reconvened in Melbourne in
September."
The timetable and agenda for the resumed conference
were determined, not by the Australian Government, but by the
executive committee of the Convention on which the Australian
Government was represented. There were representatives also
of the Opposition, of every State Parliament, the Legislative
Assemblies of the A. C. T. and the Northern Territory and local
government. The date, place and agenda for the resumed meeting
were all agreed upon by 13 August.
Yet on 28 August I received a telegram from the
Premier of Queensland advising that Queensland Government
delegates would not attend the Convention in Melbourne and
that the Premier would be moving that the Queensland
Parliamentary delegation should not attend. Western Australia,
New South Wales and Victoria subsequently took a similar attitude.
No good reason has been given for their change of view. / 3 
A 3.
Despite the obstruction of the non-Labor
parties, the Convention will go ahead. It will meet
tomorrow in the Windsor Hotel since the Victorian Government
has now cancelled its invitation to use Parliament House.
I believe that useful results can still be achieved by the
plenary meeting. For its part, the Australian Government will
press for agreement on amendments to the Constitution
to expand the provisions for the inter-change of
powers and to amend the Constitution to permit the
Australian Parliament to make grants to local government
bodies and raise loans on their behalf.
I believe the Australian Government's attitude
to local government is at the root of the Opposition'ss
boycott. The non-Labor States and the Opposition opposed
even having local government represented at the Convention.
They are now frightened that the Convention will lead to a
proper, developing role for local government in our federal
system. Strong local government has a key role to play
in the provision of needed services. From personal experience
I know the cost of living and working in suburbs long
deprived of proper health, transport, sewerage, housing and
child care services all the things that make for the betterment
and happiness of the Australian people. In my 1972 policy
speech I pledged that local government would be made a
genuine partner in ihe federal system. I declared that direct
representation of local government at the Constitutional
Convention would be a condition of the Australian Government's
participation. In spite of the resistance of our opponents,
we are honouring those pledges. We are determined to have strong
local government properly financed and properly responsive to
local community needs.
F'ar from being centralist, the Australian Government
has proclaimed its determination to bring decision-making closer
to the people. The real centralists are the non-Labor States
who have attempted to frustrate local government. The non-Labor
States want to dominate local government at all costs. They
have even challenged the right of the Territories to
representation and votes in the Federal Parliament. They
have tried to close off our support for local community groups.
This is why the Victorian Government is leading the High
Court challenge to the R. E. D. Scheme and the Australian
Assistance Plan a challenge which imperils a whole range
of local schemes which the Australian Labor Government has
implemented. In õ ' esigning innovative programs like community
health and child care centres, the Australian Government
has been conscious of the need for community groups to plan
and run their own pr; ojects. We want community participation through
community action. T1his will be achieved by vigorous local
government working in harmony-. with Australian Government programs.
These programs will go ahead despite the Opposition's boycott of
tomorrow's Convention.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



JIVA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 564
24 September 1975
FOREIGIJ ITWJEST". 1IT " OT, I ry
4In this statement I am amnoiumcirog details of further developments
in the Government's -policies tov.-ards foreign investmient. These
developments follow a revie',, b0y the Resources Committee of
Cabcieet tai asect ofthe policies in the light of the
ex-perience gained since December 19/ 72. Their are also intended
to clarify certain aspects of our policies here th-cre appears to
be some confusion in the minds of forelign inve-stors.
T" his announcement comporises comnot stteen ofth
Governmcnt's policy in the ffreg nvestment.
Th Goverfii-, erit is deternrined to s?: eglizuard the leg~ itimate
national 71spiration of Australians to Lachieve their rightful
9 ~ share in the control and oveisip o their resources.
1.7e reog,,), nise -1that development of those resource.,_ is essential
.0 A
lor :_ Lutrolia's aro,.! th. ' I; e believe the :; uidelines we are
setting out . will greatly assist de,. elooanient but at the same
ine Protect the ri( ghts of Akrinsin the ownership,
d evelopiment nduse of their rezoarces.
The Government is look ing to thqe bIusi ness commruni ty to
cooert wIt it in hclopi-r to -hiev, the pol i cy
objective of unaximrum actc -Lutlin particilation 
2. in the activities of foreign companies operating in Australia,
on the basis of fair and reasonable negotiations. It is
also, of course, important for there to be appropriate
co-operation between the Australian Government and the
various State Governments in achieving these objectives.
For its part, the Government will be doing all in its
power to foster this co-operation.
If this co-operation is forthcoming, I believe there will
Sbe great benefits accruing to all concerned foreign
investors themselves, Australian businesses and, most
important of all, the Australian nation and the Australian
people. I emphasise that the Government recognises that Australia
will, for the foreseeable future, continue to require
foreign-capital, including equity capital, if we are to
achieve our basic aim of ensuring that Australia's resources
and industies are developed in such a way as to bring
maximum benefits to the Australian people. ' i7thin this
over-riding goal, ho'wever, the Government, while continuing
to welcome beneficial foreign capital, has a major longer
term objective of the promotion of Australian control
and the maximum Australian ownership compatible with our
long term capital requirements and our need for access
to markets, advanced technology and know-how.
recognise that the private sector has a major role to
play in achieving this objective. Public bodies such as
the AIDC also need to participate to the maximum extent
practicable if the objective is to be achieved.
This statement covers three ' main areas:
First, an expansion of the process of screening new foreign 
investment poroposals, and proposals to expand existing
foreign investment activities, * here these proposals do
not invlove exchange control approvals. In a statement
on 12 June 1974, I announmccd the establishment of a new
interdepartental com-iittee ( tile Foreign Investment
Committee) to examine and rovide advice on foreign
investment proposals which come under notice through the
exchange control mechanism. At the same time, I requested
the bringing forward for the Government's consideration of
detailed proposals for the screening of foreign investment
activities w-hich do not involve exchange control approvals
for example, investment proposals financed by foreign
interests' from funds availhble to them from Australian
sources. The second area covered by todav's stUtement is a further
elaboraztion of the detail of the ' ove . riDt'S p olicy on
foreign investiment in the miner. 1l sector. The Government
hoas liven careful consideration to the questicn of foreign
investent in the miner: ls sector in the light of various
reoresentations it h(, s received to the effect that the
policy has not been spelled cut publicly ith sufficient
clarity, and that more specific guidelines are required
in order to engender business eoIfidence and to permit
both Austrilian and foreign companies to plan ahead on
projects where risks are high at the exploration stage and
lead tines are long at the develoment stag-e.
It continues to be the Government's firm policy, however,
to examine foreign investment proposals, w; hether in the
minerals sector or elsewhere, on a case-by-case basis. The
details outlined later in this statement should, therefore,
be regarded more in the natire of guidelines than as
co: istitutin inflexible rules. I stress that potential 
4. foreign investors should subm.: it their proposals to the
Governm, nt at an early date. Th s is oarticulrl1 imrortant,
if the foreign investor is uncertain as to the acceptability
of his proposals. Early submission will enable the investor
to discuss the proposals with government and thereby obtain
any necessary guidance on them.
The third matter covered by today's announcement is a
review of the Governmentbpolicy on foreign investment in
Australian real estate.
The Government has now reviewed the operation of its policy
on foreig investment in real estate in Australia in the
light of the ex: perience we have gained since the first
announcement of that policy by the then Tre-asurer, M. r Crean,
in ' M1arch 1973. In the light of this review, wie have decided
to introduce certain modifications to the policy nd. to set
out clearly the principles under which the policv is to be
administered. The relevant details are set cut below.
SCHREBNINI G OF FOR. IGI InVLE IT I
First, the comprehensive scheme for the screening of foreign
investment proposals as foreshadowed lest yer.
Establishment of New Committee
The foreign Investment Committee and the Committee on
Foreign Takeovers are to be merged into a single Committee
to be known as the Foreign Investment Advisory Committee.
The new Committee will subsLime the roles of the two Committees
which it replaces. Like these Committees, it will be
advisory, and will report to the Treasurer as the ; inister 
with overall responsibility for all foreign investment matters.
The new Committee will have responsibility for examining
and advising the Treasurer on foreign investment proposals
whether or not they involve exchange control approvals. At
present proposals which do not involve exchange control are
not screened by either Committee unless they fall within
the ambit of the Foreign Takeovers Act.
Although the broadening of the Comimittee's role into the area
outside exhange control and the foreign takeovers measures
is a new development as far as the screening process is concerned,
it does not involve any basic policy changes.
Foreign takeovers will continue to be examined in terms of
the Foreign Takeovers Act which was passed by the Parliament
on 21 Aug 1975.
In the non-takeovers area, the screening process will not,
for the time being, be backed by specific new legislation.
The Government believes that there are considerable advantages
for all concerned in continuing ; ith a system which relies on
0 the voluntary co-operation of business with the Government's
policy objectives.
Of course, where any aspect of a foreign investment proposal
recuires approval under the Banking ( Foreign Exchange)
Regulations, the Reserve Bank will continue its practice of
withholding such approval until the Government has indicated
that the proposal is not against the national interest.
Membership of Committee
The new Committee will comprise representatives of the
Treasury, Attorney-General's Department, the Department of
Minerals and Energy, the Department of Overseas Trade, the 
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Department
of ', anufacturing Industry, and the Reserve Bank. Representatives
of other departments will be co-opted to the Committee as
appropriate in the examination of particular proposals. As
previously, the Treasury will provide the. executive to the
Committee. Criteria to be used by Committee
All examinable foreign investmeht proposals will be screened
against the background of the Government's basic aim of
ensuring that X ustralian industries and resources are developed
in such alway as to bring maximum benefits to the Australian
people. In e: amining specific investment proposals, the Coxmmittee will
take into account~ various criteria, the most important of
which are listed in Xttachment A to this statement. These
criteria are not exclusive, however, and will be modified
a, necesary to suit partiular cases and in the light of
experience.
Relationshi; between General Foreign Investment Policy and
Foreign Thkeovers Act.
Foreign investment proposals will be examined as appropriate
for compatibility with the Covernment's general foreign
investment policy and/ or for compliance with the Government's
specific policy on foreign takeovers. However, foreign
investment proposals hich are actionable under the Foreign
Takeovers Act and which are deemed to be acceptable to the
Government in terms of that Act will not also be examined in
light of the general foreign investment policy. 
7. 7orein Investments to be Screened
For all foreign investment proposuls, " foreimn interests"
for the purposes of tUhr screening process are corporations
in ! which a single foreign shareholder, or associ: Ated foreign
shareholders, own 15 percent or more of the equity of the
corporation, or in , which the total foreign equity exceeds
per ccnt; or individuals whose normal place of residence
is outside Australia. Corporations are deemed to include all
types of businesses.
Commercial investment, by fori gn governments, other than
investments related to their official representation, will
also be screened.
" Foreign investment" means funds to be invested in fixed
as-ets whether o-ned or leased, whether financed from equity
or loan funds, and 1whether financed from whatever source
within Australia dr overseas.
Sforeign investment proposal will be subject to the screening
urocess if it is for the purpoe of the foreign interests
establishing a new business or undertarking a new mining
project. In' the case of manufacturing or service industries,
such a proposal ill be taken to involve an establishment of
a new business if it would result in a foreign interest carrying
on a new primary activity as defined in the Australian Standard
Industrial Classification as published from time to time by
the Australan Bureau of Statistics, unless the new activity
w! ere primar to a class in which the foreign interest is
already engaged.
Except for non-bank financial institutions and insurance
conp~ jnies, which are dealt with later in the statement, the
Committee will dso screen foreign investment roposals involving
exponsions by existing businesses where the cost of the
expansion, in any 12 months, amounts to more than 15 per cent 
of the company's total assets before the proposed expansion,
provided tiat any expansion involving more than .10 million
in any 12 months will be screened and further provided that
all proposed expansions in mining and real estate will be screened.
The Committee will also screen proposals by companies operating
in Australia to increase the overall proportionate foreign
ownership of the cmpany by more than a specified percentage
above the level of fo; reign ownership which existed at the date
of this statement. In the case of non-bank financial
institutions and insurance companies, proposals will be screened
if the foreign ownership increases by more than 5 percent,
and in other cases if the foreign ownership increases by . more
than 15 p'er cent. This applies whether or not the company
is already foreign controlled. The Foreign Takeovers Act
applies whenever there is a change in control regardless of
the degree of change in foreign ownership.
Foreign investment proposals as defined above, except those
involving the development of uranium, will not be subject to
examination ;' here the btal Australian participation in the
proposal is 85 percent or more, unless there are associated
arrangements attaching to the foreign participation which
give the foreign parties a greater degree of ownership or
control of the venture than would appear prima facie to be
the case.
Except in the case of a new non-bank financial institution
or a new insurance company, and except for minerals and real
estate, foreign investment proposals which involve funds of
less than i$ 1 million in any 12 month period will not be
subject to aeamination by the Committee, although this will
not affect the normal requirements of exchange control approval.
Furthermore, except for non-bank financial institutions,
insurance companies, minerals and real estate, if it can be 
demonstrated that a foreign investment proposal will be
Australian controlled, it will in general be approved.
Proposals 1which are not . ustralian controlled will be ex-amined
on their individual merits. Controlling interest in this context
means the identiity of the interest ( company or person) in a
position to determine the major policy decisions of the venture.
Non-Bank Fiancial Institutions and Insurance Companies
Non-bank financial institutions and insurance companies are
subject to specific Australian Governrment legisltion. Australia
is already adequately supplied with non-bank financial
institutions and insurance co: 2panies. Accordingly it is
the Governnent's general objective to require foreign interests
wishing either to establish, or to participate in the establishment
of, a new non-bank financial institution or insurance company,
or to significantly increase their participation in an existing
institution, to demonstrate that the Australian economy would
be advantaged by their doing so.
Foreign investment policy in respect of non-bank financial
inrstitutions and insurance comnpanies will be broadly administered
on the same basis as other forms of foreign investment ( with
the exception of minerals and real estate). The application
of the general screening process and criteria is qualified,
ho,. ever, in four respects:
ll foreign i nvestment proposals relating to new non-bank
financial institutions or insurance companies will be
screened, irrespective of the level of funds involved.
11 propocals to increase the overall proportionate
foreign ownership of companies by more than 5 per cent
will be screened.
Since the activities of non-bank financial institutions
and insurance compnanies ar associn ted orincially
wlith financial internediition, it uoul be i na roprite 
If1r these institutions te c-11e e; ucjt t o th ccee ning
bench. Lmark 15k increas e in lirhbi 1i Lies or ilO mill ion,
wichever is the low,, er) i!: nose on t'he exp-, anison of
non1-fLina--nce bus iness.
In view of thle diffic-ultvy in d~ si~ usin; betwveen thLe
various pri7_; ryt actLivitlies-) of" fina~ cial institutions,
the new screeningo arran ln! Pnts in this regaUrd will not
apply to these institutions so long as they confine
their activities to financial intermediation. H o ie ver,
where fin-ancial institution! s propose to expand their
acti( vities beyond wh-. rat is g-ens-rallyr re~ cr'rded as
financial intermediation, such an expansion will be
su~ ject to the screeningC pWrocess aD-olicable to
non-finance businesses.
Special Preas
Thce are also some othier areas in vhaich for,_ i n investment
i-s ofL Particular co-rcerii to t611e Governne-, t. As ell as the
long-san~~ rstrctiason 30r: ninvestment inba-. nk1-ing,
broaducasting! !-nd television, asindd some aspects-Of civil aviation,
the Governmentll continue-to PaY p-articular atteration to
foreig,, n investment. propoos-als in Lhe areas of real eotate and
minerals. In the -minerals alrea, other important considerations,
will continue to arise, -nd Ml cont1inue to be exaimined closely
by the Governmzent to enisur-, e ba anced devel o~ mnt of ' Lustralia's
mineral resources in th'e nati'on-a,. l interest. Our policies in
these -areas fare spelt out iM d,: tail blw
FOR IG IHV3K~ TI i TE II E7~ L~ S] CTOR
There have been several previous statement of the Government' s
genera7. l policy towcarcs forei Ign investment in the minerals
sector by myself, and by rnf colleague the . Ll. inister for Ul1nerals
and E nergy. On 7 NIov 1975, I t-ibled in Parliament a statement
had previously made at the Tokyo imeetinsg of the Australia-
11.
Japan Ministerial Committee. In addition, guidelines vere set
out in my press statements of 5 Nov 1974 and 12 Uar 1975. The
Minister for Minerals and Energy announced in the Parliament
on 51 Oct 1974 the Government's policy tovy! ards uranium in the
INorthern Territory.
Despite these statements, it appears from various communications
the Government has received that there is still uncertainty
among foreign mining companies as to some of the details of the
Gkovernment's policy on foreign -quity participation in the
mining industry in the future. The purpose of tod-y's statement
is to outline the Government's policy in detail in order to
resolve these uncertainties..
I emphasise, however, the point made earlier in this statement
that it continu. es to be the Government's firm policy to examine
all foreign investment proposals on a case-by-case basis in
order to ensure th-at Australia's resources and industries
are developed in such a way as to bring maximum benefits to
the -uspteroaplliea. n
Chere may, of course, be some proposals which do not meet the
g: uidelines, hut whichIl will have characteristics wihich make
them acceotable to the GoverneAnt. These could include cases
where foreign coi: panies are urible to id significant Australian
participation. Conversely, in the Government's consideration
of specific proposals, there will be a prima facie presumption
that proposals falling within these guidelines will be
accept3. ble to the Government unless there are special
circumstances attaching to the proposal which indicate that
its approval would be against the national interest.
A. Foreign Eq: uity Participation in . Iincral S;: ploration
The Government has reviewed-the administration of its policy
towa-rds foreign equity participation in mineral exploration 
12. in the light of thle experievice ; ice rcC h etUbl-hnn
of the 1Foreign Inve-tment Co,-nz-itt,+ ce in June 1974. T'fe consider
there is scope for some admini2 tra2tive ch-Mn7e-whicha sh ould
be Of benef it to both1 Austrjia.-;,_ n : dforeign71 expDlor,. tion
convTanies and which vwill LA the same time continue to meet
the Government's policy obJectives.
The GovernMient viishes to see a significant d'egree of stralian
involvement in mineral ex-olora tion, includ0ingc p. articipation.
with foreign expl1, ora. tion coippanies. '. lthough it ! Azll nbt be
Smandatoryr for for.-ign expoloration companies to seek Austr-alian
participation at the outset of initial, or gras, roots,
exYDloratton prog-ram-s, it w.-ill be necessary-for those companies
to notifoy the Foreig-n Investment -Advisory Committee df their
e-7plora,-tion pro. g) rims at the ti me they are formul. ated or
subsequently signi. ficantlyr vw-ried. Foreig-n companies will
in f. u ture be required to report to tUhe Treasurer, througxh the
Foreign Investmen-t ' Idvisory Comitut e he thI-tie
p~ rov'iing up) sta.. e is reached and in any case ever., y tw-. o yea. rs
on tille el Fortste are m:! kin t atrac t a-l-i
S ~ participjAion in their C: r) ortiu ctivities in !. ustralia.
Thnel y xcepion to the procedure outlined in the preceding
p , Zi'gr is uranu exploratiorn in the Irthei-n Territory.
As announccd by t11he M.' inis ter 1or Minerals and. 7nergy o n
31 October 19741, all1. exoPloratio. for uaimi the
J . oU. 1ern Territory, 411il be c~ trriedl out exclusive ly by the
~. stt lin omic Ener. yCo) isin
The pr-ocedure w.. ill app.-lyf to both on-shore and off-shore
For: Li~ n compa~ nios making co,;-crcial minera,. l discoveries
will be able to proceed to -the development of those discoveries 
13. only on the basis of thlie guidelines for Austr-, lin participation
in development projects outlined below. Australian participation
is to be sought on fair and reasonable terms, on the basis
of normal commercial negotiations.
B. Foreign Equity Participation at the Lineral Development
Stage Uranium. The Government's policy objective is to
seek full Australian ownexshi in the development of
uranium deposits. However, in relation to foreign
comPanies which alre dyv Ive di scoveredi, or may in
the future discover, uranium ore bodies on exploration
licences or equivalent exploration titles granted up
S to the date of this statement, the Governm: ent will be
prepared to discuss with those companies their
partici-ation in the development of those ore bodies
on fair and reasonable terms. The development of uranium
ore bodies discovered on exploration licences or equivalent
exploration titles granted after the date of this
w; taitlelr cnbet on the basis of 100 per cent Australian
ownership.
( ii) Other 7inerals. The Govern-ent has as a desired objective
the promotion of Australian equity in-and control of
its mineral resources, and maxinun Austrlian ownership
compatible with ustral. ia's longtcrm capital requirements
and its need for access to mrkets, teclhnology and
know-how. Howtzev er, given the existin high degree of
foreign ownership and control in the ninerils sector,
we recognise that this objective can only be met in a
total sense in the longer term.
a Lmsa jor step to-wards this objective, the Government
will expect proposals-for all new mine-al development 
14. projects ( other than those relating to uranium) to
have no more than 50 per cent foreign ownership, and
with the foreign participants having no more than
per cent of the voting strength on the board of the
development compuany. The Governmcnt w'ill not insist
on the Australian participants necessarily being the
technical operators and supervisors cf the project, but
will expect Australian nationals to have a significant
role to play in the managgeent, tecinical operation and
4 control. This procedure will apply to development proposals both
on-store and off-shore.
In considering proposals for foreign equity participation
in mineral development projects, account will be taken
of the relationship between the prospective foreign
participant and the expected main sources of demand for
the output of the development.
SExport Licences
A foreign investment proposal for mineral development which
receives approval from the Government as being not inconsistent
with its fo:-ign investment policies can be assured that it
will not be disadvantaged, in. applications for export licences,
because of the degree of foreign participation in the development.
AC U TI''" I OF REAL ESTATIE BY FOREIGI INTERE77. T
In a statement on 20 March 1973, the then Treasurer, Mr Crean,
drew attentio to the Government's concern about the ownership
and control of Australia's resources and, in particular,
asked overseas interests not to enter into significant commitments
for real estate purchases for the time being. Later that year,
I said that specific proposals involving foreign investment 
in real esttte would be examined on their merits. This
case-by-case approach to foreign investment in real estate
has operated since then.
The Government has reviewed its policy, and the administration
of this policy, in this ea in the lighit of the experience
gained in the past two years.
Within the general context of the foreign investment policy,
the Government is particularly concecned to ensure that
Australian real estate does not mme under the ownership
of foreign interests except in certain specific instances.
The detailed principles which will govern the administration
of the Government's policy with regard to foreign investment
in ustralian real estate are set out iq Attachment B to
this statement.
SUB' I " SIFoI P iH1E. ji', I T PCLW: L
41 There a foreign takeover is involved, foreign investors should
continue to submit their proposals to the Treasury in Canberra.
All other proposals should be submitted, in duplicate, either
to the Treasury or to the Reserve Bank.
In the non-tzIkeove: s area, applicants ctn expect to receive
a decision by the Gove-nient. on their proposal within a
maxi. ium -euiod of 90 days from the d'eo of submission of the
proposal. It is expected, however, that most proposals will
be determined in a significantly shorter time. In the
takeovers area the time periods are laid down in the Foreign
T,. eover . ct. 
ATTACHMENT A
CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT OF FOREIGN IMrSTiENT PROPOSALS
The objectives of the Government's foreign investment policy
are twofold: To ensure that foreign investment proposals are
associated with productive investment which adds
to Australia's real resources and brings benefit
to the nation; and
Whilst continuing to welcome beneficial foreign
capital, to promote, in the longer term Australian
control and maximum practicable Australian
ownership of its industries and resources.
For foreign takeovers the criteria wvill continue to be as
spelt outein the Treasurer's second reading speech on the
Foreign Takeovers Bill 1975. In the non-takeovers area
the Foreign Investment Advisory Committee will, in considering
cases for the purpose of advising the Treasurer whether or
not proposals ares against the national interest, take account
of a wide variety of criteria. The most important of these
are outlined below ( they are similar to those applicable to
takeover proposals). iowever, given the very great variation
between proposals, it should be kept in mind that not only
vill a specific criterion not necessarily apply in a: particular
case but that the weighting given to it may well vary from
case to case.
OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL
In the light of the Governmentts objectives with regard to
Australian control and ownership, the Committee will take
into account: the extent of Australian control ( including
management) and ownership in a project; and
the extent to which the participants have sought
Australian equity participation from either the
private or the public sector.
NET ECONOMIC BENEFITS
The Committee will take into account whether, against the 
background of existing circumstances in the industry concerned,
the proposal will lead, either directly or indirectly, to
net economic benefits in relation to such matters as:
a broadening of Australia's industry base;
competition, level of prices and efficiency;
productive capacity;
introduction of new technology, managerial
skills uand other know-how;
development of new mark9ts;
production;
S quality and range of products and services;
employment, including numbers and staff training.
ADDITIONAL CRITERIA
In assessing a proposal the following additional criteria
will also be takeh into account:
whether the new venture could be expected to
S follow commercial practices consistent with
S Australia's interest in matters such as:
exports local processing of materials produced
research and development
industrial relations
financial arrangements, including taxation
royalty and licencing arrangements
the interests of shareholders, insurance
policy holders, and claim holders generally,
as appropriate.
whether the proposal would be consistent with
Australia's international obligations and with the
Government's objectives for, inter alia:
environment
urban and regional development
Aboriginal land rights
maximum practicable Australian ownership of
real estate
defence. 
ATTACHIMENT B
GUIDELINES GOVRN! ING THE ADMI. NISTRATION OP GOVENMNT
POLICY ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN AUSTIRALIAN REAL ESTATE
Application of the real estate policy is not restricted to
large invetments, but covers all cases no matter what their
size unless otherwise specified below. The policy covers
ownership of Australian real estate, and therefore applies
to all forms of freehold acquisition. However, it also
applies to certain types of leasehold acquisition. The
policy also applies whether or not the foreign investment
proposal requires exchange control approval. The sale and/ or
transfer of real estate between foreigners is subject to the
real estate policy.
SThe acquisition of an interest in real estate for mining or
quarrying purposes will not be determined in the context of
the Government's real estate policy. Such investments will
be examined, as in the past, in the light of the Government's
policy on foreign investment in mining.
Investment by a foreign interest associated with and made in
order to complete a contractual commitment to acquire or
dovelop real estate made prior to 20 March 1973, will continue
Snot to be affected by the Government's real estate policy.
SThe following categories of real estate investment will, as
Sa general rule, be approved as being in conformity with the
Government's policy:
acquisitions of real estate by life insurance
companies where such , acquisitions represent the
investment of the company's Australian statutory
funds; acquisitions by foreign or overseas controlled
charities or charitable trusts which operate in
Australia for the benefit of Australians;
acquisitions of land-and/ or a residence; a business;
or a farm, for their own ultimate use by:
expatriate Australians who intend to resume
residence in Australia ( up to a total amount
of $ 100,000, with applications for amounts 
in excess of this to be considered on their
individual merits);
intending migrants who have been formally
accepted as such by the Australian Government.
transfers of real estate between overseas residents
who are members of the same family, provided that
the grounds for undertaking any such transfer do
not conflict with the Government's policy in this
or other areas;
acquisition of residences by foreign or overseas
controlled companies exclusively for use by their
f
employees resident or temporarily resident and
working in Australia;
S( f) acquisitions of residences for their own or their
irimediate family's use by foreign individuals,
temporarily working or resident in Australia;
S( g) acquisition of offices and residences by foreign
missions for use as official missions or as
residences for staff.
Approval for acquisitions listed in and above
will be conditional on the properties being sold to Australians,
C or other eligible purchasers, when they are no longer being
used for the approved purpose.
Applications for the acquisition of the following types of
real estate will be critically examined, having in mind both
the Government's normal criteria for foreign investment
proposals and the special significance the Government attaches
to foreign acquisition of real estate. ( The normal criteria
are listed in Attachment A to the Prime Minister's statement.)
real estate incidental to other purposes. This may
include factories, shops, hotels, etc or sites
therefore acquired by foreign interests and necessary
for their own use in pursuit of the purpose concerned;
real estate which is in the nature of normal stock-intrade
for real estate developers and which is to be
developed within a specific period and sold to
Australians ( or to foreign interests oligible to
acquire Australian real estate) on completion of 
development. Land held by developers for speculative
purposes or for development at some indefinite time
in the future will not be regarded as nor. mal stock-intrade;
properties for long term use for rural purposes and
which can be expected to continue to be available for
such purposes.
All forms of real estate acquisition other than those outlined
in the foregoing ill not normally be approved.
As well as freehold, the term " real estate" for the purposes
of this statement includes leases which provide for profit
sharing arrangements to the foreign lessee, which carry
options to purchase, which provide for a transfer of ownership
in specified circumstances, or which provide for compensation
or payment on surrender of the lease. Leases which do not
include any of these provisions will normally be accepted as
being in conformity with the Government's policy. 



Press Statement No. 566
26 September 1975
CHANGE TO IWY PROGRAM
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlan, announced today
that, when the financial allocation for International Women's
Year activities was determined, it was also decided to review
the proposed program of events for the remainder of the year.
In keeping w~ th the program's original aims, preference will
continue to be given to projects directed towards Australian
women. One outcome of this review is that the United Nations
Inter-Regional Seminar on Women, The Media and The Arts:
The Communication of. 3Attitudes, which had been scheduled for
Sydney at the end of the year, will not now take place.
In conveying this decision to the Secretary-General'
of the United Nations in New York, the Government is
expressing its regret.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARtGO: 7.00 PM
7 PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 565
26 September 1975
AUSTRALIAN SECURITY INTELLIGENCE ORGANISATION
The Prime Minister today announced that Mr Justice
A. E. Woodward, O. B. E. is to be appointed as head of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation.
Mr Justice Woodward has been a Judge of the Australian
Industrial Court and of the Supreme Courts of the Australian
Capital Territory and the Northern Territory since 1972. In 1974
he was appointed President of the Trade Practices Tribunal.
Mr Whitlam said that before his appointment to
judicial office Mr Justice Woodward had had a distinguished legal
career. He had appeared as counsel for the Yirrkala Aborigines
in their land rights claim on the Gove Peninsula. He had also
appeared as counsel assisting the Royal Commission enquiring
into drilling on the. Barrier Reef.
On 15 December 1972 the Australian Government
appointed Mr Justice Woodward to conduct a judicial inquiry into
Aboriginal rights in land.
The Prime Minister said that it was appropriate that
the very important position of Director General of Security
should be filled by a Judge. In the Government's view, this
position should in future always be filled by a person holding
judicial office. Mr Justice Woodward would bring to the
position qualities and a background of experience that made
him eminently suitable for appointment to it. Legislation would
be introduced to provide that Mr Justice Woodward would continue
to have judicial status while he held this office.
The Prime Minister added that Mr Justice Woodward has
commitments as President of the Trade Practices Tribunal that
will require his attention for some weeks ahead. His appointment
will take effect from 24 November 1975. In the meantime,
Mr F. J. Mahony, Deputy Secretary, Attorney-Generalls
Department, would act as Director-General of Security.
The Prime Minister also announced that Mr P. Barbour,
the present head of the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation, would be appointed Australian Consul General in
New York, He will succeed General Sir John Wilton, C. B.,
who will be completing his term of office in
October. / 2 
I -2-
Mr Whitlam said that the appointment of an officer
of Mr Barbour's seniority and experience to the position of
Consul General in New York was in keeping with the Government's
desire to strengthen and develop its relations with the
United States of America.
Mr Barbour served in the A. I. F. from 1944 to 1946
and joined ASIO in 1951. He was appointed Deputy Director-General
in 1965 and Director-General in 1970.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



. AUST
PRIME MINISTER J: õ , 7edi K 667
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
J. T. LANG
J. T. Lang's great achievement was to create new
opportunities for the people of New South Wales and by
example for all Australians. His first Government, half
a century ago, pioneered new forms of social welfare for
Australia, notably compulsory workers' compensation and
child endowment. That Government laid the foundations of
modern Sydney as an integrated community from the north
to the west. It achieved electrification of the railways,
the underground, a harbour bridge and the new Parramatta
road. So in a very real sense he was the founder of
modern Sydney.
27 September, 1975 



Embargo: 5 pia Sud-
PRIME MINISTER' S WEEKLY BROADCAST
IMO ARE THE CENTRALISTS?
SUNDAY 28 SEPTEMBER 1975
I made the point, last week that Mr Fraser is
having a hard time standing up to the bullying tactics of
the Country Party and some of the Premiers on the question
of passing the Budget. If Mr Fraser wants to prove himself
a true leader of the Opposition he must take a firm stand
on this issue and put an end to the damaging and irresponsible
speculation about an early election. He certainly failed that
particular test in his statements this week.
I mention that point again because we have seen in
the past few days an even more glaring example of Mr Fraser's
weakness under pressure. When it comes to matters of
-principle he gives in every time to the irresponsible
0 elements in the Opposition. As you know, in Melbourne this
week, there was another meeting of the Constitutional
Convention. The Convention first assembled two years ago
to study ways of improving the Constitution and making it
-a more modern and dfficient instrument in our federal system.
Every Government, Federal and State, every major political
party, took part in that Convention. It appointed committees
to get on with the work and agreed to meet again in Melbourne
this week to review the progress made. Only a month ago
Mr Fraser was saying in Parliament whaat a good thing the
Convention was and how strongly the Opposition supported it.
0 I'll quote his actual words:
" It is our hope said Mr Fraser " that this
Convention will be a useful forum in which Federal
and State representatives may constructively consider
0 constitutional reform in a way which will advance
the good government of Australia. The Constitutional
Convention... . will provide a place where constructive
efforts may be made to work out Constitutional reform...
The Opposition is glad ~ that the Constitutional Convention
will be reconvened in Melbourne in September."
Fine words. And that was just a month ago. But what
happened? When the Convention met on Wednesday it was
boycotted by the opposition and the four non-Labor States.
They didn't turn up. As soon as the Queensland Premier,
Mr Bjelke-Petersen, decided in his usual way that he wouldn't
take part, Mr Fraser went to water. All his lofty sentiments
about " constructive efforts" and " good government" were
forgotten. When the Queensland Premier decided to be
obstructive, when the other non-Labor Premiers followed suit,
Mr Fraser knuckled under to the Premiers and withdrew his own
delegation. / 2 
2.
It would be difficult to imagine a more craven and
irresponsible attitude on the part of a national political
leader. Years of work had gone into the preparation for
this Convention. All the Premiers at the initial meeting
two years ago were full of confidence and hope that the
Convention would lead to practical reforms. Remember that
the Convention has never been predominantly, or even half,
a Labor Party affair. The initiative for it camne from
the Victorian Parliament. The Australian* Government has
never sought to dominate the proceedings and we would have
been quite silly to try. We were seeking no more than a
working consensus an agreed basis for constitutional reform.
The States would never have taken part in the first place
if they had not accepted that some reform of the Constitution
was necessary. For ' tunately the Opposition boycott didn't wreck
the Convention altogether. The Australian Government,
the Tasmanian and South Australian Parliaments and the
Territories were all represented. So too was local
governmenta,-and it's here that we find the real reason
for the hostility of the anti-Labor States. The Courts
and Bjelke-Petersens of this world bitterly oppose
the efforts of the Australian Government to make local
government a full and equal partner in the Federal system.
I remind you that when the Constitutional Convention was
first proposed, back in 1972, 1 said in my policy speech
on behalf of the Labor Party before we were even a
Government that the Australian Labor Government would
participate in the Convention only if local government was
represented. We made that a condition and we stuck * to it.
We took the view that any reform of the Constitution in which
the needs of local government were ignored would be a waste
of time. The Constitution as it stands doesn't even mention
local governx7. ent. Would anyone drawing up the Constitution
today make no mention of this vital area?
It's perfectly clear that the non-Labor States want
to keep local government in its present financial straightjacket.
As a national Government we've done our best to give a new
financial deal to local government, particularly through a
generous system of direct grants, made on the basis of
independent advice, which local councils can spend in any
way they wish. The States have done their best to
frustrate these policies and dominate local government at all
costs. They talk about centralism, but the real centralists
are the State Governments who want to keep local bodies as
their permanent, improverished vassals.
When you look at our programs you will see how much
they depend on localgovernxnent cooperation and initiative.
We recognise which the States do not that some things
can only be done properly at, the local level. For example,
our health centres and child care centres involve local
communities in p~ lanning and-running these essential services.
What we call the Australian Assistance Plan is a pioneering
experiment in this sort of community involvement. The idea
here is for local communities with my Government's financial
help to seek out and meet needs for which the usual social
welfare services make no provision. Our Area Improvement 
3.
Program is intended to improve the quality of life in
nominated regions through projects determiined by-the people
of the region. We don't want to run these local schemes.
We want local councils and local groups to run them
as they wish.,
It's not just by boycotting the Constitutional
Convention that the non-Labor States are. attacking
these plans for local community activity. They have
challenged our legislation for them in the High Court.
On top of that, Mr Fraser has just served notice that the
Liberals, if ever they got back into power, would cut
back drastically tLhe grants made to the States for specific
purposes. If one thing is clear from the so-called policy
on federalism unveiled by the Opposition this week, it's
their desire for a full-scale onslaught on local initiative,
on local community projects, especially in the welfare
area. I can mention any number of projects that rely on
specific purpose grants from the Australian Government:
child care, pre-schools, projects for aged and homeless
and handicdapped and Aboriginal people, isolated children,
health centres, legal aid offices, nursing homes and home
nursing, meals on wheels, flying doctor and blood transfusion
services. All these programs are imperilled by the. Opposition
policies. In the past week Mr-Fraser has shown his utter
hypocrisy over the Constitutional Convention, his indifference
to the real needs of local government, and his readiness to
back down whenever the Premiers stand over him in defence
of their State-run centralist empires. 



PRIME MINISTER ON HSV7' S THIS WEEK PROGRAM
SUNDAY 28 SEPTEMBER 1975
You will have noticed that in Melbourne this week-
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday there was a second meeting of
the Australian Constitutional Convention. The first meeting
took place in Sydney in September 1973. That meeting, the
Convention set up, unanimously, committees and working parties
to prepare for the next meeting. And then over the last three
months all the Premiers in Australia and I have co-operated
in arrangements for this meeting of the Convention in
Melbourne. We all drew up an agenda which we thought we
should make in order to make more modern and effective
arrangements between us for the government of Australia.
These arrangements were in fact supported by the Federal
Opposition. A month ago Mr Fraser, the Leader of the
Opposition, spoke in the House of Representatives in
these terms: " It's our hope that this Convention will be
Affika useful forum in which Federal and State
0 representatives may constructively consider
Constitutional reform in a way which will
advance the good government of Australia.
The Co~ istitutional Con-vention will provide
a place where constructive efforts may be made
to work out constitutional reform. The
Opposition is glad that the Constitutional
Convention will be reconvened in Melbourne
in September."
Now those were fine words. I agreed with all ofU
0 them. And yet what happened? When we camne along to
Melbourne last Wednesday, all the Liberal leaders were
absent. The agenda had been announced three weeks before
by the Deputy Premier of Victoria, Mr Thompson, and he
expressed the hope which we all share, that this will
O be a fruitful meeting of the Convention.
But the very next day,' after Mr Thompson spoke,
Mr Bjelke-Petersen, the Premier of Queensland, said that
Queensland wouldn't be sendling a delegation. Then the next
day the Premier of Western Australia, Sir Charles Court,
said that Western Australia wouldn't be sending a delegation.
And then Mr Lewis did the same for New South Wales and last
of all Mr Hamer for Victoria. And then bringing up the
rear, Mr Fraser let it be known that he wouldn't. So all
the noble words, all the work of two years went to nothing.
Nevertheless there was a full delegation from South Australia,
a full delegation from Tasmania, a full delegation from
local government throughout Australia, a full delegation
from the Northern Territory and from the Australian Capital
Territory and of course, the Australian Government. 
2.
Now the idea didn't come from the Australian
Government; it came from the Victorian Parliament in 1972.
It wasn't a Labor gathering; a majority of the people who
should have-been there and a majority of the people who were,
in fact, there, didn't belong to the Labor Party. But
nevertheless we went through the agenda, we agreed on
proposals for the Federal Government to-put to the people
to reform the Constitution. We agreed on proposals for
the State Governments to refer matters to the Federal
Parliament under the Constitution.
Over the road on the opening day the Liberal
leaders throughout Australia met and issued a statement on
Federalism. It's amazing theydidn't choose to turn up and
debate it and discuss it with us. But the significant thing
about it was and this is the real reason why they boycotted
the Convention on the agenda was provision for local
0, government. Because, obviously, if you're looking at
constitutional arrangements in Australia today, you ought to
make it possible for the Federal Government to have
financial relations; to borrow money, to make assistance
o available to local governments as well as to the State
governments, and that's what we decided at the Convention.
And this is the key to the Liberal objection, because the
Liberal Governments, starting with the Victorian State
Government, have~ been opposing Federal financial assistance
for local government. They've challenged this in the High
Court and programs, for instance, for child care, preschools,
projects for aged, homeless, handicapped and aboriginal peo~ ple,
isolated children, health centres, legal aid offices, nursing
homes and home nursing, meals on wheels, flying doctor services,
blood transfusion serVices, all these are under challenge in
the High Court, by State Liberal Governments. The Liberalo
0 if they got the chance would cut off assistance for local
government and for community providence.
That's why they boycotted the Constitutional
0 Convention this week in Melbourne.
NOW 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT 2
HIGH COURT PLAQUE UNVEILING,
CANBERRA, 29 SEPTEMBER ] 975
Mr Minister, Chief Justice, Your Honours, Your
Excellencies, Ladies arnd Gentlemen.
Today for the first time in Au * stralia's history
the High Court of Australia is sitting in Canberra: the
Chief Justice and all the Judges. And on a day like this
it's well to recall how-nobly they have fulfilled one of
their tenets:
Let justice be done even though it Pours,
But take good heart because on this site, one
of Australia's national capital's great buildings will arise.
There will be proper accommodation for the Supreme Court of
this country, and for all those who have business before it.
It may be difficult to envisage, in this tent today,
that the ; public hall of the High Court of Australia, on this
site, will be nearly 80 feet high I was told 24 metres higrh.
Orlas you might expect me to say, 2.4 decamnetres. We've had to
wait three quarters of a century to inaugurate the principal
seat of the High Court of Australia at the seat of Government.
Right from the beginning when the first, one of the greatest
Attorneys-Genera, first introduced the legislation for the
High Court, the Judiciary Act of 1903, it took a long time
to get that piece of legislation through; several sessions
in fact. But, in fact, it did finally get through both Houses.
And right from the outset it was laid down that the principal
geat of the High Court shall be at the seat of Government.
Now, until 1927 they both were seated in Melbourne.
And then the Goverrmient came to Canberra, and now we are
making it possible for the High Court's principal seat to
come to Canberra also.
There are four great pillars of Australia's
constitutional structure. The Constitution says, there
shall be a Federal Executive; there shall be a Federal
Parliament; there shall be a Federal Supreme Court of
Australia, known as the High Court; there shall be an
Interstate Commission. Now ' three, soon, will be
seated in Canberra. Throughout the English speaking world the High
Court of Australia is acknowledged as without superior in
the common law. The Judges who serve there are quoted
increasingly everywhere where the common law has been
inherited as it has been in Australia. I make that commnent
because it is well to recall how much of the business of tChe
High Court; how much of the business that citizens bring
before the High Court, is of the same nature as has been
transacted before English Courts for centuries.. And the
High Court of Australia has contributed to the elucidation
and the development of the common law as much as any court
in the world in this century. ./ 2 
We naturally, in public life, are preoccupied
with the functions of the High Court as a Constitutional Court,
following, of course, the Supreme Court of the United StatCes,
the Supreme Court of Canada and followed, in turn, by the
Supreme Court of India, and the Constitutional Court of West
Germany. Because in Australia, as in the other Federal
Democracies in the world, it has been thought proper that
disputes, which inevitably arise, should be settled in the
rational, properly argued atmosphere of court proceedings.
Here I quote Professor-La Nauze's biography of
Deakin: to explain it, the drive which Deakin brought to his
grand design of having a High Court of Australia established
right from the beginning of our Federation. So many people
thought that it could be put off for years. But not Deakin,
because to quote La Nauze, Deakin believed that:
.1
" without the authority of the High Court the
Commonwealth would be in constant danger from the
forces of provincialism. It was not that he
expected from a High Court judgments which would
0 necessarily favour the Commonwealth at the expense
of the States. What was essential was that
disputes between them should from the earliest
years views of the Federation be examined and
finally settled by a Court, and in a mental
atmosphere, free from provincial association."
I menti'on one other Chief Justice, the present
Chief Justice. It came as no surprise to me, in the Parliament
that Sir Garfield Barwick who had already proved himself a very
great builder when he was the doyen of the profession in Australia
beca'use those of us who then practised at the Sy dney Bar would
remember, with gratitude, how much our-accommodation was improved
because he devoted himself to seeing that the profession was
adequately housed. Without him I doubt if there would have been
adequate Inns foi barristers in Sydney or in due course in
0 Melbourne or elsewhere in Australia. And the Chief Justice, of
course, had the idea that in Sydney the Australian Government
and the New South Wales Government should co-operate in
establishing new courts, so that the public would not be confused
by a dividing, and divided apparently unco-ordinated judicial
system but he has for long been working for the High Court to
be properly housed in its proper seat in Canberra, in a building
worthy of the Supreme Courts, th Constitutional Courts of
common law countries and of federal democracies.
In October 1973,. he was one of the assessors to
choose the successful architects. And on 8 October 1973 he and
I announced the winners. And I think I must say, and in this I
would be supported by the National Capital Development Commission,
and a very great number of people in the profession, as well as
in the administration, that since then Sir Garfield has been
unremitting in seeing that this building proceeded. And I don't
really believe that the plans could have been so far advanced but
for the pressure, completely proper pressure, which he has brought
to bear upon me in this way. 
The building will be a noble one. It may not be as
noble as the Chief Justice might have aspired to have it. But
it's the best that the country can produce or afford and it will
be in a splendid setting, it will be a worthy home for our
Court which stands at the peak of our national judicial system.
And all of us, I believe, on this occasion should pay tribute
to those who over the decades have sought to have this court
in Canberra. And not least to the Chief Justice and the present
Justices who have spurred us to see that within not so many years
three or four the principal seat of the High Court, a noble seat,
will be at the seat of Government. 



PRESS STATE1m1ENT NO 568
September 1975
I
CRONULLA-SUTHERLAND RUGBY LEAGUE
Th@ Prime Minister added his voice today to
appeals to save the Cronulla-Sutherland Rugby League Club.
Mr Whitlam represented the Cronulla area when he
was first elected to the House of Representatives and his
sons first played football at Cronulla schools.
He said at' that time the area was just emerging
from rural conditions. It had few prepared playing fields
or facilities for its residents.
Since then, local government authorities had done
a magnificent job and the shire was now represented in
first grade competitions in most sporting codes.
Mr IAitlam said: " It would be a tragedy for the
shire and for Sydney Rugby League football if this very
young club which has achieved so much in such a short time
should have to withdraw from the competition because of
temporary financial difficulties."
Mr Whitlam is sending a donation to the club.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRINE MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, OC. M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNICAL LIBRARY ( ANSTEL)
CANBERRA 2 OCTOBER 1975
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT IEXPRESS MY OWN AND THE
GOVERNMENT'S INDEBTEDNESS TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY COUNCIL, KENNETH MIYER. THIS IS THE
SECOND OCCASfON IN THE PAST WEEK WHEN IHAVE HAD
CAUSE TO'-ACKNOWLEDGE KEN MYER'S REMARKABLE RECORD OF
PUBLIC SERVICE. IN MIELBOURNE ON M'ONDAY I OPENED AN
EXHIBITION OF CHINESE CRAFTS WHICH THE M'YER STORES
HAVE HELPED B'RI NG To AUSTRALIA.* TODAY KEN MIY ER
PRESIDES AT THE OPENING OF ANSTEL. ON THE ONE HAND
VIE HAVE SEEN HIS CONTRIBUTION TO WIDER PUBLIC ACCESS
TO THE ARTS; ON THIS OCCASION WE ACKNOWLEDGE HIS
CONTRIBUTION TO WIDER PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION.
THE TWO THINGS ARE BY NO MEANS UNRELATED, BOTH ARE
CONCERNED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MORE INFORMED AND
SENSITIVE COMMUNITY. v &amp;/ 2 3% 1 
2.
OF COURSE MANY PEOPLE APART FROM KEN MYER. HAVE
HAD A PART IN PLANNING AND CREATING THIS LIBRARY.
THE OPENING OF ANSTEL A LIBRARY WITHIN A LIBRARY
IS A MOST IMPORTANT STEP IN THE PROVISION OF INFORMATION
SERVICES TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. THE AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL LIBRARY IS THE
FIRST PHASE IN THE REDEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL
LIBRARY AS AN OPEN INFORMATION SERVICE, REACHING OUT
THROUGH ITS ATSOCIATED ORGANISATIONS TO THE WHOLE
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY, PROVIDING INFORMATION OF EVERY
KIND TO EVERYONE WHO NEEDS IT.
WHAT WE ARE SEEING TODAY ARL THE BEGINNINGS OF
A WHOLE NEW CONCEPT OF WHAT A LIBRARY SHOULD BE AND
HOW A LIBRARY SHOULD FUNCTION. IN RECENT YEARS THERE
HAS BEEN A QUIET REVOLUTION IN THE PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN AUSTRALIA, WE HAVE COME
TO SEE THAT THE TRADITIONAL CONCEPT OF THE LIBRARY
AN ISOLATED AND SELF-CONTAINED COLLECTION OF BOOKS
IS WHOLLY INADEQUATE TO THE NEEDS OF MODERN SOCIETY,
ACCESS TO THE TRADITIONAL LIBRARY IS LIMITED, AND EVEN
WHERE ACCESS IS POSSIBLE, THE INFORMATION AVAILABLE IS
OFTEN HAPHAZARD OR INADEQUATE. THE QUALITY OF LIBRARY
SERVICES VARIES FROM STATE TO STATE, FROM CITY TO CITY,
AND BETWEEN CITY AND COUNTRY. MArjY AUSTRALIANS ARE
STILL WITHOUT LIBRARIES OF ANY KIND. 61./ 3 
3.
THE SERVICES OF THE NATIONAL LIBRARY ARE
DJESIGNED TO OVERCOME ALL THESE PROBLEMS LIMITATION OF
ACCESS, INSUFFICIENCY OF INFORMATION, INEQUALITY OF
SERVICE. HS PROBLEMS HAVE BEEN ESPECIALLY APPARENT
IN FIELDS WHERE THERE IS A RAPID GROWTH OF KNOWLEDGE
AND A-HIGH DEGREE OF SPECIALISATION. THEY HAVE BEEN
COMPOUNDED BY RIVALRY BETWEEN ESTABLISHED LIBRARY
SERVICES AND INSTITUTIONS. IN THE SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNOLOGICAL ArAA, FOR EXAMPLE, DIFFERENT BODIES
SUCH AS THc CSIROI THE ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION, VARIOUS
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND THE NATIONAL LIBRARY HAVE
ALL PROVIDED LIBRARY AND. INFORMATION SERVICES WHOSE
FUNCTIONS HAVE TENDED TO OVERLAP, ALL THESE SERVICES
HAVE BEEN VALUABLE AND TO SOME EXTENT NECESSARY
THEY WILL CERTAINLY CONTINUE BUT THEIR COMPETITION
FOR CUSTOM AND RESOURCES HAS NOT MADE OUR INFORMATION
SERVICES MORE. EFFICIENT. FOR THESE AND OTHER REASONSINCLUDING
A -ENERAL NEGLECT OF LIBRARIES By GOVERNMENTS
IN THE PAST -LIBRARY SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA HAVE
LAGGED WELL BEHIND THOSE OF OTHER COMPARABLE COUNTRIES.
IT IS TIME IVE CAUGHT UP, WE ARE CATCHING UP NOW, I I-/ 7 
4.
BETTER LIBRARIES AND MORE CONSISTENT STANDARDS
OF LIBRARY SERVICE WILL NOT BE ACHIEVED BY THE DUPLICATION
OF TRADITIONAL LIBRARY MATERIALS IN EVERY CITY AND TOWN
WHERE LIBRARIES ARE NEEDED. THIS WOULD BE HOPELESSLY
COSTLY AND INEFFICIENT. YET THIS HAS BEEN THE
APPROACH IN THE PAST. TODAY OUR APPROACH IS DIFFERENT.
WE HAVE RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR CENTRALISED INFORMATION
SERVICES OFFERING THE WIDEST POSSIBLE ACCESS TO
INTERESTED PEOPLE AND ORGANISATIONS. " CENTRALISED"
OF COURSE IS A DIRTY WORD, BUT IT WILL BE CLEAR FROM WHAT
I HAVE TO SAY THAT THE THEORY INVOLVES NO DEROGATION
FROM THE PRINCIPLE OF LOCAL COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT.
SWITH THE USE OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY AND MODERN COMMUNICATIONS
1
QUICK AND RELIABLE; ACCESS TO INFORMATION IS POSSIBLE
ANYW1HERE IN AUSTRAIA.
WITH THIS IN MIND, THE NATIONAL LIBRARY
COUNCIL APPOITED A COMMITTEE THE SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNICAL INFOR&gt; ATION SERVICES ENQUIRY COMMITTEE ( STISEC)
TO STUDY NATIONWIDE NEEDS FOR LIBRARY-BASED INFORMATION.
lY GOVERNMENT ACCEPTED THE COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATION
THAT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY SHOULD HAVE PRIORITY IN THE
REFORM OF LIBRARY SERVICES, OTHER SPECIALISED LIBRARY
SERVICES IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES AND HUMANITIES WILL BE
DEVELOPED LATER. THEY HAVE ALREADY BEEN STARTED.
MEANWHILE, WITH THE OPENING OF ANSTEL, THE NATIONAL
LIBRARY IS PROVIDING A VALUABLE NEW SERVICE TO THE
SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY. m 
SOME 80,000 SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL
MONOGRAPHS ARE ON OPEN ACCESS THROUGH ANSTEL's COMPUTERBASED
INFORMATION SERVICE. THEY WILL ENABLE THE STAFF*
I TO ANSWER INQUIRIES FROM USERS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
THEY WILL HELP AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
AND AGENCIES OBTAIN PROMPT ACCESS TO THE LATEST
INFORMATION ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, IN ADDITION,
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY WILL BE ABLE TO MAKE MUCH BETTER
USE OF THE 25,000 SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERIODICALS
IT RECEIVES FROM AROUND THE WORLD. ANSTEL's FIRST
PUBLICATION IS A LIST OF THESE PERIODICALS. OTHER
LIBRARIES AND ORGANISATIONS WILL BE ABLE TO OBTAIN
COPIES OF ANY PERIODICALS THEY NEED'i: FROM THE iIATIONAL
LIBRARY. I CAN PERHAPS ILLUSTRATE THE VALUE OF THIS
SERVICE BY CONSIDERING, SAY, THE NEEDS OF A MEDICAL
SPECIALIST I0 HOBART. IN THE PAST, EVERY HOSPITAL WOULD
TRY TO OBTAIN ALL THE SPECIALIST JOURNALS NEEDED BY ITS
STAFF. THIS WAS A DIFFICULT TASK AT THE BEST OF TIMES;
TODAY IT IS VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE. IT IS BETTER FOR EVERY
INSTITUT. ION TO HAVE ACCESS TO'A COMPLETE REFERENCE SYSTEM,
A CENTRAL INFORI. ATION LIBRARY WILL OPERATE THE SERVICE
AND ISSUE TO EACH SPECIALIST A LIST OF EVERY ARTICLE
OR PUBLICATION THAT APPEARS IN THE WORLD DEALING WITH HIS
SUBJECT, THIS IS NOT TO SAY THAT A LIBRARY SUCH AS ANSTEL
WILL DO EVERYTH IG ITSELF. AND THAT THERE WILL BE NO NEED
FOR OTHER ORGANISATIONS TO DEVELOP THEIR OWN LIBRARY SERVICES. / 6 
6.
IT MEANS THAT OTHER ORGANISATIONS INCLUDING OTHER LIBRARIES
WILL BE ABLE TO PLAN THEIR SERVICES MORE EFFECTIVELY.
IT WILL ENCOURAGE CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION RATHER
THAN RIVALRY BETWEEN INFORMATION SERVICES. INDEED,
THIS PROCESS OF CO-ORDINATION IS AN INTERNATIONAL ONE,
LIBRARIES AROUND THE WORLD CAN SUPPLY INFORMATION TO A
COMPUTER-BASED SYSTEM. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY HAS ALREADY
HAD VALUABLE ASSISTANCE FROM CANADA IN THIS REGARD.
SI SHOULD MAKE IT CLEAR THAT WHILE ANSTEL ITSELF
IS AN INNOVATION, COMPUTER-BASED LIBRARY INFORMATION
SERVICES ARE ALREADY WELL ESTABLISHED HERE AT THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY. . THE PROCESS OF REFORMING AND
MODERNISING OUR LIBRARY SERVICES HAS BEEN STEADILY GOING
AHEAD. THERE ARE ALREADY MORE THAN 5,000 USERS OF THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY'S COMIPUTER-BASED SERVICES. THE SUCCESS
OF ANSTEL AND OTHER MODERN INFORMATION SERVICES DEPENDS
ON THE SUPPORT AND CO-OPERATION OF MANY INTERESTED GROUPS
AND THE READINESS CF LIBRARIES THEMSELVES TO WORK
TOGETHER. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY HAS ESTABLISHED A FUND
FOR INTER-LIBRARY CO-OPERATION. THROUGH THE GENEROSITY
AND GOOD OFFICES OF KEN 11YER, THE FUND HAS ALREADY REACHED
$ 100,000. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY WILL NEVER BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE LIBRARY SERVICES EVERYWHERE ON THE SPOT, BUT IT
WILL BE ABLE TO PROVIDE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS AND STATE
LIBRARIES WITH THE TOOLS AND THE RESOURCES NECESSARY TO
MEET THE COMMUNITY'S N'EEDS. / 7 
r7.
SUPPORT FOR LIBRARIES HAS BEEN ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT, YET ONE OF THE LEAST KNOWN, ASPECTS OF MY
GOVERNMENT'S WORK. IN MARCH THIS YEAR I ANNOUNCED THE
APPOINTMENT OF A WIDE-RANGING COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN AUSTRALIA, IT HAS HELD
MORE THAN 20 PUBLIC HEARINGS. WE ARE GIVING DIRECT
ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO IMPROVE LIBRARY
SERVICES. WE ARE IMPROVING SCHOOL AND TERTIARY
EDUCATION LIBRARIES IN A NUMBER OF WAYS. OUR COMMITMENT
TO LIBRARIES COULD NOT HAVE BEEN BETTER SYmBOLISED
THAN IT WAS IN THE CHOICE OF A GIFT FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA
ON THE OCCASION OF INDEPENDENCE. O'bR GIFT WILL TAKE
THE FORM OF A NATI&amp; NAL LIBRARY BUILDING AND
ASSOCIATED BOOKS AND EQUIPMENT.
THE GOVERNMENT'S BASIC OBJECTIVE IS NOT JUST
TO PROVIDE t1ORE BOOKS AND BETTER BUILDINGS BUT TO
RATIONALISE LIBRARY.. SERVICE EVERYWHERE AND ENSURE THAT
0 WHEREVER AUSTRALIANS LIVE THEY HAVE THE SAME ACCESS
TO EVERYTHING A LIBRARY CAN PROVIDE WORKS OF
LITERATU RE, CULTURAL ENRICHMEN4' T, CONTACT WITH HISTORIC
BOOKS AND DOCUMENTS, AND INFORMATION OF EVERY KIND. 
8.
WHEN WE THINK ABOUT IT WE WILL SEE WHAT AN
EXTRAORDINARY AND, INDEED, REVOLUTIONARY CONCEPT THIS IS.
IN ANY DEMOCRACY, INFORMATION IS THE KEY TO AN INFORMED
AND ALERT COMMUNITY A COMMUNITY THAT IS READY AND
ABLE TO TAKE ITS OWN DECISIONS AND PARTICIPATE IN THE
DEMOCRATIC PROCESS, WE TAKE FREEDOM OF SPEECH FOR
GRANTED, BUT. THE ACCOMPANYING FREEDOM, THE NECESSARY
. COROLLARY, FREEDOM OF INFORMATION, HAS LONG BEEN
W NEGLECTED. IN ANY TRULY FREE SOCIETY, FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION IS JUST AS IMPORTANT AS FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
A CITIZEN WHOSE ACCESS TO INFORMATION IS LIMITED
OR RESTRICTED IS A SECOND-CLASS CITIZEN. I BELIEVE
IT WILL BE POSSIBLE, THROUGH THIS GREAT INSTITUTION,
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY, TO GUARANTEE FOR EVERY
AUSTRALIAN NOT JUST THOSE WHO LIVE IN CANBERRA
ACCESS TO INFORMATIOilN OF ANY KIND, WHEREVER HE MAY
LIVE, WHATEVER HIS JOB, WHATEVER HIS INCOME, WHATEVER
HIS EDUCATION., I CAN THINK OF FEW REFORMS THAT
CAN BETTER ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF OUR LIVES, AND
ENTRENCH THE RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES OF ALL MEMBERS OF
A FREE AND RESPONSIBLE COMMUNITY. 



PPIPME MNISTER S SPEEQ-1 AT TE= J-7UJNCHTNG OF DITIS MURPHY' S IXK } WYM
BRLSBAZE, 3 OZI'-OBER 1975
1Mr Deputy Vice-Chancellor, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a very great pleasure indeed to be launching another
book written by one of Australia's finest historians, a
distinguished member of thle staff of the University of
Queensland; a book printed, published by the University
of Queensland ? ress; and to launch this book, to support
the author in the house occupied by three Premiers of
Queensland. The last of those Preiers to occupy it"
being the subject of the book T. J. Ryan himself.
The Labor Party has not always had a good press but it's
always had good historians. And whatever may be said about
writers at any particular time, about the Labor Party they
always look at Australian history,-not just Australian
politics in retrospect, but Australian history in terms
of what has been achieved by the Labor party the leaders
and the members of the Labor party. And so it is with
T. J. Ryan. The fact that this book has appeared 55 years
after his death illustrates one important thing, I think,
about our history, about our biographies, and that is
that it takes a very long time in Australia to enable,
or encourage historians to write about great Australians.
Certainly T. J. Ryan deserved a biography, but there are so
many people who've been prominent in Australian politics,
in Australian histor-y, about whom no significant biographical
material has yet appeared. There is no definitive work
on Parkes, or on Griffith-a very great Queenslander-or
on Barton, or on Fisher, or on Lyons or above all on Curtin.
And there must still be much to be published about Hughes
and Bruce and Chifley. And as far as I know, noone has yet
undertaken the formidable task of assessing the Menzies
era. The journalists have been much more prompt. Alan Reid
did John Gorton in every sense. And there is another
journalist, distinguished journalist, a very perceptive
journalist, Laurie Oakes, who did a book on me and it's
now available as a remainder at 35 cents a copy.
Now at least we have a book on Ryan, a book which
has been all the better because one has been able to mull
over the history, to ponder on it, with maturity. One
inevitably wonders how far Ryan would have gone, how great
would have been his impact in the whole of Australia if he
had been spared longer. There's no question the impact he
had on Queensland in his time, and for succeeding decades.
He was only 45 when he died. He was at the height of his
power. There was every prospect that he would. have become
Prime Minister. He was superbly equipped by tarerarPnt. and
training for the role he played in. Queensland, and for the
wider, and greater role to which he aspired. The statue
in the Executive Gardens in Brisbane represents him as a
King's Councellor. He was in fact the only lawyer to head
a Queensland Government this century. That's a double
first, because he was also not only the only lawyer to-head
a Queensland Government this century, he was only one of the
two people who've been through a university and headed a
Queensland Government Jack Pizzey being the other, another
man who was taken far too early from the scene. 
2.
Now, Ryan's legal training was obviously of
very great importance to him in the two great constitutional
and legal battles of his career. Queensland Premiers have
sometimes been legal but they'Ive not always been
constitutional. He had two great constitutional fights
one was against the Upper House I'm amazed the interest
Queensland parliamentarians take in Upper Houses now they
no longer have one themselves they don't really have a
very good sense of who should be imembers of Upper Houses
even then. The other great fight he had, cons titutionally,
was against Hughes. Now the heart of Dr Denis M'urphy's
biography of Ryan is the fight between Ryan and Hughes
over conscription. there's tragedy, comedy, real drama
and mere melodrama in that story which Dr Murphy has
interpreted and perpetuated. Fortunately in these days of
reason and light it is possible for a Prime Minister of
Australia and a Premier of Queensland to conduct any
arguments they have in a very tolerant way cooperation
and imutual respect as we know. But not in the days of
Hughes and Ryan. Ryan transferred to the Federal arena
for the specifLic purpose of getting rid of Hughes.
He needn't have worried because at that time Hughes
had joined the conservative forces and they always get
rid of their leaders themselves. Ryan was barely in the
Federal Parliament and the conservatives, the Tories of
that day, dumped Hughes. And of course, before ten years
was up they dumped Latham, and another ten years they
diumed Menzies. Then it took a bit longer before they
dumped Gorton, and then it accelerated again and they
dumped Snedden now that's a very sad procession why
Tories can't be loyal to their leaders.
Now there's one aspect of Ryan's conduct in the
fight against conscription which merits mention. The
defection of Hughes and of every State leader of the Labor
Party throughout Australia in the conscription era, except
Ryan himself, meant that the Labor party for a lon-g time
was suspicious of parliamentarians and suspicious of
parliamentary leaders. Ryan was the only parliamentary
leader of the Labor party in Australia who stood staunch
during the conscription time. And as Dr Denis Murphy's
book has pointed out, Ryan insisted on a proper role being
accorded by the party to those candidates whom the party
chose and whom the public elected to parliament. No
party enjoys public support unless the party respects its
parliamentarians. Now Ryan preserved the position of the
parliamentary party in Queensland in that generation, and
he kept alive'the very necessary popular support which
parliamentarians must have. In some other States the step
was taken to see that the people outside the party elected
the parliamentary leader that was the case with Jack
Lang. Jack Lang had support of the party machine long after
he ceased to have the support of the parliamentary party.
Now it was not until Curtin's day that the parliamentary
party and the parliamentary leadership was seen to have the
support of the party all over. ./ 3 
Now one of the things which I enjoyed-in
reading Denis Murphy's book was the consistency of the
uinchanging character of the criticisms which are made of
Vhe Labor Party. Looking through some of the things I
thought t. Hfis is an amazing conte-mporary work because
Ryan's c-overnent was described as showing tyranny,
treachery, treason, mob-rule; it was communist, it was
bolshevik, it was disloyal to the Crown, it-was a
contemptible conspiracy, it was reprehensible and
represented a threat to the Australian way of life.
Now all those things were said about Ryan when he was
Premier of Queensland, when he was leader of the
Australian Labor Party in Queensland. And one particular
thing that the Ryan Government established was a
Government Ir-surance office, a State Government insurance
office and this was described as a violent, revolutionary,
socialist attempt to destroy freedom of enterprise and
the right to free choice. It's all so depressingly
familiar. That is when it's done, first, it is completely
reprehensible, it's intolerable, it. has to be condemned
and resisted and if possible rejected. But once it comes
about we see how beneficial it was. Looking back at
T. J. Ryan's life, we can see how much he did achieve in
the face of' all this irrational criticism.
Now before Ryan's leadership~ the Australian
Labor Party ' s strength in Queensland was based in the
outback and in the provincial cities. lie realised that
the core of success in Queensland politics was . to
link the interests orE the capital and the provincial cities.
And after Ryanfor decades &gt; the LaborParty -in Queensland
held office-wi-* th only a single gap of-three years-because
it retained the support of the provincial cities and the
capital. And to restore that alliance is still the key
to political success for the Australian Labor Party in
Queensland. T. J. Ryan showed it, his associates and his
successors preserved it for, a decade. If wie're to be true
to the things he established-the ideas, the institutionswe
must again bring about that alliance.
I congratulate Dr Murphy, whom I've known for
very many years, as a candidate, as an historian, as an
academic. I congratulate him on his painstaking work, his
patient research, his very readable recreation of a
turbulent, but very fruitful period in the political life
of Queensland and Australia. He records a period in
Australian history where Queensland led Australia. The
ideas that those first Labor Governments in Queensland
put on the statute books, the administrative acts they
achieved led Australia. In this record of a great career,
untimely cut short, Denis Murphy has made a major
contribution to our history and our politics; our understanding
of that history and of those politics. I'm certain that
not only will academics, not only will historians, but the
people of Queenslaznd' and the people of Australia understand
so very much better what made this great man and what in
his time, under his leadership, gave Queensland the pioneering,
the leading role in this country. 



PRIME MINISTER' S SPEECH AT THE SANDGA'TE BOWLING CLUB,
BRISBANE, 3 OCTOBER 1975
Well, ladies and gentlemen, it was some months
ago that Denis Murphy wrote to me and said will you
launch my book on T. J. Ryan? I want to make that plain
from the outset because this visit was arranged a long
time ago in principle;, the date wasn't necessarily
set Some people will be cynical enough to think
that I mnight1--be here f or some political purpose. I resent
that sort of insinuation( interjection: he's not here
tonight). I'm very glad to be here at the Sandgate Bowls
Club because I've never been on this side of the lagoon.
I would have lost count of all the times I've been'right
round it and looked across, and at last I've made it.
And I thank the presidents very much for. being so gracious
to me, but to all of you. These are excellent premises,
and I can compliment you on the way you look after your
members and guests. Thank you very much indeed.
Now, I've been with Denis Murphy with various
audiences over the last few years at the Homestead the
only time, I want to make it plain to you I ever. go
to the Homestead is to make speeches; I wouldn't go for
any other purpose. On this occasion, of course, it's
entirely a social and literary occasion. I love
li * terary lunches and academic dinners. So naturally
I brought along, I got leave to come f rom Fred Daly,
because we've been in Parliament for over 22 years now,
next month I think it'll be 23 years in my case
but it's 31 years in his he's the father of the
Parliament and he treats us all as wayward children.
Those on our side, of course,. we instinctively love himari-
d those on the other side do as they're told. It has
warm--. ed my heart to see the way you've responded when his
nat:-e was mentioned anybody that can equal Clem and
Sylvia Jones in applause is doing pretty well.
I'm here tonight not to support Denis Murphy
as a candidate,. and he has been an outstanding candidate,
but to support him as an author. I regard him as one of
the finest young men in Australia. He qualified himself
to be a university lecturer by his own efforts he didn't
have a silver spoon, as they say, or whatever it is
and in Queensland you need a pretty long spoon. But he
qualified himself in a very competitive field and I
don't know where he finds the time to conduct so many other
activities. He' s written several books; they are excellent
books. The Department of History in the University of
Queensland is outstanding in Australia because of its
concern with Australian history. You know, whenI used to
go to university, people would be a bit inclined to say that
Australian history wasn't really a subject that you could
learn at university. But the University of Queensland has
disproved that. Arind there's another field where I think the
University of * Queensland Press is outstanding.' More than
any other publisher in Australia it publishes Australian
verse. Now we have some good history here and we write
some good verse. We have very good politicians in the
British de-mocratic tradition. I mean from time to time, I'm not 
saying that they're all..
But of course: I always remember the good times, I talk
about the best. And there have beenL soine very good ones.
And also the verse, and the literat[_ ure we produce in
Australia is equal to any produced anywhere in the
English-speaking world. We ought to be pleased.
I am very happy to be at the launching of another
publication of the University of Queensland Press.
You'll notice that I'm using ' press'; I'm praising the
press in a very specialised sense.
Now Denis Murphy has had a most interesting
and admirable subject for this biography. Whatever they
might say about the reception that the press in the wider
sense gives the Australian Labor Party there's no
question the way historians regard it,~ because everybody
who writes about Australian politics this century,
writes about it in the context of what the Labor Party
has done or has aimed to do. If one looks to the past,
everybody, whatever his politics, would acknowledge
that the Labor party has been the creative and dynamic
force in Australian public life. Now people don't
necessarily believe it at any particular time they
didn't believe it when it was happening in the past.
But when it'S been achieved, when the, look back, they
all say, that is., there is nothing when people look at
Australian politics, which-: they identify with anti-Labor
politicians, or anti-Labor Governments. It's all been
in terms of what Labor politicians or Labor governments
have done. One of the charming things, reading Ryan"
is the way that in the second decade of this century all the
things were said about his government and about himself,
which are said by his successors today. All the terms
of abuse were already being used disloyal, treacherous,
treasonable, anti-monarch, and disloyal, everything like
this. The only phrase of all the ont-s which are used
about us now which was, which is with all the terms which
are used about us now, were all used in T. J. Ryan's day.
The only one that they used to use about him which we,
never copped was the word ' bolshevik'. But otherwise the
terms of abuse are precisely the same; it's most comforting
Those were the days when in Queensland the Premiers , in stead
of just standing off and hurling abuse , decided to go and
get into the action themselves. And two of Queensland's
Premiers-the ablest of them this century, Ryan and Theodore
went into the House of Representatives. Ryan died at
there is no question that if he'd lived a normal 20 years
or even more that you would have expected him to have in
Parliament he would have been Prime Minister of Australia.
Now Theodore went in in a bad time, bad economic time,
universal depression throughout the world. But everybody
now acknowledges that Theodore was way ahead of his time;
he was the only person who was a Chancellor or a Treasurer
who read Keynes and all those people that were; I mean we've
gone beyond Keynes now,. but he was* way ahead, the rigours of the
depression would have been very much less if they'd been a
few more people that had heeded Theodore, the former Premier of
Queensland, who became Federal Treasurer. These were very great
men, and of course, previously Griffith and so on in the last 
century were very great men, Premiers of Queensland who
went into Federal af fairs. GriffEith, of course, was a
Minister and then in the High Court, t~ he first Chief
Justice, and a very great one; great Premier, great
literary man too, incidentally, and first Chief Justice.
You've done some great things in this State, but you've
done them in so far as you've identified with Australia
as a whole. I've never believed that Queenslanders were
different from the rest of Australia; where you're good
it's because you're Australians too.
And perhaps I might be forgiven if I made one
particular illustration of what I mean there, because
the week before last the arrangements had been made here
in Brisbane, in the Administrative Offices -the Premier
was there, and a few other Premiers, and I myself and
somebody on behalf of the Opposition in the Federal
Parliament -we were all there and we agreed that we would
meet in Melbourne the week before last, you know last
week; Wednesday, Thursday, Friday last week, Clem Jones,
the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition all of us were
to be down there. This was all arranged in June; it was
to be a Constitutional Convention and suddenly, right at
the end, it was decided up here that you wouldn't go,
and the reason was because at the Constitutional Convention
we were going to talk about local government, It was
on the agenda, arnd it was on the agenda because when the
Convention was first suggested back in 1972, there was a
House of Representatives election imminent and we said
that we would have a Convention but only on condition
that local government was represented at it as well.
Because these days it would be absurd to look at the
Constitutional arrangements in Australia and think that
they were matters solely for the Federal Government and the
State Governments. There are many things that the local
government bodies in Australia need to do; if they don't
do them, or if they can't do them well enough, then our
com. munity suffers. So we insisted that local government be
on the agenda, that was decided at the Sydney Convention, of course,
two years ago and it was again to be on the agenda for
Melbourne last week. And because it was there , the Liberal
Premiers and the Country Party Premier wouldn't go; they
didn't want to be seen to vote against the interests of
local government. But my Government believes that it is
important that that sphere of government also be mentioned
in the Constitution and that local government be given the
wherewithall, be given the opportunity, to do the things
that need to be done on a regional, or local or community basis.
Well~ that's why they didn't turn up, at the Convention.
But they were all gathered, the absentees, on the other
side of the road; -they were all in-Melbourne. They gathered
on the other side of the road and they issued a statement
on federalism. The significance is that it was a statement
on taxation and you in Queensland will realise the implications
of that statement because the core of it is to abandon uniform
taxation and to say that everywhere in Australia you will pay
two lots of tax one lot of income tax to the Federal 
Government, and the other lot of income tax Ito the
State Government. ( Inter-jection: " Fraser's folly")
Well, I appreciate the phraseology I said that
everywhere in Australia you'd pay two lots of taxthat's
rnotright, in Canberra they'll only pay one lot,
they'll only be paying the Federal'tax, and they'll get
out of the other tax entirely, and the reason for that
is that the Federal Parliament can only impose taxes on
condition that those taxes are equal throughout Australia.
That is. the Federal Parliament couldn't pass a special
tax for" Canberra to bring it up to what any of the
other States were paying. So if you have two lots of
income tax, the Federal one and the State one,-the
people in Canberra will be overjoyed. When I retire
I'll go to live there along, the road, admittedly, but
it'd be a good place to retire, because I wouldn't have to
pay that second tax. But I don't think the people will cop
it because Queenslanders still will recall in many cases,
and those Who don't remember it will easily find it out,
and read about it, that in the days in Australia, that is
until 1942, when there was Federal income tax, and also in
every State a State income tax the taxes in Queensland
were higher than in any other part~ of Australia, and it
was because of that that so many people invested, and
employed and went to live in the southern States. And
Queensland's industries have never caught up because of
that tax. Queensland being an extensive State, a State
which has to have schools, and hospitals and other public
services throughout this very large area, the second
largest State in Australia -but only a third in populationthey
had to pay more to get Government services for people
anywhere where they lived in the State. By contrast
in Victoria, a compact State, the smallest of the mainland
States, the second largest in population of the
Australian States, their tax was lowest, because you don't
have to spread Government services over such a large area.
There are many more people able to use every centre of
Government service. So in those days, two taxes: Queenslanders
paid the highest tax in Australia, and they had to do that,
and even then couldn't get,... one must admit,-as good schools,
for instance, as were provided in the other States. Now
that is the core of this policy of federalism, bringing a
double tax system, instead of a uniform tax system, and the
comparison is made with Canada. Now I'm damn glad the
comparison has been made, because it's very easy for people
to see what the population of the Canadian provinces is, and
what the tax rates in the Canadian provinces is. And
the most populous, the most prosperous provinces in Canada.
Ontario, British Colombia,... they pay, they charge the lowest
provincial income tax; and the smallest, in population, or
the-largest in area, the poorest of the States, you know to
put it bluntlyof the provinces there, they pay the highest
taxes. Now this is just the wrong way you'd want to have it.
It ought to be possible for us as one nation to see that
whatever a person does, wherever he lives, governments
provide the things which governments have to provide of
equal standard. If you go to a new place you shouldn't"
have to wait until your family has grown up or has left
the district before standards in that district become good enough. 
If you live in a run-down area you shouldn't have to
bear, unaided, the replenishment or the improvment, the
replacement of the standards for the things which
gJovernments -have to provide. It's important that as one
nation we should see that wherever Australians live they
are able to get as good schools, as good hospitals, or
as good public services as Australians get anywhere else.
' The only way to do that is to pool the resources of the
nation and have themi spent where they are needed * most.
Now, it's true enough, people say, say about the United
States; there are State income taxes there; but you
look at the United States. It's very eVenly developed.
There are as many people on the Wiest coast in California
as on the East coast in New York. There are as many
people up in the north, say in Illinois, as there are
down in the sou * th, such as in Texas. It's equally
taxable, it's equally prosperous. There are patches
which are much less prosperous but north and south, east
and west, the place is very even. But you look in
Australia, it's in the south-eastern part, the part say,
Melbourne and Sydney, or if you like to stretch it,
from Adelaide to Brisbane and the part down below that
lineuduch is the prosperous part. The rest of Queensland
or South Australia, or Western Australia or New South
Wales is very much more expensive to run. Now the core
of what the Liberals are putting to the people now should be
seen~ by the people. And I don't believe they'll have a
bar of it. I've always said~ when there was an election,
or when one was in the offing, and the Liberals had to be
precise, people would' see the catches. It's no use just
abusing us because of unemployment, or inflation. Sure
the-v'Ie bad; but there'Is no country in Europe or North
Ainerica where they,, aren't just as bad. They're much worse
than when we came in, but they're much worse in all those
other countries than they were three years ago you can't
bl-e us alone; you don't blame Nixon for that alone;.
or Ford or Wilson or Schmidt or Pompidou or Giscard d'Estaingor
Franco. It happens everywhere in the West, everywhere.
And of course our opponents may parry by saying well we did
it; things are crook, and every political party in opposition
says it about the government in every country in the west,
one has to admit that. If we were in opposition I think
we'd be ' itaking out a very. good claim against the government.
When you have to face the people there has to be an
alternative put, and there can be no doubt that when they
start in our O? position to specify-what they would do if they
were given the chance you'll see the catch. And I don't
believe that anybody in Queensland would want to go back to
the stage of double ta * xation, because it's only the Liberal
Party in Sydney and Melbourne that has sold this policy
to the Federal leaders. You'll notice, Gordon Chalk, he's
very unenthusiastic about it; so's Kevin Cairns -the first
time I've ever mentioned him on a platform. But
I don't propose to tal= k anything about platforms or policies.
It's once they sta-rt being precise, you can see the catch.
Then they were talkin-g about tax indexation a month ago.
Hocw would you have ax indexation on State income taxes as well 
as Federal income taxes; what could the Federal people
do about tax indexation on the State income tax?
Now some people say that there will be in a few weeks,
a couple of months, an election. All I can say to you is
that before the end of June next year there will be
an election, at least, for half the Senate, there must
be. Now the Senators who are there and were elected
to go up to the end of next June, they will . be there until
the end of next June; whenever there is an election for
half the Senate the new Senators to replace them would not
take office until the 1 July. But the interesting thing
is that at the moment it is a flawed Senate, or as Jim Killen says,
a tainted Senate. There are two people there; I don't
know who owns them, but they don t belong to us. But
they succeeded people who the people elected as members
of the Labor Party. And let's remember, back at the last
elections in May last year, not only was there a very
large majority of voters for the Labor Party in the House
of Representatives we've a comfortable majority there,
but the Labor candidates for the Senate got more votes
than did the candidates of the Liberal Party, the
Country Party, the Liberal Movement, the-D. L. P. remember
the all of them combined, every party combined,
got fewer votes than we got in the Senate. But we haven't
got a majority of members in it, and to get things through
the Senate you have to get a majority. If the Senate
is evenly divided the thing doesn't go through. Now in
those circumstances, of course, it would be absurd for a
Senate not to pass legislation we put up. Now some people
say that the Senate will reject the Budget. Well if that
took place) it would be very interesting to fight a
campaign on what sort of Budget they would put instead.
It's not the Senate's job to reject Budgets; they can't
initiate money bills, the Constitution says so; they
Scan't amend money bills, the Constitution says so.
The Victorian Constitution says that the Upper House can
reject money bills, the Australian Constitution doesn't
use that word at all, so some of the comparisons made down
there have no validity in our situation. Now, I musn't
K speculate any further, because I don't,. you know, I want
to catch people with their pants down. It's an attitude
which appeals to people that boarded at the best schools.
If there was an election on the grounds that the Senate had
rejected the Budget. then the election would turn around what
sort of Budget woil; the Senate have passed? What sort of
Budget would the Liberals want? And that would be very
intriguing to find out. Because I don't believe that it is
possible in the circum. stances applying in Australia or in
comparable countries today to bring down a better Budget
than Queensland's Bill Hayden introduced. If I may draw
a comparison, he's a person very much like Denis Murphy; a
person who, without any inherited advantages, has qualified
himself superbly for an important role in this community,
and instead of just looking after his own selfish interests,
looks after the community and serves it with might and main. 



1 7 4 OVER THE YEARS, THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY HAS NOT ENJOYED
A VERY GOOD PRESS. By CONTRAST, WE HAVE BEEN GENERALLY
WELL-TREATED BY HISTORY AND THE HISTORIANS, IT IS
SOME CONSOLATION TO KNOW THAT HISTORY WILL RENDER A
FAVOURABLE VERDICT. THE DIFFICULTY IS TO WAIT AROUND
LONG ENOUGH FOR THE JUDGEMENT TO BE HANDED DOWN.
IF POSTERITY HAD THE V/ OTE, LABOR WOULD NEVER BE OUT
OF OFFICE. As IT IS WE HAVE THE PARADOX THAT WHILE
AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL HISTORY TENDS VERY LARGELY TO BE
WRITTEN IN TERMS OF THE HISTORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTY, THE PARTY AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL HAS HELD OFFICE
ONLY 18 YEARS OF THE 714 YEARS OF FEDERATION.
THE ARRIVAL OF DENIS IURPHY'S BOOK ' LIFE OF T. J. RYAN'
FIFTY-FIVE YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH, DOES POINT TO THE
RATHER LEISURELY PACE AT WHICH OUR ACADEMIC HISTORIANS
PRODUCE THEIR ASSESSM~ ENTS. THE GAPS ARE ENORMOUS.
THERE IS STILL NO DEFINITIVE WORK ON PARKES, GRIFFITH,
BARTON, FISHER, LYONS, AND ABOVE ALL, CURTIN.
THE LAST WORD HAS NOT BEEN SAID ABOUT HUGHES, BRUCE,
OR CHIFLEY, As FAR AS I AM AWARE, NO-ONE HAS YET
UNDERTAKEN THE FORMIDABLE TASK OF ASSESSING THE MENZIES ERA.
THE JOURNALISTS HAVE BEEN MUCH MORE PROMPTO
IN MORE THAN ONE SENSE, ALAN REID DID GORTONAND
I SHOULD GIVE A PLUG FOR LAURIE OAKES' BOOK ON WHITLAM
WHICH INEXPLICABLY HAS BEEN REMAINDERED AT 35 CENTS,
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT BOOK LAUNCHING OF
T. J. RYAN A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY
BY
DENIS MURPHY.
AT BRISBANE, 3 OCTOBER 1975 
-2-
THERE IS OF COURSE A POIGNANCY ABOUT THE STORY OF
T. J. RYAN. HE DIED AT FORTY-FIVE IN THE PRIME OF LIFE,
AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS POWERS, WITH EVERY PROSPECT OF EVEN
GREATER ACHIEVEMENTS AHEAD OF HIM. THERE WAS EVERY REASON
TO BELIEVE THAT HE WOULD SHORTLY BECOME THE LEADER OF THE
FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARY LABOR PARTY AND PRIME MINISTER.
DEATH WROTE A GREAT QUESTION MARK ON HIS CAREER.
T. J. RYAN WAS SUPERBLY EQUIPPED BY TEMPERAMENT AND
TRAINING FOR THE ROLE HE PLAYED AND FOR THE LARGER ROLE
TO WHICH HE ASPIRED. THE STATUE IN THE EXECUTIVE GARDENS
REPRESENTS HIM AS A KING'S COUNSEL.' HE WAS . IN FACT
THE ONLY LAWYER TO HEAD THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT THIS
CENTURY. THERE IS A DOUBLE FIRST THERE THE ONLY
LAWYER PREMIER AND THE ONLY QUEENSLAND PREMIER OF THIS
CENTURY TO HAVE A STATUE SO FAR. IN FACT JACK PIZZEY
ALSO VERY TRAGICALLY CUT OFF AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS CAREER
IS THE ONLY OTHER QUEENSLAND PREMIER THIS CENTURY TO
HAVE OBTAINED A DEGREE. RYAN'S LEGAL TRAINING WAS
OBVIOUSLY OF VERY GREAT IMPORTANCE TO HIM IN THE TWO
GREAT CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL BATTLES OF HIS CAREERAGAINST
THE PRETENSIONS OF THE UPPER HOUSE, THE HAPPILY
DEFUNCT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL, AND AGAINST HUGHES. 
-3-
THE HEART OF DENIS MURPHY'S BOOK IS THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN
RYAN AND HUGHES OVER CONSCRIPTION. THERE IS TRAGEDY,
COMEDY, REAL DRAMA AND MERE MELODRAMA. FORTUNATELY
IN THESE DAYS OF REASON AND LIGHT, AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTERS
AND -QUEENSLAND PREMIERS ARE ABLE TO BASE THEIR RELATIONS
ON A SPIRIT OF CO-OPERATION AND MUTUAL RESPECT.
RYAN TRANSFERRED TO FEDERAL POLITICS FOR THE SPECIFIC
PURPOSE OF DEFEATING HUGHES IN THE NATIONAL ARENA.
IN THE EVENT, IT WAS NOT RYAN WHO DID FOR HUGHES*
HE WAS DESTROYED BY HIS OWN COLLEAGUES, THUS ESTABLISHING
THE GREAT CONSERVATIVE TRADITION, OF WHICH IN THEIR TURN
LATHAM, MENZIES, GORTON AND SNEDDEN WERE ALL VICTIMS,
WITH LYONS AND HOLT SAVED FROM A SIMILAR FATE BY DEATH.
THERE IS ONE ASPECT OF RYAN'S CONDUCT IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
CONSCRIPTION WHICH MERITS MENTION. THE DEFECTION OF
HUGHES AND EVERY STATE LABOR LEADER EXCEPT RYAN DEALT A
VERY HEAVY BLOW TO THE CONFIDENCE OF THE PARTY NOT ONLY
IN THEIR LEADERS BUT IN THE VERY PRINCIPLE OF LEADERSHIP
ITSELF. THE PARLIAMENTARY WING AND PARLIAMENTARY LEADERSHIP
BECAME HEAVILY SUSPECT. THERE WAS A STRONG ATTEMPT TO
TAKE THE ELECTION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY LEADERSHIP AWAY FROM
THE PARLIAMENTARIANS AND PLACE IT IN THE HANDS OF THE MACHINE.
THIS DID IN FACT SUCCEED IN NEW SOUTH WALES, AND LANG OWED
HIS POSITION TO THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE, NOT THE NEW SOUTH
WALES CAUCUS. 
THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT RYAN BY HIS STATURE AND HIS
FIRM LOYALTY TO THE PRINCIPLE OF PARLIAMENTARY INDEPENDENCE
MADE THE MAJOR CONTRIBUTION IN PREVENTING THIS OCCURRING
AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL. THE PARTY'S CONFIDENCE IN
ITS LEADERSHIP WAS NOT REALLY RESTORED UNTIL CURTIN
BUT RYAN MORE THAN ANYONE ELSE PRESERVED THE PRINCIPLE
INTACT. SO CURTIN AND ALL HIS SUCCESSORS OWE THIS
DEBT To RYAN.
DENIS MURPHY'S BOOK DOCUMENTS A NOTABLE FEATURE OF
AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL LIFE THE AMAZING CONSISTENCY.'
THE STERILITY, THE SHEER LACK OF IMAGINATION IN THE
INVECTIVE USED AGAINST THE LABOR PARTY. HERE ARE
SOME DESCRIPTIONS OF RYAN AND HIS GOVERNMENT:
i 8TYRANNY. TREACHERY TREASON
MOB RULE COMMUNIST BOLSHEVIK
DISLOYAL TO THE CROWN A CONTEMPTIBLE CONSPIRACY
REPREHENSIBLE... . A THREAT TO THE AUSTRALIAN WAY
OF LIFE...," 1
AND OF COURSE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
OFFICE WAS VIOLENT REVOLUTIONARY SOCIALIST ATTEMPT
TO DESTROY FREEDOM OF ENTERPRISE AND THE RIGHTS OF FREE
CHOICE.." IT IS ALL SO DEPRESSINGLY FAMILIAR. 
BEFORE RYAN'S LEADERSHIP THE PARTY'S STRENGTH IN
QUEENSLAND WAS BASED IN THE OUTBACK AND THE CENTRAL
AND NORTHERN PROVINCIAL TOWNS, HIS POLITICAL
ACHIEVEMENT WAS TO FORGE A NEW BASE IN BRISBANE.
THE ALLIANCE BETWEEN THE CAPITAL AND THE GREAT
PROVINCIAL CITIES LAID THE FOUNDATIONS FOR LABOR'S
ASCENDANCY IN QUEENSLAND WHICH LASTED ALMOST UNBROKEN
FOR NEARLY HALF A CENTURY, TO RESTORE THAT
ALLIANCE IS STILL THE KEY TO POLITICAL SUCCESS FOR
THE PARTY IN QUEENSLAND,
I CONGRATULATE DENIS ON HIS PAINSTAKING WORK, HIS
PATIENT RESEARCH, HIS VERY READABLE RE-CREATION OF
A TURBULENT BUT VERY FRUITFUL PERIOD IN THE POLITICAL
LIFE OF QUEENSLAND AND OF AUSTRALIA, IN THIS RECORD
OF A GREAT CAREER UNTIMELY CUT OFF, HE HAS MADE A
MAJOR CONTRIBUTION TO OUR HISTORY, OUR POLITICS
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THAT HISTORY AND THOSE POLITICS,
,11a I I, 



flNTERVI-, lW WITH THE P= IME= hSTER BY CY-AIN 7 -BRISBANE 4 OCTOBER 1975
Q( JESIO: Mr hitlam, has the Senate any right to reject Supply?
PM It's very dubious no Senate has ever refused Supply to the
Government in the Australian Parliament, and this would
not now happen anywhere in the world. It's not been
possible, for instance, in Britain for the House of
Lords to do this since 1911.
QUESTION: Supposing they do force an election on these grounds?
PIM : Oh, well when you say force an election, it is for me to
advise the Governor-General whether there should be an
election fLo--the House of Representatives or when he should
ask the State Governors to issue writs for an election for
half the Senate. That can be done at any time between
now and the end of June when there has to be an election
Kfor half the Senate. Or it's my job to advise the
Governor-General whether there should be a double dissolution,
an election for the whole of the Senate as well as the
House of Representatives.
,, JESTIOW: Nowi the Liberal, th olto seems to be basing its
hopes on a double taxation system. Do you think that
will catch votes?
PM No, I think this will lose votes because don't -' believe
that Australians want to go back to the ' system. '. which
applied in Australia before the war, and which still
applies in Cana'aa. This system where you have Federal
income taxes, evarybody in Australia has to pay them,
but on top of -t:-at the-people in each State have to pay an
additional State income tax. And -in Canada still, and in
K A ustralia before the war, this meant that the people
paid diffe:: ent taxes in each State. For instance, the
big States like New South Wales and Victoria paid a lower
rate of State income tax; all the other States, including
Queensland, pain a higher rate of State income tax. The only people
who benefited were the people in Canberra, because they didn't
have to pay State tax. So that's the reason why Sir Gordon
Chalk, the Liberal leader here, the Treasurer, and people
like Kevin Cairns, one of the Liberals MHR's from Queensland,
have expressed such misgivings about this proposal to go
back to double taxation. It's really a system of unequal
taxation.
QUESTION: Thank you Mr WNThitlam 



PRIE N] INISTER' S Q{ ANNiJ -7 BRADCAST BRISaANE, 4 CC FOBER 1975
Last week I told you how the Federal and
Liberal leaders had boycotted the Australian Constitutional
Convention in M* elbourne, and on the opening day had held
a press conference on the other side of the road to
release a policy on federalism. Over the last week,
people have come to realise that this policy on federalism
is really a policy on taxation; it is a proposal to
abandon the system of uniform taxation and to introduce
a system of double taxation, of unequal taxes throughout
Australia. It's a proposal to abandon the system of
uniform taxation which was supported by all other
Prime Ministers,. Labor, Chifley, Liberal, Menzies, Holt,
Gorton and McMahon, never criticised by the Liberals
when they were in office, and to go back to the old
pre-war system where there was the Federal income tax
and on top of that a different State income tax in every
State. Now this would be the end of indexation. How
could you index seven different taxes? It would be the
end of the great tax reform which my Government has
introduced in this year's Budget; this great reform which
means that every taxpayer gets a smaller tax bill and
where everybody gets rebates of equal value in the dollar,
whatever his income. The comparison is made with Canada,
and Canada shows what would happen in Australia if we
went back to this double system of taxation. In Canada,
the provinces with the biggest population and the richest
resources pay the smallest provincial income tax;-
on the other hand, the provinces with the smallest
population and witLh the poorest resources, they pay the
highest provincial income tax, and that's what used to
hanpen in Australia; it's what would happen again.
Now ' no wonder that the Liberals are very
up-enthusiastic about it this week. The Premier of
New South Wales, Mr Lewis, has said that no one really
knows what the scheme is all about. The Liberal leader
in Queensland, the Treasurer, Sir Gordon Chalk, has
expressed his reservations about it. A Liberal M. P.
from Queensland, Mr Kevin Cairns, is quite rightly
worried that the scheme would dissadvantage the smaller
States. To quote him: " All Australians with a sense
of equity would ask: Who pays and who gets the benefits?"
Mr Gorton, the for-mer Liberal Prime Minister, points out
that every taxpayer would receive a demand varying in each
State the tax over and above what they would pay in
Federal taxation. And Senator Steele Hall, the last
Liberal Premier off South Australia, has denounced the scheme.
Now not only is this Liberal policy on federalism
a proposal to have double taxation and unequal income
taxation in Australia, it also involves fragmenting the
initiatives my Gcverninent has taken to help local government.
The amount of local government revenues coming from the
Federal Government nas risen during my Government's term
of, office from half of one percent to over six percent.
And these grants are made on the recoimmendations of a
Grants Comassion, an expert body under a Supreme Court IV, 
Judge. The Liberals would break up the whole of this scheiie.
They would continue a Federal rants cominission; on top
of that they'd have six separate State grants commissions.
This would be bureaucracy run mad. Now after further
consideration of only one week, Libe-ral confusion on
the subject, I've no doubt that the Australian people
will not tolerate a Liberal policy on federalism which
is really, in blunt terms, a policy to introduce double
taxation in Australia; to have varying State taxes.-
only Canberra would have the one tax, they're the only
people who'd benefit from it and to abandon Federal
assistance for local government. The public will not
tolerate double taxation, unequal taxes, neglected
local government. 



EMBARGO: 5 PM
PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST MR FRASER'S DOUBLE TAX PLAN T
SUNDAY 5 OCTOBER 1975
I doubt if there has ever been a more muddled and
dangerous set of policies put forward by the Opposition than
Mr Fraser's latest brainchild on State and Federal taxes.
I say " Mr Fraser's brainchild", though it's well known that
the scheme was dreamt up by Senator Carrick, a Liberal Party
Senator from New South Wales, and seems to have been adopted
by the Opposition with very little thought. It's all been
dressed up as a policy on federalism which is a nice vague
term but in reality it's a policy on taxation. And this is
the extraordinary thing: while Mr Fraser is always talking
about the burden on the taxpayer, he's now telling us that if
a Liberal Government came to power, it would allow the States
to impose income tax on every Australian in addition to the
normal income tax that all of us pay now.
In other words, it's a policy for double taxation.
W Mr Fraser wants to overturn the whole uniform tax system which
has served Australia well under Governments of every political
colour since early in World War 11. On top of our normal income
tax, we would all be paying income tax levied at the whim of.
Mr Lewis, Mr Hamer, Mr Bjelke-Petersen and the rest.
You would imagine that any party introducing a
policy as extraordinary as this would at least show some
enthusiasm for it themselves. In fact, the Opposition and
the Premiers are well ahd truly split over the Fraser plan.
The New South Wales Premier Mr Lewis, has said that no one
really knows what the scheme is all about. Sir Gordon Chalk,
the Liberal Treasuzer of Queensland, has expressed his
reservations. Mr Kevin Cairns, a Queensland Federal Liberal
member, is quite rightly worried that the scheme would
disadvantage the sma~ ller States. As Mr Cairns said, and
I quote his words: * All Australians with a sense of equity
would ask who pays and who gets the benefits?" Mr Gorton,
a former Liberal Prime Minister, points out that every taxpayer
would receive a demand varying in each State for tax " over
and above what they would pay in Federal taxation."
Senator Steele Hall a former Liberal Premier of South Australia
has denounced the scheme, and so has Mr Dunstan, the most
experienced and successful Premier in Australia.
So all told it's not surprising that the Liberals
are soft-pedalling on their latest plan. For when we look at
it closely we can see how hopeless and defective it is. The
idea seems to be to give the States a guaranteed share of income
tax revenue, and if that isn't enough, they could raise extra
revenue themselves. But what revenue would there be for the
States to share in, in the first place? Only a month ago,
in his Budget speech, Mr Fraser promised tax indexation. The
effect of tax indexation would be to reduce the revenues going
to the Federal Govern-ment. There would be a smaller share for
the States, whose own taxes would have to be steep indeed.
Mr Fraser's policies a month ago are completely contradicted by
his latest scheme. 
-2-
We can see what would happen by looking at the
situation in Canada, where the Federal Government and the
Governments in the different provinces all raise their own
income tax. I happen to admire a lot of things about Canada,
but their tax system has undoubtedly penalised the poorer parts
of the country. The poorest provinces all pay the highest
provincial taxes; people in the richest provinces pay the
smallest provincial taxes. That was exactly what happened
in Australia when the States raised income taxes before
the war, and it's the very reason why the old system was
abandoned in favour of uniform taxation.
My Government has no intention of allowing the
smaller and less populous States like Tasmania and Western
Australia to come off badly compared with the bigger and richer
States. Under this Government's policies all States get a
fair deal; all Australian pay the same taxes. There are
no second-class citizens under a Labor Government. It's quite
clear that the Fraser plan has been devised as a sop to the
Liberal Governments of New South Wales and Victoria. Because
of the Lewis Government's incompetence and its refusal to
co-operate with Australian Government policies, it wants to
grab more money at the expense of other Australians to swell
its own coffers. Mr Fraser has never specified how much Commonwealth
tax would be given to the States as a right, and he has
flatly refused to say what the share for local government
would be. We are asked to take the whole thing on trust.
You can imagine what a regular battle we would have: instead
of arguing each year what their actual share of revenue
would be as the States do now they would be arguing what
the percentage share focr everyone of them would be. The small
States would be arguaing with the bigger ones and they would
all be arguing wit:-Canberra.
The people who would be best off under this system
are the residents of Canberra, who would pay no State taxes
at all. They'd be first-class citizens. The other lucky
people would be those in wealthy suburbs where local councils
have adequate revenues. They'd at least be second-class
citizens. All other Australians, those in small States,
in remote country towns, in run-down suburbs of the big cities,
would get third-class treatment. That's the reality of the
Fraser plan inequality and more inequality. The proposals
don't guarantee an appropriate share of funds for States
where local governm-ts find it hard to raise revenues and
meet their expenses.
At present this problem is met by the Grants
Commission, which can build up the revenues of the needy States
and ensure that extra-Funds go direct to local government
areas that are falling behind. The Grants Commission, under
reforms introduced my Government, has done an excellent
job in helping loca-2 councils. When the Liberals were last
in office, less than halfL of one per cent of local government
money camne direct from the Federal Government. Now the
Australian Governmnt see that more than six per cent comes
to local government through the Grants Commission. The Fraser
alternative to this system incredible as it sounds is to set
/ 3 
-3-
up seven grants commissions the one we have now and one
for each State. Imagine it seven grants commissions
and this from a party that complains about bureaucratic
waste! The six new State bodies would have the job of
handing out a little extra money to the local councils on
top of their basic grants, but there would be no way of
seeing that the money they handed out was adequate in the
first place, or that the States who need most money would
get it. The Opposition doesn't tell us what the basic
grants for local councils would be based on, how they would
be arrived at, or by whom. It's all incredibly vague.
No wonder Mr Lewis is baffled by it all.
The only thing that's clear from the Fraser plan
is that every Australian would be at the mercy of a host
of tax-grabbing authorities. There'd be State income
taxes and council rates as well as the usual income tax.
S And where would that leave my Government's proposals for
tax reform for big tax savings for the family man and
a fair system of rebates for everyone? The tax reforms in
our latest Budget are essential to the battle for wage
indexation. Unions will only accept wage indexation if
S they know they will be saving in the tax on their take-home
pay. Introduce three levels of tax and these savings and
reforms will disappear. Indexation will collapse, and the
battle against inflation will be vastly more difficult.
Sound, uniform, national economic management in Australia
would be almost impossible. It's not surprising that
many Liberals themselves are confused and dismayed by
Mr Fraser's double tax system. I'm quite certain that the
Australian people won't have a bar of it. 



Press Statement No. 569
6 October 1975
TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
The Prime Minister, the Hon. Whitlam, and the
Premier of the Hon. T. L. Lewis, announced today that
formal agreement had been reached for the transfer from the
State to the Commonwealth of responsibility for certain
aboriginal affairs in N. S. W. with effect from ist July 1975.
Under the new arrangements, the Australian Government
will assume increased responsibility for the development of
the Aboriginal people of New South Wales, including responsibilities
for the planning, co-ordination and financing of activities
designed to promote their economic, social and cultural
advancement. Except for a small nucleus of staff to handle State
responsibilities under the arrangements, the staff employed in
the N. S. W. Directorate of Aboriginal Affairs will transfer to
the Australian Public Service.
Under the arrangements, the N. S. W. Housing Commission
will continue to administer special housing for aboriginals
throughout the State while the N. S. W. Minister for Youth, Ethnic
and Community Affairs, Mr S. G. Mauger, and the N. S. W. Aboriginal
Lands Trust will be responsible for housing on reserves.
The Prime Minister and the Premier said that there
would continue to be close co-operation between their two
Governments aimed at improving the welfare of the Aboriginal
people of N. S. W. and the new agreement would help further this
objective. CANBERRA. A. C. T.
I 



PRIME MINSTER Press Statement No. 570
7 October 1975
ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
The Prime Minister today announced that the Governor-
:,? teal had agreed to an amendment to the Administrative
i,-._ ngements Order to transfer to the Department of Urban
-egional Development those property and survey functions
zh were formerly carried out by the Department of Services
11z Property. The Governor-General also agreed to the name
t-e Department of Services and Property being changed to
-; rtment of Administrative Services. The former Minister
Services and Property, the Honourable F. M. Daly, M. P.,
vs subsequently appointed Minister for Administrative Services.
The Minister for Administrative Services will be
-s: onsible for:
Elections and referendums
Provision of accommodation, staff and other
facilities for members of the Australian
Parliament other than in Parliament House.
Australian Government transport and storage
facilities in the States and storage and
transport of goods in the A. C. T.
Australian Government purchasing policy;
the procurement and purchase of goods and
services as required for Australian Government
purposes, the maintainenance of stocks of
any such goods and the disposal of surplus goods.
Advisory services on fire protection matters.
Staff involved in the property and survey functions
th be transferred to the Department of Urban and Regional
]-=( ebpment.. A. C. T. 



PRIME MAI~ iSTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 572
October 1975
THE RANGER URANIUM PROJECT IN THE N4ORTHIERN TERRITORY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlaxn, the Minister for
Minerals and Energy, Mr Connor, the. Treasurer, Mr Hayden
and Mr Mackay of Electrolytic Zinc Company of Australasia
Ltd and Mr Proud of Peko Mines Ltd announced today the
results of the discussions they have been having on the
Ranger Uranium Project in the Northern Territory.
On 31 October 1974 the Mini er for I inerals and
Energy announced that agreempnt had b4nreach with
Peko Mines Ltd and Electrolytic Zincqc, kpany o
Australasia Ltd on the terms for the financing and construction
of the Ranger uranium project in the Northern Territory.
Peko/ EZ subsequently sought further discussions
with the Government to clarify in their mind the meaning
of some of the terms agreed to in October of last year.
These discussions have been held for the past three days
and understanding has been reached with Peko/ EZ on the
principles of the arrangements necessary for the development
of the Ranger project. These very productive discussions
with Peko/ EZ clear the way for further development of
the project. The next steps will be a series of
discussions between Government and company representatives
for the purpose of drawing up detailed formal agreements
covering the project.
Further development of the project is subject,
of course, to the outcome of the Ranger Uranium Environmental
Inquiry headed by Mr Justice Fox.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



Lp
Jj, USTRALr. -6
PIRI ME MWISTEER Press Statement No. 571
October 1975
HIGH COURT JUDGEMENTS
This morning the High Court delivered judgements
on a Queensland Act of Parliament and three Australian Acts
of Parliament. It declared that the Act of the Queensland
Parliament was not valid and the Acts of the Australian
Parliament were valid.
The significance of the judgement on the first of
the Australian Acts of Parliament is that it confirms that the
people of the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital
Territory can elect two Senators to represent them and vote
for them. Those Senators will be elected on the first occasion
that there is a general election for the Federal Parliament,
whether it is an election for half the Senate or whether it is
an eleb&amp; tilohn"' fo r the'-Iiouse -of.. R6presentat~ ives. fitis an
e -, for~ lhlf ~ t~ Snt~ hyiiak of., ice , f roin the
day that the poll is declared. And, incidentially, the
successors to Senator Bunton and Senator Field would take
office, not from the 1st of July next from but the day the
poll was declared. T'he sianificance of the judgement on the other federal
Acts, concerns the principle of one vote, one value. Therehave
been suggestions that the Australian Government should not
have sought to distribute the States on this basis of one vote,
one value, because these Acts were under challenge in the
High Court. The High Court has now said that these Acts were
valid. Accordingly the distribution of the States on the
principle of one vote, one value, should go ahead.
There have been some ironies in the question of
representation of the Territories in the Senate, in that when
these Bills were first debated two and a half years ago, the
Liberals opposed them but the Country Party in the House of
Representatives supported them. In the Senate the Liberal Senators
and the Country Party Senators all opposed them. On the two
subsequent occasions when the Bill for Territory Representation
in the Senate was passed by the House of Representatives the
Opposition didn't record votes against -it, but in the Senate on
those two further occasions every Liberal and Country Party
Senator opposed the Bill. At the joint sitting the Liberal and
Country Parties opposed the Bill. There is obviously a
difference of opinion in * the Country Party on this question.
The Bill was challenged by the Queensland Premier, a member of
the Country Party, in the High Court although supported by
members of the Country Party in the Hour, of Representatives 
-2-
on the only occasion when a vote was taken in the House of
Representatives. The Country Party Premier of Queensland
sought to denyr the right of the Country Party to have a vote
for the Country Party MHember for the House of Representatives
for the N-, orthern Territory or to have a senator for the Northern
Territory at all.
The Liberal governments of New South Wales and Victoria
supported the Queensland government in its challenges to the
one vote, one value bills which were first introduced in
March 1973.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. &gt; A jI 1 



PRIlME MW7C PRESS STATEMENT NO. 573
12 October 1975
COAL EXPORTS
The Prime Minister today announced the outcome
of a review, by the Resources Committee of Cabinet, of the
future development of the Australian coal industry.
The Prime Minister recalled that last year
Mr Connor had given an assurance to the Japanese steel
industry that Japanese needs of Austral~ ian coal would be
met. Further talks earlier this year with the steel mills
indicated their intention to purchase the maximum quantity
of coking coal from Australia, on condition that such coal
is competitive and of acceptable quality. The mills have
indicated the broad requirement of some 44-49 million tonnes
of Australian coal per annum by 1980. This represents
an additional 15-20 million tonnes per annum over the
current level of contracts from Australia. In addition,
the electric power industry in Japan has indicated a
requirement of 15 million tonnes per annum of steaming coal
by 1985, of which a substantial quantity is expected to be
purchased from Australia.
The Prime Minister said that if these additional
tonnages are to be available there is an obvious need for
some new coal development to take place. New projects which
are at present planned by various companies include Hail
Creek, Nebo, Norwich Park, Blair Athol, West Cliff, West
Ballanibi, and Bargo. He said that the Government's view
was that while it will continue to exercise an overall
supervision of the coal industry, particularly to avoid over-supply,
there would be a prima facie presumption that export
approval would be given to projects which obtain sales
contracts satisfactory to the Government, including its pricing
policy requirements. New projects will, of course, also
have to meet the Government's other policy objectives,
including the foreign investment guidelines announced by the
Primte Minister in his statement on 24 September. 
2.
The Government anticipates that sufficient
new projects will get underway in the near future to meet
the expected increased demand as it falls due. Hail Creek
has already been approved subject to foreign investment
conditions being satisfied. As a further step in that
direction, subject again to certain foreign investment
conditions and to exchange control conditions being met,
the Government is prepared to give the necessary export
approvals to enable the Nebo project in the Bowen Basin
of Queensland to proceed. And subject to satisfactory
contracts being obtained, the Government also stands
ready to approve such other projects as can meet the
Government's foreign investment policy objectives. It
would wish to see existing mines continue to play a viable
role in meeting the present export demand level. In this
context, the Government welcomes the assurance by the
Japanese steel industry that, in the event of a reduction
in their level of coking coal consumption, purchases
of Australian coking coals under contract would not be
reduced. It expects that in allocating purchasing contracts
the Japanese industry will pay due'regard to the needs for
a balanced and healthy development of the Australian coal
industry. CANBERRA, A. C. T. I
I 


PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCASTTHE THREAT TO LEGAL AIDSUNDAY
12 October&nbsp;1975
You may have missed the news this week -all&nbsp;too often these things get scant atte-ntion in the pressthatthe Opposition has decided to delay the passageof the Legal Aid Bill through the Parliament. Theyare adopting the old obstructive technique of referringthe bill to a Senate committee. What they are reallytrying to do is block the legal aid scheme by abackdoor method. They know the scheme is popular; theyknow the great public demand for it. But they haven'tthe courage to vote against it on the floor of the Senate.I'll return to the legal aid scheme in amoment, but first, it's worth looking more closely atthis Opposition tactic of referring bills to Senatecommittees. They do it all the time. it's a familiarand characteristic method of Liberal obstruction.They will neither vote for a bill nor vote against it.For example, our bill for a national compensationscheme was held up for eight months while a Senatecommittee made a report. An even worse example concernedlegislation to clamp do 4n on lurks and fiddles inthe share mparket and securities business. The originsof this go back f~ ve years to 1970 when the Senateset up an inquiry into share trading swindles duringthe mining boom. When their repor t finally appearedwe promptly drafted legislation to deal with the problem.The Opposition majority in the Senate referred the billto yet another Senate committee for a report. Thatwas last April. Since then we've seen the crash of oneshare broking firm, Patrick Partners. now much more0 evidence is needed of in~ tability in the-' stockbroker..business how.* many more shareholders must burn theirfingers -before our legislation goes through?In view of all this I suppose we shouldn'tbe too surprised by the opposition's attitude to the LegalAid Bill. After all, Mr Fraser himself promised in hisBudget speech that if the Liberals got back into officethey would abandon legal aid entirely. They would abolishit. Why the Opposition should want a Senate inquiryinto something they want to abolish is difficult tounderstand. The fact is that despite Mr Fraser, quite anumber of Liberal senators have expressed support for theLegal Aid Office and several Liberal members have actuallyasked for legal aid offices to be established in their ownelectorates. For my part, I regard legal aid as one ' ofthe most important achievements of the Labor Government.It was set up to give general advice and assistance toanyone who needs it, to anyone with a legal problem whomay lack the means to go to a lawyer. We've been settingUP these offices in cities, suburbs and towns all over
2.Australia. They operate in conjunction with localcomnunitv and welfare organisations. The atmosphereis friendly and relaxed and discussions are absolutelyconfidential. Just how badly the service was needed canbe seen from the public's response during the pasttwo years. It has been quite phenomenal. It's truethat many of those who use the service are peoplesusoicious or a i4ttle fearful of the law, poorpeople, inarticulate or poorly educated peoole, andmigrants with lancuage difficulties. Many officeshave lawyers who speak the language of a localethnic group. But generally speaking, clientsrepresent a very wide cross-section of the people.All told, the Legal Aid Office has provided assistanceto 130,000 Australians. That's a figure to rememberwhen Mr Fraser talks of abolishing the scheme:130,000 Australians have been helped in the past twovears, and the office is still not fully established.Not long ago there was a national opinion poll on= eonle's attitudes to the Legal Aid Office. Ninety-four= ercent of those questioned saw a need for a legalaid service, and 75 percent ( including 71 percnet ofLiberal-Country Party voters) could see nothing wrongwith the present scheme. If ever th e was a. servicedemanded and needed by the Australia eople,; is theAustralian Legal Aid Office. II want to make it clear that despite theobstruction of the Opposition the legal aid servicewill continue. We introduced legislation this yearto establish the office as an independent statutoryauthority. It is this legislation which the Oppositionis now blocking, but their obstruction will not preventthe service from operating in its present form as abranch of the Attorney-General's Department. We prefert the idea of a statutory authority because we believethe office should be independent and seen to beindependent of the Government. Don't get the ideathat we're taking over all the work of lawyers andlimiting their opportunities. With a very few exceptionswe've had the warm support of the legal profession insetting up this scheme. In many cases we have foundthat legal aid services are best provided by utilizingthe talents of the private legal profession.During the past two years my Government has shownits determination to reform and modernise the law on awhole range of issues. I've mentioned the Corporationsand Securities Bill. Last year we brought in ourhistoric Trade Practices legislation, which is alreadyprotecting consumers and making business more competitive.And again, as you know, Parliament has passed the FamilyLaw Bill, which establishes a single new ground fordivorce and sets up a Family Court of Australia to handleall matrimonial matters. Those are just three of the thingswe have done in the field of law reform.
3.it's not much use reforming -he law ifd... ry people have no opportunity to resort to thelaw and take action through the courts where necessary.Perfect law and well-organised courts are of littleuse if the -Decple who most need the protection of thelaw cannot afford access to the courts. We've alwayst aken the view that citizens in a free society have anabsolute right to equality before the law. For toolong many Australians have been denied access to oursystem of justice because they could not afford these. rVices of lawyers or were not aware of their rightsu-der the law. The Legal Aid Office puts and end to thisinjustice. Just as Medibank ensures that the servicesof the medical profession are available to all whoneed them. he Legal Aid Office ensures that legal servicesare available to all who need them. Just as theLiberals have threatened to demolish Medibank, they nowpromise to demolish legal aid. Their behaviour in theSenate makes it quite plain that they object to legalaid in principle. None of us knows when we may somez-Le need legal aid. The Liberals have shown theircontempt for the thousands upon thousands of Australianswho have sought the help of the Legal Aid Office andfor all of us who may some time stand in need of legalassistance or advice. ti



PRM EA NVUI S 73 ER
PRESS STATEINENT NO. 574
14 October 1975
MR CONNOR
Today I advised the Governor-General to accept
the resignation of Rex Connor as Minister for Minerals
and Energy. I took this course in order to uphold a precise
and fundamental principle of parliamentary government.
The principle is that the Parliament must be able to
accept assurances given to it by a minister, and if
those assurances prove to be misleading, the minister.
concerned must be held responsible.
Last Thursday, in answer to a question from the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition, I gave a written reply:
" I am assured by the Minister for Minerals and Energy
that all coiminications of substance between him and
Mr Khemlani were tabled by him on 9 July 1.975."
Yesterday I received from solicitors in Melbourne
a copy of a statutory declaration signed by Mr Khemlani
and copies of a number of telex messages between Mr Khemlani's
office in London and the office of the Minister for Minerals
and Energy. In my judgment these messages did constitute
" communications of substance" between the Minister and
Mr Kheiulani. I was therefore driven to conclude that I had been
misled by Mr Connor and that, in consequence, my own
answer to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition had been
misleading. It was in these circumstances that I advised
the Governor-General to accept M4r Connor' s resignation.
I have made it clear throughout the life of this
Government that there is one standard which, if departed
from, must carry the heaviest penalty. It is a principle
on which the integrity of Parliament itself depends.
There was, I believe, a departure from that principle. 
I want to make the clearest possible distinction
between the conduct of Rex Connor in his capacity as
Minister, the manner in which he fulfilled his duties,
including all his involvement in overseas loan raisings
and this one precise principle. It is not the contents
of those telex messages . which constitutes-any . breach
of'propriety. It . was his failureto tell me about them.
It is because that failure led to a-breach of parliamentary
standards last week that I accepted the resignation of
! the Minister. At no time has there been any allegation of
improper conduct, of dishonest conduct, of reprehensible
conduct,-of illegal or corrupt conduct by any member
of the Government. No such allegation or charges were
made at the special sitting to discuss this matter on
-9 July. ' No such charges were made in the Senate for all
the Senate's abuse of Parliamentary privilege.
No such charges are made now. My own painful duty in this
matter has been twice to defend and preserve a great
and fundamental-parliamentary convention. It is
because of my insistence on preserving . such standards and
conventions that a great minister . and a close . friend
and colleague has fallen.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



if;
PRIUVE -PAISTER Press Statement No. 575
14 October 1975
CONSUMER PROTECTION
The Prime Minister today announced that following
an amendment to the Administrative Arrangements Order approved
by the Governor-General, the Minister for Science and Consumer
Affairs, the Hon. Clyde Cameron, has assumed
responsibility, for administration of consumer protection
provisions ( Part V) of the Trade Practices Act.
The Minister for Science and Consumer Affairs
will administer these matters and the staff of the Trade
Practices Commission which has been handling consumer protection
matters in Canberra and all State capitals are being transferred
from the Trade Practices Commission to the Department of
Science and Consumer Affairs for this purpose.
These arrangements consolidate under the
Minister for Science and Consumer Affairs the Government's
policies in the field of consumer protection. The Government
contemplates that ultimately consumer protection functions
will be undertaken by the Australian Consumer Protection
Authority. A Bill to establish that Authority is to be
introduced into the Parliament today.
The Trade Practices Commission will now ce~ ase
to handle any consumer protection matters. Current investigations
and proceedings will be continued by the transferred staff.
All enquiries on consumer protection matters should now be
directed to the Department of Science and Consumer Affairs.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PREIM ERAINSTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 576
October 1975
PRIME MINISTER'S STATEMENT ON A. B. C. TELEVISION
Recall these words:
" The basic principle which I adhere to strongly
is that a Government that continues to have a
majority in the House of Representatives has
a right to expect that it will be able to
govern."
Fine words.. fine pririciple.. The basic principle
of our Australian parliamentary democracy. That man of
principle is the present Leader of the Opposition, Mr
Fraser. He said those words just a few days after he
replaced MLr Snedzen. as Leader of the Opposition. He has
asserted that. principle again and again. He knows the
course of honour, of decency, of democracy. Yet today
he has made statements which can only mean that he is willing
to overturn his principles and overturn the basis of ' our
system. He has said that he intends to use the accidental
numbers he thinks he controls in the Senate to delay
passing the Budget until the morney runs out.
In other words he intends to produce chaos in order to
prevent the Government being able to govern., This is
not just what Sir Robert Menzies has described as a
falsification of democracy, not just the pursuit of what
Sir Robert Menzies described as " the purely opportunist demands
of those who find constitutional convention irksome"
it is constitutional revolution.
The House of Representatives the people's
House alone determines who shall govern Australia.
Only seventeen months ago, the people for the second time
in less than eighteen months, elected the Australian
Labor Party to govern for a further three years.
I state again the basic rule of our parliamentary
system: Governments are made and unmade in the House of
Representatives in the people's House. The Senate cannot,
does not, and must never determine who the Government shall be. 
2.
That principle has been upheld since
federation. ' t has never been broken or challenged
except during this Government's life. It has been
scrupulously observed on at least twenty occasions
since federation when the Opposition had the numbers
in the Senate to reject Supply.
our majority in the House of Representatives
has never been threatened. The House of Representatives
has passed the Budget. Bud~ gets and all money bills must
originate in the House of Representatives, The Senate
cannot even amend them but it can delay them. And
this is what Mr Fraser proposes. And how will he do
Q this? By using the numbers in a stacked Senate which
is not even the same Senate which the people elected
only seventeen months ago.
It is in the words of Mr Killen, the Liberal
0 Member for Moreton in Queensland " a tainted Senate".
In May 1974 the people of Australia elected a Senate
in which the Government had twenty-nine Senators
and the Liberal and Country Party also had twenty-nine
Senators, there were two Independents. The Labor Partythe
Government received 200,000 votes in the elections
for the Senate over all our opponents combined.
But because two State Premiers flouted another great
constitutional convention the Government now has only
twenty-seven Senators. ./ 3 
3.
It is this unrepresentative Senate, this tainted
Senate, which Mr Fraser intends tco use as a weapon to strike
down the democratically elected Government of Australia
to render it incapable of carrying out the program which
it was elected to carry out.
A week ago it was generally thought that Mr Fraser
would stick to his principles. Last weekend the Liberal
Party Council the faceless men off the Liberal Party met
in Canberra and apparently gave Mr Fraser his ridingr
instructions. I make it clear that the Government will not yield
to pressure. We will not yield to blackmail. We will ' not
be panicked. Wie will not turn overT the Government of this
country to vested interests, pressure groups and newspaper
proprietors whose tactics would destroy the standards and
traditions of parliamrentary government.
The business of Government will go on.
Mr Fraser has no credible answers -to the great
problems that Australia shares with all other comparable
countries. As the elected Government we will continue our
fight against the effects of world-wide recession and
unemployment. For that reason our Budget must be given a
chance to work. There must be no disruption to the process
of economic recovery.
Let there be no mistake about the gravity of
Mr Fraser's intention. Parliamentary democracy is a
complex and fragile thing around the world it is under
challenge. And'now it is being challenged in Australia
by the very man who professes to be a man of principle. 



I7
Press Statement No. 577
16 October 1975
GRAHAM4 PERKIN
I knew Graham Perkin well and was shocked and saddened
to hear of his death.
He was an outstanding journalist and a brilliant editor
whose integrity and professionalism and extraordinary capacity
for work made the Age one of the great newspapers of the world.
Australian journalism can ill afford tbeloss of a man of
his ability and independence of mind.
I offer my heartfelt sympathy to his widow and family.
CANBERRA_~ A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIM11E M INISTER, AT THE PARLIM ENTARY LUNCHEON
FOR THE PRIM E MINISTER OFM14ALAYSIA, 16 OCTOBER 1975
On each of my nine visits to your capital
since 1962 as Deputy Leader of the Opposition, as Leader
of the Opposition, as Prime Minis ter of: Australia, you have
always received me and I have been able to draw on your
wisdom and experience. I have valued that highly and
equally value the warmth of your friendship. It may be
that in Australia we cannot welcome you with that natural
grace, the instinctive elegance, the unaffected charm which
is the characteristic of the Malaysian people. But there
is nothing lacking in our warmth of feeling in our welcome
to you and Toh Puan Rahah and our warmth and goodwill
towards your people and your nation.
My pleasure in welcoming you here on your first
Prime Ministerial visit derives in considerable part from
the honour I find in being host to a leader who must rank
as South East Asia's longest serving and most dedicated
and industrious servant of his people. For 20 years from
the beginning of national independence, you have served as
a Minister. Under your guidance the last five years have
been years of marked growth and development within Malaysia.
I recall my previous visits to your country
not only because -of the pleasure the memory holds for me
but as a measure of the remarkable and beneficial changes
which have occurred in our region in that period. in
1962 ASEAN could not have existed, could hardly have been
contemplated. Confrontation has given way to regional
cooperation which as made ASEAN one of the world's most
truly effective regional associations. All the nations
of our region except our commuon great reighbour Indonesia
refused with varying degrees of hostility and ignorance,
to recognise the reality of China. A thirty-year civil war
in Indo-China was in a temporary lull before its bloodiest
and most catastrophic renewal. The concept of a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality for the region would have
been dismissed as dangerous nonsense as indeed it still
is in certain quarters.
As Prime Minister, Tun, you have been very much
in the vanguard of those who have had the foresight to
take positive steps in the developments which have ended
old hostilities and the old sterilities. You led the way
in recognising the reality of China and others have followed
this lead. And now with the end of the Vietnamese and
Cambodian wars your Government is actively working for
harmony amkongst all the nations of South East Asia. I
cannot but agree that the end of the war in Indo-China
provides the region with its first real opportunity to
achieve peace, progress and stability. You are to be
commended for making cooperation and conciliation the
basis of your relations with the new Indo China G overnments. ./ 2 
2.
You realistically ackanxledge , I know, that the
process of reconciliation will not be without its
frustrations. But you will persevere. In the end
trust and goodwill will be rewarded with the development
of lasting links and mutual respect. You have
urged ZOPPAN. Our region must not be the area of
confrontation and competition between the Great Powers.
It is gratifying to reflect upon our
exchanges in Kuala Lumpur in January 1974, when the
0 war in Indo China still raged, and note that many
of the hopes we held then for the future of the region
have come to be fulfilled.
The relationship between our two countries
today is deepening and widening. Trade, investment,
development assistance, defence cooperation, participation
in common regional organisations and in particular,
the Commonwealth of Nations, and student exchange, and
tourism, make our relationship meaningful, fruitful,
living. We share common inheritance of institutions,
Q particularly those relating to parliamentary democracy
and the rule of law.
Q We share the Federal system and a
bicameral system, we share to a varying degree the experience
of the difficulties of both. You, Prime'Minister,
may even have experienced the passing pangs which come
from the pretensions of provincial satraps.
There may even be occasional murmurs against the cerntralists
in Kuala Lumpur as there are against your counterparts
in Canberra. Democracy, particularly in a federal system,
is extraordinarily complex and extraordinarily fragile.
Around the world it is going through its most challenging
time. It is under challenge in nations with a
relatively brief tradition of Parliamentary democracy,
and in those with a long tradition. We are two of the 
3.
handful of Parliamentary democracies left in our*
region. There are those in both our countries, who
in their different ways, are challenging the system,
challenging the tradition. The Aalaysian national
Parliament is only twenty years old. It would be
natural that such a nation would look to nations
with a more mature Parliamentary system, an older
tradition, well-entrenched democracy conventions,
as an example nations like Australia, Parliaments
like the Australian Parliament. It would be
appalling if we were unable to get t-hat example.
You, Mr Prime M1iniser, have battled valiantly in your
country to uphold the essence of democracy. You
have done your part. May I say in this Parliamentary
gathering, as one Parliamentarian-to another, I
intend to play mine. 



I?
AUSTRALIA Speech by
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
Prime Minister
on
The Constitutional Crisis and The Whitlam
Government
( From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 16 October 1975)
Mr WHITLAM ( Werriwa-Prime Minister)
( 10.24)-Mr Speaker, I move the resolution:
Considering that this House is the House of the Australian
Parliament from which the Government of Australia is
chosen; Considering moreover that on 2 December 1972 the Austra
lian Labor Party was elected byjudgment of the people to
be the Government of Australia; that on 18 May 1974 the
Australian Labor Party was re-elected by judgment of the
people to be the Government of Australia; and that the Australian
Labor Party continues to have a governing majority
in this House;
Recognising that the Constitution and the conventions of
the Constitution vest in this House the control of the supply
of money to the elected Government;
Noting that this House on 27 August 1975 passed the Loan
Bill 1975 and on 8 October 1975 passed the Appropriation
Bill ( No. 1) 1975-76 and the Appropriation Bill ( No. 2)
1975-76 which, amongst other things, appropriate moneys
for the ordinaiy annual services of the Governiment;
Noting also that on 15 October 1975, in total disregard of
the practices and conventions observed in the Australian
Parliament since Federation, the Leader of the Opposition
announced the intention of the Opposition to delay those
Bills, with the object of forcing an election of this House; that
on 15 October 1975 the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate
announced that the Opposition parties in the Senate
would delay the Bills; and that on IS October 1975 the Senate,
against the wishes of the Government, decided not to
proceed further with consideration of the Loan Bill 1 975:
Considering that the actions of the Senate and of the
Leader of the Opposition will, if pursued, have the most
serious consequences for Parliamentary democracy in
Australia, will seriously damage the Government's efforts to
counter the effect of world-wide inflation and unemployment,
and will thereby. cause great hardship for the Australian
people; 1. This House declares that it has fall confidence in the
Australian Labor Party Government.
2. This House affirms that the Constitution and the conventions
of the Constitution vest in this House the control
of the supply of moneys to the elected Government
and that the threatened action of the Senate constitutes
a gross violation of the roles of the respective Houses of
the Parliament in relation to the appropriation of
moneys.
3. This House asserts the basic principle that a Government
that continues to have a majority in the House of
Representatives has a right to expect that it will be able
to govern.
4. This House condemns the threatened action of the
Leader of the Opposition and of the non-&amp;. overnment
parties in the Senate as being reprehensible and as
constituting a grave threat to the principles of responsible
government and of Parliamentary democracy in
Australia.
5. This House calls upon the Senate'to pass without delay
the Loan Bill 1975, the Appropriation Bill ( No. 1)
1975-76 and the Appropriation Bill ( No. 2) 1975-76.
This motion brings to the formal notice of the
House a situation of grave constitutional crisis
without precedent in the Australian Parliament
and the Australian nation-without modem
precedent in the parliamentary democracies of
the world. That situation arises from statements
made outside this chamber by the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr Malcolm Fraser) yesterday that
the Opposition parties will use their numbers in
the Senate to delay the Government's annual
Appropriation Bills, which have been passed by
this House.
Subsequently the Leader of the Opposition in
the Senate ( Senator Withers) moved, and the 
Senate passed, an amendment to the Loan Bill
1975 that the Bill be not further proceeded with.
It is transparently clear from what he said that
the Opposition proposes to take the unprecedented
step of blocking the Budget of the
democratically elected Government of Australia.
In the face of the Leader of the Opposition's
attempt to sabotage the foundation of our parliamentary
system, this House must, in unmistakeable
terms, make clear its rights. For the rights of
this House are nothing less than the rights of the
Australian people. This House must expose the
political opportunism of the Opposition in the
Senate for what it is. And what it means is constitutional
revolution-the proposition that governments
can be unmade by the Senate and not by
the House of Representatives-the people's
House. Let me recall the words of the Leader of the
Opposition: The basic principle which I adhere to strongly is that a
government that continues to have a majority in the House
of Representatives has a right to expect that it will be able to
govern. He has professed that principle again and
again. He knows the course of honour, of
decency, of democracy. Yesterday he espoused a
course of action which can only mean that he is
willing to overturn his principles and overturn
the basis of our system. There is the really
' reprehensible circumstance' today-a man who
knows what is honourable, yet who does the
thoroughly dishonourable-the exact definition
of a man without honour, a man without principle.
As another self-indulgent wool grower said
in putting personal interests ahead of the
nation's interest, video meliora proboque;
deteriora sequor.
The House of Representatives-the people's
House-alone determines who shall govern
Australia. Only 17 months ago, the people for
the second time in less than 18 months, elected
the Australian Labor Party to govern for a
further 3 years. I state again the basic rule of our
parliamentary system: Governments are made
and unmade in the House of Representatives-in
the people's House. The Senate cannot, does not,
and must never determine who the government
shall be.
The Leader of the Opposition himself has
asserted that basic principle again and again. In
a very real sense he owes his present position to
the assertion of that principle. He wasonly able
to destroy his predecessor because the right
honourable member for Bruce ( Mr Snedden)
had fatally weakened himself by his attempt to
subvert the principle iii April 1974 and his failure to pledge that he would never again be party to
another attempt.
By appearing as the champion of this basic
parliamentary principle the present Leader of
the Opposition drummed up support among Liberal
senators who wanted security of tenure, and
among the business community who wanted
stability in politics more than they wanted a
change of government. That was how he was
able to destroy his leader-the second time he
had destroyed a Liberal leader by posing as a
man of principle. He enjoyed his honeymoon
with the Australian people precisely because he
professed the principle-the principle that the
elected government had the right and responsibility
to govern for its full term of 3 years. This is
the man of principle, the man of honour, who
stood up in this place on 9 March 1971 when he
for the first, but not for the last time, destroyed
his leader and said of the former Liberal Prime
Minister of Australia, the present Independent
member for Higgins ( Mr Gorton) and the next
senator for the Australian Capital Territory:
This man is unfit to be Prime Minister of Australia.
His own reproach will be his own epitaph. And
it will be my exquisite duty soon to ram this message
home to the people of Australia, in terms
that neither they nor the Leader of the Opposition
will ever forget.
The Leader of the Opposition announces with
some pride that departments are running or will
run short of funds. Of course they will run short
of funds. The Leader of the Opposition is refusing
to pass the Appropriation Bills in the Senate
which provide for the ordinary annual services of
the Government. He will be responsible for bills
not being paid, for salaries not being paid, for
utter financial chaos, and this will continue as
long as the Leader of the Opposition refuses to
allow the Senate to pass the Supply already authorised
by this House, the people's House. And
now, like a pyromaniac he dances around the
fire. He will get burnt.
Let us cut through the humbug. The Leader of
the Opposition has been planning this action
ever since he was elected. And all the nonsense
about ' reprehensible circumstances or
extraordinary circumstances' was so much eyewash,
so much a smokescreen for his real intentions.
Look at the terms of the Senate resolution
yesterday-the reasons it gives for delaying Supply,
for not proceeding further with the Budget.
It mentions the Government's overseas loan raising
efforts. There is nothing in that resolution
which raises matters which were not fully known
on 9 July when the House met to thrash this 
whole matter out. Yet neither then nor subsequently
has the Opposition in this House ever
moved a motion of censure or no confidence
upon the Government on this matter, any more
than it has ever been able to bring any specific
charge of illegality or misconduct by the Government
or the Ministers in our negotiations. It is absolutely
plain that the Leader of the Opposition
determined upon his course from the outset, just
as the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate,
Senator Withers, let the cat out of the bag, last
time, when he said:
We embarked on a course some 12 months ago to bring
about a House of Representatives election.
That is, from the time that the people of
Australia had the impertinence to reject the men
born to rule and to elect a Labor Government.
Over the period of 75 years since Federation
there have been 20 occasions on which the
annual Appropriation Bills have come before a
Senate in which the Government did not have a
majority of its own. There has been a similar
number of occasions in respect of the Supplementary
Appropriation Bills and also of the
Supply Bills. Not one of these Bills has ever been
rejected. They number in all 139. 1 seek leave to
table a list of the Bills concerned.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Sinclair-Yes, leave is granted.
Mr WHITLAM-On the other hand, numerous
examples can be given of government
measures other than annual Appropriation and
Supply Bills that have been rejected by the Senate.
In this 29th Parliament alone, in a bare 15
months, 22 Bills have twice been rejected by the
Senate and a further ten have been rejected once,
deferred or unacceptably amended by the Senate.
The contrast between the record of the Senate
over 75 years in respect of Appropriation and
Supply Bills with its treatment of other Bills
points to only one conclusion. The conclusion
must be drawn that the treatment by the Senate
of Appropriation and Supply Bills has reflected a
firm conviction that the. Bills for financing the
annual services of government should not be
rejected. The specious protestation by the Leader of the
Opposition that it is not rejecting the Budget will
fool no one. But it does at least serve to reveal
that even he is conscious of the gross violation of
constitutional principles involved. He shrinks
from calling his action by its true name.
There are compelling reasons why the Opposition
cannot be allowed, in an unscrupulous
grab for political power, to shatter the principles
that have stood for 75 years. Appropriation and Supply Bills can originate only in this House and
the Senate may not amend them for the ordinary
annual services of the government. Responsible
government on the Westminster model, upon
which our system of government is founded,
requires absolutely that the people's House-this
House-through which the Government is
chosen, should hold financial paramountcy over
an upper House. The convention has been clearly
established that the Senate, which has no power
to originate or amend money Bills, shall not
block or reject them either.
The principle I assert is the principle for
which, I am certain, everybody who has stood i~ n
my place in this House would also have stood
firm in the three-quarters of a century that we
have had a National Parliament. Prime Minister
Menzies did. Prime Minister Holt did. Prime
Minister Gorton did and does. I repeat the principle:
The Government is formed in this House
and is answerable to this House and this House
must control financial matters. This has been the
situation in every English speaking democracy.
No other democracy would permit a situation
where an upper House could reject a Budget.
In no other parliamentary democracy has the
elected government been subject to the artificial
pressures and intolerable stress to which this
Government has been subject by the unconstitutional
threat of an election every 6 months.
And that threat has been sustainable only
through the fortuitous, the accidental situation in
the Senate-by the actions of a Senate. described
by, the honourable member for Moreton ( Mr
Killen) as a ' tainted Senate'.
Last night on television the Leader of the Opposition
made 2 remarkable assertions, breathtaking
in their audacious distortion of the truth.
He said that the people of Australia had given his
coalition a majority of senators at the last Senate
election. The truth is of course that at the last
Senate election the People not only recorded
200 000 more votes for the Australian Labor
Party candidates-the. Government-than for all
other Parties represented in the Senate combined,
but elected 29 Labor senators and 29 Opposition
senators and 2 Independents. Because 2
State Premiers flouted another great constitutional
convention, the Government now has
only 27 senators. Yesterday's Senate vote was a
complete distortion of what the people decided
about the Senate in May last year. The second assertion
last night by the Leader of the Opposition
was that the scandalous appointment of a
replacement for the late Senator Milliner by the
Queensland Government was not relevant to 
yesterday's decision. Senator Steele Hall nailed
this once and for all when he said:
Let it be remembered that the Opposition succeeded only
because a Labor senator died. They did it over a dead man's
corpse. If the Premier of Queensland had acted honourably
and constitutionally by appointing a Labor
supporter to hold Senator Milliner's place then
the Opposition's amendment would have had as
many senators voting against it as voting for it.
Yesterday's spurious resolution in the Senate
would have been negated.
The political immorality of the Opposition is
demonstrated further by the grossly improper incitement
of non-Labor State governments to restrain
the Governors of the States from exercising
their duties under the Australian Constitution in
relation to periodic Senate elections. On 24
occasions the Governor-General has suggested
to the Governors of the States the date which
they should set for elections of senators for their
States. On four of those occasions-May 1953,
December 1964, November 1967 and 1970-an
election for the House of Representatives was
not held. On all 24 occasions the State Governors
met the Governor-General's request. The years
1975 or 1976 could see the first time in the 75
years during which Australia has had a national
Parliament, the first of the 25 occasions on which
a Governor-General has put such requests to the
State Governors, that a Premier advises a Governor
to disregard constitutional practice, to fail in
the duty which the Constitution imposes on a
Governor. This outrage would be at the behest of
the Federal Council of the Liberal Party last
Sunday-the faceless men of the Liberal Party.
At this time particularly when constitutional
issues are at stake it ill behoves any representative
of the Crown to cast aside the traditions of
his office and throw in his lot with one or the
other of the political parties in dispute on
national issues. It is a matter of grave concern
that a man in this position can be so careless of
his responsibility, so unconscious of the
precedent, so unthinking as to the danger as the
Governor of Queensland showed himself
yesterday. I have recently had occasion to quote many
authorities on the perils of the course upoA which the Leader of the Opposition has embarked-not
least Sir Robert Menzies who founded his Party.
Let me now quote Quick and Garran, writing at
the time of the founding of the Australian
Parliament: The House or Representatives is not only the national
chamber it is the democratic chamber it is the grand depository
and embodiment or the liberal principles of government
which pervade the entire constitutional fabric. It is the
chamber in which the progressive instincts and popular aspirations
or the people will be most likely to make themselves
first felt by the Constitution, it is expressly
intended to be such a House, and by its organisation and
functions it is best fitted to be the area in which national
progress will find room for development.
And this, with a prescience, prophetic insight,
that Quick and Garran would not have claimed
for themselves, gets to the heart and the root of
this present grave crisis. It is because this
Government has attempted to make this Parliament
the instrument for reform, for long overdue
change, for progress, for the redistribution of
wealth, for the uplifting of the underprivileged,
for the reduction of the privileges of great wealth
and deeply entrenched vested interests, an
instrument towards equality of opportunity for
all Australians, that our opponents and those
vested interests have from the very beginning, as
Senator Withers revealed, embarked on a course
to destroy this Government at the earliest opportunity.
But what they are really doing is destroying
the very basis of parliamentary democracy in
our country.
The Senate resolution talks about ' submitting
to the judgment of the people'. Precisely! This
matter should be submitted to the judgment of
the people. It will be submitted to the judgment
of the people. The issue is the unconstitutional
and undemocratic conduct of a chance majority
in the Senate. The issue is the rejection by the
Senate of a Budget designed to bring great
benefits to this nation. It is the Senate which is on
trial. It is the Senate which will have to submit to
the judgment of the people. It is the Senate which
has rejected the Budget. It is the Senate which
must face the people. Again, in the indelible
words of Senator Steele Hall, it is the Senate, the
Liberal Party and the Liberal leader which, by
the course they are now attempting, have sown
the seeds of their own destruction.
13883/ 75--LI 388/ 75b-yL PAruitnhtoerdit y by the Government Pninter o( Australia 



EI4BA RCO: 8.30 Pm 2
PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH KERRY O'BRIEN ON. FOUR CORNERS
SATURDAY 18 OCTOBER 1975
O'BRIEN: Mr Whitlam at the outset can we ascertain one thing:
is there going to be a half Senate election?
PRIME MINISTER: There well may be; I will1 not be certain
about this until or unless the Senate rejects * the Budget Bills.
At' this stage they have not rejected them. they've just moved
to defer them.
O'BRIEN: Is it as clear cut as that~ that until such time as
they actually reject the Bills, if they just keep delaying and
delaying? PRIME MINISTER: If it becomes clear that from the extent and
the duration of the delays that they're only hedging, that they
are, in effect, rejecting, then it is very likely that I will ask
for there to be a half Senate election.
O'BRIEN: Wouldn't that be a moot point as far as the public is
concernedJ I mean the situation is here, now?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it's a very critical point among the Liberal
and Country Party not maybe among the Country Party but in
the Liberal Party there are very great qualms felt about rejecting
a money Bill. It's never happened in Australia in the Federal.
Parliament yet. And there have been many occasions when the
Government that is, the party with the majority in the House
of Representativeshas not had a majority in the Senate. But
in those circumstances there have been 139 Bills which could
have been rejected by a Senate, where there was an anti-Government
majority, but it's never been done. So they are very reluctant
to come to that crunch.
~ O'BRIEN: Well~ what is your scenario of the next few months?
PRIME MINISTER: All I can be positive about at this stage is
that I will not advise the Governor-General to issue the writs
for the House of Representatives election at the behest of
the Senate. That is, as long as I have a majority in the House
of Representatives.
O'BRIEN: How long can you afford to stall?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, this is two Parties here, each taking up
an attitude; one will have to yield. I will not yield on this
issue. It is central not just for my government but for any
Australian Government from now on,, it is an impossible situation
if the Senate can dictate when there are House of Representatives
elections. I will not cop that.
O'BRIEN: Do you hold out any hope that Mr Frasbr might yet
back down?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not going to speculate on what will happ en
in the Liberal Party. All I'm positive about is, that as long
as I have a ' majority in the House of Representatives I will never
advise the Governor-General to issue writs for a House of
Representatives election at the behest of the Senate. I will stand
firm on that, no question whatever. 
1~ O'BRIEN: What's your own analysis of how a half-Senate election
would go; could you in political reality hope to gain a temporary
majority in the Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. There are six persons who would be in the
Senate from the day that the polls were declared: six persons
who are not there now. The rest of the Senate, that is the
successors to the people who were elected to the Senate, would not
take office until the first of July. But following on the High
Court decision of Friday week, there will be two Senators for the
Northern Territory and two from the Australian Capital Territory
from the day that the polls are declared and also there would be
a replacement in Queensland and New South Wales for the two
appointments, non Labor appointments, which were made to succeed
the former Labor Senators. So there would be six Senators from
the day that the polls were declared, as distinct from next July.
O'BRIEN: What are you prepared to put the country through in
terms of Public Service disruption?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we obviously will do all we can to remove
or reduce the distress that will be caused to Public Servants,
soldiers, patients under Medibank, people in aged persons homes,
students, all those people that can't get payments from the
taxes until the Australian Government gets its Budget passed.
O'BRIEN: Although it was Mr Fraser's decision that forced the
situation, do you have any moral right to expect or ask the
country to share that with you?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly, certainly. This is quite basic
to democracy in Australia. The Constitution says-and everybody
has assumed-that the House of Representatives should last for
k' three years. Now the proposition that is being put up by the
Opposition under Mr Fraser's dictation at the moment is: that
if the Government, the Party with the majority in the House of
Representatives 6oesn't have a majority in the Senate,-that is
O if it is in a minority or if it only has half of the Senatorsit
can be made to have an election at any time within that
three years. Obviously in Octoberwhen the Budget has to be
passed or in April with the Supply has to be passed. Now this
is an intolerable situation. No Prime Minister would have
accepted it in my time Menzies' wouldn't; Holt wouldn't; Gorton
wouldn't and Gorton of course doesn't accept it now.
O'BRIEN: To what extent would you be relying on drastic economic
disruption to turn public opinion against Mr Fraser?
PRIME MINISTER: There will certainly be a great deal of disruption,
From all the signs I see, from hundreds of telegrams pouring into
the office, and also of course, crowds that you saw outside
Parliament House admittedly that was Canberra, full of Public
Servants-on Thursday; from all those indications people are very
much aroused by this thing. Not just Labor supporters; it's true
that in my Government's first term there was a similar threat
half way through. Well, we took it then. Now there is a threat
a second time, midway through our second term; we will not accept
it this time.
O'BRIEN: Just on the point of public support; are you concerned that
a militant response from trade unionists could led to political
violence? -2-
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what you mean by political violence?.
O'BRIEN: In the current...
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what you mean by political violence
are you meaning, you know, physical violence?
O'BRIEN: Yes physical violence?
PRIME MINISTER: . Oh) I would certainly hope not. Bu't there can be no question...
O'BRIEN: Do you see that the mood is there?
PRIME MINISTER: PeoDle are very incensed, they are very roused
by this and the appalling thing is of course, that it'Is the
conservatives who have flouted the conventions. It was
conservative governments that broke the convention about appointing
Senators of the same party as former Senators to vacancies. It
is now conservatives who are flouting the convention that the
Budget and money Bills generally are passed by the Senate.. And
Qit is the conservatives who are threatening that StLate non-Labor
Governments will advise State Governors,., not just the Governor
of Governor of Queensland but State Governors in general . to
refuse the Governor-General's request to issue writs for a half-
Senate election. Now the conservatives are putting all these
basic conventions in jeopardy.
O'BRIEN: Well what of the conservatives point tha t, in fact, o
wanted to reject Supply in the Senate in 1* 970? yo
PRiME MINISTER: There was one money Bill te, wst it? I know
0 this is constantly... Mind you if they think that the view I
expressed on a particular money Bill at that time was correct..
why don't they reject Supply? But they're shrinking from that.
I did in fact express that view; I might have been right or I might
have been wrong. If they think it is right, why don't they
0bite the bullet, why don't they reject the Budget They haven't.
O'BRIEN: Isn't that awkward ground for you now to be arguing on?
IRIME MINISTER: No, no. When it was for real, let me quote this
there is no question about this circumstance. In 1967 the
: 1 Holt Government was in a minority in the Senate and we and the DLP
-whom I got rid of at the last election combined to reject
increased postal charges: they are not money Bills incidentally
under the Constitution. When the Budget came on the Holt Government
reintroduced those in the form of money Bills. And when they did
that I successfully argued in the Caucus that we should not oppose
them. Now there was a big fight in the Caucus on this, some of
p the Labor Senators wanted to vote against the money Bills; they
could have done it; I said that it was wrong. And I prevailed.
That is when it has been for real when there has been an anti-
Government majority in the Senate that could have rejected a
money Bill, I successfully strove to see that the Labor Party
didn't connive at that course.
O'BRIEN: Isn't expediency the first convention of politicians?
PRI14E MINISTER: No, no" oh no. What my Government does, what I
do as Prime Minister now, can affect every subsequent Australian
Government. If I don't stand firm orn the principle that money Bills
are the responsibility of the Government that Governments are made 
7
yor unmade in the House of Representatives, then every subsequent
Australian Government will be under threat by a Senate in which
it doesn't hiave a majority, twice-a year. And it is impossible
for any political party, even in the most'-tranquil times, to have
predominant popularity throughout a three year term. ' No Governmen~ t
can be sure that it will popular in six months' time.
O'BRIEN: Quite obviously') you will be arguing Constitutional crisis
as a main thrust in the campaign?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, quite,, quite; and this is a winning issue.
O'BRIEN: Mr Fraser on the other hand argues the totality of your
performance in government. A failed Budget...
PRIME MINISTER: No...
SO'BRIEN:-' and of the loans affair?
PRIME MINISTER: How can you say that the Budget has failed when
it hasn't been passed? This election when and if it takes placewill
be very largely on the Budget. And for the first time
Mr Fraser would then have to say on behalf of the Liberal and
presumably the Country Par-ties what sort of Budget the Senate would
pass. This is just not an idle thing criticising our'Budget:
it would be a question of what Budget would it pass, what Budget
do they think would be better? And as any viewer would know_.
I'm satisfied that the public believes that Hayden is a better
Treasurer than Lynch would be.
iJ
O' BRIEN: What about his other point., that you have had to sack
two senior ministers because they misled. you?
PRIME MINISTER: Well these are very big wounds for the Government)
obviously. And I regret to say that these two senior colleagues
misled. the Parliament. They have paid the penalty.
0 O'BRIEN: 11ow does a man of reputed abilities and experience
allow that, to happen?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose I was too trusting. These were people
who had been in Parliament in one case for 20 years and in another
case for 25 years. They should have known better.
O'BRIEN: Do you accept Mr Khemlani's claim that he's been in such
close and constant touch with Mr Connor?
PRIM4E MINISTER: I don't know; I don't know whether that is so or
not. O'BRIEN: Did Mr Connor explain to you why he misled', you?
PRIME MINISTER: No~ he didn't. He didn't dispute that Mr Khemlani
had sent him several telexes about which of course he hadn't told
me, nor the Parliament. But these are side issues. This might
have driven the opposition to the brink) as Senator Gair' s. appointment
* to Ireland. During the campaign you never -heard about Gair. 
O'BRIEN: But if we can just pursue that side issue for a moment.
You've said that dismissing Mr Connor, cr accepting his resignation,
was one of the most painful decisions
PRIME MINISTER: Yes of course it was.
O'BRIEN: of your life; how close were you to him?
PRIME MINISTER: I thought he was a very capable man. And he
has done, he has produced, a transformation in the attitude of
Australians to their resources. He's been terribly delayed
of course by challenges in the Courts, by actions of the Senate.
But he has brought about a complete transformation in the terms
upon which Australians are able to develop their resources or
sell the products of their resources.
O'BRIEN: Was he an influence on you politically?
PRIME MINISTER: We were on each of us. He is a very able man
indeed. It s distressing that he made this error, a gross error;
an isolated error, I believe. But he has paid the penalty.
O'BRIEN: And you accept none of the blame for either of those two?
PRIME MINISTER: None whatever. I knew nothing about these telexes. He never told
me. He never told anyone. But these are side issuesquite
frankly. Connor's influence on Australia's resources for the good
will endure. It was remarkable the way, when the Liberals
bought out their policy on natural resources or overseas
investment last Monday it was a copy of what we'd brought out a
week earlier.
Q O'BRIEN: Just one last question on that side issue. Does
the buck not stop at Gough Whitlam's desk? Could the Opposition
fairly claim that~ as they also fairly claim~ that under the
Westminster system you should resign?
O PRIME MINISTER: They are wrong. Once I knew that a second
minister had misled the Parliament, there was only one course
he had to go, and he did. Whenever I have found anything like
this, I have acted immediately.
O'BRIEN: Is it political reality to think that you have the
option now ahead of you, of loss or victory at the polls, or
is it more a choice between decimation and respectable loss?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that if my Government goes the
three years for which it was elected, we shall win. After all,
this is a very good Budget, a very good Budget. I think it
will be a popular Budget, but it must by given an opportunity
to work. And this constant threat which we've hadyou
knowtwice a year in the three years we've been in about
rejecting money Bills. because this has been threatened every
time, it was threatened the first six months wewere in
in April 1973 it was threatened. This obviously upsets
business confidence.
O'BRIEN: In this campaign do you have more respect for . the
Opposition leader now than you have had for his predecessors? / 6 
6.
PRIME MINISTER: I thought I would have I now don't.
I think Mr Fraser...
O'BRIEN: I mean in terms of him as an opponent?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, I think Mr Fraser is now seen as
a naked opportunist. He'll do anything. he was getting rid of
Holt he got rid of Gorton; he got rid of Snedden; on the
second occasion. And I think people see that he will stop
at nothing. He will eschew no. methods to get into office.
O'BRIEN: Ifafter a half Senate election~ the decision was
made on the vote of Senator Albert Field to go to a double
dissolution, to what extent would you exploit him as an
issue? PRIME MINISTER: Mind you, you're assuming that if the
Governor-General asks the State Governors to issue writs
I( T fhoarv e aa Ssekenda teo n el24e ctpiroenvi, o-usso meotchciansgi ownhsi cahn dG wohviecrnho resv-eGreyn eSrtaalte
Governor has always complied withyou're assuming that if
that's done) Mr Bjelke-Petersen would advise Sir Colin
Hannah not to issue thewrits. From what I know of Mr
Bjelke-Petersenkhe might well do that. From what we now
know of Sir Colin Hannah he is the sort of man who might,
for the first time, break a three-quarters of a century
convention in Australia. The conservatives will stop at
nothing: Premiers, or, I regret to say, some State Governors.
/ h O'BRIEN: Are you aware of a groundswill of support for you with-
I J in the Party now like you haven't bad before? Do you feel that
you're standing is higher?
PRIME MINISTER: Well there's no question in our Party
there is a strong feeling of support that this is an outrage
we cannot cop. On the other hand the Liberal Party
is unquestionably beset by qualms over this.
O'BRIEN: Why does it take potential disaster like this for
the Party to pull you together?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't feel that it needs, that there is
a potential disaster, I don't feel that it needs a disaster
to pull us together. I think people don't realise that
political parties do change over the years. It's true that
the Scullin Government, the Lang Government, went to pieces,
the last time Australia was going through an economic situation,
world-wide as it was, similar to what Australia, and all
western societies, are going through now. But I don't believe
that this will happen to the Whitlam Government.
O'BRIEN: You've presented a picture in the last few days
of a man who's in a tight corner; who's come out fighting, and
you've looked like you're enjoying the fight. Would that
be an accurate observation? 
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't be, I wouldn't stay, in this life
if I didn't think that there were compensations for the
rigours which it entails. It's a very tough life, but I've
been in it for a long time. I believe in the Parliamentary
system and I'm going to fLight for it.
O'BRIEN: Even allowing for your opti mism in the elections.,
if you did go into Opposition, would you want to stay on as
leader?
PRIME MINISTER: ' I haven't thought about that. Let that
happen. I don't concede it will. There will be a House of
Representatives election sometime before July 1977.
When it comes about~ I shall decide. I shall not advise
the Governor-General to issue the writs at the behest of
the Senate.
3 O'BRIEN: Mr Whitlam, thanks very much for app earing on
' our Corners'
Af 



PJ1E M4INISTER' S INTERVIEW ON CHAN4NEL 7 NEWS 18 OCTOBER 1975
bir Whitlam, what',; the possibility of a half Senate election through
either deferral or rejection of Supply rather than the normal
circumstances now?
There has to be an election for half the Senate before the end of
next June because half the senators' terms of office will expire
at that time. Now it's usual for the new senators to be elected in
November or DEcember beforehand and to do that one would issue
writs about this time. I haven't made up my mind when I will advise
the Governor-General to ask the State Governors to issue writs for
that half Senate election. When I give him that advice will depend
very largely how soon the Opposition makes uP its mind about the Bu dget.
They are threaten" hg to reject the Budget Bills; they haven't yet
done so. They've at this stage only carried a motion to defer
debate on it.
There' s obviously a deadlock -who is going to hack down?
Well they'll have to. I can assure you that I shall not. There will
not be an election for the House of Representatives just because the
( Senate wants it.* The Governor-General issues the writs for a
House of Representatives election on the advice of the Govern-ment.
And the Government has a majority in the House of Representatives, and
there is no sign that it will not keep that majority that is,~
the Government will have an election for the House of Representatives
at the ordinary timze in another eighteen mionths.
Q: Well, Mr Fraser has suggested that the Governor-General could intervene.
is that possible?
No , it would be completely improper for the Governor-General to do it.
it was possible for the Kings of England to do something like that a
few centuries ago, but it is not p ossible today. But not only that, our
Constitution expressly says that the writs for a House of Representatives
election are issued by the Governor-General-in-Council that means
by the Government.
Just summing that up you don't believe, well you believe that the
opposition will pass Supply; you don't believe there'll be a House-of
Representatives election next year.
I'm certain that there will not be a House of Representatives election
just because the Senate says so. I'm not certain that the Opposition will
pass the Budget in the Senate; I'm not certain, of t -at. I am certain
of the other there will not be an election for the House of Representatives
except at the proper time, and that is not determined by the Senate.
Well, if it doesn't pass the Budget, can we really expect the sort of chaos
that we've been hearing...
There will be very great disruption in economic matters, businesses and so onvery
great disruption, that is true. But that is what the Opposition is
risking. 



I PRIMI MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH CF-A14Z-EL 10 NZ'S 18 OCTOBER 197522
Mr Whitlam it was reported yesterday that you asked all C-overnment
Departments to submit reports to you on their financial positions.
Have you received those reports?
No, I'm expecting them for Monday when there's a Cabinet meeting.
As you know it at the moment, what is the finarcial position of
the Government?
Well there is full ' upply voted last May up ' till about November.
Then there are many things for which Supply has been voted on a
continuous basis. The matters where the money will run out are
payments for Public Servants, for the armed forces, for Medibank
patients, for students, for services for people in aged persons'
and handicapped persons' homes, that sort of thing.
How long ' do-you think before those things are affected?
It would vary from one Department to another. I wouldn't, I
Q couldn't, give, effectively, an overall estimate.
It's been suggested that it may be three or four weeks. Do you think
that would be conservative?
In some cases; in some cases, it might be less than that. In some a
bit longer.
What's the Government's next move in this situation? What do you plan
to do next?
O P. M.: The next move is up to the Opposition. The Opposition has voted to
defer the Budget Bills, and of course they are avoiding the crucial
issue: whether they will pass them or reject them. They have to make
up their minds a Budget has never been deferred in the past; it
certainly never has been rejected in the seventy-five years we've had
an Australian Parliament. And they have broken all precedent and all
principle even in deferring the Bills. The Bills will have to be passed.
Q: What is the likelihood of a half Senate election now?
Oh, there has to be an election for half the Senate before the end of
next June. I haven't decided when I will recommend to the Governor-General
if he asks the State Governors, whose job it is, to issue the writs for
that election.
If there wasn't a half election until the middle of next June and this
deadlock remained, what sort of a situation would the Government be in?
What sort of a situation would the coutry be in if the Budget was rejected?
That's what you're asking. The Government will be there whether the
Budget is passed or rejected, because the Government has a majority in the
House of Representatives and it's in the House of Representatives that
Governments are made and unmade and it's only in the House of Representatives
that any Budget Bills or any money Bills at all can be introduced. / 2
Q: w
ea 
Q: Mr Fraser suggested yesterday that unless that the. Government made
a move shortly to end the deadlock that the Governor-General may,
in fact issue writs for
The Governor-General can only issue writs for a House of Representatives
election on the advice of the Government. The Constitution says
that the writs for.: a House of Representatives election are issued
by the Governo. r-General -in-Council -' that-means, in effect, by the
" Government. So then, ' the Government will certainly not advise the
SGovernor-General to issue writs for a House of Representatives election
just because the Senate wants them to be issued. So, the House of
Representatives has a majority of members supporting the Government,
and therefore the Government decides, the House of Representatives
. decides,-the Senate doesn't and mustn't decide-whenthere will be. an
election for the House of Representatives.
Q: o-So irrespective-of how bad the situation gets, there are-no circumstances
under which the : CGvernor-General could issue those writs
That is absolutely right. The Queen, in England, or her Viceroy in
Australia, the Governor-General, cannot issue writs for a House of
Representatives election except when the Government advises him to do Q
-so. . He has no -indeendent right nor of course. has the . Queen, any
indepen" Sr. t * right, o ; say that th-re will be an election for the House
of Representatives here, or the House of Comnons in Britain. It is
". the Gover-nmruit that decides that question.
Q: How ' do you view statements by the former Liberal Prime Minister, John
' Gatton ,: that if the situation continues we could in fact -see riots in
the streets?
There are undoubtedly very strong feelings on this matter. I've never
seen people so stirred up on an issue as they have been by this
-usurcation by the Se. ntors. Look, I should say this: the motion that
was passed by the Senate was an amendment to uhe motion to pass the
. Budget; it was an amendment to defer the debate, and if the Labor
Senator Milliner hadn't died a few months ago. and, if the Premier
of-Queensland hadn't appointed a non-Labor replacement, then the votes
-on that amenament would have been 50-50 there would have been as many
voting against it as for it it wouldn't have been carried.
As Senator Steele Hall said, this amendment was carried over a dead man's
body.
Q: Just on the subject of rioting in the streets, just how much worse
do you think the situation...
I don't want-to speculate on that -' I. believe that the Senate will
. pass the Budget; that is what I expect.
Q: -Well, . when do you think they'll do it Sir?
It may be a week, it may be-a few weeks, but that is my expectation
that the Senate will pass the Budget.
Q: That surely.-would be ea, s l. ap in the face for. Mr Fraser?
Well, he. has put himself in to this position. He was saying, only a
very few months, and he said it in fact as recently as the time the 
3.
Bu * dget was introduced, that the Party which had a majority in the
House of Representatives was entitled to govern for the three years
for which it was elected. And he also said that he couldn't see
circumstances why the Budget should not be passed. Now, nothing
has changed. See) the Government has a majority in the House of
Representatives; it will have a majority for the rest of the life~,
the three-year lifeof this Parliament; it's entitled to govern.
Sir, you're known-as a man who likes a bit of excitem-ent and a
challenge. Is this an exciting and challenging time for you, or is
it a worrying time
P. M.:
0
11 P. M.: Well, it's a challenge, obviously. I pick up the challenge, I will
not surrender this. It's a great principle that the House of
Representatives decides who will be the Government. There are two
Houses, you can't have the Senate deciding who will be the Government
you can't have a Prime Minister in the Senate; you can't have a
Treasurer in the Senate. It has to be, in each case, in the House of
Representatives. Now, this is not something which my Government or
the Labor Party acknowledges and propounds it's something which
every Party, every Government, has propounded and acknowledged.
If I were to accept the situation that the Senate can decide when there
will be an election for the House of Representatives, even if it
doesn't face the people itself, then I will have sold the past, it
will be imnpossible to have stable government in Australia in the
future. There are two times every year when money Bills have to
be passed there is October for the Budget, there is April for the
Supply to carry over from July to November following that, while the
next Budget's being passed. Now if we accept that the Senate can,
. on those two occasions every year, reject a money Bill, cut off
the funds for the Govern~ ment, then we are conceding the principle
that governments in Australia are elected, not for three years,
but for six months, and that is impossible, in those circumstances,
to have stable government.
Can you see the political structure, Australia's political structure,
ever fully recovering from this crisis, or do you think~ it's gone
too far?
If I don't win this issue, there will be permanent wounds in the
Australian political structure. The conservative forces are those
that always stress the proper course, the conventions, the
right thing, and this year, in the course of a few months, the
conservative forces have inflicted, or are threatening to inflict,
very serious wounds on all the political proprieties in this country.
First, two governments, State governments, appointed successors to
Senators who didn' t belong to the Party to which the former Senator
had belonged. Secondly, _ Mr Fraser has said that the Senate may
reject the Budget it's never happened before. And thirdly,
the Liberal Federal Council, last weekend, urged the State Premiers,
the non-Labor Premiers, to advise the State Governors not to meet
the Governor-General's request for the issue of writs for a half
Senate election. Now these are three things which have never happenedthat
is . the appointment of a person who doesn't support the Party. of
a former senator had never happened in the quarter of a century
that we've had proportional voting for the Senate; the rejection of
Supp! yhas never happened in the seventy-five years we've had a
federal Parliament; and for a State Governor to disregard the request
by the. Governor-General for writs for the Senate had never happened on the
previous 24 occasions when ther-e' vp hr 
Was the recent visit to Australia by Tirath Kh,_ mlani an embarrasement
to the Australian Governnent?
Oh, yes it was, but. this is a pure side issue, because he didn't say
anything that wasn't known three months ago. And the Opposition
never did anything then. That is there is no impropriety, no illegality,
which they can point to. They've never moved a motion about it yet.
Q: Were-you disappointed in Mr Connor's performance in the....
This is a completely side issue. We-were talking about the gross
impropriety of rejecting the Budget. -That is completely ' irrelevant
towhat you arenow asking.
Thanks very much. 0
that any Budget Bills or any money Bills at all can be introduced. / 2 


THE CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS -&nbsp;SUNDAY 19 OCTOBER 1975
The House of Representatives passed the basic Budget Bills&nbsp;ten days ago. This week they came before the Senate. There the&nbsp;Liberal and Country Party Senators combined to carry an&nbsp;amendment that th e Bills should not be debated by the Senate.&nbsp;until I had called an election.
You will notice that the Opposition Senators didn't reject&nbsp;the Budget Bills, this has never happened before in Australia.&nbsp;They knew that it would not only be unprincipled and unprecedented&nbsp;but monstrous&nbsp;to reject the Budget Bills. That's not the function&nbsp;of the Senate.
But in the meantime, their blackmailing me by saying&nbsp;Sthat-unless I call an election, then the taxpayers money can't&nbsp;&nbsp;be spent by the Australian Government to pay Public Servants,&nbsp;and soldiers, and Medibank, and students, and aged persons homes&nbsp;o all these commitments.
Now I will not yield to this blackmail. This week the&nbsp;House of Representatives again reaffirmed its confidence in my&nbsp;Government.
There are two Houses of the Federal Parliament, the Governrment&nbsp;is that Party or Parties with a majority in the House of&nbsp;Representatives. There can't be a Prime Minister or a Treasurer&nbsp;in the Senate. It is not the Senate's function to decide who&nbsp;shall be the Government of Australia.
There can't be an election for the House of Representatives &nbsp;unless the Government advises the Governor-General to issue the&nbsp;writs. As long as I have a majority in the House of Representatives.&nbsp;I will not advise the Governor-General to issue writs for a House&nbsp;of Representatives election at the behest of the Senate..
Now this amendment which the Opposition carried in the&nbsp;Senate was done in reprehensible circumstances. This is not&nbsp;the same Senate as was elected in May last year. At that election&nbsp;the Labor candidates secured more votes than the cand-idates of all&nbsp;other Parties combined. The Labor Party secured 29 Senators, the&nbsp;Liberal and Country Parties secured 29 Senators.. There were two&nbsp;independents.
Now the Labor Party has only 27 Senators. Two vacancies&nbsp;occurred in the Labor ranks and two State Governments in breach&nbsp;of a convention which has been followed in every State Parliament,&nbsp;by both sides of politics for the last quarter of a century; non-Labor Senators were appointed to take the place of the former&nbsp;Labor Senators. If Senator Milliner of Queensland, had not died&nbsp;a few months ago, then this amendment would not have been carried.&nbsp;This is a bogus Senate, a tainted Senate. And the amendment was&nbsp;carried in the cruel, but telling words&nbsp;of Senator Steele Hall:&nbsp;" Let it be remembered that the Opposition succeeded only because&nbsp;a Labor Senator died. They did it over a dead man's corpse."
The principle for which we are ' fighting is this: that&nbsp;a Government with a majority in the House of Representatives&nbsp;is entitled to govern. A Budget can only be initiated or amended&nbsp;in the House of Representatives; not in the Senate. I am thinking&nbsp;in this issue, not merely of the fortunes of my own Government,&nbsp;which previously~ halfway through its first term~ had to have a&nbsp;premature election; which is now being threatened by the Opposition&nbsp;again halfway through its second term. I am thinking not only of&nbsp;the fortunes of my own Government, I'm thinking of Parliamentary&nbsp;democracy in Australia. If I yield on this issue then no future&nbsp;Australian Governmrent can every be secure in the face of a Senate&nbsp;where it does not have a majority. It could every six months,&nbsp;every time the Budget comes up, every time the Autumrn Supply Bills&nbsp;-come UP, be threatened by the Senate where it doesn't have a&nbsp;majority.
Now in previous years the Government has often not had&nbsp;a majority in the Senate. But never previously, before my&nbsp;Government,&nbsp;has the Senate threatened the Government with a&nbsp;majority in the House of Representatives. There is a great&nbsp;issue at stake in this matter. The Opposition knows that there&nbsp;are feelings of disquite among its ranks. In the Government&nbsp;we are staunch, we will stand firm by the proper principles of&nbsp;Parliamentary democracy in Australia.


Q: Sir, you've expressed confidence that the Budget is going to go through..&nbsp;Now why?
Prime Minister: I believe that basically the consequences of the action which they've&nbsp;threatened, the Liberal Party in the Senate will allow the Budget to pass.&nbsp;You'll notice at this stage they've only passed a motion to defer&nbsp;debate on it. They haven't come to the crunch of rejecting the Budget.
Q: It was a verv confident Mr Fraser at this afternoon's meeting in Melbourne,&nbsp;he showed no sign of...
Prime Minister:&nbsp;Well, I haven't seen the film.
Q: Do you think it will come from Mr Fraser ) this failure of nerves?
Prime Minister: I&nbsp;don't know. All I'm saying is what my determination is -I will not&nbsp;ever again allow the Senate to stand over a Government which has a&nbsp;majority in the House of Representatives,&nbsp;Governments are made and&nbsp;unmade in the House of Representatives,&nbsp;&nbsp;Budgets and money Bills&nbsp;generally are initiatied only in the House of Representatives and I'm&nbsp;going to ensure that&nbsp;never again do we, does any Australian Government,&nbsp;have this threat from the Senate. The Senate's money power is going to&nbsp;be broken for good as a result of this crisis.&nbsp;
Q: Very strong words, Prime Minister....
Prime Minister:&nbsp;I've never been so certain in my life of the necessity of doing this.
Q: What's going to happen if this deadlock isn't resolved?
Prime Minister:The Budget will go through. I expect that.~ but I am certain that my&nbsp;Governmnent will go its full term.
Q: What will you do if the non-Labor States refuse to issue the writs?
Prime Minister:&nbsp;Well that depends when I advise the Governor-General to ask the State&nbsp;Governors to issue writs for the Senate election. There doesn't&nbsp;have to be a Senate election until the end of June next.&nbsp;
Q: You would favour a half Senate election?
Prime Minister:&nbsp;Well there has to be a half Senate election, there has to be. It's not&nbsp;just whether I favour it or not; half the Senators have their terms&nbsp;expired at the end of next June and obviously there has to be an election&nbsp;for their replacements before the end of June and on top of that, of course,&nbsp;there have to be replacemtnts for the two former Labor senators whom&nbsp;the New South Wales and Queensland Governments placed with non-Labor&nbsp;Senators and there also has to be two Senators elected from the Northern&nbsp;Territory and two from the Australian Capital Territory those Territory&nbsp;senators being elected for the first time. Now, all that has to take&nbsp;place before the end of&nbsp;June and I haven't yet decided when I will ask&nbsp;the Governor-General to ask the Governors to issue the&nbsp;writs.
Q: This has been described as the gravest constitutional peril that Australia&nbsp;has ever faced.&nbsp;
Prime Minister:&nbsp;I think that's a correct description. That is why it is essential&nbsp;that the Government wins it. Not just my Government, but I cannot&nbsp;sell the pass on this issue. This could not happen in any other&nbsp;country in the world. Australian parliamentary democracy is already&nbsp;under very serious threat; the fact that in the middle of last&nbsp;year for three months we were without a Parliament shows how serious&nbsp;this sort of disruption can be. Now this is not going to&nbsp;happen again.&nbsp;&nbsp;I'm. standing firm this time.
Q: It's obviously a little simplistic to say somebody's to blame&nbsp;Whitlam or Fraser,-. but surely there must be some fault or some blame&nbsp;on your part. Do you accept...
Prime Minister:&nbsp;No, not a bit, I sought and Mr Snedden sought, last May, election&nbsp;for three years as a government. The people chose my Government for&nbsp;another three years. It is my duty to govern, therefore,&nbsp;for three years.&nbsp;The losers now decide that they'll blackmail us intohaving an election&nbsp;for a second time halfway through our term. Never again.&nbsp;
Q: You would dismiss the argument that there would appear to be considerable&nbsp;public support for another double, or for another election, another&nbsp;general election.
Prime Minister:&nbsp;Well I notice a poll today which said a considerable majority of people&nbsp;were against having another election.&nbsp;
Q: Considerably less support for you than the Opposition has.
Prime Minister:&nbsp;Oh, yes, that's another issue. You're whether there should be an election,&nbsp;and there was a considerable majority of people who didn't want an election&nbsp;, at this stage. And it's true that the polls show that my Government isless popular than the Opposition, but when the Budget goes through there's&nbsp;no question that this will entail a big increase in support for my Government&nbsp;that's what the Opposition fears. They know it's a good Budget.&nbsp;
Q: And the Budget will go through?
&nbsp;Prime Minister:&nbsp;That's my expectation,' but I can't be certain of that. All I can be'certain of is that I will not advise the Governor-General to issue writs&nbsp;for a House of Representatives election until towards the end of our term.&nbsp;Our term ends on the 8 July 1977. There will be no writs for a House of&nbsp;Representatives election for well over a year.
Q: Thank-you very much.



Press Statement No. 578
19 October 1975
COMMONWEALTH LABOR ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The Commonwealth Labor Advisory Committee which
comprises the four Federal Parliamentary leaders, the National
officers of the Australian Labor Party, the officers of the
represe~ ntatives of the Australian Council of Salaried
and Professional Associations, and representatives of the
Council of Australian Government Employee organisations met
tonight at the request of the Prime Minister.
The Committee gave strong support for the principle
which is being correctly fought for by the Government, namely
that a Government which has a majority in the House of
Representatives should be able to complete the term for which
it was elected. There was agreement with the assertion of the
Prime Minister that no election for the House of Representatives
should ever be held at the behest of the Senate. The peak
organisations of the Trade Union movement pledged unqualified
support to the Government in pursuit of these democratic
principles. The Committee called on opposition Senators to cease
obstruction and to exercise their constitutional responsibility
to pass the Budget. While not conceding the right of the Senate
to reject Money Bills and while noting that no Senate has ever
done so the Committee called upon Opposition Senators to desist
from their cowardly course of voting only to defer the
Xppropriation Bills, and demanded instead, that they vote to
pass or reject them. It believes that Mr Fraser should be
prepared to test whether he has the support of all his Senate
colleagues. The representatives of the Trade Union organisations
pledged organisational, physical, and financial assistance to
the Government in its fight for the future of democracy in*
accordance with the above mentioned principles. The Trade Union
representatives urged that those of their members participating
in rallies for democracy should do so peacefully. They deplored
the provocative and inflammatory statements of Opposition
spokesmen such as Mr Fraser, Mr Anthony and Senator Greenwood,
statements whi4ch can lead only to that same violence they
profess to deplore. The Committee after hearing a report from the CAGEO
representatives, called upon Public Servants throughout Australia
to exercise loyalty, patience and restraint in the face of
provocation by Mr Fraser and his colleagues who seek power by
any means, no matter what the cost to Austr-' lia.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 
ATTACHMENT ATTENDANCE AT MEETING OF C. L. A. C.
KIRRIBILLI HOUSE, 19 OCTOBER, 1975
Prime Minister
The Hon. F. Crean, M. P.
The Hon. Senator K. Wriedt
The Hon. Senator D. Willesee
A. L. P.
Mr R. Hawke
Mr J. Egerton
Mr J. Ducker
Mr D. Combe
Mr K. Bennett
A. C. T. U.
Mr H. Souter
Mr J. Roulston
Australian Council of Salaried and Professional Associations
Mr B. Richardson
Mr P. Riley
Mr S. Crabb
Mr J. O'Neil
Council of Australian Government Employee Organisations
Mr B. Gradwell
Mr B. Smith
Mr K. Turbett 


PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST
THE CONSTITUTIONAL CRISIS -&nbsp;SUNDAY 19 OCTOBER 1975
I've been astonished in recent days by the&nbsp;flood of messages and telegrams which have come to my office&nbsp;in support of our stand against the latest abuse of power&nbsp;by the Opposition. ely have I seen such a massive and&nbsp;spontaneous de ration of feeling on any political&nbsp;issue. Aus alians have been roused to anger by the&nbsp;actions the Opposition in the Senate in the past week.&nbsp;The position has embarked on a course which imperilsC e foundations of our democratic system and threatens&nbsp;the whole nation with chaos. By refusing to pass the&nbsp;Supply Bills they are holding up the money for essential&nbsp;public services. It's not just my money or their money&nbsp;they're holding up it's your-money, the taxes paid by&nbsp;every Australian for the running of the country, for the&nbsp;defence forces, the for Medibank, for schools,&nbsp;universitieis, transport and a host of other things. What&nbsp;the Opposition is saying is this: " We don't like the&nbsp;Government. Unless it resigns, we'll stop the essential&nbsp;services of the Australian people. We'll bring the country&nbsp;to a standstill unless we get our way." In other words,&nbsp;the classic demand of the terrorist: " Surrender or we'll&nbsp;take your money."
It's as simple as that. The Opposition is&nbsp;threatening the country with chaos in a grab for political power. They are telling the Australian people that a&nbsp;democratically elected Government, a Government with asecure majority in the House of Representatives, a&nbsp;Government elected for a three-year term, should hand over&nbsp;power half way through its term simply because it suits&nbsp;the Opposition. Could any self-respecting Prime Minister&nbsp;yield to such tactics? What leader worth his salt would&nbsp;give in to this sort of blackmail? I certainly will not.&nbsp;The Government will not. The Opposition's methods are&nbsp;a violation of every constitutional and democratic&nbsp;principle. If these tactics became the rule in future,&nbsp;if an Opposition could force a Government to resign whenever&nbsp;it suited them, Parliamentary Government would become&nbsp;unworkable. It is simply not on the Opposition knows it,&nbsp;and I believe the people know it.
Having created this constitutional crisis&nbsp;that threatens the whole nation with disruption, the&nbsp;Opposition has the gall to say that it's the Government's&nbsp;responsibility to get rid of the crisis by surrendering&nbsp;its mandate. I remind you that it'Is not the G overnment&nbsp;which is holding up the people's money. It's not the&nbsp;Government which is blocking the use of your-taxes.&nbsp;It's not the Government which is threatening the life&nbsp;and stability of the nation. It's the Opposition in the&nbsp;Senate. The House of Representatives has passed the supply&nbsp;bills. Every Labor senator has voted for them. Every&nbsp;Labor member of Parliament and every Labor senator will&nbsp;go on voting for these money bills until they are Passed.&nbsp;The Opposition senators alone are holding them up.&nbsp;
Let's look at the Senate which is causing&nbsp;this crisis and threatening chaos to the nation's life.&nbsp;Who are the men responsible? It's not the same Senate&nbsp;that was elected 18 months ago. It's a stacked Senate,&nbsp;a bogus Senate or as Jim Killen, the Qt. eensland Libera has put it, a " tainted Senate". Remember this:&nbsp;&nbsp;at the elections in~ ay last year Labor candidates polled&nbsp;200,000 more votes than all other candidates and parties&nbsp;combined. We were returned with 29 senators the same&nbsp;number as the Liberals and the Country Party. And there were&nbsp;two independents. Since then the Labor senators have been&nbsp;reduced to 27, because two State Premiers have flouted&nbsp;another great constitutional convention that senators should&nbsp;be replaced by a man or a woman of the same party as the&nbsp;one elected by the people. Last Wednesday's resolution&nbsp;to block supply would-never have been carried but for the&nbsp;death of Senator . M4illiner of Queensland. As the Independent&nbsp;Senator Steele Hall put it so vividly and accurately this week:&nbsp;" Let it be remembered that the Opposition succeeded onlybecause a Labor senator died. They did it over a dead&nbsp;man's corpse. "
A dead man's corpse! It's on that basis&nbsp;that the Opposition now claims the right to subvert the&nbsp;elected Government and bring the nation to its knees in&nbsp;order to achieve its political goals. They say they want an&nbsp;election. Certainly we shall have an election. If the&nbsp;Opposition carries out its threat and finally rejects the&nbsp;supply bills we shall have an election for the Senate&nbsp;for the every House that has brought this crisis on the nation.&nbsp;We shall submit this tainted, stacked, vicious and irresponsible&nbsp;Senate to the people's judgment. It is the-Senate which is&nbsp;blocking supply. It is the Senate which will answer to the&nbsp;people for its actions. And when the normal time comes for&nbsp;the G overnment to go to the people we shall do so confident&nbsp;that the people will endorse our record over a normal&nbsp;three-year term.
What a sorry spectacle the Australian Liberaland Country&nbsp;Parties present to the world. How wantonly they've &nbsp;degraded our country's reputation in the eyes of other,nations, of the nations of our region, of new nationslike Papua New Guinea who should be looking to us now as an example&nbsp;of mature and stable democracy. How recklessly they've weakened the democratic cause in every nation where democracy&nbsp;is under challenge. Mr Fraser, by&nbsp;this action,&nbsp;has destroyed whatever pretensions he had as a man of&nbsp;honour and principle. He knows it in his heart. He has&nbsp;succumbed to the same pressures and embarked on the same&nbsp;suicidal course as Mr Snedden, the Liberal leader he stabbed&nbsp;in the back only seven months ago. The Opposition failed in&nbsp;these tactics when Mr Snedden tried themi last year.&nbsp;They were taught a lesson by the Australian people. They must&nbsp;be taught that lesson again in a manner they will never&nbsp;forget. We shall win this battle. It won't be won by me,&nbsp;but by the united resistance, the angry defiance of the&nbsp;whole Labor movement, the trade unions, decent parliamentarians,&nbsp;and above all by the great mass of ordinary Australians who&nbsp;cherish our democratic ins-tutions and will not have them &nbsp;trampled by a power-hungry Opposition anrd the vested&nbsp;interests who support them.&nbsp;



PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW ON ' A CURRENT AFFAIR', 20 OCTOBER 1975
( Recorded 19 October 1975)
SCHILDBERGER: Prime Minister do you think that people of Australia
want a change of Government?
PRIME MINISTER: At the moment they do. When our Budget is passed
and commences to work, they will want to keep the present one.
SCHILDBERGER: Why don't you think they should have the right of
having a change now?
PRIME MINISTER: Because a Government is entitled to last out its
full term. For the second time the Opposition is trying to cut
our term off half way.
SCHILDBERGER: You've made promises before, like the one that you've
just made now, that when the Budget works things will get better.'
You made those promises in May 1974; they didn't come true.
Are you concerned?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I think things have improved in many respects.
But we have had an immense amount of obstruction, as you know.
SCHILDBERGER: You think that now the promises that you make can
be kept?
PRIXE MINISTER: Yes. That's what the Opposition is frightened of.
They realise that this is the best Budget for years.
SCHILDBERGER: Why can these promises be kept now and they
weren't before?
PRIME MINISTER: Well why do they want to prevent the Budget taking
effect. Their judgement and mine is the same in each case, that
this is a good Budget.
SCHILDBERGER: Don't they believe also that there have been other
problems with the Government, changing of acting Prime Ministers and
Deputy Prime Ministers, Loans Affairs?
PRIRE MINISTER: So what? I demand the top standards in my Ministers;
they didn't. Their Ministers misled Parliament; they covered up.
Where mine have misled Parliament, they've gone.
SCHILDBERGER: Do you feel yourself in anyway negligent about
what your Ministers have done behind your back?
PRIM1E MINISTER: I'm disappointed. But nobody knew it; nobody could
have known it.
SCHILDBERGER: Do you think that it is partially your fault that
you didn't know?
PRI'E MINISTER: No I don't. Everybody was misled.
SCHILDBERGER: What do you mean by that?
PRIME MINISTER: Well nobody knew; nobody knew that Dr Cairns and
Mr Connor weren't telling the truth. / 2 ' I
r. I 1 
SCHILDBERGER: Shouldn't you have known, though, what was going on?
PRIME MINISTER: They -should have told me.
SCHILDBERGER: Does this mean. that there's not enough involvement
between you and your Ministers?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. They concealed it from me, as from the
Parliament. They've paid -the penalty. But as I say, I demand
top standards from my Ministers. -But look at'Mr Fraser, look at
Mr Lynch: they were Ministers for-the Army during the Vietnam
involvement. Did they tell the truth? Their Prime Ministers
covered up for them. Look at the VIP planes affair. A Prime
Minister -then covered up for the Ministers concern--d; he might
have been part of it. My standards are severe.
SCHILDBERGER: Why would your Ministers be disloyal to you?
. PRIME MINISTER: It's not just disloyal to me; they're disloyal,
they've let the Government down.
SCHILDBERGER: There must be a reason?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I won't speculate what faults of nature there
may" be. They were experienced parliamentarians; they'-ve paid
. tte . penal'ty..
SCHILDBERGER: Could it be that. you misled them?
PRTIE ' MINISTER: Certainly not. Are you making any suggestion
that I misled them?
SCHILDBERGER: I'm suggesting that possibly they believed that
they were doing the right thing?
PRIME MINISTER: Well they weren't. There is no excuse for telling
other-than the truth, and the whole truth, to Parliament.
. Liberal Prime Ministers have covered up for Ministers, but failed,
' by ' that test. I will not cover up.
S2HILDB3RGER: Prime. Minister, of the four politicians who-signed
that Executive Minute 1-ast December about the Loans Affair, three
are , gone, one is left, and that's you?
P. RIME MINISTER: Yes.
SCHILDBERGER: Does that feel a bit eerie?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. It's astonishing that no charges have been
made in Parliament, where they could be made. See, you would
hesitate to say anything now, because I could. sue you. But in
PRrliament people can say things under -privilege. And nobody in
Parliament over months has ever made a charge of impropriety or
illegality by any of those Ministers or by me. Why those Ministers
went, was not because of illegality or impropriety, it was because
they misled -the -arliament.
SCHILDBERGER: Have you considered resigning?
PRIME MINISTER: Never.
SCHILDBERGER: : Nc-t at all... 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: Well, only last 1hursday, the House of Representatives
by a very considerable majority, expressed its confidence in my
Government. SCHILDBERGER: That's a matter of numbers; you had them?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course I did. And I shall until the middle
of 1977, when the next House of Representatives election is due.
And when it will be held.
SCHILDBERGER: You've threatened to Caucus on a couple of occasions
that you might resign?
PRIME MINISTER: No I haven't.
SCHILDBERGER: We've been led to believe that you...
PRIME MINISTER: Well you were misled, because I have no intention
of resigning.
SCHILDBERGER: Has it come into your mind at all in the last
twelve months?
PRIME MINISTER: Never.
SCHILDBERGER: No dissatisfaction on your part with what the Labor
Government of today is doing?
PRIME MINISTER: I've been disappointed at the difficulties but
on balance it's well worth while. I have a duty to give good
government to this country and only a Labor Government can do it.
SCHILDBERGER: When a managing director of a company, gets his
company into disarray, a situation that Australia is at the moment...
PRIME MINISTER: The share holders are very well satisfied 1ifn the
present managing director.
SCHILDBERGER: Are you sure?
IRIM-E MINISTER: Certainly.. You saw the way they cheered him last
, v eek.
SCHILDBERGER: That's a limited number...
PRIME MINISTER: No. It's the largest combination of members of
Parliament in the Federal Parliament or anywhere in Australia. And
they are very satisfied with the managing director.
SCHILDBERGER: What about the people of Australia who are also the
shareholders?
PRIME MINISTER: When the Budget is passed and takes effect, they
for a third time, will endorse the Whitlam Government. Because
you'll notice that the Liberals don't put up any better proposals.
They don't say what Budget they would pass. They know that this
Budget is as good as the country can produce at this time and
in the present circumstances. / 4 
SCHILDBERGER: Prime Minister, you are at present accusing the
Opposition of taking unprecedented steps.
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly.
SCHILDBERGER: Could it be said that you are taking an unprecedented
step in not facing the people?
PRIME MINISTER: No. There never has been an occasion when an
Opposition has threatened to reject a Budget or, in fact, a Money
Bill. Mine is not the first Government which has not had a
, majority in the Senate. But never, before my Government was in
office, had an Opposition threatened to reject Supply or a Budget.
SCHILDBERGER: But it did happen in May 1974?
PRIME MINISTER: No it didn't.
SCHILDBERGER: ' There . was a threat of the rejection of a FIoney Bill?
PRIME MINISTER: , Ncta Budget
SCHILDBERGER: Not a Budget?
PRIME MINISTER: . No, -ot a Budget.
SCHILDBERGER: So basically the principle...
PRIMS MINISTER: There was some argument about this, but you
notice that in the Senate it was not rejected.
SCHILDBERGER: But it didn'. t need to. be, because you went to the
people. PRIME MINISTER: No, no we-didn't. The election was at the end
of 1972.
SCHILDBERTER: In 1974 there was an election?
PRIME -MINISTER: I -thought you said
SCHILDBERGER: 1974.
PRIME MINISTER: On that occasion there was a threat. And on that
occasion I asked the Governor-General to grant a double dissolution.
Now if I do that again now, it will become a habit. I'm not going
to fall for that again. That is, my first Government was cut
:-off halfway through its term. My second Government will run its
full term.
SCHILDBERGER: So therefore you admit that . it -was unprecedented
perhaps in ' 74?
PRIME MINISTER: It was a threat; it was a threat as there is only
a threat at this . stage. You will notice that the Opposition hasn't
yet. rejected-the Ludget, they're fooling around with it. They
moved an anmndment and because a Labor Senator had died they were
able to carry that amendment. The amendment was to defer the
debate. Now if this Labor Senator hadn't died, there would have
been : as-many . peopla . voting against the amendment . as voting for it.
And therefore it would not . have been carried. As Senator Steele Hall
said: The amentient to defer the debate on the Budget Bills, was
carried . over a dead man's corpse. 
SCHILDEERGER: But if that dead man had been there the Opposition
could still have been able to reject the Budget and presumably
would have?
PRIME MINISTER: They in fact haven't moved to reject the Budget.
That is, they know how unprincipled not only unprecedented but
unprincipled it would be to reject a Budget. There have been
a hundred and thirty-nine Money Bills in the history of the
Federal Parliament passed by the Senate, passed that is, getting
a majority in the Senate although the Government of the day didn't
have a majority in the Senate. No Money Bill has ever been reject: ed
by the Senate before.
SCHILDBERGER: It's fair to say that the Constitution provides for
what the opposition is doing now. The Constitution doesn't.
provide for what you' re doing?
PRIME MINISTER: No, that's not true. The Constitution may
or may not say that the Senate can reject a Money Bill. The fact
is the Senate never has rejected a Money Bill. The Constitution'
also says that an election for the House of Representatives takes
place when the Governor-in-Council decides. That is, when the
Government decides. I have a majority in the House of Representatives.
I will not be advising the Governor-General to issue writs for
the House of Representatives until towards the end of my term.
SCHILDBERGER: What about a half-Senate?
PRIME MINISTER: I riay. But possibly not until it's due, which
of course, must be before the end of next June.
SCHILDBERGER: You are giving thought to having it early?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm giving thought to it. But I don't want you
to get any impression that I'm committed to it.
SCHILDBERGER: You're going to between you and the Opposition
leader, between the two of you hurt a l. ot of people in the next
coming weeks?
PRIME MINISTER: That is possible. If the Opposition persists in
this unprecedented and reprehensible course of rejecting a* Budget,
many people will be hurt.
SCHILDBERGER: Do you want to continue that hurt or do you believe
that in your position as Leader you should prevent the hurt?
PRIME MINISTER: NoI am determined to see that ' there will be
stable Government in Australia. If I sell the pass on this
occasion, there can never be stable government in Australia in
the future. If I accept that the Senate can send the House of
Representatives to the people, whenever it sees fit, then you can
have governments in Australia going for six month periods only.
I will not accept that. It's not just what my Government may think
about it; it's what every future government also would think
about it. When the people go to the polls, they expect to elect
a House of Representatives, a government, for three years. They
don't expect that the Senate-which will not be facing the people
can send the House of Representatives to the people at six month
intervals. 
SCHILDBERGER: Could it be said that you're doing this at the moment
because you, believe that you wouldn't win the election? In other
words you're doing it for political reasons?
' PRIME MINISTER: I would lose next Saturday. But when this Budget
ispassed, I would win an election.
SCHILDBERGER: So right now . though, you're doing it for political
reasons?
PRIME MINISTER: No. It's my duty to see that there is stable
government in Australia. This sort of thing to which my government
has been twice. subjected, has. never happened to any-previous
Australian government. If I let it . happen a second time it
" will -then become embedded in our political -practice. And whenever
a. Government, . that is, a Party or Parties. with a majority
in the House of Representatives doesn't have a majority in the
Senate then-there will not be stable government. It is my duty
to see that stable government is preserved in Australia. And shall.
SCHILDBERGER: Does the present situation worry you?
PilME-MI-NI'STER: Of course it does. I have. learnt from the
experience of last year. That is, I'm not... the Opposition
-thought that, by threatening to reject the Budget, this tire, my
reaction would be the -same as it was in April last year, when
they threatened to refuse Supply. They thought that I would then
ask the Governor-General to have a double dissolution. I shan't.
SCHILDBERGER: Are you being stubborn?
P. RI,-E.. MINISTER: No. ' ve learnt from experience last year.
* They. haven't. Mr Fraser has made the same mistake as Mr Snedden.
SCHILDBERGER: You say it's a mistake, but it's causing a lot of
. hardship and can cause hardship?
PRIME ' MI-NISTER: It can cause hardship and he is . responsible for it.
SCHILDBERGER: You won't take any of the responsibility?
PRINE MINISTER: None whatever. I was elected for three years.
' The -House of-Representatives has confidence in my Government.
Governments are made or unmade in the House of Representatives.
Last Thursday the House of Representatives expressed confidence
-again in my Government. And also asserted the right of the House
of Representatives to determine money matters.
SCHILDBERGER: Is -the'Constitution wrong in making it possible
to let the Opposition do what it is now doing?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. But everybody had assumed that this would
. never happen. There's no other country in the world where what
' the Opposition is.-now; threatening could happen, . whether it is a
' Federal system or unitary system. This wouldn't happen anywhere
else in the world. And I'm determined on this occasion to end
for all time the Senate's power over Money Bills. I am going to
see . that what':; . threatened now fcr-the second time will never be
threatened ag'in. 
-7-
SCHILDBERGER: Only be establishing other precedents because you
can't change the Constitution?
PRIME MINISTER: No. But everybody had assumed that no Senate
would reject a Money Bill. I mean the Canadian Senate theoretically
can but it doesn't; it never has. This would be unthinkable
everywhere else in the world.
SCHILDBERGER: Won't you accept that it's in the Constitution for
a reason?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it is not; it's not.
SCHILDBERGER: It doesn't make a specific mention of the fact that
Money Bills can be rejected?
PRIME MINISTER: It doesn't expressly say that, that's true. But
everybody had assumed that that was the situation.
SCHILDBERGER: Why do you say that?
PRIME MINISTER: Well it's never happened. And it couldn't happen
anywhere else in the world.
SCHILDBERGER: If it shouldn't happen, then wouldn't it be
specifically written into the Constitution?
PRIME MINISTER: It never has. People don't guard against unthinkable
propositions. This had never been contemplted before. That is,
nobody realised how obstructive the Senate could be. In the three
years that my Government has been in office, the Senate has
rejected more Bills than it had in the previous 71 years of its
existence. SCHILDBERGER: Is the Labor Government today the sort of Government
that you hoped to lead?
PRIME MINISTER: In many ways, yes; in many other ways it's been
more difficult.
SCHILDBERGER: In what ways?
PRIME MINSITER: There are two principal ways. One is that we are
faced with a world-wide period of economic difficulty; every
western country, every trading country, every industrialised country
is going through this bad bout of inflation and unemployment.
The second thing is that I didn't think the Senate would be as
obstructive as it has been. You'll remember when we were elected
in December 1972, the Senate still had 18 months to run. And nobody
suggested during that campaign that the Senate would reject Bills
which we've brought in to carry out our election promises. And in
May last year, when we were re-elected, nobody suggested that if the
Senate was evenly divided which is what it was after the election
that it would reject Bills which we've brought up in performance of
our election promises. Nobody expected that. Nobody said it in
May last year. Nobody said it in December ' 72. 
SCHILDEERGER: You've often-been accused of fin.-ding scapegoats.
Could it be said now that you are now lookin. r t these as
scapegoats, as well as the Connors, Cairns arnd Creans?
PRIME MINISTER: Well the figures show, don't they, that the
' Senate has rejected more Bills in the last three years than in
all the years between 1901 and 1972.
SCHILDBERGER; But have they really done much -to harm your progress?
PRIME. MINISTER: But of course they have. Of course.
SCHILDBERGER: Yes, but to cause problems we now have?
' PRIME MINISTER: Of course they have; of course they have. We
' have a very great number of economic and social pieces of
legislation which we promised to bring in. And they have delayed
-them or rejected them.
SCHILD3ERGER: But they wouldn't have -helped you solve the
unemployment problems or the . inflation... I
PRIME-MINISTER: Of course they would; of course they would.
SCHILDBERGER: ' Well -hy?
: PRIM. E.. MITNISTER: Well look at the delay there was in passing
-there ; still is in passing the Trade Practices and Corporatio. is
Legislation. We promised that. It had been very thoroughly
-examined over years before we came in by Senate comrmittees.
When. we put it up, it's delayed, it's shelved, it's even
rejected. SCHILDBERGER: One of the other reasons why your Government
doesn't have -such a good name at the moment is the loans affair.
Was that a mistake?
, P. RIME MINISTER: . In retrospect, in retrospect, . yes.
* SCHILDBERGER: It was?
PRIME . MINISTER: It didn't succeed; to that extent. yes. But
-I will point out " that the country isn't a cent'worse off. And
Australia's overseas standing, its credit worthiness is the
, highest in the world. -We.. have triple A rating.
' SCHILDBERGER: Are. you-sorry that you don't have the $ 8,000 million?
PRIME-MINISTER: We could have used it very advantageously. 8,000?
SCHILDBERGER: Well, whatever figure it really was.
PRIME IINISTER: ' Yes, well we should be precise. No, itnever was
-never 8,000 was it?
SCHILDBERGER: 8,000 million?
PRIME MIIISTER: No it. never -was, was it?
SCHILDBERGER: I don't know. 
-9-
PRIME MINISTER: Well it's all in Hansard. This has been
common knowledge for months. Are you trying to-mislead
your viewers?
SCHILDBERGER: No, I would like you to tell me how much it
really was?
-PRIME MINISTER: It was 4,000 in December and January last.
And then after that, for three months, it was 2,000. It
was never 8,000. Now don't you try to mislead your viewers.
You know what the figures were.
SCHILDBERGER: I find it hard to know.
PRIME MINSITER: There is no difficulty at all. Every question
which has been asked has been answered. Every one. And
nobody has challenged them.
SCHILDBERCER: Why did you keep it a secret in December of
last year?
PRIME MINISTER: Because loan raisings are never bruited abroad.
SCHILDBERGER: But this was slightly different from the normal
loans?
PRIME MINISTER: No, the same method. If there was anything
improper, anything illegal, don't you think that somebody
in Parliament would have made that allegation? Nobody has.
SCHILDBERGER: But they didn't know about it?
PRIME MINISTER: They've known every fact. For months they've
brought Public Servants before the bar of the House, they've
brought a migrant millionaire before a bar of the House.
They could have brought Mr Khemlani, but didn't. That is,
they know perfectly well all the facts that there are to be
known. And there is no wrong-doing whatever. Nowisn't it
amazing that if there were any wrong-doing, that Mr Fraser or
Mr Lynch or these unknown Senators would not even.., don't
you think they would have made the allegations? But they
haven't. SCHILDBERGER: You told Parliament that you had never met
Mr Khemlani. Did you ever speak to him on the telephone?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Now, go on, pursue this question? Are
you suggesting that I've ever seen him, spoken to him,
written tb him?
SCHILDBERGER: I'm not suggesting that at all. I want to
ask you.... 
P-RIME MINISTER: Well you ask me? You ask me?.
-SCHILDBEPRGER: I would like to know why you didn't have
-involvement with Mr Khemlani?
PRI-E MINISTER: Why should I?
SCHILDBERGER: Because he was our supersalesman out to
' raise -a lot of -money on Australia's behalf?
PRIME MINISTER: He wasn't our salesman at all. ' Michael,
I don't-know whether'you-are trying-to mislead your viewersi
he was never our intermediary; he was never our agent;* he
-was never our -salesman. Now this is quite clear -from all
. the doctjaments, from all the debates, from all the. answers.
There-is no excuse for you not t-el ling -the facts. The
-coquntry -isn'. t a cent ou of pocket.)
SCRiILDBERGER: Well, what -involvement did he have then? Wasn't
he given the authority to seek money on our behalf?
PRIME MINISTE.: No,, he was not.
1-SCHILDBERG&amp; P.: -By 1,1r Connor?
* PRIE'~-INISER: Mr-Connor was given authority to enter into
arrangements for loans if Mr Khemlani introduced. p?-ople. PBut
,' MNr Khemlani -was not our agent. He would -have been the agent
' for, any pros~ ectiv~ e lender. He-was -not our agent.
SCHLDERER M~ Kemani now says hc was,-able
*,, PRIME MINISTE.: No he doesn' 1t., he ' doesn'It.
; SCHILDBERGER: I think..
PRI-1E IMINISTER: Well if you're accurate, yes.
, BSCH. ILDBEOGER: Well quoting-him accurately. * That -he
provided the money, was able to provide the money on the terms
. andconditi~ ons requested by the Australian Government?
PRIME MINISTER: He never put . up a proposition. -He never oDut'-
. up -a proposition.
SCHILDBERGER: Well he claims, of course, -that he has...
PRIMEMINISTER: Well he never did, he never did.
SCHILDEERGER: Why do you -think he bothered coming to
Australia now.'?
PRIME MINISTER: Wel~ l I presurme , that scme of the moedia
" facilitated is -visit.
SCHILDSERGEBR: Why do you think he would -be saying this?
What you are accus ing him, of course, -is -being -a liar? 
-11-
PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't reme Mber him saying this.
But all I can say is he never put up a proposition. Never.
Never. SCHILDBERGER: Prime Minister what happens to Gough Whitlam
if the Labor Party happens to be out of office in the next
few months?
PRIME MINISTER: The Labor Government will not be out of
office until the end of its three year term.
SCHILDBERGER: And at the end of that three year term if
Labor is out of office, what happens to Gough Whitlam?
PRIME MINISTER: I think we will win the next election. You
would have thought in April last year we wouldn't have won
that election. We did. And we will win the next. And it'; s my
responsibility to advise the Governor-General when the writs
for the next House of Representatives election will be issued.
And they won't be issued for at least a year.
SCHILDBERGER: What about the long term for Gough Whitlam?
What does the future hold?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh I don't know. I haven't really thought
ten years ahead.
SCHILDBERGER: Do you think you'll be in office that long?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I've said all along I'll get out when
I'm 65. That gives me nearly six years.
SCHILDBERGER: You still holding office then...
PRIME MINISTER: I expect so.
SCHILDBERGER: Who will be the next leader of the Labcr Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. The Party decides that.
There are very many good prospects.
SCHILDBERGER: Who would you like to see as the next leader?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh no, I don't... it's not an immediate
option is it?
SCHILDBERGER: No. Perhaps in six years?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course it ever be in six years.
SCHILDBERGER: Will Bob Hawke even be leader of the Party?
PRIME MINISTER: If he gets into Parliament he has a very
good chance. 
a -12-
SCHILDBERGER: Would you like. to see him as Leader of the
Party? PRIME MINISTER: I would like him to be in the Parliament.
SCHILDBERGER: As Leader?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's for the members to decide
who are in the Party, in the Parliament, isn't it?
SCHILDBERGER: One last question. When does-the present
crisis, when do you believe that it will be resolved?
-PRIME MINISTER: Within a month.
SCHILD3ERGER: . What will happen at the end of that month?
PRI-ME MINISTER: The Senate willpass the Budget. -And it
will begin to work. And we will soar in public estimation
-again.
ISCHILDBERGER: Have you been too confident over the years and
. perhaps -are now : being too confident?
PRIME MINISTER: I've never been so certain of anything in
' my life as I am, that the Senate's money power will be
' broken as a result of this crisis. No future Australian
Government will ever be threatened by the Senate again, with
a. rejection of its Budget or a refusal of Supply. Never again.
-SCHILDBERGER: And you won't feel guilty if in the meantite
-there is fighting . in the streets...
. PRIME MINISTER: No, no " fighting in the streets",
. don't threw that in! Who said there'll be fighting in the
. streets? There won't be fighting in the streets. People
. are incensed about what the Liberals are . doing, a second
grab, Fraser doing a Snedden.. They are incensed but there will
ot be violence. But I am determined to see that stability
of government in Australia is never again threatened in this
-unprecedented and reprehensible fashion.
SCHILDBERGER: Thank you Prime Minister. 



222O CT1w5
AUSTRALIA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 579
21 October 1975
THE MINISTRY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, this afternoon
announced changes in the Ministry following the election
of Mr P. J. Keating, M. P.
The Prime Minister said that the Governor-General
had appointed P. J. Keating as Minister for Northein
Australia and the former Minister for Northern Australia,
Dr Rex Patterson, as Minister for Agriculture.
In his new portfolio, Dr Patterson will continue
to be responsible for the Government's activities in
relation to the production and marketing of sugar. The
Prime Minister said that he proposes to recommend to the
Executive Council that those functions will be transferred
from the Department of Northern Australia to the Department
of Agriculture.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



.4 1 ? RESS STATE: MENT-NO. 50E. 1 C
914 C r 197-/ 5
7neGcvrnrentis J aa1l1l . i _ ts p: F'rto s ee-that-
DCL~. 3Jli1s are passe: d. In the event,
ovr,' thea Oc'-ciz. on in t'l Senat-e remains
-Lca-a,-d r nst h7e 1D avet-iL o f s Zlar1iae Sis su SDe n C . d
will. ncve-' rt. h-l. csS, T
to assent'-al oo:~ cieisv sarsv : e ffec-Lively
as Dosbe It iS hSe in te re st s o al 1 PO S. Oo. c FL lj-S the
1-: 1 nt s objec t ve an d cl1ear d Uty-to M i n S e a ny
d i I-c rt i o n o F 1 t~ t ehi~ h To cnr, COJrwe
would exci llls-nloe~, t r .1o we7--jjave to 3-oak, J'or
tne provi.,-sion o-so mayvital servi es, t~ o con aniie a T
cmplovim-ernt and to Vork1ormJ. iv
I " Ile guarnc aa ia~ ee -tha t th -orn ior t'ñ s
salary and sg oriiet ari-sing . rrom thi'atL erloyimr1nt-wil
event-Utalv bea t At t1h-= s; inxe time the Go-vernm-e nt knowsFthatla
ari cutOn th-"-e CIC0o'J: tWA. and qrocd sen: o-L all1
orri-* cerS, on the loy-altv t-hc-y give to whatever Govc,-, rnmerit is
in powear., and on th * aanthey apply t o ' th eJ-r t. as, s.
The Govern-ment will not, however, act other than strictlyv
~ naccord1arnCe with 2law ' n a-;-terripting to preserve, aciministrabive
s e ac. . s a nd maP ~ a n Eg e an sai--l a r y p aym1e n tS.
The Goverrument h-as revieojed the f inancial position ofL
all Dea-rtmrents and authl-ori-ties and-; steps have beenaen to
ensure that w-. acre and salary payme-nts will be maintained th11iroucilh
th uply period, that is until. the Cend: of Nov embl'er.
T3, e Govornment has directed that all spendi ng on non-essential-s
is to ~ ecLt to the bon--and that funds bie conserved as -much DS,
possible. It is likl-ely that. in addition to -vages arld salaries
Most ot;-e-r essential paymrents can a lso be wholly7 main t a~ in ntilI
orfl oY em: r
If IChe Opo)-7ositi*' on in the Senate continues to deny Supply,
n-owever, Government employees may face som-e proa. nrsis
, n that event I would ask them to accept some personal but
_ e-moorarv sacrifices i n the interest of tewelfPare ol hi
' o ustr-alians. T can assure thee1-that the0 2-o-verrnn-ent iS
loo-: inc an-d wi2ccntinue to look at every possi blFe w% 17ay oT.
sa ~ c the icu1tie-s and inconv. oni once whilichnu face its
/ 2 
2.
cm-,) lovees and that t[-he Governnlen 4. c V. cveloping schemes
which wil co-, l with the. exis--a and which are
imed at all-viating, as much as thsieb -problms
which micht con-front e! mplovees afterT. the
Cn of] N Ibar. 



P RT lei P J. 1. ITT 1Rf* 3;. 1_ T', ECXi. UI IkY : i'cj; 1, SYDNEY, 24 OC---L I97:
Mr. Chairm,-. an, L E U-i1 and Gecntlemen.
Seventeen months ago th2-people of-his Lity-and this State and this
count.-y had an bloctior i f: r Pec: rl-3. f or the, House of.
Representatives and for-tlj,-: Serial-. r. "' Ind riery large iFJor. Uy of'
the peocpl~ e of this cit%--y and this ~ a~~ and t-h-is country Said that.
they waned, once z. crain, to havec I-k~ -o~ rari. t 1he'
. of Australia. And t-hroucjhout that my o1leag-. ces arnd I,~
on behalf.-of the Labor Par-iw, a. nd th:ñ^ r! u pciople on beha-lf ofC
the Libnral Party and the Country P , rty all saidl that t'Aatlein
was to choose a Govcernmcent for thec fallowing tie years. nve
said that if we didn'lt qct a majorit~ y in thci Hoiuse of Rie. res3ent.&amp;-tives
but were able to broak c., vcn only,. in the Senzite and use t. he enzaQ.(
* to block the Gove rnrlent xvh _ cl had a tajority in the-Houmse of
Representatives, that iqc would bloc% it, Wel were very clear wit))
the public; we didn't Nant once uaprx the -; ituatian to atisc, which
arose in April last year,, w,. here a~, after only sevCen1teen-1v10rthsr
* the Senate threatened to block tho. i] ney ' for thc, Governwnent to cr~
the affairs ofthe Nir'Lion. Everyb. oay kno-w that that had hap--tmea. C
once and during the caii-paigny nobody said thpat it would happeni again
if he didn't get a majority in the louisz of fersttvs. I
never said it and Mr Sneddcn, who wa thne lceadeir of-thc Li. beral
Party at that time, he never said it either. And for those, who
* knew of DNr Fraser, hie never said it dluring the earnpaicrn. Sco the
people were asked, only seventeen mihsago to say, who was to he
the Government of this -country for the next three years.
And the people said that they wanted another three years of a Labor
Government iii Australia. And they gave the Labor Party a crmfortable
* majority in the House of Representativs In thea hundreds of
divisions which have takeni place in the House of. Rep re sentative r
last year and this year the L~ abor Gcva-rrnent: has never been def-!* ete..
And every time we have sought a vote on. anything that we put thejro,
any time we've been challenged to hav-e a voto on something the
O * aLnidb ecroanlsv inancdin gthlye. Countzy Party put up there, we have won it fairly
Now in the Senate, the system is so complicated, we only broke even
in May last year. We got 29 out of 60 Senators. The Liberals and
the Country Party al. so got 29 out of 60 Senators and there were two
independents. Now, in this Sta-te, we'-. ve got an overwhelming majority
for the Senate, and in the whole of the coun~ try,, the Labor candidat. 1es
for the Senate got 165,000 more votcf: than wore given to the
candidates of every other Party in tic. o Senate. All of themi combined. rl
got 165,000 fewer votes than the Labor Canjdirj ~ tes. But the zsystc) eni
* is so complicated and Tasmania, one elIevoenth of N 1ew South Wales'
population, still gets at. many Senators as D~ ew South Wales. We
-only were 50-50 in the Senate. Now., i those-circumstances it waS
reasonable enough that wia should forii the Goverrient. Gover-nmento
always are formed in the House of Y1ew'-sesntatives, and not only
that, only in the House of Represciit-at3. vc-s can a Mon( e-y Bill be
initiated, only i~ n the House of Repro sentat.. vos carn a Money Bill.
be amended. The Senate can not initii at a V~ owey BiJl le &amp; lone. Za
* Budget anC. the Senate co-Lild not a a. aino ne\ ) 3iU~ let alone a
Budget. Now in those circumrstances wnv were thec Govorrinceiit of
Australia. We had the majority in th(-House of ) 7epresentati%, es.
Now the proposition that is being pat to you now by the Liberals I. s, 
the p eople who ve liost out in of ' s e nalive. F. t'ihe
people t~ hat got 165,000 fci' VC~'. n the : 7 1t c-s1h ovTd Stil.) o.
able to ' use th e Sc ate to 1) cck 11c es o Y cntaeii: Liv nru!
the principlie for hich woare fiq~ Linrg is th,: h oueo
Represent~ atives shall continue to It. ie Feclrn. ll House where Covernments
are made and nmd. IIurasecondl time, do vhat I1
in April last year,, that is* at th: 2 miere threat of the refusal, of
the money for the Government to cFa,-: zy on, t h i ask f or a. double
dissolut-ion -and . C coul. d at thi,, rloient i f I do that,.: I
abandon the princieile that the. Pou -c oJ_' Repr eF; ntati-vea is wherre
Governments are nalae or unmade. An(_ i thlat Wil. not onl-y, that will
not only interrupt Governiment. in Ai7 , tralia, frustzate G vrnmcn
in Australia on this occasion: it will interrupt and : ifrustratn
Government-in Autralia whenever th, 2 Serna te chs. oses -to reject or
* delay a Money Bill. even a Budget. And we can't have 1.. hat happen
asecond time. It s not just the fortunes of the prezm Govcrnrjnt
the -Labor Government, my Government, it's not that; it, is the
fortunes of every s~ ubsequont Covexi-:! r. nt in Pastralia whchth
people choose by giving a majority its Party in the House of
Representatives. I am impressed here as I was in Mlelbournp last Monday and, as my
colleagues were last weekend in every other capital in Australia
by the immense ntunher, the thousandr.-of people who ' ye attencled these
protest rallies, who, were, born in oth; r countries. Because people
from other countries know how,. fragile democracy -is: how much, how
often, how ruthlessly the corneraLv recinr1 ore1ilkl
democracy when they th-ink they can cuet away with it. And one of the
things that enthused and elated and up].. fted thia migqrants in Austrai
was that in December 1972 they saw that in Australia after the hard
fought campaign, at a secret-ballot, it was possible to change thi_
Government. And they expfected that Government to have at least
3 years, not just from December ' 72 to April they expected it
to have 3 years. And when they made! their great, their immense
contribution to reelecting that Government in May last year, they
expected it to have 3 years and not just seventeen months. And we
-don't want the system in Australia that has bedevilled and weakened
democracy in so many countries f rom which migrants-have come, whcre
Governments change too f requently, where no government has the.
opportunity to carry-out its program. In Australia we elect
Governments, it's always been thought, for three years an t h
end of three years there is a ballot, a secret ballot-, a-free
W campaign and you can then decide whcet*;-her you want to have the
Government for another three years or whether you want another Party
to be the Government also for three years.
And what is at stake now is not whether you will have House of
Represent ative s elections every one and a hal~ f years, which is what
the Liberals are now saying, but whether you. could have House of
* Representatives elections every six rmonths. Bec-use twics every
year the House of Repre sent at ive s paFsses Buqttide Bills, Supply
Bills. Every year in October the House of Representatives passes
Bills which will carry out the whole of the -financial arrangerilents
of Australia from July to June!, the whole twelve months. And thenin
April every year the House of Rep -PsentatZ'ves passes other ' Bill.: s
as to how much money yuwlhae how you w'ill spen t3he iiin. n! y
from July to Noveraber followuing; twi. ce a year, in Oct-ol) Ar and in
April the House of Representatives initiates Money Bills, the Budc. t 
3.
andSu~ pl an ter~~' ey oto the Sr. rt te. PAiW or th: 75 year-,
that woe'Ive.. had-a * N~. onal P ciit~' iI in. iistc-:. a. thie S, E. t
always par-sed tho . e " Aills, it ha~ s Y) rir O] vo5those( 13511s, or
. rustrate.~ -hose Rills. Au -trrcliar, Jrr three quarters of
acentury has operatcd. on thvz baisis tiiia twieca uenya h.
Representatives brings up, th. s colleoAic'n. of ~ ci-i~ zand. tho
Senate pal-se them.
But the Liberals are now saying th~ o. oevy eofhz cain,
every October, every Apriltt'h y can. rc~ Jezt theo M. cney 13i. 11 zsand tlie..
L ut I want to assure you because mcof. i. of yo11 ( OdOnl woeekly or
fortnightly incomes paid by/ employers-many ol: yo~ ur ei yers are
Government or Government Department: 3 risv etlto I a: sure
you that we have the money passed t April t: o pay every salar,',
every wage bill, not only this week Lnr ~ i Cor-Liight'Is time and.
in four weeks time. The monoy is thc:: e to stec te, evrhodywh
depends on. the Australian Governient for his inecorne, for her incoinc,
will receive that on the dot unti~ l the enid 01: Novcmber.* And we
are confident that if by the end of N'ovcmber lbc Senatc'] Es s till.
refused to debate the Budget:, or has ril ref-Lru:: d to pails the
Budgetrother arrariqements can be made to enable(-people to stick at
their jobs, to do their duty, to ser-vef the pc'oupJ. e of Austra] ia;
other arrangements will be mcade. We f-; hall not let the mecn and Vioimea
of Australia who depend on the Australian Goveritent for payment for
their services or ' thoir supplies, we :, hall not. zJlow theiri to be l'etdown.
But mEantime we are determined th,-* t the Australian Governmenrt
wil-govern for the three years for which you elected us. We will.
I'd ask you to note -that the Senalte has not rejected the Budget,
it's only deferred-t it's delayed it, stalled it. Dccause even
the most cussed and unprincipled and greedy * Liberals realise t-hat
this would be a step that * has never beecn taken in A7 str. to eea
Federal Budget. It's never been done and they hesitate to do it.
In the House of Representatives, it's, true, they ' ye twice vote(' aqainrr. t
all the Budget Bills, they did so a imntli agoo theny did so this weekj..
But when the Bills go to the Senate thecy hesitate; they don't vote
against them, they Just move an arnendv,., cnt_ to de1fe--r them. Now I would
-point out that they would rnot be able to carry these amenrdrients to
defer the Budget had not a* Labor Senat11or, SenetI-or Milliner from
Queensland, di~ d f our moriths ago. Anil M BjeJ) kc--Petersen appoirited
a non-Labor Senator to take the place of~ Labor' s Senator Milliner.
WNow if the Labor Senattor Milliner waz: still alii. ve he would be voting
in the Senate with his Labor-colleagjuc~ s as he had done in every day
of his life. And this amendment to d c'ay the Budget would not have.
been passed. The Senate would have bcen evenily oivided. And in
the Senate, if there's as many peoplc voting aqainst a proposition
as for a proposition if the numb,-r: are eqi-al, then the proposition
is lost. And that's the basis of Sen;: te demtocracy. That is, thse
House of Representatives should have 1iJ0ujoity the Sc. nate c,-In
evenly divided but. yet the Senate pre-vail because you need
a majority of votes to get somethint'-ibhrough the. Senate. Now if
Senator Milliner were still alive he N,. ou3 d bc vot ing against the
amtendment which the Liberals have mnv( d to ftfer the Budcfet; to Oelay
the budget; to stall the budget; thlmro would be as nan-y pCeo:,-. le
voting against the amndcid motion Fa: fo~ r it , c it wou'id be lost. 
4i.
And in tliose c trcurfr'stance s IChc fTb era~ wotiA_(. h-ave ir. 1KC rm V).
mind s whe ther to vcote f or i-i ozr not-. tow i-tghtj : 9ri hl. h
S ome dissaltisfaction with the fluCgheL_. somec ' 1 cmer even:
the Budg3ts failcd. I don't -c Io thy . m ' Ytht ;-nte
haven't passed it. So, of Thi r~ urec: erf htoc
Budget is passed people w ill b( n~ r to hciinEit fro-m itc, o s
when this Budget is passed, 3Tiiillio,, taxpayr-n3 in Au! 7tral. ia wiil. l -e
paying taxes at. a lowe-. r ratc. Anc) when tb 3 udcet. E. p~ as e d,
half a million people who've been) p'y tnq tax wily. no luc~ n-gr
have to pay income rtax. An( C ug~ ~ r~ s~ a1 Fhnti hs
. rorts , those concessions fr',* i -which thea wea* 1; ilr used to be-nefi.: wiill
be replaced by reba'.-e which are of eqjual valu e to everybody. AInd
the Liberals are torrified of the p~ opular r&amp; pnewhich the preople
-will show this 1judget when it p.'. SSeO.
Now you sometimes hear, ' Well what about a ( o( ublce dissointiorn?
may well be that in due cours'e there .% ill a double 6jssoliutin.
But not yet. And I'll tell you why you can' have a dovile di: s '. utio
on the Budget. For one thing, if yoi) Nwere to hve a do-obl. e dsotion,
this is what has to happen. The Sei) te has eJeoc t i. illadte
3 months later the Bill has to be passed acg-. in by the P. Ouse of:
Representatives, pas; sed a second tieby the House of Represent6. t: ves
and rejected a second time by the Senate. So if we were to haveLv an
election, a double dissolution, on the Budgctryou Couledi't haCve. f. t:
for at least 4 months arid th1 Senate would have t eette] hqt
' not just * delay it, reject it; thenz 3 months later we'd have to de:. batza
it again. The whole of that process would talKe abouL 4 nonthsq. thl-at
is, if the Senators next Tuesday, were to rejnct the Budcjet, We couldn't
introduce it again in the House of Representati~ ves for another 3
months and then in about a fortnight we-might b able to have the
vote in the Senate on the second occasion. An6i if it were rejcctod
a second tine you could have a double dissolution on the Budg~ et You
couldn't have it for 5 or 6 weeks a'fter it was rejected and then
the last double disFolution, the one that was hce0d last May, it took
over two months to count; for 3 montho AustraliLa was without a
Parliament, the Parliamn wa isfeo h 0 April last y( ar
and it couldn't me et until the 9 July last year.' For 3 Months less
one day, Australia was without a ParJliainent and the whole of the
Goveznment and Public Servants were tied up for 3 moribhs.-Now
ifyou want a double dissolution, on the Budcet you roul@ n It.. yu
want the Budget now. A double disselution couldIn't be held on the
Budget? the Parliament couldnr't meet-to vote on the Budget. another
time for 5 or 6 months fromn now. You can't wait that long; you
shouldA~ be fobbed off from the benefits of Bil1l Hayden's fltudgot
for another 6 months. You want to get: the bcnef its in amonth~ s time
as you are entitled to have them.
Now there may be a double dissolution before-P by about the end of
next year, if the Senate keeps on the obstructionr it has uptil now.
Because in the 3 years that we've been in Govcr; ment thce Senate has
rejected more bills that it passed in the previous 72 ye2ars.
From 1901 till 1972, the whole of those 72 years, the Senate has not
rejected as many bills as it has already rejected in 1973-4-5. Now
if we hadn't had the double dissolution last Ilay,, it's tyue we
wouldn't have got througlr the Medibank B3ill. You wouldi' t have had.
Medibank and you wouldn't have been ablc to got through the -; Ai. 11s
which provide that everybody' s vote in Aiist-rajia will Le of equal
value. But while the B ills have gon-e tlthrough the SeriateC., on A. occusions
has rejected the proposals ' which will carry out that elinctoral
distribution. Because what is at the heart of the objeciion by tbre 
Liberal., a. ndj thc Co--.-ixtry Par~ ty to my'G~ erf~ t is thn.-. rRy
Gove rmt : Is dL: indt( -, cc that.. Aiwsta . ian-: wherev'er they
live, wh-: tever tha' l -o'.., cver ol~ t thi . rrr ih: xv~
rtheir ] neanzi they wil I. &amp; 1 . bave in equal. And. : in this
State of New Sou-th W~ ales treare eleot-orTLesr so:-ae Federal,
electorates who.-n there are fewrer th--n 50,000 pe): oplte with a vote
and there-are other electorate-. s in Soifth W, 1res whoj-there
are-nearly 90,000 peonle. i-. h a vote, The a-to bc!. iWeer J: c
than 50,000 andc al.. iiiost 90,000; it Ic. very urmev(-n) and we wir nt to ea
thtin ! hustralia.,. TV-in tho United -atsor e-inmot hronc ar
countries, at loc-~ t. the el. rte hav the sne num1 of p eo,.
in themn. They are dead scared -that : Uf we have a half S: neate election,
which we -will before the end of next Junetwc'li, be able to. get a
fair electoral system through the Senate at last.
Now, you've got the remrd of the Sonate in cgeneiral, ino: e bills
defeated in 3 years than in -the provwious 72. Itht the r. resent
issue is the Budget. -And' what's the alternativc? The onrl'Y*
alternative that Mr Fraser has put 13:-to tho JBu( g( et i1s toa bring
in doubl1e taxation. So that there \ Li II be ia Stzl: te systo'n of incoine
taxation on top 9f the Federal system. We abandoned. tht back Jn
1942; w. e don't want that unncqua1 sys. temt bac! k in AustraJ. i: a. And
every othnr. feature, what he said about the lluelloet, what he said in
his own speech on the Budget is now'-O e says;' inoperativc!' It's a
great wqord which camie f rom President Nixon," " Ino-ecrative.
That not only have. they now abandoncd, as of Wedniesday
* week thle Budget proposal~ s they put up, but they i-ow say t~ hat if 7 c
have an electionfor the House of Representatives now, that is if
I accept their biackmrai-l-as I did in April last year, what would
they do? They ' d pass the Budget.
Now you see the whole design*. they don't have any objection to the
Budget; their own alternative Budget is now inoperative.' it's been
exposed; it's been abandoned and they say if we have an caection of
the House of Represcntati-ves -as if that's any buiesof the
blasted Senate then they'll1 pass the Budget through the Senate.
Or alternatively, if there's a double dissolution, we c,-n wait for
5 or 6 months to pass thE, Budget. The other thing is to have ai-j
Welection for hal~ f the Senate only. Now that-wouldn't be a bad ide!,;-
it's the usual time of the year to hzive them., I know that Sir
Robert Menzies said. I What a monsterous idea, what a monsterous
idea to have an election for the Senate in November or Decermber'.
* Now when Sir Robert Menzies was Prine MiniStEr he bad 6 cle( otions
for the Senate one of themt was in April, for the ScnatorF; ' to take
office in July and the other 4 were in December or November previously.
That is, 7 or 8 months ahlead of when the Senators were to tzake off ie.
And -the sixth one was in September, 9 nonths before they were to take
office. And now he says what an impertinence. it would ba to have a
half Senate election now, lie forgets what he did; he always had them
about thiz-tim-e of the year. But thejc-e is a catchb, because
*. Mr Bjelke-Peterson-and pardon me for meritioni. ng, it agai. 7n he said
that if the Goverior--e neral, in a usual waywrites to allt the State
Governors and says, ' T.; Jell I suggest arid requeist that you. j iss; ue the
writs to the Senators for your State en such and such a dae tiion
the Governor of Queensland, Sir Colin flannah you'd never heard ofhim
before he spoke out of tuirn a fortnight og-he will. lie advisr: d
by Mr Bj :) 7!. ke-Peter_, cni--and ha might e-vesi doitj J. V w i hout ar-advi . cc e' 1
say to the Governor-Cceneral, ' I ' ll ta'Ke no notice of you-,. sug-gestion,
I'll have it on a date which suits mne'. ' So that means that we, 
can'It get a Labor replacemnent for Senator Milliner, the ec-: A
La~~ Soninr in Qture( nsl cnd, r vCeat-.1cio or 1th-
Serl LOrs i~ n lueelsland. Fi-vc o! thmwC) ui. tahe off ice on tl-t
fir,, 1., of JrulJ% 7 ne xt but the-: succec,-r, the habor sucC%-_' s: rr to
Sent cor Mill. naar, would. L1-ake o) Ui ca in~ rc.-, i the day the pol. was
declare--d and. tbc-i won'lt have, they'll put~ off as longc as thoy
can qc -ting LEvhor replaccement 2-or:' a dccasfe. d Labor man. The-y
want to be able to pass motions to defer the Budget. They wi: U only
be able to p! ss thos.* e motions, as Senator Ste _ 1e Pall said, ' ove., r
a deSdc ormsen'.' T ha i-the way the ! J. berajls and the Country
Party operate. They take advantage of deceas'ed Senators and thcy
* want to bury daimiocracy in the process-. Because this : Ls what' tha
conse-rvatives, the reactionary iorces, in this countrv are precpe--! re~
* to do. For t-he first tii in 75 years they're prepared, it may bc,
to reject the Budget. They're certainly prepared to defer and
delay a Budget. It's never happened in 75 years: In the hnndrcrd an~ d
f if ty ' times that there has been a .1udget or Supply put up from. t--he
Huos fX~ preenat* Lves to the Senate. There could havo befenr 339
Bills rejected, Money Bills rejecte,, d, by the Senate on the OcCOE:-jofl3
when there was not a majority of Government support in the Snie
But it has never-happened before. For the first timc in the 25 veroYs
since we had proport-ional voting for the Senate, for the first tiim,
here in New South Wales, now, in Queensland, you have anti-Labor. Stat', e
Governments appointing a non-Labor successor to a Labor Senator,.
W When we put Labor's Attorney-Gerieral Murphy on the High Court to
pair off with the Liberal Attorney--cenera). B( rwick, they appoint an
anti-Labor Senator. That is, when Senator Milliner died they
appointed an anti-Labor successor. . For the first time in 20 years
U State Governments each State, both sides of politics have done
the wrong thing; the conservatives have done the wrong thinq. A-nd
now they are threatening that when I advise the Governor-Genieral to
* suggest a Senate election date for the State Governors, some oE tLhem
say they'll advise the Governors to disregard what the Governor-
General says. And this comes from people who are now asking the
Governor-General t~ o get them off the hook, to cover up for their
mistakes. There is nothing, ladies and reten thtIh
* conservative forces in this country are not prepared to do to get hold
of the people's money again: to reject or delay the Budget; to
Sreplace deceased Labor Senators with anti-Liabor Senators; to tell
UState Governors to disregard the re'quest of the Governor-General,
for the first time in the 25 years that Governor-* Generals have made
those requests.
. adies and Gentlemen, you can't trust the conservative forces in
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is immnensely encouraging for my collcaoiies
and-mD on the platform to see you come out here to the heart of
Sydney on a wet day in tens of thousands, millions of yoii here, to
* support demtocracy in this country. You've turned out in your lunch
time on a wet day in your millions, not just to support a Labor
* Government, t4-he present elected Governiment. You have come here
to support democracy itself. And from now on every political. Party
will realise that when thcre is an election for the House of
Representatives there will be an oelection for a Government to
govern for 3 years. And never again will the Senate, whoever bas a
majority or, which is enough, half the membors of the Sonatebb&amp;.
able to fru!-strate the House of Repzesentat-ives where GovernmeTints
are made and unzmade. 
Never alt. n, by tb: ciftening to cut-. o-t~ he Covy nme'nt igh b
Spend the-Laxes a they co:, 1az in, nav( cr agiain~, w. 1 the S nr. atE-b o
able to tircaten. thc~ t agavinsL the. cected Govcx~ iinent.*. 3.-ter thi
the Senat mTone'l. power ill1 be dcI.. r-( oyed. Niut. demo( er. cy will
be presccvcd. And the I~ our; e oif epresei-itative-s will. ' Las: t for its
full 3 years. Anid t~ he righ'LS of the ! Joiis(-of Rr--. prcse-t-at: ves
the pecpl I s Ilouse, to detenmtne hov. Jti@ peOplEts money. wL1b
spent on their behaflf will he vindicc. Cc a* rid c-nshrined
in the practice of this count.
Ladies and Gent lerrten,. seveft e an month!-ago you dcterninrA in t hb3
City, this State, this country, that you would have anothcr 3 years
of Labor Government..
The Government which you elected has a comlfortpJhle ' majority in tbe
House of Representat ives the. People. 7 House, thc IP ous whore
Governiments are made or un-made. Ladies and Gcntlemen, when a t th e
end of 1976, there ' s a doubl. dissolutior. to clear out all. the
obstructiorL of the Senate, the piled up Bill. which thicy'v
rejected twice, or in 1977 in thie nor-ma~ l tirie for a Hou!-e of
flprecntives election, wheri then you are againn e'-lect. Ixng the
* Government of" Autralia, I am confident that on our recordF our
Principles, you will once again have a Labor Government of"
Australia.: 



J! AUS October 1975
OPENING OF BELLORANA LODGE, BELLINGEN
The Prime Minister Mr Whitlam said today that he was
determined to press on with the ordinary business of government,
despite the current constitutional crisis. Mr Whitlam-was speaking
in Coffs Harbour at the beginning of an official visit to
Coffs Harbour and Bellingen.
Mr Whitlam said his visit to Bellingento open Bellorana
had been a firm engagement since July when it had first been
mentioned to him. He said that the degree of community involvement
in the planning and building of Bellorana was an example
of the kind of co-operation between the Australian Government and
voluntary organisations which characterised the Australian
Government's approach to social needs. Mr Whitlam has already
opened old persons' homes and hostels in other New South Wales
country areas this year including Ozanam Villa Hostel at Lismore
and Blakeney Lodge at Tumut. These have been made possible
through the Australian Government's decision to increase the
former $ 2 to $ 1 subsidy for such establishments to $ 4 for every
$ 1. Mr Whitlam said he was looking forward to the Civic Welcome
at Bellingen and his visit later in the day to the Coffs Harbour
Council Chambers. He said he valued the sense of partnership
which had grown up between local government and the Australian
Labor Government. Last year the Australian Government had made
direct grants to local government bodies for the first time. This
year Bellingen Shire Council had received $ 100,000,
comqp red with $ 77,000 last year, an increase of 29.9% while
Coffs Harbour had received $ 188,000 this year, compared with
$ 138,000 last year, an increase of 36.2%.
Mr Whitlam said that the Australian Government was
determined to use its powers to increase equality of services and
opportunity between regions. Last week the full High Court had
ruled in favour of the Australian Government providing direct
grants to the Australian Assistance Plan. This power had been
challenged by the Victorian and New South Wales Governments.
Had the State Governments' challenge been successful, it could
have endangered federal grants for old peoples homes and hostels,
such as " Bellorana" at Bellingen, as well as such services as
meals on wheels, isolated childrens allowances and many other
social welfare services. ( A list of Australian Government
expenditure in Bellingen and Coffs Harbour is attached. This
list includes some programs which could have been affected by
the High Court challenge.). 



Embargo: 5pm Sunday
PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST
THE THREAT TO RECOVERY
26 October 1975
During the past week we have had brought home to us
the harsh practical consequences of the Opposition's refusal
to pass the Budget. The violence done to our democratic
institutuions is monstrous enough, but the violence being
threatened to Australia's economy is scarcely less serious.
In its crab for power, in its bid to overturn the elected
Gover.-.. ent, the Opposition is threatening the whole difficult
and fra ile process of economic recovery at the very time
when the first real signs of recovery are beginning to
appear. During the debate on the Budget a month ago I warned
that nothing would be more harmful to Australia's economy
than a * wholly unnecessary constitutional crisis engineered
by the Cpposition. I pointed out that the Budget must be
given a chance to work. By refusing to pass the Budget,
the Opposition is denying that chance. They don't care
about the consequences to the economy. They don't care
about the effects on employment, on business confidence,
on consumer spending or on anything else. They cheerfully
contemplate the wreckage and disruption of the Australian
economyn as long as they get their way.
The Opposition has the gall to claim that the Budget
has failed a Budget which they won't even pass through
the Parliament. They say the Budget isn't working when it
hasn't even been passed. Yet when we look at the latest
figures we can see that the Government's economic policies
are working. On Thursday the consumer price index for the
September quarter was issued by the Statistician. It
showed an increase of 0.8 percent a strikingly low
figure, and the fourth consecutive quarter in which the
rate of price increases has fallen.
Now I don'twant to make too much of that figure.
It would be tempting to claim, by multiplying that figure
by four, that Australia's annual inflation rate is only
3.2 percent, the lowest in the western world. After all,
that's how Mr Lynch, the shadow Treasurer, interpreted previous
quarterly cost-of-living figures: he multiplied them by
four and called that the annual rate of inflation. Well,
I'd be happy for Mr Lynch to tell us now that Australia's
rate of inflation is the lowest in the world, but we have to
be auite realistic about this. We have to remember that
inflation is still a problem in most comparable countries and
that Australia has a long hard battle ahead before inflation
is beaten compoletely. What we can fairly claim is this: / 2 
the latest encouraging figures on the prices front are due
largely to the success of our wage indexation policies.
Wage indexation is an immensely fragile and sensitive
experiment. With goodwill on all sides it can work.
It has taken months of negotiations with the unions and months
of argument before the Arbitration Commission to bring
indexation about. Nothing would be more likely to shatter
the unions' cooperation and put wage indexation at risk than
the Opposition's reckless attack on the elected Government
and the resulting economic disruption.
Let's recall what is in the Budget which the
COposition is holding up. And let's remember that at no
time has the Opposition proposed any credible alternative.
About 3 million Australians something like two-thirds of
all taxpayers will benefit from substantial. tax cuts.
About half a million present taxpayers will be freed from
i: come tax entirely. Pensioners and low-income earners will
gain the greatest benefit. The average wage-earner will pay
almost 30 percent less tax on overtime and additional earnings.
The family man with a wife and two children will be able to
earn more than $ 100 a week free of tax. The old system of
deductions, which favoured the wealthy, will be replaced
by a system of rebates which is fair to everyone. The Government
has introduced a new tax deal for all Australians. What is the
Opposition's alternative? They want double taxation a return
to the discredited system of pre-war years, when the States
imposed income taxes on top of the federal tax, and the smaller
States were worse off than the others.
SFor all of us in Canberra it's been interesting
to see the growing panic and desperation of the Opposition
reflected in their conduct in Parliament. Mr Fraser and his
deputy have resorted to wild and unsubstantiated charges against
Government ministers. Mr Fraser himself made a scandalous and
quite unfounded attack on Frank Crean, the Deputy Prime Minister,
accusing him of leaking a confidential document to the Opposition.
The charge was promptly denied. It was baseless. Mr Lynch
then tried to revive his pet Khemlani business by asking a
question based on a newspaper report, and completely ignored
the fact that in the very same newspaper there was a statement
by an Adelaide solicitor denying the report on which the
question was based. The Opposition will stop at nothing to
smear ministers and even implicate their personal staff in
phony charges of misconduct. This week Mr Fraser accused the
Australian Statistician, an officer completely independent of
the Government, of producing fraudulent cost-of-living figures.
The most contemptible aspect of the Opposition's conduct has
been an attempt to put pressure on the Governor-General
himself. We've read and seen their desperate appeals to get
the Governor-General to dismiss the Prime Minister and
presumably install Mr Fraser instead.
The confusion and contradiction of the Opposition in
this affair have been unbelievable. This week, when we
submitted our Budget bills again to the House of Representatives
every Opposition member voted against them in every division.
Yet when the bills went before the Senate the Opposition resorted
to its old stalling tactics and deferred the bills without
actually voting against them. They lack the courage of their own 
3.
convi~ ctions. They denounce the Budgct buat ha-ven' t the quts
to vo,-eo aqjain st it. They oppose it in on-e Ho1use butL defer it
in the other. They block the money for running the nation's
affairs, and then claim that_ there's no cons tituti onal
crisis. For months they've criedi doomi and disaster arid
tried to panic the Australian people, buit now, as the full
meaningT of their action dawns upon them, they assure us that
evervthina is normal, that there's no cr. Lsis at all.
They go on parroting the sloga2n that the people must
choose who the Goverinrent should be. Thr-: e fact is that the
-eonle have made that choice. ' Ih* ey made it17 months ago
clccto-d a Government that c.-,=, ands a majority in the
House of Representatives, a democratLic Government, a
ueocle' s Governjent, a Goverrnment that wilnot be removed
rromoffce alf way through its term just because i t
suis heOmu;-os;."_ n. ~ vrtiathat has haeonened this wea'..-
th-e ra~.ñ ies ancd demonstrati 4ons in suupport of -he-elected
G o ve r n2nt, the strengtn and unit': of the Labor move,-e,=
tho pnc oa-: Mr Fraser and his followers, the mounting concern
of -Austr1alians about where the Opposition is leading the
n -tion's economv in thi-is hour of crisi. s everything has
stkrengthened MY resolve tCo stand firm and resist this att-ackI
on A:, ustralian democ racy. Mr Fraser has blundered. He knows itad
to ju rom this weksnewspa-per ed-itoria3 s, his
: rien-ns i: r ie press kno-., it too. in one stupid act of
con s t tt2ona I egn7rcs sion he has dest-royed hi s ow., n honour,
threatened .7" ustralia ' s econom-ic recovery, undermiLned our
aemocratic institutions a--nd rallied the nieLbr oe t
H-{ u -will re-gretL this fEolly for the rest of his lifec. 



] RIME' MINISTER'S BRO;; DCA; T ON CIAUNL., 7 26 OCTOFER 1975
Last week I mentioned to you about the torrent of
telegrams that I'd been receiving protesting against the
Opposition's unprecedented action in delaying the debate
on the Budget Bills. Since then I've attended many public
meetings last Monday in Melbourne's City Square;
on Friday in Sydney's Hyde Park; and just this afternoon
in Melbourne's Town Hall. And on each occasion it's been
remarkablethe sense of outrage that ordinary citizens have
felt at this unprecedented and unprincipled action by the
Liberals and the Country Party.
It was particularly moving in the Melbourne Town
Hall this afternoon because there there were thousands
of migrants people who'd come from countries where,
sometimes, democracy has been destroyed, or where democracy
is weak, or where democracy is under challenge. And they,
more than most Australians, in December 1972, were impressed
by the fact that in Australia, after a vigorous election
campaign, there was a change of Government at the ballot
box one Government was rejected and another one was elected
by peaceful means. They were among the people who were most
outraged, when after 17 months, there had to be another
election in April and May last year. Againthey expected
that the Government would be able to serve a three year term
and now, for a second time, they find this challenge to
Australian democracy, which they had respected. And they
particularly are alert to the stratagems to which conservative
forces will resort in order to look after their vested
interests. And this year there have been three such
examples: first of all, for the first time in 25 years
since there's been proportional voting for the Senate, we
found that two State Premiers replaced Labor senators by
non-Labor senators; now for the first time in 75 years
we find that the Senate is contemplating rejecting the
Budget. Very often in the past the Government of the day
hasn't had a majority in the Senate, and if half the
senators vote against any proposition, if the votes in the
Senate are 50-50) then the proposition is rejected.
Now there have been 139 money Bills over a three-quarters of
a century of our Federation which have been passed by the Senate:
although the Government didn't have a majority in the Senate.
This is the second principle, the second conventionwhich
has been thrown out by the Liberals and Country Party last
year and this year. And the third is that the Governor-General
asks the State Governors to issue writs for the Senate and on
24 previous occasions the Governors have always obeyed the
Governor-General's suggestion. Nowfor the very first time
in 75 years of our national Government the Premiers are
contemplating advising the Governors to rebuff the Governor-General.
Now I point out that the Opposition has not rejected
the Budget this would be too much for many of them.
You might have seen in a program last night, and midday today,
on another television station, where a Liberal senator said
he would never vote against the Budget and he said that there
were many of his colleagues of the same mind. But they're
prepared to vote to delay the Budget they haven't got any / 2 
Budget proposals to put in its stead; Mr Fracer has now
used the great phrase about his own Budget proposals
that they are ' inoperative'. lie says that if there is
to be an election to the House of Representatives, then
they'd pass the Labor Budget but of course he is not
prepared to give the Government, which has a majority
in the whole Parliament and a majority in the HIouse of
Representatives, the opportunity to govern for the three
years for which it was elected. It can continue to pay
the public servants, the soldiers, all the accounts; until
the end of November. We're satisfied that after that)
alternative arrangements can be made. I point out to
you that the Government can get money by borrowing or
from taxes, but the Constitution says no money shall be
drawn from the Treasury except under Appropriation made
by law. Now our opponents are trying to frustrate
the Constitution by refusing to make those Appropriations.
I trust that everybody who is on the Australian
Government's payroll -civilian and military, and people
who rely on the Australian Government to pay for the
services and the supplies they render will be patient and
will except the assurance that they will finally be paid.
The Australian Government will do all it can to mitigate
the hardships that they endure. But we are determined
that the Government which has a majority in the people's
House, the House of Representatives, will not be frustrated
by this unprecedented, unprincipled use of the Senate,
where nobody has a majority, where no Governments can
be formed.. The people are entitled to have the Government
they elected. 



PRIME MiINISTER'S SPEECHI AT JTHIIE " TV I-IiKE IT AUSTRALIAN CAMiPATGl
ML'LBOUR.. NE, 26 OCTOBER 1975
You've just seen the man who often represents me
. I'm now speaking in my own right.
Ladies and gentlemen, we've all shown by our
presence tonight that we want to make TV Australian
we've acknowledged in the flesh, directly, the men and
women of talent who can make television Australian.
On behalf of the Australian Government I support their
efforts. But I must confess that it's become much more
difficult to do so than I thought when I pledged'this support
on behalf of my Party three years ago. It's not that
very much hasn't been attempted and quite an amount achieved
but I must mention two particular difficulties we have:
first, of course, it's only in recent years that the
Australian Government has tried to do anything about making
TV Australian. Before John Gorton, who is with us tonight
and except for John Gorton, no other Australian Governments.-
have ever tried to do anything about making television
Australian. And one of the early pleasures I had as head
of the present Government was to bring in-to the House, and
get through both Houses, the statute to establish the
Television School. Then we established a Film, Radio and
Television Board in the Australia Council; and we've
established an Australian Film Commission.
But there is one very long-seated difficulty that
we have in Australia there are too many television
commercial stations; and this stems from the fact that in
the later 1950' s and the early 1960' s the Australian
Government of . the day had to make sure that every one of
the newspaper families got its own two television stations.
And it is very much cheaper to be one of the few hundred
television outlets for television programs made in the United
States or even the-United Kingdom than it is to be one of
the half dozen catering for Australian programs.
With a great number of outlets it's cheaper and therefore
Australian television programs are too expensive, so they say.
And all the newspapers do their best to disparage the
Australian program and they do it under the guise of
telling their viewers that they are entitled to a choice:
they're entitled to the best, and the best -the inference
is comes from overseas.
And then there is one other very great difficulty
that we've found: the laws under which there is supervision
of radio and television in Australia, the Broadcasting and
Television Act, has not given sufficiently clear powers
and durisdiction to the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board. Where it has been possible by administrative action
to improve the Australian Broadcasting Commission or the
Australian Broadcasting Control Board the Government has done
so. The people who work for the A. B. C. now for the first
time have elected somebody themselves to represent them on the
A. B. C. And the Australian Broadcasting Control Board for
years said there were no more channels available and FM was
not possible in Australia. We now know that these were false 
statements. But still the Broadcasti c Control. Board can
maLe suggestions and can issue orde( rs and Lhe television
sti. tions can disregard them with impunity.
And twice the House of Representatives has passed amendments
to give the Broadcasting Control Board teeth and twice
the Senate has rejected those amendments. I will Eay
no more about the Senate, of course. But we've done our
best and until the laws are amended, radio and television
in Australia will be handicapped by the lack ofT proper
national power.
Ladies and gentlemen, we've all seen with our
own eyes, and heard with our own ears tonight the extent,
the range, the quality of talent, that there is in Australia
to produce Australian TV programs. And I believe your
voices, your response, to the artists, to the writers, to
the producers, will yeL be heard. Ladies and gentlemen,
we all have to work harder, resolutely, patiently, to see
that Australian talent is not only seen. in Australia, but
identified as Australian around the world. We have made
increasing sums of money available -' 73 Budget, ' 74 Budget,
Budget, when it geLs through. But this is not enough
we must all see , as Australians, that all our resources
are increasingly Australian whether they are material
or human-. And we have a wealth of human material, human
resources in this country, and not least in the performing
arts and in the most modern and pervasive of them all,
television itself. Let us make it Australian. 



EXTZAM~ FROM PRIME MMNS œ ER' S SPEH AT MIGRA!\ T RALLY,
M"= LUNE TOTN HAIL, 26 OXCIOBER 1975
Thank you for coming along in your thousands
to support the cause of democracy in Australia. In the last
twenty-five years, three million people whc were born
overseas have decided to live in Australia. Most of themi
have come from countries where democracy has disappeared or
where democracy is weak or where democracy is being
challenged. Most of them cafle to Australia because they had
heard that Australia was a mocracy, a Parliamentary democracy.
They had heard that Australia was a country where everybody
could express his political views and where every three years
people could go along to polling booths and pass the secret
votes for the Party which they themselves supported. And they
had heard that not only in the national Parliament of Australia
but in all the six States in Australia it was possible every
three years to choose a government you wanted.
Three years ago, no-one was more delighted than the
migrants in Australia to find that after a very vigorous
election campaign when all the political parties where able
to put their arguments on the radio or in the TV or at public
meetings, then you could have an election. In December 1972
you were delighted you were enthusiastic that you were able
to see a change of government in Australia. The people voted
against the government that there had been and they voted for
a new government, a Labor Government.
The change from the Liberal Country Party Government*
to the Labor Government was a peaceful change. The people
expressed their wishes and their wishes came about. They were
fulfilled; in Australia migrants saw all their hopes were
fulfilled. Migrants saw that at least in Australia, it was
possible by the democratic means of a vigorous and open
election campaign, by a secret vote on the polling day it was
possible to have a peaceful change of government. Migrants
expected, as all other Australians. expected, that the Government
which was elected in December 1972 would be able to govern
for. three years. / 2 
How many migrants were disappointed when the Government
which they helped to elect was forced to go to the people
prematurely in May l. ast year, only 1 years after the Government
was elected for three years? But once again the people of
Australia, including the millions of migrants who have votes,
once again they voted, after a vigorous campaign, in a secret
ballot, to have three more years of the Labor Government.
And now after another 17 months, before the
Government's 2nd term of office is half-way through, the
reactionary, the conservative, the fascist elements in
Australia are once again trying to interrupt democracy in
Australia, to frustrate democracy in Australia...
The Fraser fascists are now saying that because
they can get half the Senators voting against anything that
we put up, because they are therefore able to frustrate any
of our legislation, any of our motions, they are entitled to
govern the country... But-if you count up all the Members of Parliament
in Canberra, all the men and women who belong to the national
Parliament of Australia, there is a big majority of Labor men
and women over all -the others combined. That is, in the
Parliament as a whole and in the House of Representatives in
particular, Labor has a majority. Labor is entitled to govern.
And I will point out to you what the obstruction
has been this last week and the week before. The Budget Bills,
the basic Bills which enable the Australian Government to pay
the Public Servants, to pay the soldiers, to pay for services and
contracts which'people have provided, that's in a couple of
Budget Bills. And when they've gone to the Senate, the Senators
haven't voted against the Bills, they've just carried a motion
to defer the Bills, to postpone them.
And the device they u sed is to move an amendment
to the Bills that they don't be debated until there is an election
for the House of Representatives. And that motion has been 
carried three times in the week before last, . three times
last week, because a Labor Senator from Queensland died.
And Mr Bjelke-Petersen appointed an anti-Labor Senator
to take the place of the Labor Senator who died. If the
Labor Senator had still been alive he would have been voting
as he had all the years hie was in Parliament, he would have
been voting with the Labor Party. And in that case, these
six motions to adjourn the Bill would have been defeated
because there would have been as many Senators voting
against the motion as were voting in favour of the motion.
That is, there would have been an equal number of votes
and the motion to adjourn would have been defeated. And
as Senator Steele Hall has said: the motion to adjourn the
debate on the Budget Bills was carried over a dead man's corpse.
Because the Liberals know that if they were'to have a vote
to reject the Budget, then some of their people would vote
to pass it. Because not all Liberals are fascists; there
are some decent Liberals...
The only way that Mr Fraser can keep all his people
in line, is to movre an amendment to defer the vote to put
it off, to postpone it, to stall it, because if he were to have
a vote on passing or rejecting the Budget, t-he Budget would
be passed. And it would be a very good Budget indeed,
because there are three million people who would pay smaller
taxes once the Budget is passed. And there are half a million
people who have to pay income tax now, who will not have to
pay income tax once the Budget is passed. And instead of
having these tax concessions or deductions, which benefit
the rich people much more than they benefit the poor people,
there will be a system of rebates which will be of equal value
to everybody, whatever their incomes. This is a very good
Budget indeed. It is the best Budget this country has put to
the Parliament for years and years.
This Budget will particularly help migrants, it
will help'the family man, the working man, the underpriviledged,
the disadvantaged, the newcomers. It is of particular benefit 
for migrants. And the Liberals don't want you to feel and
enjoy the benefits of Bill Hayden's Budget. And they've
got no alternatives themselves. Because when Mr Fraser started
the debate on the Budget on the Opposition side, everybody
saw the disadvantages that would come if they got the chance.
Because there is going to be two lots of income tax, not
only Federal income tax but State income tax on top of that,
if the Liberals become the national Government. And now
they say that their Budget proposals are inoperative. You
remember that infamous word that President Nixon's Press
Secretary came out with, that a particular thing that the
President had said was " inoperative". Well that's what
they say now about their Budget. And they don't vote
against the Budget; they say that if there's going to be
an election for the House of Representatives, they will pass
the Budget... They're blackmailing you, they're depriving you
of the benefits of this Budget.
You ladies and gentlemen who come from overseas
have seen from your own bitter experience, that of your mothers
and fathers, how the reactionary, conservative and fascist elements
in * your countries have stopped at nothing to destroy democracy.
It's warning to see on an occasion like this, that
the people of Melbourne, and particularly the people in
Melbourne who were born overseas, want to see that democracy
is preserved in Australia. Because migrants in particular
realise that in my Government they have the first national
Government which has ever been interested in their welfare.
Because Liberal Government the government of Menzies and
Holt and Gorton and Billy McMahon once the migrants arrived
at the airport or at the port, they lost interest in them.
They were only interested until they landed or alighted in
Australia. After that they were factory fodder. And the
migrants. in Australia have been the principal victims of our
unplanned cities and our impoverished schools and our expensive
hospitals. 
You know it' s the Labor Government which has
made sure that wherever people live in Australia, wherever
they were born, whatever their occupation, whatever their
income, they will have equal opportunities in this country.
It is the Labor Government which has seen that You
are entitled to get citizenship rights all after-the same
length of time: no first, second, third grades of citizens;
everybody who comes to Australia is treated the same.
You are all entitled to portability of pensions; if you
become entitled to any social welfare payments in Australia
then you can now enjoy those payments anywhere in the world.
And if you have dependent wives or children or parents
in another country, you can get benefit from your taxation
for them before they get here. You're now having ethnic
radio stations; you can hear on the radio, you can hear
programs of your own choice, in your own language when you
want. You now have legal aid, you have Medibank, and if you
ring up a Federal Government Department you can speak to
people in your own language or you can get your documents
translated. We have looked for people to appoint to government
commissions and boards and departments. Because we have
appointed migrants to Qantas; we've appointed migrants
to the Universities Commission' we'ye appointed migrants
to the Australia Council; we've appointed migrants to the
International Women's Year National Committee; we'vye
appointed migrants to the Australian Broadcasting Commission;
we've appointed migrants as Head of Government Departments.
Certainly we've been criticised for these things. But there
is no doubt, for the first time, under the Labor Government
elected in 1972 and re-elected in 1974 for a three year term,
migrants are being considered for government appointments.
You are now getting all the opportunities which
are available to people who were born here. Don't lose it:
support the Labor Government which brought these benefits. ./ 6 
6.
The Government that you elected twice, the
Government which you most recently elected in May last year,
the Parliament which was first able to meet on the 9th
July last year, the Parliament, the Government, which you
elected for three years still has a Labor majority.
And with your support and the support of millions of your
fellow Australians, you will have a three year Government,
a people's Government, with a majority in'the People's House. 



t-
SIPR COLITN MA NNA H RR VC I RMT OP7TA CO K" O2N
Her MiW-iestv Thf: OnQ ent ", P a'v~ c ' c -r t'e P r irn
Minister has revo'l. e',. the ?_-orman-Jos~ sris: oe c. on
d -er-the
, Gov er no Q, i0,.
Govo2rr-ent-of-. Austral&gt; -toen ah. v
r c 1, o va I or absercre out thec , Go'~ oorr: u nor -Ger
Backcoround Note
Dormant Cormm ons' alr The Queen on
the ac vice of the TPr= ne . nse cir'"
th-e person oin tbCoi'. in. n exetKo'fo
so thc oenrGnr. o o? 2 et
acr'min~ ster the Goverre. nt-of7c'Pr&gt;,. f. teeeto
aoc i_ rcr vo c 02: of C tnr 7a J
of teGovernor-Gcn . rnl., CTorem~ i n s -: 00
ov: ates the reecf. s, to .; e
on v e ryv occasion where an " enr ', Of th
Govcx,.: no-Cranerai
"' le Tpresent practicer.. r to ireDorva~ nt Com-. 4nss-co
to some State C-overnorz Cr. call n Sen-l o_
Gov,, r-! nor holdinc Cc= nr. s-.*. on tobo-. Kn o ' n t_.-e
evert of' the a. hsence, ec Ci o'nrGnr2
CAN2BEOP-A, A. C. T. 



Press Statement No. 583
28 October 1975
THE RANGER URANIUM PROJECT IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
The Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam; the Managing Director
of Electrolytic Zinc Company of Australasia Ltd., Mr Mackay;
and the Chairman of Peko Mines Ltd., Mr Proud signed this
afternoon a Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government and the Companies for the development and mining
of uranium ore deposits in the Ranger area in the Northern
Territory and for the production and sale of uranium
concentrate from that ore.
This Memorandum represents an elaboration of the
Agreement Previously signed by the Ministers ana representatives
of the Companies on 30 October 1974.
The completion of this Memorandum of Understanding
will now facilitate the early preparation of formal agreements
in relation to this Venture. It is understood by the Parties,
however, that these agreements will not become effective
until Australia has affirmed them following consideration of:
the Report of the Ranger Uranium Environmental
Inquiry ( Hearings by this Inquiry commenced on
9 September 1975 with Mr Justice Fox as
presiding Commissioner.);
the outcome of any claims by Aboriginals in respect
of land within the Ranger area ( in conformity with
the procedures to be required by the Aboriginal
Land ( Northern Territory) Bill 1975 now before
the Parliament).
The discussions which have led to the signing of the
Memorandum of Understanding this afternoon confirms the
confidence of the Government and Peko and EZ in this major
Australian mining enterprise. The Government believes that
the'Ranger Project can be a major export earner and it will
be working with Peko and EZ to bring this fully Australian
mining project to fruition. Nevertheless, it is essential
before the project can proceed, that the Government receive
the Report of the Environmental Inquiry and take whatever
steps it may then judge necessary in the light of the findings
and recommendations of that Inquiry.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 


PRIME MINISTER'S CURTIN MEMORIAL LECTURE,AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, E,CANBERXIA 29 OCTOBER 19750C1. " I HIThirty-four years ago -October 1941 -in\@ dl't atpolitical upheaval and at a time of supreme danger f t a,the House of Representatives asserted its unchallenged andexclusive right to make and unmake Australian governments. As aresult of that assertion of its exclusive authority, John Curtinbecame Prime Minister of Australia.It is timely to recall tonight the manner in which heachieved office and the manner by which the first CurtinGovernment, one of the very great, if not the very greatest ofall Australian Qovernments, was maintained for more than twoyears thereafter. It was a. Government formed solely through amajority of the House of Representatives and maintained solelyat the will of the majority in the House of Representatives.Neither in attaining nor retaining the Prime Ministership didCurtin ever have to consider the state of the political partiesin the Senate. Thus, in the most critical time in this nation'shistory, one of the,-, strongest of our governments was sustainedby the narrowest possible majority in the House of Representatives.But that bare majority was enough for the highest possible ofall purposes the security and survival of this nation. Therecould be no more striking proof if proof were ever neededofthe power and absolute supremacy of the majority even amere majority -in the House of Representatives.. The Australian Labor Party has happened to form federalgovernments during significant parts of the three great worldcrises of the tiwentieth century the two World Wars and theGreat Depression. Naturally enough we have tended to believethat the people of Australia have turned to Labor for leadershipin times of the greatest peril.. This is only true in the veryloosest sense. The eloctions of 1914 and 1929 which both resultedin the return of Labor Governments were in no wiay fought on theSgreat international issues then about to engulf the world. Andin Curtin's case, the government was formed not directly as aesalt of any election at all, but by the decision of the House~ Qof lepresentatives -by the will of the majority in the House. of . aepresentatives. The prolonged political crisis of 1941 was about numbers* in the-House of Representatives. Throughout that crisis theMenzies Government and then the Padden Government was supportedby a clear majority in the Senate. But the numbers in the Senatewere never a consideration throughout the turmoil. It was onlybecause of-his precarious position in the House of Representativesthat Menzies sought to form a national government with Laborparticipation. He wanted to build a reliable working majority* in the House of Representatives. He could not do that unlesshe had Labor support. He failed. He resigned. The Fadden Budget* was then defeated by the votes of the two Independents, Messrs* Coles and Wilson. That is the majority in the House of Representativeschanged and therefore the Government of Australia changed. And* with that paper-thin majority in the House of Representatives,I
2-despite its-minbrity position--in* the Senate,-the CiirtinGovernment* went-on'. t mobilise..-Australja anal to steer Australiathrough the perils'of. 1942-and 1-943. That Government was notonly Curtin's. vindication; it was'-a vindication " of the authorityof the House of-Representatives, a vindication never to be forgotten.episodeIt is especially worth recalling those days because theepiodeillustrates the novelty of the pretensions to make andunmake governments now being put forward on behalf of the Senate.The significant thing about 1941 is that throughout the period,the state of the Senate and the opinions of Senators were alwaysirrelevant to the central issue, and totally irrelevant to the* outcome. No historian today would view the position of the. Senatewhich resulted from the 1940 elections as an important factor inthe situation any more than did the politicians of the dayanymore than Menzies or Fadden or Curtin took it into account.the Melbourne University is now publishing the second volume of' teCaucus Minutes, the minutes of the Parliamentary Labor Partyfrom 101 to 1949. The most intriguing revelations intriguingSperhaps in more than one sense of the word are about the periodW 1940 1941. In particular, there is the correspondence betweenSMenzies, Curtin, Fadden,* Earle Page and Beazley about the possibleformation of a national government. In all that correspondence,you will never find the Senate mentioned.In those days; by those men, in the great matter, theSenate was treated with the reverent silence due to all irrelevantanachronisms. We do not however have to go back thirty-four years;recent as that is in terms of constitutional history we have to* go back no further than our own experience the elections of1972 and 1974. The elections of 1972 were for the House of'&gt; Representatives alone; whatever the result had been the stateof the Parties in the Senate had to remain unchanged; an anti--, Labor majority was guaranteed until at least July 1974. NoAustralian at that time considered that the Senate would be a&gt; cru,: ial factor in determining the timing of future elections.Nobody approached the 1972 campaign with any thought othertha~ i what Australians were doing then was electing a governmentfor a normal three-year term. There might have been some fleetingthought given to the possibility of the circumstances by whichLabor, if successful, might be brought to the need for a double. dissolution. But certainly no-one seriously considered thepossibility of the House of Representatives being forced to anelection by the refusal of Supply by the Senate. And no-oneconsidered the poss. ibility of a double dissolution triggered offby the threat of refusal of Supply by the Senate. It has been* a remarkable example of the unthinkable becoming apparentlyquite acceptable. It has since appeared that the Government had barelytaken office when the Opposition in the Senate began planningto use its numbers to force an early House of Representativeselection. In the words of Senator Withers speaking in April 1974:" We embarked on a course some 12 months ago tobring about a House of Representatives election."
-3-The course of action was being prepared by Senatorswho had taken office one and a half and four and a half yearsbefore the Labor Government, and who had been elected two andfive years before the Governmnt. In the present * crisis therehas been a tendency to overlook the fact that the rejectionof money Bills or the refusal of Supply by the Senate doesnot of itself and cannot of itself lead to an election for theSenate. It is aimed only against the House of* Representatives.The fact that grounds may exist for a double dissolution onother issues is incidental. It may be politically relevantbut it is constitutionally irrelevant. In April 1973* when thiscourse was first contemplated there were no grounds for adouble dissolutionno legislation had been twice rejected bythe Senate with a lapse of three months between the firstrejection and the second introduction. Nor when the rejectionof the 1974 Budget was threatened last October did the groundsexist for another double . dissolution. The slate had been wipedclean by the 1974 elections. The rejection of the Budget last,,. year could only hav&amp; led. to a House of Representatives election.The existence of grounds for a double dissolution now,on twenty-two Bills which have nothing whatever to do with theBudget, only obscures -the real implications and the realintentions of the actions of the Senate. To accept the Senate'sclaims now would be to accept the right of the Senate to havethe House of Representatives dissolved without itself havingto go to the people.It is now clear that behind the present constitutionalstruggle there is a wider political question the answer to whichis central to the way in which Australia's whole political lifewill develop for the rest of this century and beyond. Thequestion is not just whether this particular government, the* Whitlam, Government, will be allowed to govern for the term forSwhich it was elected. The question is whether any duly electedreformist government will be allowed to govern in the future.What is at stake is whether the people who seek change andreform are ever again to have any confidence that it can beachieved through the normal parliamentary processes.0 During my period as Leader of the OppositionlI addressed-myself to three principal tasks: to develop a coherent program-of relevant reform; to convince a majority of Australians thatthose reforms were relevant; and to convince the Labor movementas a whole that the Parliamentary institutions were relevant inachieving worthwhile reform. The great organisational battlesbetween 1967 and 1970, particular in Victoria, were essentiallyabout that third task. It was the toughest of all.I would not wish on any future leader of the AustralianLabor Party the task of having to harness the radical forces tothe restraints and constraints of the parliamentary system ifI were now to succumb in the present crisis. it is clear thatthe basic attack which has been mounted against, the LaborGovernment from April 1973 onward was not an attack on itscompetence or its effectiveness but on its very legitimacythe legitimacy of any reform government now or in the fut-ure. ./ 4
-4-There is a certain poignancy for mec in delivering thisCurtin Lecture at a time of deep constitutional crisis ' and highconstitutional drama. It was very mnuch due to John Curtin thatI first became concerned about the Australian Constitution.In 1961 1 delivered the second Curtini Memorial Lecture uinder theauspices of the University of Western Australia branch of theAustralian Labor Party. I said then:" My interest in constitutional matters stems from* the-time when John Curtin was Prime Ministor.The Commonwealth Parliament's powers were than attheir most ample and it was constitutionally, ifnot always politically, more open to a Labor* Government to carry out its policies than it is inpeace time. Johin Curtin, however, saw -that he waspresiding over a passing phase. He was not contentwith the paradox that the Labor Party was free toenact its policies in times of war alone.Accordingly, in 1944 he sponsored a referendumto give the Federal Parliament post-war powers.His motives for holding the referendum were basedon patriotism and experience. He argued the casewith his full logic and eloquence. The oppositionto the referendum was spurious and selfish. Thearguments were false. My hopes were dashed by theoutcome and from that moment I determined to do* all I could to modernise the Australian Constitution."The title of that lecture was '. Democratic Socialismwithin the Constitution". Some years previously, in 1957,I delivered the Chifley Memorial Lecture in Melbourne. Thetitle of that lecture was '' The Constitution versus Labor'.It. would be fair to say that the difference in the two subjectsexpressed the development of my thinking over the interveningfour years. In the Chifley Lecture I was concerned withthe difficulties confronting the Australian Labor Party incarrying out its policies under the federal system. In the 1961Curtin lecture, I emphasised the opportunities a Labor Governmentwould have to carry out its policies under -the federal. system asit then stood and as it still stands. I summed up by saying:" Members of the Parliament must accept the permanentnecessity of seeking the people's consent beforethey can nationalise an industry. This should notbe regarded as too stifling an inhibition in these* times. Socialists are now more concerned with thecreation of opportunities than the imposition ofrestraints. Within our own nation we do not haveto ration scarcity but plan abundance TheAustralian Government has as much constitutionalfreedom as any other national government to plan thepublic sector in Australia and to make arrangementswith other countries. Through its financialhegemony it can create better conditions in transport,housing, education and health; it can create newindustries; it can create new communities. Throughinternational arrangements it can share in the moreorderly and equitable production, distribution andexchangeof goods and skills. Socialists have toplay the most dynamic role in the relatively skilledand affluent community inhabiting our remote, dependentand unevenly developed continent."
To a very great extent the broad lines of actionIthen foreshadowed were to form, after years of refinement anddevelopment in the Parliament and within the Party, the, programon which the Party was elected in 1972 and which the AustralianGovernment has endeavoured to carry out during the two Parliamentsin which we have had a clear House of Representatives majoritythetruncated twenty-eighth Parliament and this threatened,turbulent twenty-ninth Parliament.One of the ironies of the present situation is thatthe philosophy of the program assumes acceptance of the rulestheground rules of a system which is inherently conservative.The program accepts the limitations of the Cornstitution, theunwieldiness of the Parlirnentary system as an instrument forexecutive action and the frustrations of the federal system.We accepted the rules of the game. In our innocence we thoughtthat our opponents did too.In practice the real difficulties in carrying out the.pogram have not arisen in any serious degree from the obviouslimitations imposed by the Constitution and the federal. system.* True, there has been obstruction and non-co-operation and oftensheer bloodymindedness on the part of the States. And true,we have so far failed in attempts to secure amendments to theConstitution. These involved setbacks;. but the Government canlive with them. I know it would disappoint him terribly, butI must confess I never lie awake at nights worrying aboutMr Bjelke-Petersen. I can easily put up with the pretensions* of the Premier's palindromic pro-consul or as easily putthem down. The really intractable difficulties, however, havearisen from problems quite external to the Constitution and* the federal system. These have been political and economic,but the economic difficulties themselves have been vastly., compounded by political distortions. So in a very real sensewithoutany attempt on my part to escape responsibility or to* deny mistakes and misjudgements Australia's present difficulties,M. ot least the economic difficulties, spring from a gross andprolonged distortion of normal political processes.I first put our economic problems in their worldperspective but, equally, I do suggest that our ability totake national action to ameliorate the consequences of aninternational situation has been seriously compromised by anartificially-induced domestic political crisis.When my Government was elected our aim was to financeour new programs from growth. But world-wide inflation andrecession frustrated this objective. This is no mere self-* justification. The whole industrialised world is currentlygoing through the worst peacetim~ e inflation on record and thedeepest recession since the 1930' s. Within the OECD, themembership of which includes virtually every industrialisedcountry in the world, the average rate of inflation jumped from3.9 per cent per annum in the decade 1962 to 1972, to 7.9per cent in 1973 and 13.4 per cent in 1974. Real Gross NationalProduct which rose at the rate of 5.4 per cent per annum inthe decade to 1972 declined slightly for the OECD countries? a whole in 1974 and is expected to show a decline of about5per cent in 1975. / 6
-6-The OECD Economic Outlook stated on 17 July 1975:" The present recession in OECD countries is themost serious since the war. It is remarkable notonly for its length and depth a third consecutive. half-year of negative growth has now been recordedfor the area as a whole but also for its widespreadnature: virtually every OECD country grew by lessthan-its miedium-term average rate in 1974, and noeconomy is expected to take up slack in 1975.The margin of idle resources in the OECD area is nowthe largest in the post-war period, with unemploymentat record levels. The forecasts presented in theDecember Economic Outlook, and to a greater extentthose being made at that time by national authorities,proved to be too optimistic. Industrial outputin the matjor countries fell very sharply in the lastquarter of 1974 and the first quarter of this year.The extent and simultaneous nature of the declinewas unlike anything recorded in the post-war period.The combined GNP of the major countries, which wasthought at the time to have increased marginally inthe second half of 1974, is now estimated to havefallen, at an annual rate, by over one per cent.output was expected to continue stagnating in thefirst half of this year; it may in fact have fallenat an annual rate of about five per cent. TheDecember Economic Outlook gave reasons for supposing. that the balance of uncertainties attaching to the. forecasts was on the downside; but the extent to which thisproved to be the case is astonishing."There is no way in which Australia could have escapedbeing caught up in these disruptive world-wide economic developments.We are, after all, a major trading country, so what happens toour major trading partners the United States, Japan and theUnited Kingdom is bound to affect us. It is estimated that inthe course of the recession industrial production fell bySpei7 cent in Japan, by over 14 per cent in the United States andby. over 8 per cent in the United Kingdom. Even West Germany,wh . ch has ridden out this storm better than most, suffered afall in industrial production of ' over 11 per cent. What is more,these declines should be viewed against strong upward trendspreviously existing at least for the United States, Japan andWest Germany; on this basis the loss of potential output has beenmuch greater than these figures imply.Against this background, the OECD forecast for a realgrowth of 2 per cent of GDP in Australia this calendar year isrelatively good, disappointing by past standards though it maybe. In the same period, the OECD expects real growth in Japanto rise by 1 per cent and to fall by 2 per cent in Germany andalmost 4 per cent in the United States. And overall, growthof real GDP in all the OECD nations in calendar 1975 is expectedtLo be minus 1 1 per cent. In an international situation such asthis, it was inevitable that Australia would also be faced withsizeable economic problems. ./ 7
-7-Havin~ g said that, it is impossible to exaggerate thedegree to which the impact of these world-wide trends has beenexacerbated by internal political disruptions. It is impossibleto exaggerate the additional. pressures placed upon theGovernment in trying to ameliorate those difficulties. For thefact is that during two critical periods in the nation'--economic cycle, the normal business of Government has beendisrupted and interrupted. In his Calwell Memorial Lecture.on 22 September the Treasurer, Bill Hayden, emphasised thedisruption that-had occurred because Australia was forced tohave two general elections within eighteen mnonths and whichwould occur again if Australia were forced to have a thirdelection in less than three years. Mr Hayden said:" Surprisingly, it is not widely realised that thatvery act of premature elections itsel~ f is enormouslydestabilising to the administration of this country." For instance, at the time of the double dissolution* last year, the administration of national affairswas more or less in a state of suspension forsome thing like three months during the electioncampaign and the post-election uncertainty until themarathon Senate count was completed." The distraction of the election diverted, attentionfrom detailed social and economic management,especially from the latter." The community should be aware that the economycannot afford that again.n " In retrospect, it seems that there were a numberof significant economic developments during thatperiod which were subsequently to create problems." If the undistracted attention of the Governmenthad been available to attend to economic management. at that time, the ill effects of those developmentsmight at least have been moderated."That was the Treasurer speaking on 22 September. Noneof us really foresaw what would be happening a mere month later.Quite frankly we did accept at their face value the repeatedstatements made by the Leader of the Opposition. Clive ofIndia contemplating the plunder he might have engorged confessedhe stood amazed at his own moderation. Sometimes I stand amazed,. at our own trustfulness.In this situation we should be concerned not only withthe political disruption but the psychological effects thatthis disruption must inevitably have upon the economy, upon thepeople, and not least, upon the public service. ./ 8
-8-The Budget itself is a nicely balanced even aprecariously balanced attempt to deal with the competingdemands of pressing economic problems and of social justice.It is as adventurous and as imaginative a Budget as has everbeen attempted in this country or in any comparable country.For any significant Budget, and this one in particular, atthis time in particular, its effectiveness depends on a wholerange of subtle, intangible, psychological factors. It wasin recognition of this, for instance, that the Treasurer, veryproperly, very-commendably, took a special step to ensure thatthe leader of the trade union movement the spokesman forthat section of the Australian community upon which thesuccess or failure of the Budget must chiefly turn shouldunderstand its underlying nature and purpose.But what authority can a Budget have,, what successcan a Budget strategy have if it is delayed week after week--and those the most . critical weeks in the financial year?There is another very serious aspect of this presentcrisis which perhaps only those of us who have to live and workmost of our time in this city will fully appreciate. Thiscapital is, arguably, the most pol. itical and most politicisedScity in the world, not excepting Washington. We are not the'. only City cxeated as the political and administrative capitalof a nation. But the curious combination of isolation andintimacy in this city, of all the people who live and work init, makes it a uniquely sensitive organism. It is extraordinarilydifficult for the normal administration, the normal decisionmakingprocesses, the normal operations of the on-going publicservice to continue unaffected, uninterrupted almost at anylevel -when this city is preoccupied by a political crisis.I think we are all aware of this. Without putting it too high,there is always a very real risk in Canberra that an,-overwhelming political preoccupation will mean administrativeparalysis. I think it appropriate I should point this outhere in this city and in this University, which gives Canberraits best claim to be a true city in the full meaning of the word.V. It is something of which everybody who has to make decisionsabout this present crisis should take note.I I want to put it to you that we have an extraordinarysituation combining great international difficulties withartificially imposed political difficulties. Yet it is asituation in which the elected Government is determined to continuethe business of Government and is duty-bound to continue thebusiness of Government. The world's economic problems willcompound Australia's problems and only a slow recovery can behoped for. Encouraging signs are emerging; the wisdom of theBudget is now apparent if it is allowed a chance to work.Nevertheless, highly undesirable implications of inflationimpose a limit on the rate of recovery. Control of inflationis the Government's first economic priority. Unless inflationis curbed the nation's productive capacity will run down and jobopportunities will diminish. Failure to control inflation wouldmean that the present undesirable unacceptable -high levelsof unemployment would worsen. / 19
-9-This Government rejects any policy of deliberately creatingmassive unemployment and widespread business failures in orderto stop inflation abruptly but until inflation is controlledwe will have to live with unemployment at a level that would,in other circumstances, be unacceptable; otherwise we will notbe able to achieve our goal of full employment in the future.The Government is adhering resolutely to its wagespolicy and to support of indexation. There already areindications of the value of its resolute stand. But we canonly successfully continue that stand if the elected Governmenthas, and is seen to have, authority and legitimacy.The Government has adjusted personal income tax scalesto give relief to those most in need from the higher incidenceof taxation due to inflation and to remove the inequities fromthe income tax whereby the well-to-do benefited more fromconcessional deductions than those on lower incomes.. TheGovernment has not hesitated to intervene in industrial disputes* that threaten its wages policy.The Government is concerned to stimulate and maintainbusiness confidence and to create an environment in which businessrcwill invest. Consistent with the Government's wishes thePriesJustification Tribunal has placed greater emphasis onfuture profitability and investment plans of industry. TheMathews Committee recommended a changed approach to the valuationof trading stocks for business purposes and the indexation of* depreciation allowances. The enormous revenue costs and thepractical difficulties of implementation left the Government noalternative but to set these recommendations aside and to adoptan alternative recommendation made by the Mathews Committee toreduce company tax and also to continue the system of doublerates of depreciation beyond 30 June 1975, extending it to all-vsectors of commerce arid industry.Let me put this as succinctly as I can: the programnof the Australian Labor Government has been designed to achieveiandindeed has achieved a significant redistribution of the~&gt; national wealth in favour of the majority but the base on whichthat redistribution has been achieved and in a mixed economythe private sector must be a powerful part of that base iS notnow strong enough to sustain the continuing upward redistributionof wealth or, perhaps, to sustain the great gains that havealready been made.As to the reality of the redistribution,-let meinstance two examples employees and pensioners that is, theoverwhelming majority of Australian adults.Average minimum award rates have risen by 55 per centand average earnings by 45 per cent over the past two yearswhile the cost of living, as measured by the increasedby 32 per cent in the same period.
using a slightly different base period between1969 and 1974 the average income of those aged 65 or ' overwhose principal source of income i-s Government social service* benefits rose by 74 per cent while the C. P. I. rose by 38 percent. For those people it represented a rise in real incomein that period of around 26 per cent.* I must emphasise, however, that in our mixed economythe base on which these advances have been made must bestrengthened. Not least of the purposes of the Budge:, thistremendously important Budget now put in a sort of limbo bythe Senate-is to strengthen that base by increasing theprofitability and viability of the private sector.. A coupleof months ago, business might have said that the one thingneedful to restore confidence was a change of Government.Increasingly business now recognises that the one thing needfulis to pass the Budget, to end the present political crisis,_to let the elected-Government govern.I return to the beginning: the basic principle is thatthe elected government must be enabled to govern and that theelected Government is made or unmade through the House ofRepresentatives. I quote Quick and Garran first in time andfirst in authority on our Constitution writing at the timeof the founding of the Australian Parliament:" The House of Representatives is not only thenational chamber; it is the democratic chamber;it is the grand repositry and embodiment of theliberal principles of government which pervadethe entire constitutional fabric. It is thechamber in which the progressive instincts andpopular aspirations of the people will be mostlikely to make themselves first felt... by theConstitution, it is expressly intended to besuch a House, and by its organisation andfunctions, it is best fitted to be the area inwhich national progress will find room fordevelopment." I put it to you with all earnestness: it is because* this Government has attempted to make this Parliament theinstrument for reform, for long overdue change, for progress,for the redistribution of wealth, for the uplifting of theunderprivileged, for the reduction of the privileges of greatwealth and deeply entrenched vested interests, an instrumenttowards equality of opportunity for all Australians, that ouropponents and those vested interests have from the very beginning,as Senator Withers revealed, embarked on a course to destroythis Governmentat the earliest opportunity. l
-11-I fully expect that the authority of the House ofRepresentatives shall be asserted and established quitesoon and in such a way as to assert and establish it beyonddoubt for all time. I fully expect that the authority ofthat House will be as successfully asserted and established,in a very different time, in a very different context, butwith the same significance and value for this nation as itwas 34 years ago -as it was to make the greatest of allmy predecessors. John Curtin -Prime Minister of Australia.
3q~~ 2~ o~ 9P jib / VcAr''( Pc! DEPLOAN CARD DETAIL Call No.I, ro II~ e A cusiun N o T. P RIMMEIN ISTAENRCD A BINET91027459 0 0



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 584
October 1975
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
and the Minister for Manufacturing Industry, the
Hon. Lionel F. Bowen, M. P.
COMMITTEE TO ADVISE ON POLICIES FOR MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
The Prime Minister today tabled Volume 1 of the report
of the Committee to Advise on Policies for Manufacturing Industry
the Jackson Committee. Three further volumes containing supporting
material and statistics are expected shortly.
The Committee was established on 18 July 1974 with terms
of reference: To advise on appropriate policies for the development
of manufacturing industry, including:
the machinery required for integrating
such policies with the Government's
general economic, social and regional
policies, the place of, exports and imports in the
development of manufacturing industry,
and the role of firms of overseas origin in
manufacturing,
and to advise on communication between the Australian
Government and the private sector and the State
Governments, with respect to the development and
implementation of such policies. / 2 
2.
The Chairman of the Committee was Mr R. G. Jackson,
General Manager and Director, CSR Limited; the other members of the
Committee were: Mr B. IJ. Brogan, Consultant, Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet;
Mr R. H. Carnegie, Chairman and Chief Executive,
Conzinc Riotinto of Australia
Limited;
Mr Currie, Secretary, Department of
Manufacturing Industry;
Mr R. J. L. Hawke, President, Australian Council of
Trade Unions;
Mr G. A. Rattigan, Chairman, Industries
Assistance Commission;
and
Professor E. L. Wheelwright, Associate Professor,
Department of Economics,
University of Sydney.
The report of the Committee is a large and complex
document dealing with wide-ranging issues. It will provide a
valuable basis for further involvement of the community in
assessing the way in which Australia should progress in the
manufacturing sector, and for determining well-founded policies.
Comments upon the report or submissions to the Government about it
will be most welcome; they should be directed in writing to the
Hon. Lionel F. Bowen, Minister for Manufacturing Industry,
Canberra, 2600.
The Annual Report of the Industries Assistance Commissiou,
which was tabled today, will also contribute to the public
assessment of the future of the manufacturing sector in Australia.
As well as providing a basis for discussion and debate
the report of the Jackson Committee makes several recommendations
which will require immediate consideration by the Government.
Accordingly, a Committee of Ministers has been established to
examine those recommendations only, as a matter of urgency, and
advise Cabinet on them. The Committee consists of the Prime Minister,
the Deputy Prime Minister, the Ministers for Manufacturing Industry
and Labor and Immigration, the Special Minister of State and the
Treasurer. The report is presently being printed and copies are
expected to be available for general distribution within a few weeks.
Special steps have been taken to ensure that a reasonably-priced
edition is available as quickly as possible, to ensure the widest
possible circulation and the fullest possible public debate before
decisions are taken. Advance orders for either Volume 1 separately
or for all four volumes of the report are being accepted by the Mail
Order Sales Section, Australian-Government Publishing Service,
P. O. Box 84, Canberra, 2600,
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



. PRIME MINISTER.' Press Statement No. 585
October 1975
. ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
The Prime Minister announced that the Administrative
Arrangements Order had today been amended to transfer the
administrative responsibility for the procurement, purchase
. and disposal of goods from the Minister and Department of
Administrativ6 Services to the Minister and Department
of Manufacturing Industry.
In the appropriations for the Supply period passed
last May, funds for the salaries of persons employed on
the purchasing and-associated activities were provided for
the Departments of Manufacturing Industry and Special
Minister of State which both had functions relating to
Government purchasing. When the purchasing functions
of those departments were later transferred to the Department
of Services and Property ( now the Department of Administrative
Services) the necessary allocations were provided in the
Appropriation Bill ( No. 1) 1975-76 which is being delayed
by the Opposition in the Senate.
The formal, but temporary, transfer of administration
of the purchasing functions will enable the personnel
concerned to be transferred temporarily to the Department
of Manufacturing Industry and to be paid at least until the
end of the Supply period from the appropriations originally
allocated for them. Only a small numiber of the staff were
earlier transferred from the Department of the Special
Minister of State, and they too are being transferred to the
Department of Manufacturing Industry rather than to their
former department under this temporary arrangement.
The administrative action that has been taken is in
keeping with the statement the Prime Minister made on
24 October that the Government will not act other than
strictly in accordance with law in attempting to preserve
administrative services and maintain wage and salary
payments. The action is a consequence of the steps that
have been taken to ensure that wage and salary payments will
be maintained through the Supply period.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



4C. J,, AUSTHAL IA
PRIME MINISTER Press Statement No. 586
October 1975
THE BUDGET
The present constitutional crisis must be resolved, and it must
* be resolved quickly by the men who brought it about. There can
no longer be any doubt that the opposition's policy on blocking
the Budget has been rejected by an overriding majority of the
Australian people and, increasingly, by Opposition Senators
themselves.
Many of you will. have seen the results of the latest public polls.
To put it simply, they are quite devastating. It is not my usual
practice to comment on these polls, but it's interesting to
remember that Mr Fraser has always placed great store by them.
He justified the rejection of the Budget by claiming massive
public support for his chosen course. That course has proved
disastrous; it has failed; the latest polls have shown it. They
reveal that 70 percent of the Australian people believe the Budget
should be passed. Well over half the Australian people believe
the Government should be allowed to govern.
This week we saw the final collapse of the long drawn-out and
farcical Khemlani business the so-called loans scandal. The
Opposition itself has admitted that nothing in Mr Khemlani's
documents those eight mysterious suitcases could justify
the unprecedented course they have taken. We know now that
Mr Fraser is relying on a handful of Opposition Senators who have
publicly expressed their reservations very grave reservations
about the rejection of the national Budget. Senator Igessell,
a Liberal, has said firmly that he would never vote against the
Budget, and he added and I quote his words " A good many
others would feel the same way as I do." That is, a number of
Opposition Senators, who have gone along with the deferral of the
Budget, are now saying they would never reject it. That's the
sort of backing Mr Fraser has for his present policy doubts and
fears among his own Senators, and overwhelming rejection by the
Australian people. * 99/ 2 
I have to say frankly that the opposition's present tactics are
perilous in the exctreme. It is not my intention, it is not my
desire, to provoke needless fear or alarm. But we must be quite
clear about the consequences of what is happening. The
continual refusal to pass the Budget to give the elected
Government the means to govern and maintain the essential
services of the nation -is already damaging the business
community,-threatening the normal life of the nation, and
endangering the whole delicate process of economic recovery.
These are critical weeks and months in the nation's life. The
decisions we take now and above all the orderly working of
our Budget strategy may well determine our economic future,
our prosperity and strength, for years to come. Every day that
passes, every day the Budget is delayed, makes our task more
hazardous and difficult. I have said before there can be no
surrender on this issue; the fundamental principle ofdemocracy
is too important for me, or for any future Prime
Minister. On that I am absolutely determined. I ask my fellow-
Australians to stand with me in defence of this principle, and
whatever trials may come, to maintain as best they can the
normal business of * the nation. The Budget must pass. The
Government must be allowed to govern. The economy and the
nation must go forward. 



PRIME MINISTER'S INTERVIEW WITH PETER HARVEY, CHANNEL 9 NEWS
31 OCTOBER 1975
HARVEY: Prime Minister with the public opinion polls moving
towards you, as they are, you must be very tempted to go for
an election?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh yes there is a temptation, just a's there was
early in the year when Mr Snedden fell and was succeeded by
Mr Fraser, there was a great temptation to take advantage of
disarray in the Liberal Party.
HARVEY: Do you think you wouldwin now, sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. I've thought all along that in any election
campaign we'd win. Because I'm sure that when the public is
faced with a choice between us and the Liberal alternative, they
will rally to us. But quite apart from that I think there are
two reasons why one doesn't have-a premature election for the
House of Representatives: one is that as recently as May last
year we sought, as the Liberals did, a three year term as a
Government. And the public gave us that three year term. And
accordingly we should fulfil the job which we sought. And the
other reason is, that last April and May when we had the last
Federal election, we were without a Parliament for three months.
The two Houses were disolved on the 10th of April, And holding
the election as quickly as possible and counting the votes as
quickly as possible, we still couldn't assemble the new Parliament
until the 9th of July. Now I don't think that in the present
economic circumstances you can have the Parliament and the
. Government and the administration suspended for three months.
HARVEY: Its. been said Prime Minister that Mr Fraser has got
himself into a corner. Now would you be prepared in anywayto a
help Mr Fraser out of that corner, does it have to come to/ crunch?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh it's not he's got himself into this corner.
He's done the wrong thing, as Mr Snedden did the wrong thing.
HARVEY: ', Couldn't the two of you perhaps... 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: Oh no. I've got a duty to see that the system
is preserved under which, if the people elect a government it
is given the opportunity to govern. I can't accept the proposition
that whenever the Senate sees fit to force or wish an election
for the House of Representatives then the House of Represenatives
has to oblige the Senate. Because this situation can arise every
six months, e very October the Parliament has to pass-the Budget
for the period from the previous 1st of July to the following
of June. And every April the Parliament has to pass the
Supply Bills to cover the period from the 1st of July following
to the 30th of November following. Twice a year this happens.
Now since we became the Government the Liberals -,, more priual
the Country Party have always threatened to block the Budget,
to block Supply. Now if we accept that then no government which
is elected will ever be able to govern with confidence or courage.
Every government goes through unpopular patches. And any
government which may have-to face the people in six months time
will do the popular thing, and very often the irresponsible thing.
All governments have to make some unpopular decisions, some tough
decisions. And accordingly they must have the three year period
in which to plan a whole program.
HARVEY: Well given then, what you've said and the fact that
Mr Fraser says that he has no intention of backing-down, how on
earth is this going to be resolved?
PRIME MINISTER: Well if it comes to the crunch, it is ' probable
that the Government can govern without the Budget. We are.
confident that all our employees, civilian and military, will
be able to get their incomes. Furthermore, we are pretty
confident that all our creditors and our suppliers and contractors,
will be able to get their debts met. Now we are satisfied of that.
It's a messy business, it's inconvenient to a lot of people but
nevertheless, the Australian Government's obligations will be met.
This doesn't say that there won't be a great deal of uncertainity
and disruption in the business community; it's already feeling
this. The Budget which is to be the principle instrument of economic
recovery is being delayed. The other things . we've done;
for instance, submissions to the Arbitration Commission are
obviously working very well. We are now in a very much position
than Augtranti ( ivorninonts , wore iriti. 1 quilto rocantllltO monitor 
the money supply. In those respects thc Government is doing very
well. But it needs the Budget.
HARVEY: But you suggested a minute ago that you don't really need
the Budget, you can go ahead and govern?
PRIME MINISTER: It is not the regular, the easy way to do it.
There are legal ways to see that those people who depend on the
Australian Government for their incomes, or their debts to be met,
will in fact have all those obligations met. We are confident
that this can happen. But its still this air of uncertainty,
particularly among-the commercial community and the private
sector which the Liberal and Country Party Senators are bringing
about. HARVEY: Could it come to the crunch that you do have to govern
without the Budget?
PRIME MINISTER: It might, it might. We are prepared to do that.
And it is all completely legal. The methods upon which
we have sought and got advice.
HARVEY: Prime Minister, thank you. 



PRIME MINISTER.' S ADDRESS AT A FUND-RAISING LUNCH, 0
ALICE SPRINGS, 1 NOVEMBER 1975
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you
very much indeed for the organisation you've put into the
events of today. It was a great meeting in the park this
morning and this is a magnificent gathering for lunch now.
And I'm most heartened at the reception you gave the newest
minister, the youngest minister, in the Australian Government.
Only 31 years old, he's been in the Parliament less than
six years; I can assure you there is very great com~ petition
to get into the ministry. But you've been able to hear and
see the quality of the man, who less than six years in the
Parliament, barely 31 years of age, is able to win a ballot,
a secret ballot, among very tough competition. And I can
assure you, in giving you, as your new Minister for Northern
Australia, a man of this capacity, this drive, this capacity
to comprehend and convey the big things, the big opportunities,
to approach, and we trust, solve the big problems of this
immense area of our continent, we've made a very good decision
indeed. And I thank you for the reception you gave him;
he deserves it; he'll need a lot of support, and I know the
Labor people of this Territory, and indeed all, the people
who are here in this Territory to develop it, to produce
a good community in this Territory, will give him their support.
Now ladie~ s and gentlemen I spoke earlier in the
park'and so I needn't go over all the things I said then.
There is one particular thing that is rousing people from one
end of Australia to another. And this is the fact that for
the first time in the seventy-five years that we've had a
nation, and a national Parliament, the Senate has taken it on
itself, to block the Budget. It's true that in April last year
they moved a motion to defer the Supply Bills and in those
circumstances, I advised the Governor-General to dissolve both
Houses, to have a double dissolution of the Parliament.
There were a great number of things which needed to be solved,
and one of the thin~ gs which needed to be solved were some of
the-Electoral -Bills, including the bills which were to give you
representation in the Senate this you remember was in the
policy speech in 1972, it was in the policy speech in 1969 as
well. And in Opposition we had brought in bills to give
the representation and vote to people in the Senate from the
Territories. This has been a very long-standing platform of
the Labor Party and I've put it on the Labor Party's behalf
at many elections, and our opponents never objected, never.
Sure, they stalled it when we brought the bills in in Opposition;
but never during a campaign did they ever say, least of all
of course, in the Northern Territory where there was a member
for the House of Representatives, that they objected to you
having members in the Senate. They never said it.
Well, there were six bills in April last year which they had
twice rejected in the Senate, and this was one of them
Medibank was another, other electoral ones were also involved.
So we thought, right, we'll settle it, we'll have, dissolve
both Houses, we'll start off with a clean Parliament. And
at that timie, -they said, we said, that we were seeking to have
the opportunity of governing Australia for three years. They
lost; they made a grievous mistake; we won; we got a comfortable
majority in the House of Representatives; we got as many 
Senators as they got in the whole Parliament we obviously
had the majority. That is, the majority of the members of
Parliament; but of course, in the community as a whole, we
had a very large majority of the votes. In the House of
Representatives I think we got half a million more votes than
all our competitors in the Parliament combined, that is~ the
representatives of the Parties in the Parliament. And in the
House of Representatives we got 165,000 more votes for the
Labor candidates, in the Senate, than were cast for the
candidates of all the other Parties that are represented in
the Senate So by every basis, every test every criteria,
we -ought to have been able to govern uninterrupted for
three years.. But our opponents who courted that election, who
lost that election, haven't seen fit to abide by the verdict.
of the people. And they're up to the same game again.
Once again they've passed the motion to put off a vote on
R~ loney Bills, on the Budget itself. And three times now
they have carried a motion to defer debate on three of the
Budget Eills the Loan Bills and the two Appropriation Billsthree
times they've done this for each of the three bills.
And this time I'm not going to buckle under because if I did,
not only would I, not only would this Government, but any
future Prime Minister, any Government that the people elect,
would have the same threat hanging over them. And the
threat would be made twice a year, because every October
you have to pass the Budget. Bills to pay for the business
of Government for the whole of the financial year from
the first of July previous, to the thirtieth of June following.
And every April you pass the Supply Bills to make provisional
appropriation for the next financial year, from the first
of July to the thirtieth of November, until the Budget in
turn is passed for the whole of that financial year. Twice
a year money Bills come up and if the Senate rejects those
bills and is thereby able to produce an election for the
House of Representatives.. no Government can carry out any
programs it would have to govern for a faw months ahead
alone. And the wicked part of it is that the Senate could,
usually, avoid going to the people itself. Because most of
the people in the Senate are safe as long as their IpArties
endorse them they're safe from the wrath of the electoratebecause
the number 1 and 2 on the Liberal and Country Party
tickets, the number 1 and 2 on the Labor Party ticket
in each of the six States is certain to get back it's only
the fifth person that there's any battle over whether it's
to be Labor or whether it's to be Liberal and Country Party.
There's onlyone-fifth of the Senators who are in any jeopardy
when there's an election for the Senate. But on most of these
occasions there wouldn't be an election for the Senate at all.
You can only have an election for the Senate in two circumstances:
one is when half the Senate is about to come to an end at the
end of the following June you can have an election for that
half of the Senate at any time during the previous twelve monthsthat
is, half the Senators well there've been a couple who've
left the Senate and so 28 of the Senators who are there now,
will be replaced or confirmed some time in this financial year,
and they'll take their places or people will take their~ places
on the. 1July next. 
3.
But at the present moment there are very
special circumstances. When there is an election for the
Senate or for the House of Representatives then for the
first time there will also be two Senators elected from
each of the mainland Territories and there will also be
a choice by the people to, for enators to replace the two
former Labor Senators whom the New South Wales and
Queensland Premiers had replaced with anti-Labor or
non-Labor people that is the successors for Murphy and
Milliner would take office f rom the day the result of the
election for the Senate was declared. So as soon as there's
half a Senate election, which can take place any time
in this financial year.. and the election is usually held
in November or December,. then on this occasion the new
Senators will take office, not from the 1 July only, but
there will be six who will take office from the time the
election result is declared. So that's one circumstance
in which you can have an election for the Senate.
And the other circumstance in which you can have
an election for the Senate is where there is a Bill, or more
than one Bill which has been twice rejected by the Senate.
Now that is the situation now as it was the situation, of course,
in the first half of last year when we had the double dissolution.
But if there is not half a Senate coming up, or if there has
not been a double rejection of any Bill by the Senate, then
there can't be an election for the Senate. And in those
circumstances-and these were the circumstances for the first
seven monqths that we were in Government, and they again were
the circumstances for the first seven months after we were
re-elected in May last year,.. then they can cut off the Budget,
they can cut off Supply and, they believe, can then bring
about an election for the House of Representatives without
having to face the people themselves. Now this is an end
to stable government in this country.
I've been astonished and gratified by the number of
migrantswno come to our meetings. And one of the r'easons, IVmconvinced,
why they come to our meetings on this issue, is
that they have so often come from countries where democracy
ha3 been destroyed or where.' it is very fragile or where it
is under challenge. And they thought that Australia, an
independent pioneering country,. but nevertheless a country
which was the heir to British parliamentary traditions, at
least was a country where people could change the Government
at the ballot box, where there could be a peaceful transfer
of power if the people saw fit, from a Government to an
Opposition. And then if the opposition became the Government
it had a fair go, it had three years in which to justify
itself. And then if it couldn't, it would then go back
into Opposition and the previous Government would come back.
At least they thought that in our democracy it was possible to
change governments peacefully and by your private decision
at the ballot box and then the government you chose could
govern.-I am determined to see that governments which are
elected by the Australian people are allowed to govern. I will not 
have an election for the House of Representatives or the
Senate or both until the Budget is passed. And that's
to be quite clear.
I've never had any doubt as to the result of
an election between the Liberal-Country Parties on one
hand and Labor on the other. When it camne to an election,
when people had a choice, where they saw the alternatives,
where they saw us for better or for worse, and where
they had to size up our opponents for better or for-worse,
they once again would choose us. I believe the remarkable
thing of the last three weeks has been the perception by the
public of the type of man Mr Fraser is. They've seen him
to be impatient and greedy, because he's not the sort of
person that knows what the Australian people want in the
cities or the outback Sure, he represents what's
called a country electorate. But if you go to that country
electorate which he represents ) you will see that it is
a long-settled, very serene sort of place. -That is, it's
not bursting with vitality' it is not a pioneering outback
electorate; it hasn't got the new resources which
Australians want to develop for themselves; it's an
old-fashioned electorate.-good people undoubtedly, but
not the sort of people that have to face the problems which
now have to be faced in the cities and in the outback.
He's not in touch with the Australian people and the people
to whom he turns for advice are newspaper proprietors
including the exp;. triate -proprietor who owns your papers
in the'Territory I don't know how Rupert Murdoch II
remains on the electoral rolls or remainis as the owner of
television or radio stations because you're supposed to be
Australian residents if your to be on the rolls or if your ' re
to own the electronic media and he's not an Australian
resident. Nevertheless. the other-people that back him are the
Country Party, and the Country Party are the most selfish
people in Australia no question about it. And it was the
Country Party, as well as the Liberals, who didn't want you
to have votes in the Northern Territory. They thought you
would upset their apple-cart and if you go for your
advice, if you seek the views'of newspaper proprietors and
Country Party leaders you'll go wrong, and that's what Mr
Snedden did, and he went wrong, and he went bad, and this is
what Mr Fraser has done as well. I've always thought he'd
betray himself this way he's done the wrong thing, and he's
been found out and the people have noticed it. Now I've
always been certain that if we have an election campaign and
they have to give up just relying on our sins and try to
project some virtues of their own, they'd flop, and they willwhenever
I call the election. But the big thing is that I've
got to ensure that whatever the Government is . the people choose,
is able to govern. -It was a great shock to the conservative
system when we were elected in December 1972. Th * ey felt
that we were usurpers we were trespassers, and they are
doing their very best to see that the people' s will, twice
expressed ) is frustrated. They've wanted to keep us off balance,
or to get us off balance they're not going to. Because
we are fighting for a proper principle that if the People 
choose a Government,. that Government must be given a
fair go. What's the alternative. Th extraordinary
thing I hear them expressing now is that if a Government
can't get things through the Senate then the Senate ought
to choose a Government. But they haven't got a majority
in the Senate either they have 30 meinbers,* half the
Senate and if you're to get something through the Senate,
you've got to get a majority. If a vote is even in the
Senate, then the motion or the Bill is not passed.
Now they'Ive not had a vote on the Budget and it's plain
from what Liberal senators have said on TV that if there
was a vote on the Budget the vote would go in the affirmativethat
is~ the Senate would pass the Budget. But the device
they've used, three times, on each of three Bills, is to
put up a motion that the debate should be deferred. That is,
as I put it at the meeting this morning, they've gone on
strike they won't do the job. And of course, even then
they wouldn't have carried it if Bjelke-Petersen hadn't
put in an anti-Labor person to succeed t1illiner.
If Milliner had been there, then the vote would have been
even and the vote to adjourn or to defer would have been
defeated. Now that is the technicality, the illegitimate
technicality) upon which they have gone on strike.
Now I put to you this morning a couple of things
which I believe are very great arguments to u ' se
in the' Territory. One is the way they've cut things off
for the Territory. Because here, and in Canberra, you
depend on the Federal Budget alone. There is no part of
Australia, with the possible exception of Canberra, where
so many people depend on national Government payments
they'e on he' payroll or they're doing contracts ' or the
Government. If federal money wasn't spent in the Northern
Territory most people in the Territory wouldn't have a job,
or they wouldn't be able to get contracts, or
make supplies. This Territory depends on the federal
Government more than any other part of Australia. It depends
on the federal Budget more than any State depends on the
federal Budget, and the State Government Budgets and the
Local Government Budgets combined. Private enterprise is
certainly valuable in the Territory as it is everywhere in
a mixed economy like Australia but private enterprise,
for historical and understandable reasons, bulks smaller
in the Northern Territory than anywhere else in Australia.
For better or for worse you depend on the Government in the
Northern Territory more than any other part of Australia
depends on Governments. You don't have State Governments
you depend, you only have a couple of local councils
you depend more on the national Government than any other
Australians depend on all Government activities
employment, orders, contracts,. combined. And this is what
they've done to you in the Budget. In the Budget, which
they've stalled, there's $ 439 million for the Northern
Territory there's $ 58 m for housing and construction;
there's $ 45 m for education; there's $ 113 mn to run the
Department of Northern Australia; there is $ 40 m for
health services and there is $ 32 m for Aboriginal welfare and 
advancement. And in total $ 439 m held up. Now I believe
the people in this Territory will be outraged when they
see what is happening at the hands of the Liberal and
Country Party. And then I come to the other argument which I
believe is.. overwhelming, overpowering in this Territory.
The next _ election there is in this Territoryl or anywhere
in Australia, the next time there's an election for the
House of Representatives in Australia, the next time there
is an election for the Senate in any State in Australia, there
will also be an election for two Senators from the Northern
Territory and I believe in these circumstances you ought to
be able to get two-thirds of the votes, you ought to be
able to get in both Ted Robertson and Kevin Frazer
Frazer spelt with a I noticed from most of the signs
around Australia, the other Fraser is spelt with a
swastika! And you know they've got the gall now to
contest the Senate situation in the Northern Territory.
They've tried their level best, by every medns, to prevent
the Northern Territory and Canberra having the right to
elect Senators,. it's astonishing in this day and age
that a Parliament which makes laws for any community shou" Ld
not give, that community the right to choose members in the
law-making body. I mean this wouldn't occur, we would think,
anywhere else in the world, but you have to obey the laws
passed by the federal Parliament and the laws can only be
made if they-go through the House of Representatives and
the Senate as well. And they've said every Liberal
and every Country Party man,.-except one, on one occasion
has said that you shouldn't have senators in from the Northern
Territory, you shouldn't have a voice, still less a vote,
on anything in the Senate, even if it concerns the Northern
Territory alone, as some legislation does. You can not choose
your law-makers that's their proposition. And three
times we had to put this bill up in the Senate: on the
first time it came before the House of Representatives the
Liberals voted against it, -they've been consistent;
the Country Party on the first time voted in favour of it.
When it went to the Senate, they all there voted against it.
And it was defeated. So with an interval of three months,
which is required, we brought it up again; it passed through
the House of Representatives; in the Senate once again,
every Liberal and Country Party member voted against it.
And then that was all we could do in that Parliament, but it
was one of the bills for the double dissolution. After the
double dissolution we again put it up in the Senate it
was passed by the Reps" we put it up in the Senate, and
again, every Country Party and Liberal senator voted against
it, although it had been, once again, onre of thepp ledges--
the Government made. The first time they'd been a double
dissolution and the Senate had not passed the bill had
produced the double dissolution. So for the first time in
history we have to have a Joint Sitting and we had the
numbers in the Joint Sitting and every Country Party and
Liberal member voted against the Territory getting
representation in the Senate except Sam Calder; he cuts no
ice among his own crowd, because they all voted against hiim 
Hie did vote for it himself, but he was terribly embarrassed
because for the first time he made a scene in the Househe
wanted to be thrown out so he wouldn't have to votebut
we weren't going to accommodate him that way; he
had to stay. So he voted for it; the best vote he's
ever cast in his years in the Parliament. And a]. l his
mates deserted him.
Th ese Country Party candidates-don't forget that every
Country Party man in the Senate, there' s no women in the.
Country Party, has voted against having representation
in the ( interjector whistles) they wouldn't be worth
whistling for if they were! Everybody, John Gorton,
Billy McMahon, Billy Snedden, Malcolm Fraser you seem
to have forgotten the others they were no betterand
Anthony and Sinclair and Nixon, and all of themthey
all voted against it. So when in the Senate
campaign any Lib EaJ. or Country Party person comes up here
* say Why did you vote against us having a vote for the
Senate?. Why because they all did. But then of course,
when it was finally through, that wasn't enough, a
* Country Party Premier, Bjelke-Petersen, he then asked
the High Court to say that it was unconstitutional, that
is*, something that the people had endorsed, one would
have thought at the ' 72 elections and again at the ' 74 elections,
something that had been passed by the House of Representatives
three times, and at a Joint Sitting, this was then said to be
unconstitutional. And he was supported by the Liberal Premier
of Western Australia. Well the High Court determined,
three weeks ago yesterday, that it was constitutional.
I notice somebody in the audience this morning blamed Murphy
for this-I meanMurphy did the
sensible, decent thing. I mean ~ some people seem to think
that there's something wrong in having a Labor Attorney-General
on the High Court, but it's O. K. to have a Liberal one.
And there's no need for me to tell you how Barwick voted on
this, and how he voted, and how Murphy voted on this.
on the Court. And Senator Greenwood made a great to-do
about this three weeks ago: how montrous that Murphy should
have given judgment on a piece of legislation on whose
constitutionality he had advised. Now the fact is that back
in 1961, when Barwick was Attorney-General, he advised the
Government that there shouldn't be a vote for people in the
House of Representatives from the Territories except on
matters which concerned the Territories alone. So one would
have thought that Barwick's views on representation and
voting for the Territories in the House of Representatives and
the Senate were well known, just as well known as Murphy's,
and they've been consistent, both of them; they've been
consistent. I don~' t blame Barwick for being consistent, but
I think it's a bit of a cheek to blame Murphy for being
consistent. On this matter they were ' paired'. But
not only this Bjelke-Petersen heaped insult on injury by
saying that the member of the House of Representatives from the
Northern Territory shouldn't be able to vote either
now we know he never speaks, but Bjelke-Petersen said he
shouldn' t vote either that you not only shouldn' t have people
in the Senate, with * seats or votes, the chap you had in the
House of Representatives could have a seat, couldn't speak
that makes no difference but couldn't vote either. 
So I think it's pretty clear, up in this
Territory, you know what the striking Senators from. the
States, the Liberal and Country Party Senators from
the States, who've gone on strike, what they think of the
Territories. Canberra and the Northern Territory ought
to be outraged on this because they suffer more than any
other part of Australia. It's the Liberal and Country
Parties who are provoking unemployment in this country.
Just when we seem to be turhing the corner, in these
respects, . inflation and unemployment,.-they are now
wanting to exacerbate the position, to bring about a
deterioration. They're the wreckers. This Budget of
Bill Hayden's is the best the country has had for yearseverybody
in the Territory will benefit from it.
And they don't want to give it a chance to work. They
say that in certain circumstances they'd pass the Budget
Mr Fraser made a speech on the Budget himself made
quite a number of criticisms in fact and then they
were shown to be very shallow or in fact falacious.
And he now says that his Budget is ' inoperative' the
old Nixon word you remember Nixon's Press'Secretary,'
Zi * eglerj said that one of the answers, not altogether
accurate answers, that the President gave was ' inoperative'.
Well Mr Fraser's speech on the Budget, in his own words,
is now ' inoperative'. He doesn't want ours to operate either.
lie's got no alternative; purely negative.
Ladies and gentlemn, . I'm certain that when,
sometime before the end of next June, there is for the
first time an opportunity for the -people of this. Territory
to choose representatives in the Senate ~ that they will choose
people who will not brook any further damage to this Territory;
who will insist in the Territory having its, full rights
in the national Parliament, and they will turn to the Party
which has fought ok those things, through all the
obstruction, through all the opposition by States and Courts
and Senate that they will see that the Senate is only
properly represented from this Territory by two Labor
candidates Robertson and Frazer with a 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THE WHYLL WORKERS CLUB S
1 NOVEMBER 1975
engagement f or months past up at Port Augusta
tomorrow morning. It's a diamond jubilee, an ecclesiastical
diamond jubilee. And I get so few of these invitations I
found it irresistable. So I though in the present situation
I should spend a day on the way at Alice Springs and then, of
course, we flew on here and I welcome very much the opportunity
to drop in at the Club.
There is perhaps a couple of things I might say to
you. The situation that we have in the national Parliament is
one to which you're very much accustomed in South Australia.
Because there is no part of Australia which is so very much
aware of the intrusions and the usurpations of an Upper House
of Parliament as you are in South Australia. Because the
Legislative Counrcil here for years has rejected legislation
from the House of Assembly and for years has prevented
South Australia having a decent, equal, fair electoral system.
And Don Dunstan has suffered from this and Steele Hall suffered
from this.. That is, anybody who wanted to bring about any
reforms has suffered from the Upper House of South Australia.
Now for three years that we've had a Labor Government
in the Australian Parlia. ment, we've been suffering from the
Senate, the Upper House there. And in the last three years
the Senate has rejected more Bills than it had rejected in
the previous 72 years of its existence. Fewer than 70 Bills
were rejected from 1901 to the end of 1972 when we came in;
and since then it's rejected over 90 Bills. Now it's come to
a climax when the Senate has gone on strike over the Budget.
It hasn't rejected the Budget Bills. But for three times on
each of the three basic Bills it has carried a motion to defer
the debate, to go on strike, as far as the Budget is concerned.
And they are doing this partly because they know that if there
is a vote on the Budget it would be carried.
Mr Fraser's own Senators, some of the Liberals, have
said they would not vote against the Budget; that was
Senator Bessell of Tasmania said it on Four Corners last weekend
and he also said that there were several others of the same
mind. So if it came to a vote on the Budget it would be passed.
Now the attempt t-hat is being made is to stand over
the elected Government. Because in Australia as in British
democracies all round the world, the Government is formed by the
Party or Parties with a majority in the Lower House, the House
of Commons or the House of Representatives. That's where the
Prime Minister has to be; that's where the Treasurer must be.
And, you know, the Senate in Australia now, is behaving as the
House of Lords used to do before 1911. Just as Asquith in 1911
broke the power of the House of Lords over Money Bills we now
in Australia have to break the power of the Senate over Money
Bills. / 2 
-2-
As you know, in Britain the House of Lords can't hold
up any Money Bill for more than three months. And it's never
tried even to do that. And in Australia for the last 75 years
the Constitution says that the Senate can't initiate Money Bills;
it can't amend Money Bills; and all. it can do is make requests
to amend them. And the House of Representatives may then,
if it likes, make amendments. But this time the Senate hasn't
rejected, it hasn't in fact even made requests. But what it is
trying to do is to say that whenever a Government hasn't got a
majority in the Senate, then the Senate can bring about an
election for the House of Representatives.
And they tried this in April last year and I then
accepted the position, we had a double dissolution but for
three months we were without a Parliament, it took so long to
hold the election and to count the results. I'm not prepared
to have another three months without a Parliament at this stage.
I'm not prepared to say that the Government which has been twice
elected, twice elected for a three year term is to be interrupted
and brought to a halt and the whole system interrupted at the
behest of tShe Senate. Because the Liberal and the Country Party,
they haven't got a majority in the Senate, they had 165,000
fewer votes last May for the Senate than we had, 165,000 votes
more for Labor candidates for the Senate in May last year,
than for the candidates for the Senate of all the other Parties
in the Senate. And we ended up with 29 Senators; they ended
up with 29 Senators and there were two Independents. One of
the, Steele Hall, has remained pretty independent. The other
one joined the Libe-rals. But they still haven't got a majority
inm the Senate. We have a majority in the House of Representatives;
we have a majority in the whole Parliament. The Joint Sitting
showed that. We are entitled to govern. When we went to the
people they elected us for three years; the other side have
not accepted that. Never before in the 75 years that there's
been an Australian ? Parliament has the Senate ever voted against
a Money Bill. Althorgh again and again, 139 occasions, there
have been Money BillIs passed by the Senate although the government
of the day didn't have a majority of the Senate. Because if the
Senate is evenly divided then the motion or Bill is not passed.
Now it's on that technicality that they're relying. Although if
it went to a vote there would be sufficient Liberal Senators to
vote in favour of the Bill, for the money, the Budget and it
would be passed. What's be'e-n happening is that Bjelke-Petersen, the
Country Party Prem~ ier of Queensland, appointed an anti-Labor
man a scab, Pat the Rat to succeed a Labor man. And if
Senator Milliner '-ad still been alive he would, as he had always
throughout his life of service in the Labor movement, have
supported the Labor Par-ty. And the motion to defer the debate
would have been defeated because there would have been as many
people voting agars it as voting for it. But it's purely over
a dead man's body as Steele Hall has put it, that this motion
to defer the Budge-t, to go on strike in the Senate, has been
carried. 
A -3-
Now I want to conclude on this: an area like this
at the top of the Gulf, this Iron Triangle you depend very much
on Australian Government employment, and Australian Government
orders. Places like this would be hard up indeed if it were
not the Australian National Railways; if it were not for the
subsidies which are paid for the ships which are constructed
in the largest shipbuilding yards in Australia, here in Whyalla,
And you know better than most people in Australia what happens
to your employment and to your amenities and to your prosperity
if the, payments made by the Australian Government are interrupted
or reduced. My Government has been the first one which has
taken any interest in local amenities. Your Council here, has
received money directly to spend as it sees fit. In the last
two years it's in the Budget at the monent which is waiting
to go through you've have assistance from the Australian
Governmen-for sporting and cultural and educational facilities,
such as no-previous Australian Government has ever paid.
Let me give you some of the figures on that:
Local Government here, the Whyalla City Council last year got
$ 178,000 from the Australian Governmnent. In this year's
Budget there's $ 210,000. The Australian Assistance Plan uptil
24th of October so far-has $ 18,000, and that's the rate it
will be getting for the rest of the year, if the Budget goes
through. You've had a community recreation centre, $ 360,000
from the Australian Government. And a supplementary grant of
$ 40,000; you've had things for the lifesaving club; for the
sew erage program $ 73,000; pensioner dwellings $ 105,000;
the RED Scheme over half a million.
Ladies and ilentlemen these are indications of what
the Labor Government of Australia has been trying to do for areas
like tais which no Drevious Australian Government has ever
attem--, ed to do. oWe set out to do it. We want to make
certaina that company tzw-ans, such as Whyalla or Port Augusta or
Port Pinie, are assisr~ ed to provide the amenities which people
want in their spare timne: education, culture, recreation
and so on. No Austral-ian Government has ever done it before.
Previous Governments afforded not to. Do you want a Liberal
Government again to cut off all these things? You have your
answer mate; you have your answer. The Australian people
have twice elected an Australian Labor Party Government in Canberra.
It's entitled to govern. And you can't have the usurpations,
my Lord, of the Senate taking over from the elected government
of Australia. Ladies and gentlemen, stand firm on this. So
many people came to Australia because they thought that it was
possible here to elect a government at a secret ballot to change
the Government by peaceful means; their faith is being destroyed
by these impatient, t:--ese unconstitutional, these greedy people
in the Senate: the LIberal and Country Party. In an area like
this in the next few months you will have an election for the
Senate. Make certain-that once again you give a majority in
this area, this State, 1 to the Labor Party candidate. 



PRIME MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE, ALICE SPRINGS
1 NOVEMBER 1975
PRIME MINISTER: commitment that we have, the Labor Government
said that it would create a fully electea ' Legislative Assembly:
it's done that. It said that it would produce votes for
Territorians in the Senate: it's done that. We have done in
our three years more for the Constitutional and political
development of the Territory than had happened-in the previous
three-quarters of a century. So obviously we are going to get
on with it. But one can't give a timetable, all that I can
point out to you is -that we have carried out these other promises
as promptly as was possible. There was a very great deal of
obstruction as regards the-fully elected Legislative Assembly.
And still more as regards representation in the Senate. But we
overcame it, we carried out the promise, we will carry out this
other promise.
QUESTION: Mr Whitlam. on the subject of the half Senate el-ection
now, you are hopeful that you'll get two Labor Senators in there.
, What happens if you don't get two Labor Senators in there?
How will this help the balance of power?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh well, it would be very much the same as it is
now. See, in ordinary circumstances one would expect that the
Government and the Opposition, whichever Parties they are, would
get one of the Senators from the Northern Territory, and one of
the Senators from the Australian Capital Territory. I believe,
however, that in the present circumstances there are good prospects
of the Labor Senate, candidates both getting up. That would
require two-thirds of the votes. And why I say that I believe
there are good prospects of this, is because in the Northern
Territory more than any part of Australia there is damage to the
people's welfare and the general economy of the region through
the Senate's going on strike. That is, the Senate is holding
up $ 439 million being provided for the Territory in this Budget.
And the other reason why I believe that we will poll so well in
the Senate is that the Liberal Senators and the Country Party
Senators, all of them, without exception, voted against the
Northern Territory getting Senators. And it was a Country Party
Premier, Mr Bjelke-Petersen, who challenged the Bill when it got
through, in the High Court. So wherever it's been in the Joint
Sitting for instance, all the Country Party and Liberal members,
in the Senate and in the House of Representatives, from every
State, voted against the Territory having Senators. Now I think
people will be outraged by the Senate's denial of Budget Moneys
for the Territory and will be outraged by the Liberal and Country
Parties' resistence to the Territory having Senators. That ought
to be to the advantage of the Labor Party, which wants to get
the Budget through, which has wanted the Territory to have Senators.
QUJESTION: Could we just isolate the Territory for one second.
We have a Legislative Assembly which is fully elected but there
is not one Labor member on that Assembly. Do you see this as an
anti-Labor indication?
PRIME MINISTER: I believe that was an utterly exceptional
circumstance. I would have no doubt that at the next time there
is an election for the Legislative Assembly we'll do very much
better; we might win. Because the Country Party members of the
Legislative Assembly, I think one much acknowledge, are a pretty
indifferent bunch. They've not been impressive. 
t-the whole week and they didn't call him.' And they didn't call
him because they knew that they'd get no change out of him.
IThat is there was nothing to embarrass me. Now I say Mr Fraser's
been found out because people now-see that he is an impetuous,
as impatient, as greedy, as improper as Mr Snedden. And Mr Fraser
has been led astray by his Country Party confederates and by the
newspaper proprietors.. Now you'll never change the minds of
these Country Party confederates. They will, that tail will
wag the Liberal dog as long as the Liberal dog doesn't have a
better head'than Mr Snedden or Mr Fraser. The newspaper
proprietors, with one exception, have changed their minds.
The Country Party will never change its mind and the other people
whose advice Mr Fraser takes have changed theirs. He's left
high and dry. He's been found out. He did wrong. And people
see it. And he will go the way that Snedden went. Sad but true.
QUESTION: Sir, back to the south road, considering that-you ' ye
made a promise or given a timetable, the last time that you were
approached on the topic, would you care to do that again, to say
that providing you were staying in power, how long would it take
for the south road to be sealed?
PRIME MINISTER: This will come up in the triennial roads
legislation which we were hoping to bring in before the end of
this year.
QUESTION: Sir, we had Mr Anthony and Country Party Leaders here
this week, last week sorry, and you're here this week;
Mr Bjelke-Petersen is coming next week. Does this mean that there
is already a p-ee-Senate campaign on-in the Territory?
PRIM4E MINISTER: I'm coming here because I've had an engagement
for some months in Port Augusta tomorrow morning, Sunday the
2nd of November. And in view of the present circumstances I
thought that instead of getting to Port Augusta on Saturday night
directly from Canberra or Sydney, I'd spend the day at Alice
Springs on the way. After all I was in Alice Springs about
three months ago. I've been to Alice Springs and the Territory
more often than any Leader of the Liberal Party or the Country
Party, Federal or State. You might think that this is an unfair
comparison because I'm now doing over the fifth successive Federal
Liberal Leader. But during the time that Holt was Prime Minister
and then Gorton, and then McMahon and during the time that
Snedden was Liberal Leader, during the time that Fraser has been
Liberal Leader, in every case I've been more often to the
Territory than any of them. 



PRIME MINISTER' S INTERVIEW WITH STUDENTS IN ALICE SPRINGS
ON RADIO STATION 8HA 1 November 1975
I gather the local commercial station has made available
some period every week for the students of the High School
to express these views and to interview visitors like
myself. This is a very fine contribution-by the radio
station itself; it's also a very proper opportunity given
to the students. Many people will get the taste for the
media; many people who go to High School here will now
want to become radio announcers and producers and the
radio station has given them the opportunity, and this is
the time of life, of course, when you're bursting with
ideas and when you respond most quickly to opportunity,
I'm sure that the pupils of the High School will take
advantage of this opportunity and the wider community
will follow their contributions with much interest.
Q: What effect do you feel, what effect do you think this
type of program will have on, say, the staff, the students
and the community as a whole?
Well let me mention the effect on the people interested
in the school itself. I think it's coming to be realised
more and more that a school': concerns not only the staff,
not only the pupils, but also the parents and the wider
community. School-' takes up 12 years of every young persons'
life; he spends more hours at school than he does at hcne or
in any other activity. Accordingly,. it's very important indeed,
that the whole community should realise what goes on at
school. The school is part of life people are staying
at school much longer and so I think as far as the school
is concerned everybody will understand what goes on there
and will be able to contribute to what goes on there much
better than before.
The other thing is that through radio, people who don't have
children at school, people maybe who didn't go to school very
long themselves, people who didn't go to school in Australia,
will get a much better idea of what the rising generation
is interested in doing, what it's succeeding in doing. I'm
sure this will be very valuable for everyone, and it!'. s best
done through radio. I believe that the community in general
is coming to realise that radio is something that people
can enjoy in greater variety and in more circumstances than
any other medium. If you want to read a newspaper, you have
to go out and get it, or you have to have it delivered to you,
and if you' re in a place like Alice Springs many of the newspapers
that you would want to read are delivered, are bought, hours or
days after they are available in the place where they are
produced. Again, television is extraordinarily expensive.
It costs an immense amu-ount to build or to staff or to run a
television station; also if you're to pick up television
programs you have to have some expensive equipment and you can
only operate it in certain circumstances. A radio, on the
other hand, can pick up what is being broadcast instantly
from any part of the world, and you can pick it up wherever
you are, at any time of the day or night, any part of the
country at work or at play, on the beach, out fishing, riding, 
whatever it is. you can listen to radio. Radio is-with
you the whole time; you've got the instant choice; you
can pick from programs from all around the world, wherever
you are, whatever you're doing, straight away, without
expense, without delay.
Q: Getting off the subject of the medium of radio and
television, what do you think of the Northern Territoryin
particular the people. Do you think they're different
from any other, other different Australians?
The people of the Territory comprise both the Australians
who've been here longest, tens of thousands of years,
and also the Australians who've been in this region for
the shortest time. The Territory would have people
living here for a shorter time than most parts of
Australia. Most of the people who live and work in the
Territory were not born or educated in the Territory.
Accordingly there is immense mobility in-. the Territory
population. Furthermore, there are things which have.-
to be done in the Territory which can be done to the
advantage of the whole of Australia and which should be
done now. Some of Australia's most valuable resources,
particularly mineral resources, are available in the
Territory. Hitherto, Australians haven't processed
these resources sufficiently themselves. In fact, in
respect of most of the mineral wealth of the Northern
Territory, it was not known to exist as recently as
years ago. So, there was a great lot to be done here,
and Territorians are different from other Australians
because they've been here, except for the Aborigines,
a shorter time than any other people as regards the
Aborigines~ longer than any other people.-Furthermore,
they're in that part of Australia where the resources
are most plentifuil and least used.
Q: Teenagers in Alice Springs say that there's not much to do, you
know, no social life. Do you believe this, in your short
visit here?
I wouldn't care to express a view. This is something
which teenagers express in most parts of the world, including
most parts of Australia. But, there are a great number of
things which teenagers can do here, more excitingly, than
they can do in other parts of Australia. Teenagers very
often say that the community isn't looking after them,
but the things that are worth doing are usually the things
you pioneer and create yourself. And there are an immense
number of things that can be pioneered and created in this
Territory a great number of Australians who are holed up
in the big cities would find this an exceptionally exciting
life.
Q: Do you believe that teenagers are influenced politically by
their parents ' beliefs?
I think they probably are. I think that most people vote
the way their parents voted; nevertheless, the younger
you are the more likely you are to make up your own mind. 
3.
It's when you're young that you're likely to be most
critical. It's when you're young that your ideas'
are most likely to be changed or to be formed.
And so whil~ e most teenagers would vote as their parents
did, or maybe their teachers, yet they're more likely
to made up their own minds than older people are -the
older you are ) the more set you become in your ways.
The teenagers are really, and the people in their twenties,
are the people who are most variable and mobile in their
political allegiances. That's largely, I suppose,
because they see more critically what's wrong with our
society, but they also still have the hope that things
can be changed.
Q: Do you think the High School should help teenagers to
understand politics by having a particular subject in
the curriculum to help with politics?
I think -they should. I know this is a very controversial
subject; a very great number of people say that politics
should never be discussed at school. They say that
the students will be too much influenced by the views of
their teachers. This is mainly a view expressed by
conservative people people who want the world to stay as
it is; people who don't want theories, or practices or
habits, to be analysed; they don't want things to be
examined or criticised or reassessed. Now it is absurd that
people going to school shouldn't have a full discussion
on things that are going to be immensely important to them,
particularly during the ten years after they leave school,
when they will be completing their training for life, when
they'll very often be marrying and getting into their life
style these are the formative years; they ought to discuss
these things at school, quite clearly. And moreover, every
high school now has scores of men and women who are able to
vote; it's absurd that they can't discuss these things at
school.
Q: Thank you very much Mr Whitlam for your time.
Well I wish you well in your project. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, ALICE SPRINGS
1 NOVEMBER 1975
Ladies and Gentlemen: I've had along standing engagement this week
down in Port Augusta, but I thought that in the present circumstances,
the time when the Senate is on strike, when it's holding the whole
of the country to ransom, when there is going to be an election in
the next few months for the Senate, and because despite all Country
Party obstruction the people of the Territory will at last get a vote
for Senators in the National Parliament,. it is the people in the
Northern Territory and in Canberra who will break to strike by the
Senate. And I'll give you some of the consequences of this strike.
Because the two Territories, the Northern Territory and the Capital
Territory, depend more than any other parts of Australia on what is
in the National Budget. And for the first time in the country's
history the Budget is being stalled. It's not been rejected; it's
been stalled. The Senate hasn't gone on record against the Budget;
as a matter of fact, they see nothing wrong with the Budget. They
say if there is an election they'll pass the Budget the Budget must
* be beaut. But they've tried,. But they've gone on strike. They won'tt
vote on the Budget. And they've stalled it on one particular dirty
Country Party trick. Three months ago, a Labor Senator died in
Queensland. And a Country Party Premier appointed an anti-Labor man
to succeed the deceased Labor Senator.
Now don't blame the Liberal Ministers in Queensland because they
voted to do the right thing. Every Liberal Minister in the Queensland
Parliament voted in favour of a Labor replacement for the deceased
Labor $ enator. But it was the Country Party Ministers, the Country
Party Premier, the Country Party and Liberal rank and file who
perpetrated this dirty trick. They chose an anti-Labor Senator to
succeed a Labor Senator and accordingly when a motion was moved in
the Senate to put off voting on the Budget, to defer the Budget, to
stall the Budget, to go on strike, the motion was carried only because
a Labor Senator had died. If the Labor Senator had still been there,
if, a he had throughout his life., voted in favour of Labor principles
then the attempt ' by the Count ry' Party to defeat, to defer, to stall*
the Buidget would have been frustrated. As Senator Steele Hall said,
a former Liberal Premier of South Australia,* the motion to go on
strike in the Senate was carried over a dead man's corpse. ' If a
Country Party Premier had done the right thing and had appointed a
Labor replacement for a deceased Labor Senator, then the plot to go
on strike would not have been carried in the Senate. The Senate
would have had to vote for the Budget. And if there is a vote on
the Budget itself, then it will be passed in the Senate. Because
on T. V. last weekend a Liberal Senator, from Tasmania T. you might
never have heard of him, his name is Bessel) Senator Bessell said
that he would never vote against the Budget and he also said that
there were a number of other Liberal Senators of the'same mind. That
means that the Budget would be passed if it ever came to a vote. But
it's not being passed for the sole reason, that the Senate has gone
on strike.
Now let me show you the results of this strike by the Senate.
Because in the Budget there is a total for the Northern Territory
of '$ 439 million, $ 439 m'illion will come to the Northern
Territory as soon as the Budge---is passed. And this $ 439 million
is being held up, it's being denied to the Northern Territory 
because the Liberal and Country Party Senators have gone on strike.
* Now up in the top, in Darwin, there is $ l02* million waiting
to reconstruct Darwin. It's being held up by the Senate strike;
-$ 102. rmillion. And then for housing and construction throughout
the Territory, on top of that, housing and construction which in the
Territory depend principally on Federal Government funds, there is
$ 58 million being held up by the Senate strike. Once the
Senate passes the Budget then this year there will be .$ 58 million
available for housing and construction in the Northern Territory
It's being held up by the Senate strike. And then for schools
and colleges in the Territory, there is a sum of $ 45 mnillion.
being held up by the Senate. The Senate strike is denying the
Territory $ 45 million for education. Then for health services,
hospitals, health centres) there is * the sum of $ 40 ' Million being
held up by the Senate strike. Once the Senate calls off its strike
there will be 40 million dollars available for hospitals and health
services in the Territory. And then for* all the rest of
the-functions which the Department of Northern Australia provides
in the-Territory there is a sum of $ 113 million being held
up by the Senate strike. And then for Aboriginal welfare and
advancement there is a sum of '$ 32 million. being held up by
the Senate strike.
Now Ladies and Gentlemen, the strike may finally be broken by having
elections for Senators in the Northern Territory and the Capital
Territory. And I will give to you the long-protracted fight we've had
to have in the Federal Parliament over the last three years to get
the right. for people in the Territories to elect people to the
Senate and to have votes for the people in the Senate. The Country
Party and the Liberal Parties have put up the longest battle against
this reform that they've put up on any issue whatever.
Now first, you'll remember that back in my 1972 Policy Speech I
promised that if we became the Government there would be Senators
for the two Territori'es with full voting rights. Two Senators for
the Northern Territory. Two Senators for the Australian Capital
Territory. And I'm on the platform here with Labor's candidate
as Senators for the Northern Territory, Ted Robertson and
Kevin Frazer. Now this is one of the good Fra * zer' s. I don't think
the other Fraser has ever been to the Northern Territory. Well
I don't think Billy Snedden -you remember Billy Snedden, he was once
Leader of the Liberals And I don't think he came here. And I don't
remember Billy McMahon coming here. And I don't remember John Gorton
' coming here, or Harold Holt, or Bob Menzies, that is, Liberal
Prime MinistersrLiberal Leaders never came to the Northern Territory.
I don't think Menzies or Holt, or Gorton, or McMahon, or Snedden or
Fraser. I'm sick of the constant change.
. I'm ih the process of doing over the fifth successive
Liberal Leader. And I don't think any of them ever bothered to hold
a meeting in Alice Springs. We did last last election in May,. ' 74,
* but-. they never came here. Because they didn't have elections for
the Senate. They didn't have to worry about you. But we promised
at the last electionsthat we would see that the Northern Territory
got representatives'in the Senate. Because you have to obey laws
which are passed by the Federal Parliament, both the House of
Representatives and the Senate. But according to the Liberals and
the Country Party you weren't entitled to have-anybody in the Senate
which had to make those laws. And because you will now have members in
the Senate you will be able to break the log jam that the Senate
has presented over the last three years. Because in the last three 
years, the last three years, the Senate has rejected more Bills
than it had in the previous" 72 years. In all the years between 1901
and 1972 the Senate had rejected, all told, less than 70 Bills.
In the last three years the Senate has rejected over * 90 Bills.
So they've been more obstructive than any Senate in history.
Three years: they've done more to throw out than they had in the
previous 72. But this is what they've done about the Territory.
Is there anybody in this audience who doesn't think the Territory
should have representatives in the Senate? -Will you please raise
your hand if you think that the Northern Territory shouldn't have
a Senator? There's 2 people; there were 3 hands and 2 people. Is
this the best you can do?-Aren't there any people who'll support
the Liberals and the Country Party in denying the Territory
* representation in the Senate? I just want to go back, that is, I
want to tell the House of Representatives next week that in this,
the largest political meeting ever held in the Northern Territory, 4
there were only 2 people that were prepared to say that the Northern
Territory shouldn't have members in the Senate. Because this is the
history, this is the history of ourattempts to get representation in.
the Senate for the Northern Territory-We brought in the Bill on
the 30 May 19731 two and a half years ago in the House of RepresentativeE'
we passed the Bill to give the Northern Territory two Senators. That
is~ two and a half years ago. The Liberals voted against it. Gorton.,
McMahon, Snedden, Fraser, they all voted against you having
representatives in the Senate. The Country Party voted with us in
favour of the Northern Territory having Senators. It's the only time
the Country Party has ever voted for you to have representatives in
the Senate and when it went to the Senate every member of the Liberal
Party, every member of the Country Party and the DLP you
remember the DLPI'? they voted against you having representatives.
So that was the first time.
On the 7 June 1973 the Opposition in the Senate denied you having
representatives in the Senate. Then three months later we brought
the Bill in again and on the. 27 September 1973 it went through t'-he
House of Representatives; for the second time the House of Representatives
said you should have Senators from the Northern Territory.
It went up to the Senate and on the 14 November 1973 all the Liberal
and Country Party Senators, all of them, voted to defeat the Bill.
That meant the next election, the election in May last year for the
House of Representatives and the Senate, you couldn't get Senators
because the Liberal and the Country Party voted against you getting
them. And you remember in May 1974 in this town I repeated that if
we were returned once again we would try to get you Senators for the
Northern Territory. And we won the election. We won the second time.
And then we brought the Bill up again and in the House of
it was passed for the third time. And for the third time the Senate
rejected it; every Liberal, every Country Party Senator, on three
occasions has voted against the Northern Territory having Senators.
So then we had a Joint Sitting and at the joint sitting all the
Liberals and all the Country Party, with one exception your Country
Party member never speaks; silent Sam never has a word to say,
but for once in his life he did the right thing; he voted for you
to have representatives in the Senate. And such influence does he
have on his Country Party colleagues that they all. left him alone
and voted with the Liberals against you having Senators for the
Northern Territory. 
if the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory
had had Senators, then the Senate would not have goneon Strike.
Because this is what the strike is costing the Northern Territory:
$ 439 million is being held up for the Northern Territory; $ 439
million is being held up for the Northern Territory by the Senate
strike. And $ 58 million is being held up because the Senators from
the* States have gone on strike and $ 45 million is being held
up because the Liberal and Country Party Senators from the States
have gone on strike. And aboriginal welfare and advancement in.
the Northern Territory is being denied $ 32 million; the Liberal
and Country Party Senators have gone on strike. And hospitals and
health services in the Northern Territory are being denied $ 40 million
because the Liberal and Country Party Senators from the States have
gone on strike. And schools and colleges, Government and Church
schools and colleges, in the Northern Territory are being denied
million because the Liberal and Country Party Senators from
the States have gone on strike. All help and all the affairs
of the Department of Northern Australia are being held up because
$ 113 million for administrative services to pay employees, to pay
contractors, to pay suppliers~ is being held up $ 113 million being
held up for the Department of Northern Australia because the Liberal
and Country Party Senators from the States have gone on strike.
All told therem$ 439 million waiting to come
tothe Northern Territory between now and the end of next June
because the State Senators, the Liberal and Country Party Senators
from the States have gone on strike.
Ladies and Gentlemen) I know perfectly well the attitude of the people
of this Territory. Never again will you allow the Senate to go on
strike. Never again, never again will the Senate be able to hold
the Teriitories up to ransom. Because the Territories more than
any other parts of Australia depend on the National Budget for their
welf are, their prosperity and their progress. If the Liberals
and the Country Party had not prevented the Northern Territory having
Senators since May last year, if you'd had Senators from the Northern
Territorythe Senate wouild not have gone on strike. The Northern
Territory would be getting the $ 439 million to which it is entitled
without interruption.
Ladies and Gentlemen , when the election comes don't forget to make
Ted Robertson and Kevin Frazer the first Senators from the Northern
Territory. Never again allow the Senate to hold up the welfare,
prosperity, and progress of the Northern Territory. Never again
allow State Senators to go on strike. 



PRIME MINISTER'S RADIO BROADCAST IN PORT AUGUSTA, S. AUST.
SUNDAY 2 NOVEMBER 1975
It is a very great pleasure to be in Port Augusta
again in the centre of South Australia's iron triangle
and to have this opportunity to talk to you. I was last in
Port Augusta in April, before going on to Tarcoola for the
inauguration of the new railway line to Alice Springs. That
railway will be one of the many achievements of my Government
of benefit to the people of South Australia and the Northern
Territory. Since then South Australia has had a State election.
It was an election on the very issue of railways, and I was
delighted that Don Dunstan won that election and was able to
put through his lesiglation to transfer financial responsibility
for the State railways to the Australian Government. It was
an excellent financial deal for South Australia, and it will
make possible a very great improvement in South Australia's
railway services.-Of course the other issue, the basic issue in your
election, was the power of an Upper House to frustrate a
Government's policies. Don Dunstan won that battle too,
and now in Canberra the national Government is facing an even
more serious challenge from a reactionary Upper House and
we are fa: ing it for the second time in the life of my
Goverrent. We have to win that battle for the sake of democracy,
for t e sake of our Budget with all the benefits it will bring
to thee Australian = eople and for the sake of the economic
health and stabili-y of the nation. The Senate is threatening
Australia with total chaos and disruption in its attempt to
ovet_ r_ n the Gover-nent, in its determination to follow in
the wcrds of Senator Steele Hall, a great South Australian
the " sleazy road to power."
In the pas-t few days the opinion polls have shown
clearly what the Aus_-alian People think of Mr Fraser's tactics.
Seventy percent of the people believe the Budget should be
passed. Yet Mr Fraser persists with his disastrous policy.
Already the Liberal-Country Party tactics are damaging the
business community and threatening the nation's economic recovery.
The Opposition is threatening the country with chaos in a grab
for political power. They are telling the Australian people
that a democratically elected Government, a Government with a
secure majority in the House of Representatives, a Government
elected for a three year term, should hand over power half
way through its term simply because it suits the Opposition.
Could any self-respecting Prime Minister yield to such tactics?
What leader worth salt would give in to this sort of
blackmail? I certaily will not. The Government will not.
It's not Government which is blocking the use of
. your taxes. It's = ot -he Government which is threatening the
life and stability cf the nation. It's the Opposition in the
Senate. The House of Representatives has passed the Budget
Bills. Every Labcr Senator has voted for the Budget Bills.
Every Labor member of Parliament and every Labor Senator will
go on voting for these Money Bills until they are passed.
The Opposition Senators alone are holding them up. / 2 
-2-
We have to remember that at the Senate elections
in May last year Labor candidates polled 165,000 more votes
than the candidates of all other parties represented in the
Senate. We Were returned with 29 Senators the same number
as the Liberals and the Country Party. And there were two
Independents. No party has a Senate majority. Since then,
the Labor Senators have been reduced to 27, because two State
Premiers have flouted another great constitutional convention
that Senators should be replaced by a man or woman of the same
Party as the one elected by the people. The Senate motion to
block Supply would never have been carried but for the death
of Senator Milliner of Queensland. As Steele Hall put it in
another vivid phrase: " Let it be remembered that the Opposition
succeeded only because a Labor Senator died. They did it
over a dead man's corpse."
I ask the people of South Australia a State that
has consistently demonstrated its concern for democratic
principles and for the rights of elected Governments to
stand firm with me in resisting Mr Fraser's threat to democracy
and his threat to the nation's economy. The Budget must pass.
The Government must be allowed to govern. The nation and the
economy must go forward. 



. I. ME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, PORT AUGUSTA
2 NOVEMBER 1975
Mr Wallis, ladies and gentlemen. I was asked about
six months ago to come to Port Augusta today because it's
the Diamond Jubilee at the Diocese of Willochra. And this
was a somewhat unexpected invitation, so novel in fact, that
I penned it in six months ago in my diary. And in the*
meantime-some other events have occurred, so I thought that
yesterday I would travel to Port Augusta via Alice Springs
and Whyalla. And I'm happy to have an audience of Labor
supporters in this electorate of Grey just before I go in
about twenty minutes time to the other celebration.
The last time I was here was in April and I was
passing through on the way to Tarcoola to inaugurate the
biggest railway project in Australia since the transcontinental
was started in Port Augusta at the outbreak of the First World
War. The biggest railway project in Australia for over
* sixty years. And shortly after that, you'll remember, that
we tried to put through the South Australian Parliament the
agreement to hand over the financial and management responsibility
to South Australia's non-metropolitan railways to the Australian
Government. And the Legislative Council of South Australia
* blocked it. And you had an election in South Australia.
And there were two big issues in that election. One was the
excellence of this financial deal that the Dunstan Government
had made with my Government to hand over the non-metropolitan
railways to the Australian Government which would mean an
immense financial advantage to the State Government; and
also an immense improvement in railway services, in South
Australia and through South-Australia, frorai all the other States
and up to the NorthernTerritory. That was the first issue.
And the other issue was the obstruction by an Upper House against
the policies of an elected government. And that's the thing
which is happening in the Australian Parliament now.
And I'm satisfied that we are going to win this issue
in the Australian Parliament throughout Australia, the same way
as Don Dunstan won on this issue last July in South Australia.
The simple fact is that governments, whether they're
the Federal Government or the* State Governments are made or
unmade in the Lower House. If a Party or Parties have a
majority in the Lower House, the House of Representatives or the
House of Assembly, then that's the Government. You can't be
the Government of Australia or South Australia or of any of the
States, unless you have a majority in the Lower House. And
* twice now, in December 1972 and in May last year, the Australian
Labor Party secured a comfortable majority in the House of
Representatives. And on each occasion, in December 1972 and
again in May 1974, the election was about who was-* to be the
Government of Australia for the next three years. Before half
that time-was up, in April last year, the Senate threatened to
block Supply, to say: " Well, look we won't give the Government
the authority to spend the taxes which are being collected.
We'll bring the business of Government to a standstill." / 2 
-2-
Now, at that time I said., " Right, we'll have a double dissolution;
there are six Bills which the Senate has held up, which it's
rejected twice, and we can settle the issue of Medibank, we
can settle the issue of equal electorates, electorates of the
same number of electors, we can do that now." And we had a
double dissolution, and we won. We got an overall majority,
a comfortable majority, in the whole * Parliament. And when on
a third occasion the Senate voted against the Medibank Bills
and a third time the Senate voted against the Electoral Bill;
and the third time the Senate voted against the Petroleum and
Minerals Authority Bill, which was designed to give-Australians
the opportunity to develop their own natural resources; when
a third time all those things happened, we had a Joint Sitting.
And at that Joint Sitting we comfortably passed all those
Bills. And never since has the Government been beaten in
any division, and there's scores of divisions which have taken
place in the House of Representatives.
We are clearly entitled to see out our three year
term. We were elected as the Government, and in the House
of Representatives where governments are made or unmade, we
still have a comfortable majority. And the proposition which
is being put by the Liberals and the Country Party is, that
because we haven't got a majority in the Senate, they can
blackmail us, hold us up, hijack us, whenever they wish. But
they haven't got a majority in the Senate either.
Now Governments are never made in the Senate; they
never have been; you can't have a Prime Minister in the Senate;
you can't have a Treasurer in the Senate and the Constitution
says that the Senate can't initiate Money Bills; the Senate
can't amend Money Bills and all. that the Senate can do is to
make a request to the House of Representati. ves to amend the
Money Bills. And the House of Representati~ ves may, if it sees
fit, accept the request or it can reject the request. That's
the sum total of the Senate's powers as laid out in the
Constitution. Let's go back to what happened in May last year, when
there was an election for both Houses. The Labor candidates
for the Senate got 165,000 votes more than the candidates of
all the other Parties represented in the Senate. But because
it's a complicated electoral system and so on, we ended up with
29 out of 60 Senators; and the Liberals and the Country Party
ended up with 29 out of 60 Senators; we got more votes but
they got as many members; but they didn't-get a majority, we
didn't get a majority. And in the Senate if the votes are
equal on any issue then the vote is lost. If there is a motion
for a Bill comes before the Senate and there are as many
people voting against it as for it, then it's lost. It's rejected.
Now after the election an Independent from Tasmania
joined the Liberal Party. And on our side, Senator Murphy
was appointed to the High Court fair enough that there should
be a Labor Attorney-General on the High Court, for the last ten
years there has been a Liberal Attorney-General, Barwick
himself,' it's fair enough that there should be an Attorney-
General from each side on the High Court. And then later
Senator Milliner died, the Labor Senator from Queensland. 
-3-
And the New South Wales Government -a Liberal Premier and
the Queensland Government a Country Party Premier appointed
replacements for Murphy and Milliner, who opposed the Labor
Party. The one from Queensland is the worse case Field,
Pat the Rat but still, still the Liberals and the Country
Party haven't got a majority in the Senate.. They have 30, one
of the Independents joined them, they've got 30. That is, even
if they thought they were entitled to-be the government, they
couldn't get the things through the Senate without the support
of the people who don't belong to their Party. And they have
no chance of getting a majority for any proposition they put
up in the House of Representatives.
So you have this situation, that at the moment the
Senate is not the Senate that the people elected in May last
year. There are two Senators who were appointed by anti-
Labor State Governments until there is an election for the
Senate and they belong, they are opponents of the Labor Party.
It's a stacked Senate. It is a tainted Senate. And on the
* basis of this Senate different to what it wa's when there was
last an election in May last year; and different because a
Liberal Premier and a Country rParty Premier. have done the wrong
thing; on this Budget the Liberals and the Country Party
relying on a stacked pack of cards, a tainted Senate, take
* it on themselves to say: we won't allow the Australian
Government to have the authority to spend the taxes which
everybody still has to pay.
Now it has never happened before in Australia's
history. There have been many occasions, particularly since
there was proportional elections for the Senate introduced
in 1949, when the Government hasn't had a majority in the
Senate. There were many occasions when Holt, and Menzies before
him and Gorton after him, didn't have a majority in the Senate.
But nevertheless t-he Senate always passed the Government's
Money Bills. The Senate can't initiate them; it can't
amend them; it can only make a request to amend them and the
House-of Representatives can accept or reject that request.
But never on all the occasions when a Government has not had
a majority in the Senate, has the Senate ever presumed to
reject the Budget. On 139 occasions Money Bills have been
put by the Government to the Senate when the Senate didn't
have a majority of Government Senators. And on every occasion
the Senate has passed those Bills.
Now I want to point out that on this occasion, the
Sienate hasn't yet rejected the Bill; it hasn't voted on it.
What has been passed is a motion to defer. debate; to stall;
* the Senate has gone on strike. Liberals and Country Party
Senators have gone on strike. And on this motion the voting
was 29 to 28, that is, there was one majority. If Senator
Milliner had still been there he would have been voting with
the 28; it would be 29 all. And in those circumstances the
motion to defer debate on the Budget Bills would have been
rejected. There is not a majority against the Budget in the
Senate. And all that Mr Fraser is doing, is keeping his
Senators sufficiently in line to vote for a deferment. Some
of them have said, Senator Bessel of Tasmania said on Four
Corners last weekend that in a vote on the Budget itselft he .4 
-4-
would not vote against the Budget. And he also said, Senator
Bessell on Four Corners last weekend that there were many other
Senators of the same mind. So once there is a vote on the
Budget Bills in the Senate, the Budget Bills will be passed.
And the motion which has been carried, just because Senator
Milliner is dead; the motion was carried as Senator Steele
Hall said " over a dead man's corpse". They say " If there is
going to be an election, we'll pass the Budget". That is,
there is nothing wrong with the Budget according to the Liberal
and. Country Parties.
True enough, Mr Fraser made a few criticisms of the
Budget after it was introduced, a week after it was introduced.
And his criticisms, of course, were shown to be very damaging
to his cause. And one of the things that the Liberals proposed
was that if they got into Government they would go back to the
old system of income taxation where there was Federal income
tax and State income tax as well. And this is the proposal
which would benefit maybe the people of Victoria and in
New South Wales it would be equal fifty-fifty, it would make
no difference but in the four smaller States everybody would
have to pay higher income tax. That's what used to be the
case in Australia before uniform income tax was introduced by
a Labor Government in 1942. It was the case still in Canada,
if you're in the smaller Canadian provinces you pay ' higher
State income tax, provincial income tax, than you do if you're
in the big one, the prosperous one like Ontario and British
Columbia. All the other provinces pay a higher tax. And this
is what Mr Fraser was proposing in his alternate Budget. He
realised that it was very unpopular in the four smaller States,
including yours. So he now says that his Budget proposals are
inoperative. You remember that great phase of President Nixon's
Press Secreatry came out, President Nixon was caught out in
giving a reply which wasn't accurate in Australia if anybody
does that he's sacked but in the United States they said: The
answer was " inoperative". And Mr Fraser at a press conference
on Wednesday week used the same phase: my Budget proposals
are " inoperative*. So there is nothing wrong with the Budget; it is.
just a hijack operation. They say they want an election now.
Now of course, they didn't say in May last year, at the last
election that if they lost they wouldn't accept the verdict; they
didn't say then that they would use any numbers they got in
the Senate to prevent the Government governing for the full three
years for which it was elected. Arnd, of course, back in that
was Billy Snedden was in charge of it that time it's getting
very uncomfortable for me, you know; I'm in the process of
demolishing the fifth Liberal leader: Holt, Gorton, McMahon,
Snedden, Fraser; they're all lasting less time as time goes on.
Watch for the next fascinating instalment, ladies and gentlemen.
But last April., April last year, when I yielded to
this blackmail we had an election which meant that we were
without a national Parliament for three months. The two Houses
were dissolved on the 10th of April. and we had the earliest
election we could; we had the quickest count we could; and
then we assembled the Parliament as quickly as possible. And
we couldn't bring it together until the 9th of July, one day
short of three months after Parliament had been dissolved. 
I don't believe that at this time in our battle against inflation
and unemployment, we can afford to have the Australian
Parliament suspended for another three months. We must get
on with the Budget; we must get on with the economic recovery;
we must get people back to work, particularly the school
leavers in the next month or two months. And the Liberals
and the Country Party are deliberately holding the country
to ransom; their strike is designed to promote unemployment
and dissatisfaction. Now we must make it plain to the Australian people who
are the guilty men. Because Mr Fraser when he took over from
Mr Snedden and when he realised that Mr Snedden had been
destroyed by taking the advice of the Country Party Leaders
and the newspaper proprietors, he said, very properly, that he
believed strongly that if a government had been elected it was
entitled to govern for its three year term. And he made an
exception; he said: " unless there are reprehensible.
circumstances." And as the pressure has grown on him from
the Country Party Leaders, as the pressure built from the
newspaper proprietors, he forgot his principles, he was
casting round for some reprehensible circumstance. And he's
never been able to find any at all. Every weekend he gets
more and more desperate in his abuse of me. And the Country
Party Leaders too. -But I've had no associations with CIA
money in Australia, as Anthony has. My wife hasn't received
any $ 16,000 necklaces for launching ships overseas, as
Sinclair's wife did. I haven't got, or my family hasn't got,
superph. 6sphate subsidies as Fraser's has. No income tax troubles
in my family. That is, they've been able to get nothing on me.
And they're getting more and more desperate, these men who
are subsidised by the CIA or overseas ship builders, or the
superphosphate people. They're getting more and more desperate
in their personal abuse of me and the whole of the Labor
Government. They've got nothing on us; there are no
reprehensible circ-, unstances at all. The only reprehensible and
extraordinary circumstance is the fact that for the first time
in 75 years a Senate is stalling on the votes on Money Bills.
They haven't voted against them; they know that they wouldn't
all line up at the barrier to reject the Budget. No Federal
Budget has ever been rejected in the 75 years that we've had
a Federal Parliament. And no Upper House in the world nowthe
House of Lords or Canadian Senate or any of these countries
which still have Upper Houses would ever reject a Budget.
It wouldn't happen anywhere else in the world. We've been
made the laughing stock of all our neighbours and in all the
longer settled. democracies around the world by these
shenanigans of the Liberals.
What is at stake is this: are we ever to have in
Australia, the opportunity of changing a government at the
ballot box and being sure that that government will have the
chance to carry out the policies upon which it was elected?
Because if you accept the situation that the Senate, by rejecting
a Money Bill or even just by stalling a Money Bill can produce
an election for the House of Representatives, then you can have
this situation arising twice a year. Because every October
the Budget is brought up to authorise the expenditure of taxes
and loan funds for the whole of the financial year, from the
1st of July past until the 30th of June f~ llowing. / 6 



PRIME MINISTER'S WEEKLY BROADCAST
RMR FRASER'S CLOWNS
SUNDAY 2 NOVEMBER 1975
I don't suppose there has ever been a time when the
Opposition's behaviour has come closer to sheer knockabout
farce than it did during the past week. At the centre of
it all was the continuing drama of Mr Khemlani. For days
we were led to believe by the Opposition and the press that
Mr Kheilani had the answer to all Mr Eraser' s prayers
evidence which would somehow incriminate the Government and
justify the Opposition in blocking the national Budget.
Mr Khemlani's documents, we were told, would prove that
the Prime Minister . had been associated in the loan raising
activities of thn Government,
Mind you, I have never been able to understand why
a Prime Minister should not be associated with the loan raising
activities of the Government it would be extraordinary and
reprehensible if he were not. But let that pass. Mr Khemlani
duly arrived in Canberra. The world waited with bated
breath while his luggage -was examined by the Opposition.
Now my colleague, Fred Daly, has a well known talent
for humour, so I thought I'd read from an account he gave to
Parliament of what happened on Mr Khcmlani's arrival.
Fred Daly had been studying all the press reports of thse
incidents, so naturally his version is authentic. He pointed
out that a Comnmonwealth car was booked by the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition to meet Mr Khemlani on his z. rrival at
Canberra Airport. He was greeted by members cf Mr Lynch's
staff. Fred Daly went on:
" Mr Khemlani was then pushed into the Commonwealth car
along with 2 sinister bearded staff members and taken
on a high speed car chase through the back streets of
Fyshwick reaching speeds of 100 kilometres per hour,
turning down side streets, and doing sudden U turns
before coming to a sudden stop at his destination
a $ 23 a night room at the Hotel Wellington. Mr
Khemlani, still using the car, and the men then disappeared
into room 49 the room adjoining the motel shoe-shine
box. Lemonade, potato chips and 2 Sydney afternoon
papers were pushed through the breadfast hatch. He
stayed locked in his room while the staff members
stayed huddled in a corner sifting through his 8
suitcases of documents. Later in the afternoon Mr Khemlani
was taken on another high speed car chase. This time,
as a taxi pulled up at the front of the motel,
Mr Khemlani disappeared out the back door and sped off
in a late model gold Torana with the manager of the
Wellington Hotel at the wheel. That is service. It
raced through the peak hour traffic, went one and a half
times round State Circle, and reached speeds of up to
120 kilometers along Commonwealth Avenue before swinging
around and returning to the hotel. Then Mr Khemlani
dis ineared." 
2.
That waG Fred Daly's account. Of course, the
real embarrassment for the Opposition canme later, when
SMr Khemlani's" documents" were examined by Mr Ellicott, their
appointed spokesman on Aboriginal Affairs of all things.
Presumably it was felt that Mr Ellicott's'; legal training
could quickly enable him to : ac. ' sc the documents as evidenc.
As it happened, Mr Ellicott promptly offe: red his considered, . ind
no doubt honest opinion, that the documents proved nothing.
They did not implicate the Prime Minister in any wuy. To use
his own words: " There is no direct evidecnce in the documents
I saw which involved the Prime Minister." But that wasn't ( jood
: enough for the Opposition. Mr Ellicott war summoned to a
meeting of the Shadow Cabinet and later issued another statement
saying that while there were not documents passing between
Mr Khemlani and the Prime Minister, he was sure the Prime Minister
was involved. I was reminded of Mr Chipo's humiliation a few
weeks ago when he stated publicly that the Liberals would scrap
Medibank and was later persuaded to issue a statement saying
the Liberals would do nothing of the kind. The trouble with
Mr Fraser's shadow ministers is that they are often too candid
for Mr Fraser's comfort and too outspoken for their own good.
While the so-called loans scandal was collapsing
around the Opposition's heads, some pretty large cracks
were appearing in the temple of Liberals unity which Mr Fraser
has proclaimed. Mr Fraser keeps saying that he won't yield
on this issue, but what about his senators, what about his
friends and followers? His whole case depends on getting an
election for the House of Representatives as soon as possible.
That's the purpose of the whole discreditable exercise a
quick election. Yet Mr McMahon, a former Prime Minister, was on
the radio this week telling us that he didn't know when the next
election would be held. I quote him " It might not be in
the immediate future, it might be a little later on, next year
or even the year after." Obviously the former Prime Minister
isn't too confident that an election will be held before 1977:
and we all know the views of Mr Gorton, the Liberal
Prime Minister before that.
The truth is that behind these sideshow antics there
remains a grave threat to the nation's economy, to social order
and our democratic institutions The farcical side of the
Opposition's conduct is in marked contrast to the behaviour
of the more responsible Opposition senators. Senator Bessell,
for example, can see very clearly the perils involved.
Senator Bessell is -one of a small groups of Liberals who have
grave reservations about Mr Fraser's chosen course. Senator
Bessell said firmly this week that he would never vote against
the Budget, and he added again I quote good many others
would feel the same way as I do." All that Senator Bessell and
his group are prepared to do is defer the Budget. Only in this
way, on this tenuous measure of support, can Mr Fraser sustain
his threat to deprive the Government of the taxpayers' money and
bring the nation to a standstill.
We had a very good illustration of the anxieties of
these senators during an incident in the Senate on Wednesday.
Senator Missen and Senator Baume two of the waverers, the 
" jellyfish" as Mr I" raser's people contemptuously call them
were presenting petitions fi.: cm Australian citizens prot esting
at the opposition's tactics. Senator Greenwood objected to the
petitions being received. Senator Missen and Senator Baumne, to
their great credit, insisted on the right of the Australian
people to protest. It was a revealing moment. It came 24
hours after another Liberal, Senator Wlood, failed to turn
up for a division on one of the crucial money bill~ s.
The way things have been going for Mr Franer, we
can hardly be surprised by the results of the latest opinion
polls. Normially it's my practice not to comment on opinion
polls, but the recent surveys have been so unanimous, so
clear-cut-so decisive and essentially so relevanrt, to the
nature and origins of the present crisis that no one can ignore
them. Certainly Mr Fraser can't ignore them. The polls
show that 70 percent -of the people believe the Senate should
pass the Budget; well over half the people believe the
Government should remain in office. it is rare for any opinion
poll on a matter of basic political allegiance to produce
a result so unmistakable, so overwhelming; but in the present
context the polls have a special significance. Mr Fraser
has tried to justify his action in blocking supply by repeated
claims that the people were demanding the Governmient's disis-sal.
He talked of a great upsurge-of public opinion, a rising tide
of anger, a veritable public clamour to see the Government
removed. These lofty insights into the national mood, so
mysteriously vouchsafed to Mr Fraser, are now revealed as
illusions if indeed Mr Fraser ever really believed them.
If Mr Fraser wants to liv e by the polls, let him now accept
the verdict of the polls. The people have given him their
answer with dramatic clarity. They want an end to the farce;
an end to the fruitless fishing expeditions of the past week,
with their wild charges, their web of innuendo, the car
chases and suitcases; and end to these threats of economic
and social disruption; an end to this challenge to our
democratic system. Mr Fraser has one course only left open
to him. Hie must let the Budget pass. Hle must let the
Government govern. He must let the economy and the nation
go forward. 



St; L-ate ren No 5 8 7
3 N~ ovember 1975
THE BUDGET
Mr Fraser can muster the votes of half thr. Senat.-ors
to delay a vote on~ the B~ udget. By various strcagatemEs he
is trying to use this half of the Senate to force an e). e ction
for -the House of epeetivs
The system of Government that Australia has
enjoyed for 75 yecars would be destroyed if any Prime : Unister,
now or in the future, were to give in to the type of b: lackmail
Mr Fraser continue s to use.
The Senate has never rejected a Budget. Mr Fraser
cannot muster the votes to reject the 1975 Budlget. The
Liberals are deferring a-vote on thce-Budget because they
are desperate. The Opposition has been making hysterical
accusations against the Government because it now realises
that Public Servants will not be bankrupted by any
Opposition refusal to pass the Budget. My Government would
not contemplate any raising, authorisation or expenditure of
money which was not within the existing Australian Conistitutional
and legal framework. My Government believes in Parliamentary demcocracy.
It has kept the Parliament sitting through its normal recess
because it asserts that the political problems of the day must
be settled in the Parliament not by some backdoor deal..
The Australian Labor Party has a clear majority in
the House of Representatives. While it retains that majority
it remains the Government.
on the particular issue of the Budget, the Government
in fact has the support of a majority of both Houses of
Parliament. only the creation of false numbers in the Senate
through the death of a Labor Senator and the destruction of
conventions by two anti-Labor Premiers has enabled the
Opposition to keep deferring a vote on the Budget.
I once again challenge Mr Fraser to free his Senators
to vote on the substance of the Budget that is to vote on
whether they will pass or reject the two Appropriation Bills.
It is intolerable that the present sham of deferring a decision
on these Bills should continue. The Australian people have a
right to know whether the Senate accepts or rejects this Budget
and the economic strategy it contains.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



PRESS STATEI2ENT BY THE MVINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
MVR PAUL KEATING, M. P. Canberra 4 November 1975
BURDEKIN BASIN INVESTIGATIONS
The Minister for Northern Australia, Mr Paul
Keating, said today that investigations into the potential
for development in the Burdekin Basin region of north
Queensland were nearing completion.
" The program of investigations, now in its third
year, is under the supervision of the joint Federal/ State
Burdekin Projects Committee".
" Particular attention had been paid to an assessment
of potential future commitments of the water resources of the
Basin for industrial, urban, irrigation and power purposes,
and for flood mitigation. The development potential of the
large coal reserves in the Burdekin Basin is alsn receiving
considerable attentinn".
" The-se investigations have involved engineering and
hydrological studies, while soil surveys and field trials
have been undertaken for an assessment of the potential of
unproven soils in the lower Burdekin for intensive agricultural
development., The environmental consequences of further
industrial development in the Basin are also under study.
Consultants have been engaged where necessary, particularly
with regard to industrial processing investigations".
M~ r Keating said that the Burdekin Basin, an area
of 130,000 square kilometers, was well provided with
infrastructure facilities and these would contribute
significantly to future large-scale development in the region.
The Burdekin Project Steering Committee met in
Brisbane on 3 November to discuss progress of the program of
investigations and other requirements for a report to be
completed next year. 


RIME MINISTER'S * INTERVIEW WITH MIKE WILLESEE, 6 NOVEMBER 1975.
WILLESEE:, Prime Minister thanks for joining us. You seem very determined?
PRIME MINISTER: Quite.
WILLESEE: Totally determined?
PRIME MINISTER: On the central issue,. totally.
WILLESEE: The central issue, you mean that the Senate mustn't take&nbsp;money away from the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right. Inr other words the PartyN'which the&nbsp;people give a majority in the House of Representatives must be allowed&nbsp;to govern.
WILLESEE: So on that issue you will hold fast, whatever the cost?
PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely.
WILLESEE: Whatever the cost?
PRIME MINISTER: Whatever the cost.
WILLESEE: You stand improving to be very good politics but I wonder if&nbsp;it is necessarily responsible leadership? I mean, Mr Fraser has made an&nbsp;offer; he'll allow the money to go through the Senate if you have an&nbsp;election by the end of next June. Now that can be interpreted in two&nbsp;ways: one that it's a sign of weakness and he's backing down;&nbsp;alternatively it can easily be seen that he is being responsible, he's&nbsp;giving a chance to the situation to be resolved?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not wanting to emphasise weakness; I don't&nbsp;want to make it difficult for Mr Fraser to do the right thing. I&nbsp;agree he doesn't deserve much sympathy; he's done the wrong thing and&nbsp;he's failed. But I'm not going to use any terms such as weakness or&nbsp;climbing down. But the other thing is this, that his offer, when&nbsp;you look at it seriously, involves me going to the Governor-General&nbsp;now and telling the Governor-General that in six months time I will be&nbsp;advising him to issue writs for the House of Representatives. In other&nbsp;words Mr Fraser is deferring the payment of the ransom; he's saying&nbsp;that the hijack can be put off another six months..
WILLESEE: Do you concede any circumstances where a Senate would be&nbsp;justified in stopping the Government's supply of money?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I would not concede that there are any circumstances&nbsp;ever. And incidentally, nobody has ever up till now, thought that was&nbsp;the case. There have been many cases in the past and in the 1960' s&nbsp;it happened constantly where the Federal Government didn't have a&nbsp;majority of the Senators as its supporters. And never has the Senate&nbsp;rejected a Money Bill.
WILLESEE: I wondered if wb could imagine an extreme case, as extremeas you like, if perhaps the roles were reversee. you ". ad power in theSenate and the Government of the day wanted to put hundreds of thousandsof conscripts into a war, that was perhaps a civil war, and you knewthat the population of your country didn't approve, an extreme case?
PRIME MINISTER: Well there 4, s no doubt,.,
WILLESEE: And you had the power to stop it?
PRIME MINISTER: What by cutting off money?
WILLESEE: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: No, no I would still not. And this did happen. The&nbsp;first year that I was Leader of the Labor Party in the Federal Parliament,&nbsp;in 1967, you will remember that the Senate had disallowed some regulations&nbsp;to put up postal and telegraph charges . and then a couple of months later&nbsp;the Holt Government brought those increased charges in with the Budget&nbsp;Bills, it brought them in as a Money Bill. And there was a big&nbsp;argument...
WILLESEE: Yes, but I think that...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well this was a Money Bill in the Budget context&nbsp;and I persuaded the Labor Party not to persist in its opposition,&nbsp;to let the Budget, including the increased charges...
WILLESEE: Yes, but that's not an extreme case is it? I'm just&nbsp;wondering because I'm trying to test the principles...
PRIME MINISTER: Yes sure.
WILLESEE: to see how much it can be.
PRIME MINISTER: The answer is I would still, I would still not&nbsp;endorse the rejection of a Budget or refusal of Supply.
WILLESEE: No matter how extreme and gross the evil of the Government?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right. That's right.
WILLESEE: Isn't that a bit silly putting principle before perhaps&nbsp;peoples lives?*
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, I mean this is a tough case but I still stick&nbsp;to what I say. I don't believe that the Senate should reject Money&nbsp;Bills or the Budget.
WILLESEE: So you reject the argument also that it's a question ofwhether the Senate is being wise in using this extreme power at themoment, not a matter of whether it can. It's not a question ofwhether. PRIME MINISTER: I don't concede they can, but nevertheless I'm certainthey never should. And they never have up tilinow. There's been 139Money Bills which have been passed by the Senate at a time when theGovernment didn't have a majority in the Senate. So this is the firsttime it has ever been tried.WILLESEE: You're totally firm on that principle?PRIME MINISTER: Absolutely.WILLESEE: Your opponents aren't and that's why we have this deadlock.I think its proper that I should put some questions to you based ontheir opposition...
PRIME MINISTER: Sure.WILLESEE: questioning the Government's right to govern. You havea mandate twice in a very short time.PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: But they say, I think I'm accurate in saying, they narrowit down to two elements which can now be considered further to thelast election, the economy and the loans affairs? The economy,briefly. Do you accept that there is evidence that says we have notcontrolled inflation as well here as comparable countries?PRIME MINISTER: No, the evidence, the latest evidence, is ' rather theother way. For instance the wage component of inflation is now bettercontrolled I'm not particularly keen on using that term in relation toincomes but nevertheless it is better controlled in Australia than ina great many other...WILLESEE: You say the latest, I think that it's fair that we shouldconsider the last 18 months or 2 years because that's the period ofjudgment. PRIME MINISTER: Yes, you can see developments over that period. Yes,sure. WILLESEE: There are several things that seem to go against what you say.One is that we didn't have the oil crisis that precipitated or made worsethe situation in other countries.PRIME MINISTER: But there's no doubt that the oil business in theMiddle-East has put up costs in Australia. But not as much as in someother Western countries that's true.WILLESEE: Would you also agree we should be more naturally...PRIME MINISTER: I mean let's face it, oil hasn't hurt the United Statesor Canada, either of them; it'. 1s hurt mainly the Western Europeans.WILLESEE: Do you accept that we should be more naturally healthy andeconomically resiliant than many of those other countries that youcompare us with?PRIME MINISTER: On the whole package we're very similar to NorthAmerica, Western Europe and Japan. And in general we compare quitefavourably.WILLESEE: The other thing on the matter of the economy is that you havesacked, or demoted, or allowed to leave, all of your senior economicministers, all of the original ones.PRIME MINISTER: I've changed some of them round Yes.WILLESEE: Isn't that a concession on your part of faults in yourmanagement of the economy?PRIME MINISTER: It's a very difficult job being Treasurer.WILLESEE: But all of your managers have gonePRIME MINISTER: No, no, the Treasurer that's the significant one.
The Treasurer. I've had three Treasurers; I now have the bestTreasurer that this country's had for decades.WILLESEE: You've had two that you feel failed in one respect oranother? PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: Over that period that is relevant to this case. Isn't thatan admission of some incompetence in your administration?PRIME MINISTER: I've now found a better one.WILLESEE: How about someone like Mr Connor, people talk about lackof business confidence; it couldn't be more marked than the mining field..-PRIME MINISTER: No, no, you're unfair to Mr Connor there; he wasdealing with some very tough people. But he did not go because of anyfailures in administration.WILLESEE: Despite the...PRIME MINISTER: I mean let's face the, let's acknowledge, whatMr Connor has had to put up with. The Senate in July, I think it was,last year, disallowed regulations made under the Atomic Energy Act,which the Menzies Government had passed in 1953. This was sheercussedness by the Senate, that put things back. Again we've had towait 5 and a half years now for this legislation on seas and submergedlands. It was brought in unde r Gorton, by McMahon, in April 1970.WILLESEE: But that's concentrating on the Senate not on the Mr Connor.I mean if you did it all again would you like Mr Connor to go in andhandle business in Australia in the same way?PRIME MINISTER: Don't blame Mr Connor for any of these business things.I won't have you insinuating that. I don't endorse what you're puttingto me.WILLESEE: Well I'd like to put it as a straight question.PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: If you did it again, had another go, would you put Mr Connorin and let him deal with the Australian, that section of the Australianbusiness community, exactly the same way again?PRIME MINISTER: Mr Connor did some magnificent things where it wasopen to him to do it, that is, in the coal industry for instance.There's no doubt the coal industry in Queensland and New South Walesis ever so much more prosperous now than it was when he came in. Asregards uranium, and off-shore oil, he has been very grievously hinderedby the States.WILLESEE: But the overall question was, would you have him do it thesame way again?PRIME MINISTER.: My appointment was correct. Mr Connor has been a verygreat Australian; he's done an immense amount to develop Australianresources and to give Australians the opportunity to share in thatdevelopment.
WILLESEE: Don't you think that that industry has been confused?PRIME MINISTER: It's been very obstructive and so on and theStates confuseWILLESEE: It has been confused by your lack of plans.PRIME MINISTER: No: and that's not true; that is not true. Everybodyknew what laws we wanted to make. We wanted to put through thelegislation that the Gorton Government introduced in April 1970,we did at last get it through and then it's been held up by Statechallenges all States, all six of them in the High Court and theHigh Court still hasn't given its judgment. The atomic, the uranium.business was put into confusion because the Senate rejected theregulations made under the Menzies Act of 1953.WILLESEE: Could the country have been better managed economicallyin the past two years?PRIME MINISTER: In the light of the knowledge and skill that we nowhave, yes, of course it could. But let's face it, every Western countryhas been going through this exceptional situation.WILLESEE: The loans affair is fairly indigenous?PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: Why did you want all1 that money in the first place?PRIME MINISTER: So as principally to help develop our natural resources.WILLESEE: Did you have feasibility studies done on how you would spendthe money?'PRIME MINISTER: In many cases, yes.WILLESEE: Why, weren't they revealed?PRIME MINISTER: Many of them have been. We know what it will cost todevelop offshore oil. We know what it will cost to develop uranium.We know what it will cost to develop coal resources, coal ports. Weknow all that. No mystery about that.WILLESEE: Why did you avoid the traditional manner of getting approvalfor such fund raisings in Australia?PRIME MINISTER: The traditional method was adopted, that is, authoritywas given to a Minister to raise the loan.WILLESEE: Is there any precedent for that?PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: That amount of money, avoiding the Loan Council?PRIME MINISTER: Not that amount. Wait a bit, you say avoiding theLoan Council? No. The States would have been involved in a very greatdeal of this. You couldn't have built the coal ports or developedcoal resources without doing it through the States.
WILLESEE: You decided to raise some money?PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: A large amount of money?PRIME MINISTER: Well, to see if it was available, yes.WILLESEE: An amount of money without precedent?PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Mind you, when you say without precedent,companies aim to raise that sort of amount. The CRA gave evidence tothe Tariff Board that it would be needing that sort of money in thespace, I'think, of about 4 years. So it's not a staggering amount.WILLESEE: Well, isn't if fair to even use a term like staggering whenthe Government has raised nothing like that in one sum before?PRIME MINISTER: The Government hasn't, the Australian Governmentcases have raised such amounts.WILLESEE: Now, it wasn't a traditional way of getting approval was it?PRIME MINISTER: Authority from the Executive Council? Certainly it was.WILLESEE: What's the precedent for that? I'm talking about comparableamounts of money; there's no precedentPRIME MINISTER: No, no, for that amount being raised by the Government.But the method of raising money is always the same; you do it underExecutive Council authority.WILLESEE: Having got that approval, why did you then avoid the traditiona.'avenues of fund raising abroad?PRIME MINISTER: We had offers put to us. And of course we'vehad many offers put to us. Three have been debated in the Parliament.WILLESEE: Is that sufficient reason for not checking with thetraditional and historically responsible sources?PRIME MINISTER: We adopted all the checks that had ever been used.That is, the Attorney-General's Department, the Reserve Bank, theTreasury and the relevant departments were all involved.WILLESEE: So you approved Mr Khemlani then as a reliable man?PRIME MINISTER: No, he didn't make any offer. I'm not saying whetherMr Ehemlani is reliable or not. The fact is that he never made anoffer and as a result, as I made plain in the Parliament months andmonths ago, no money has been paid to Mr Khemlani; no money has to bepaid to Mr Khemlani; no money will be paid to Mr Khemlani. And Igather from Mr Rhemlani's statutory declaration he complains thatour tests were so tough.WILLESEE: I don't think that's quite in question. It was the mannerof trying to get the money that I think is in question. I think....PRIM. E MINISTER: He never made an offer.
WILLESEE: July 9 in Parliament, you talked about a national andinternational conspiracy I presume you were talking about the moneyworld that would take any steps to harm Australia or harm theAustralian Government even if it meant harming Australia. Now wasthat the real reason that you refused to go to traditional sources?PRIME MINISTER: No, we would be quite entitled to consider any offersthat were made to us. No offer was made. We could have used thatmoney. The money is needed. And it would be a very good deal to getthat sum of money on the terms, which we were prepared to accept. Wewill need that sort of money to develop our natural resources. We willneed it.WILLESEE: But why deal with people on the fringe of the money worldrather than established sources?PRIME MINISTER: If anybody had made an offer, then it would havebeen accepted, if it was on proper terms.WILLESEE: How do people know to make an offer of $ 4000 million?PRIME MINISTER: This sort of money is raised by companies, as Imentioned. WILLESEE: Yes but you made the approach, surely you tell them you wantthe money.PRIME MINISTER: No, no people know that we are prepared to borrow moneyif it is on satisfactory terms and no offer was made in this case.So therefore we didn't borrow any money. What I think you'rereferring to is this, that there has been a very big change in thelast two years in the sources of money. The oil people have a verygreat deal of money to lend. And they're looking for good borrowersand Australia is in the top rank of borrowers. our credit is notexceeded by any country. in the world; we have a triple rating.WILLESEE: Do you say it's O. K. because of the changed circumstances,accumulation-of wealth, but is there any precedent for people such asthose that Mr Connor and Dr Cairns were dealing with, the fringe moneydwellers as well as if I could call them. Is there any precedent forthose people raising a loan of this amount? $ 4 billion?PRIME MINISTER: You're using the establishment term, fringe money.Ten years ago the oil countries didn't have a cent to lend, now theyhave thousands of millions of dollars to lend.WILLESEE: But is there a precedent for these people? I'm not talkingabout the Arabs.PRIME'MINISTER: Well, I am, I am.WILLESEE: Do you know of any such loans that these men have raised?PRIME MINISTER: No I don't know what loans, if any, Mr Khemlani hasraised. WILLESEE: Don't you think it's a little bit strange as a businesspractice? PRIME MINISTER: We were prepared we still are of course to considerany reasonable offer. But no offer was ever put by Mr Khemlani.
WILLESEE: Alright, this national and international conspiracy youtalk about?PRIME MINISTER: Did I? Did I?WILLESEE: Yes, Parliament on July 9.,PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well I'm..WILLESEE: You gave as one of the reasons why you would go away from thetraditional sources because you felt that they didn't have your interestsat heart, and they were trying to hurt you, the Labor Government.PRIME MINISTER: Obviously, obviously, the people that raise money andlend money over the years want to keep that businesq to themselves.That's all I said...WILLESEE: You said more than that; you said they would use any weaponsthey could to harm the Labor Government?PRIME MINISTER: I frankly don't remember the details. I mean I'mnot disputing or...WILLESEE: Did you have anyone in mind?PRIME MINISTER: No.WILLESEE: Do you have any evidence of such a conspiracy?PRIME MINISTER: I don't remember saying it. Did I use the wordconspiracy?WILLESEE: Conspiracy, national and international.PRIME MINISTER: Well, I assume that it was because those people thathad always had the business of lending money to Australia wanted tokeep the business to themselves or they wanted any new lenders to gothrough them.WILLESEE: Now with Dr Cairns, you dismissed him because of the letterwhich indicated he'd misled Parliament. You made a statement on July 1and you referred to having been shown the letter the day before. Youdidn't say whether you'd been shown it for the first time, you saidyou'd been shown it. Had you in fact seen that letter prior to thatPRIME MINISTER: No, no. This is getting a bit far away from the Budgetisn't it? Isn't it? ' Cause this hasn't been mentioned at all in thelast 3 or 3 and a half weeks that the Liberal and Country Party Senatorshave been stalling on a vote for the Budget. This has not beenmentioned. This isn't said to be an excuse for this unprecedentedconduct by the opposition.WILLESEE: Well I'm not basing it all my questions on what the Oppositioncould do?PRIME MINISTER: I thought you were. I thought that's how you wereleading in.
9. WILLESEE: No, well because they talk about questions not beinganswered and I think...PRIM4E MINISTER: Well, that's not true. Every question has beenanswered. WILLESEE: Now you say you hadn't seen that letter. When you firstsaw that letter, which was because of a publication in a newspaper,you then took action...PRIME MINISTER: Look I forget the details on this.WILLESEE: Well specifically, because it's very important.PRIME MINISTER: I gave of course it is, and it is all inHansard and nobody has disputed it since and you said not answeringquestions. Every question which I've been asked I have answered. Ithink there's over 200 of them. There's not a single question on thenotice paper now and I wasn't asked a question today in Parliament.I know these allegations are made but the fact is...WILLESEE: Having raised this I think it's fair to round up thatDr Cairns says quite categorically, that the head of your Department,Mr Menadue, had sent you a copy of that letter, June 18.PRIME MINISTER: That's right, and I was in Launceston at the time.WILLESEE: Your departmental head wouldn't have shown you a letter thatwas worthy of a Minister being sacked?PRIME MINISTER: I was in Launceston at the time and as with everypiece of paper, I've said, send it to the interdepartmentalconirnittee which is looking at all these matters. What ' I was intentto know was whether the Australian Government was liable to make anypayments in any of these matters. And the advice all along has been,including on that letter, No.WILLESEE: Don't you think it's a bit strange that your Departmentcould have that letter...PRIME MINISTER: No I don't.WILLESEE: not give it to you and it's up to a newspaper to publishit and then you took action?PRIME MINISTER: No. It's all been argued and you're now makingallegations that nobody has been prepared to make.WILLESEE: I would think they're questions rather than allegations.PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Yes, well, I didn't see it on the date youmentioned. You say June the 18th.WILLESEE: Yes, from Mr Menadue to Dr Cairns.PRIME MINISTER: Well wait a bit, Ill look it up in my diary. Yes, Iwas in Launceston that day. On Wednesday the 18th I signed theMedibank Agreement in Launceston with the Premier of Tasmania. Anyother date?WILLESEE: It took 13 days
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well wait a bit, any other date? You mentioneda date and I answered fou.WILLESEE: No, I don't think it's very relevant where you were.PRIME MINISTER: You say did I see it on the 18th and I tell youwhere I was.WILLESEE: You could have been told; were you told, about the letterbefore that?PRIME MINISTER: No I wasn't.WILLESEE: You weren't aware of it until the newspaper published it?PRIME MINISTER: I forget exactly when the newspaper published it.I mean the facts are very clear, they've been argued months ago. Theyhave no relevance to the present situation.WILLESEE: Mr Connor's dismissal was also triggered by a newspaperpublication. PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: Do you assert that that was your first knowledge of thatinformation?PRIME MINISTER: of most of the documents that the Melbourne Heraldpublished and which it gave me Yes.WILLESEE: Of the relevant material?PRIME MINISTER: Yes.WILLESEE: Another thing about Dr Cairns I think I should put to you.Your comments about Dr Cairns and Mr Connor being sacked on ' A CurrentAffair' led Dr Cairns later to say, " If he said that he, himself wasdistorting the-situation..."PRIME MINISTER: Look if you don't mind I'm not going to connive atthe handling of that program, that program ' A Current Affair' becauseyour rival there has played it several times in different versions.Yes if you don't mind I'm not going to comment on selections from oneor more of the playings of that program.WILLESEE: I was going to go past what you said and go to what Dr Cairnssaid. PRIME MINISTER: No, well I'm not going to respond to that.WILLESEE: Alright, now this current situation has certainlyintroduced... PRIME MINISTER: What we're coming back to current matters? Righto..WILLESEE: Well, I'm not sure that they're not all current. There'sa new tone in politics now.PRIME MINISTER: Yes isn't there?WILLESEE: Dirty politics do you think?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, not particularly, what's happened is thatthe Liberal leadership is now being.-shown to be extraordinarilyimpatient and greedy. That is, this new conservative leadership hasbeen exposed. It's been a revelation. I mean I wasn't surprised.But the public in general didn't realise what Mr Fraser as leaderwould lead our opponents into doing.WILLESEE: But in fighting this out day to day, don't you think it'sgetting a little dirty?PRIME MINISTER: Well be specific. I mean I've been...WILLESEE: Alright, well Mr Fraser and Mr Anthony are making suggestionsabout you becoming irrational, I think.PRIME MINISTER: Oh, yes they say I'm going mad.WILLESEE: Yes, well they're imputing something about your stateof mind?PRIME MINISTER: Yes that's right.WILLESEE: That's dirty politics or is that fair politics?PRIME MINISTER: I'll let the public judge that. Anybody followingthe Parliament, I think, would think that they were wide of the mark.WILLESEE: You also want the public to judge your allegations aboutMr Anthony in the CIA?PRIME MINISTER: They were right weren't they?WILLESEE: But surely your....PRIME MINISTER: I didn't mention the man's name. I didn't mention thejob he did. I didn't mention where he did the job and Mr Anthony,he mentioned thope things and confirmed everything that I'd learnt.WILLESEE: An association with CIA money has fairly sinisterconotations doesn't it?PRIME MINISTER: Of course, it has. And...WILLESEE: He rented his house for $ 500.PRIME MINISTER: Oh, that's not the money one's referring to.WILLESEE: Well, what is your allegation?PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm going in that respect on the allegations thatthe Financial Review makes. The Financial Review asserts that CIAmoney has come into Australia to condition the political and economicattitudes of Australians. I'm not saying that Mr Anthony was paid bythe CIA or that he handled money for the CIA. But Mr Anthony has hadvery close domestic relations with a CIA chief in Australia and heshould have known better. And there's no dispute of this association.WILLESEE: I accept that, but your allegation was association with CIAmoney And as y6u say it's not really the rent which...PRIME MINISTER: Well of course it's not; of course it's not.
A12. WILLESEE: What is the association with CIA money and Mr Anthony that'sthe real basis of your allegation?PRIME MINISTER: The Country Party of which Mr Anthony has been avery senior and influential member for a long time; before he becameLeader, you know his father was a Country Party minister too itshould not have allowed itself to appear to be influenced by the CIAagainst Australia's interests to the extent that it may well have been.WILLESEE: That's by association with the CIA?PRIME MINISTER: Of cours ' e it is, and it's a domestic association...No.. No the association Mr Anthony let the country down and one whoshould have known what he was doing by this domestic relationshipwith a CIA chief in Australia. And America's interests as representedby the CIA would in many cases be quite inimical to Australia'sinterests.WILLESEE: Are you suggesting that you would withdraw your basic, yourfirst allegation, of Anthony being associated with CIA money?PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don't want it to be thought that Mr Anthonyreceived any money from the CIA; I don't want it to be thought thatMr Anthony handled any money from the CIA; I do believe that the CIAhas put money into Australia. But what is absolutely certain, thatMr Anthony had an undue association with a CIA chief in Australia,extending over several years and this was against Australia's interests.And a senior politician, like Mr Anthony, should have known better andshould have done better. IWILLESEE: There are a few other allegations that, the cost of gifts andsome questions on notice...PRIME MINISTER: Yes, yes, you're referring to Mrs Sinclair receivingjewellery worth $ 16,000 for launching two ships. Now that was a grosslyexcessive present to receive.WILLESEE: But how do you know that it wdas $ 16,000?PRIME MINISTER: She said so.WILLESEE: She was reported as saying so?PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well, of course she was. She was speaking ata political gathering in Albury and she stated that and it wasreported. And the report has not been denied, although it's beenreferred to in the Parliament more than once in the last week.WILLESEE: Do you think it's proper that these things are now comingbefore the Parliament?PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I think he was a darned fool to do it. Andinferences can be drawn. I've been subject to all sorts of allegationsfor years. None of them have ever stuck. You seem to have touched onthe periphery of some of them in the last few minutes. But I've neverhad an association such as Mr Anthony has obviously had with a CIAchief. I've never received, nor my wife,. any gifts such as Mrs Sinclairreceived. And these were very unwise things for them to do. And they'vebeen exposed in the current circumstances and the public is entitledto know what sort of people are behind the obstruction to the electedGovernment. Prime Minister thanks very much.



PRESS STATEMENT NO. 588
6 NOVEMBER 1975
NEW COMMISSIONER FOR THE DARWIN RECONSTRUCTION COMMISSION
The Prime Minister, Mr E. G. Whitlam, today announced
the appointment of a new Chairman of the Darwin Reconstruction
Commission. He is Mr Clem Jones, who for 14 years was Lord Mayor
of the City of Brisbane. He is 57 years of age, married with no
children. He is a licenced surveyor and holds a Bachelor of
Science degree. He took a post graduate course in Public
Administration at the University of California, Los Angeles.
The Prime Minister said that the Government was fortunate to
obtain the services of a man of-Mr Jones' great experience.
Brisbane is the only all-purpose local government authority in
Australia. It covers approximately 400 square miles, a population
of 725,000 and has a budget of approximately $ 200 million.
The Prime Minister paid tribute to the excellent job which
had been done by the retiring Chairman, Mr Tony Powell, the
Co= issioner of the National Capital Development Commission in
Canberra. At the time of Mr Powell's appointment in March this
year he had indicated his willingness to serve for an initial
period of 12 months in order to establish the Reconstruction
Commission. It tyas agreed that at the end of the 12 month period
the position would ba reviewed.
The Prime 4inister said Mr Powell had recently suggested
that it waa now an appropriate time for the Government to
reconsider his position on the Reconstruction Commission.
The current situation with regard to the Commission is
that all of the senior staff have been appointed, including the.
General Manager who is the full-time chief executive. The
1975-76 work program'is committed and under way. A report on the
overall Five Year Reconstruction Program is with the Minister for
Northern Australia, IMIr Paul Keating.
Mr Powell told the Prime Minister that after its
somewhat difficult beginning the Commission was well set to
complete the tack it had been constituted to carry out. .7,7 
2.
Mr Powell also advised the Prime Minister that he had
received the utmost courtesy and friendliness from the people
he had met and worked with in Darwin, but that there were
significant limitations upon his tine and availability in
trying to cope with full-time duties as Commissioner of the
N. C. D. C. in Canberra, and part-time Chairman of the Rleconstruction
Commission in Darwin.
With the advent of a new Minister in Mr Keating,, Mr Powell
felt it was time for the Government to consider whether he should
stand down as Chairman in favour of someone who would have more
time to devote to the job and would be able to identify more closely
with the Darwin community.
The Prime Minister said the Government wished to place
on record its gratitude to'Ar Powell for the way in which he had
coped with the difficult period of establishing the Commission.
The. Government was pleased that the appointment of Mr Clem Jones
to the position of Chairman of the Reconstruction Commission
would enable Mr Powell to devote his great talents to the important
task. of planning, construction and development of the national
capital. 



* U( A PRESS STATEMENT NO. 589
7 November 1975
THE BUDGET -STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
It's now more than three weeks since the Opposition
in the Senate embarked on its reckless course of blocking the
Budget. It must be quite clear to them by now that their
attempt to subvert the elected Government has failed completely.
Yet wilfully, want~ only, in the face of this knowledge,
with total disregard for the nation's welfare, they persist
in a course which must gravely damage the economy and damage
the national interest a course which will set back by weeks,
by months, the difficult process of economic recovery which
was getting underway.
It is a tragic fact -tragic but true that damage
to the economy has alreadly been done and is already being
felt. Business confidence is already suffering. A grave
blow has alread' been struck to Investment, to stability,
to co~ nsumer spending, and above all to employment. The
Oppos ition's answer to this hardship and confusion is more
political crisis, another election, a campaign which, by
their own invitation, could last six or seven months, with
all the paralysis entailed to normal administration.
I repeat: it is just not on. It is simply no answer.
The-Budget must pass.
I want to make it clear that the Government,
mindful of its duty, is doing everything possible to minimise
hardship and suffering among innocent victims of this crisis.
Public servants, as I have already announced, will be paid in
the normal way on the 13 and 27 November. Thereafter-the
banks the private banks as well as the Commonwealth Bank
and the State Government banks are concerned to ensure that
their custormer, whose incomes are threatened, obtain credit
during this difficult time. The Government welcomes the
statement by the banks that they will do all they can to
provide credit. We shall cooperate with them. That is the
very least we could do for the loyal public servants who are
sticking by their posts. And it is a duty which Mr Fraser
himself acknowledged publicly on Sunday week. He was asked
if the opposition would consider giving public servants
assistance with credit, and he said I quote his words
" We certainly would. I have already said that we would not
want to see any individual, Government employee, hurt or
* damaged as a result of whatis happening." That was his
attitude to the emergency measures perfectly legal and
constitutional measures that we are now taking. personal
./ 2 4.-I: Z)
/ 3 
* 2 But I have to say this: individuals are
being hurt. The economy is being hurt. Nothing can
flow from further delay to the Budget but disruption
and economic decline. Mr Fraser must end this farce now.
The nation must return to its normal steady course.
The elected Government must be allowed to govern.
CANBERRA, A. CT. 



PRIME MINISTER CANBERRA
FOR PRESS8 NOVEMBER, 19-75
THE PORT HEDLAND CYCLONE
I WOULD LIKE TO EXPRESS MY CONCERN AND SYMPATHY FOR THOSE
WHO HAVE LOST THEIR HOMES IN THE PORT HEDLAND CYCLONE.
I AM RELIEVED TO HEAR THAT THERE HAS BEEN NO LOSS OF LIFE FROM
THE CYCLONE WHICH AFFECTED PORT HEDLAND EARLIER TODAY.
I HAVE ASKED THE SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE SENATOR WITHERS TO
GO TO PORT HEDLAND TOMORROW, NOT ONLY IN HIS OWN CAPACITY AS
A MINISTER BUT ALSO TO REPRESENT ME.
HE WILL REPORT DIRECTLY TO ME ON THE DAMAGE CAUSED BY
THE CYCLONE.
I AM INFORMED THAT THE PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA SIR CHARLES
COURT WENT TO PORT HEDLAND THIS AFTERNOON.
WE STAND READY TO CO-OPERATE WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENT ON THE
APPROPRIATE MEASURES TO RELIEVE HARDSHIP AND DISTRESS. 



PRIME MINISTER' S WEEKLY BROADCAST
THE DRIFT TO DISASTER
Sunday 9 November 1975
I want to suggest one very good way of
describing the present behaviour of the Senate of
putting that behaviour in perspective. It's a comparison
that should appeal strongly to Opposition members themselves.
The Liberals and the Country Party are fond of condemning
Australian workers whenever they go on strike. They love
to getup and fulminate about the evil of strikes. I wonder
if it ever occurs to them that the Senate's present
behaviour amounts to a strike. The Senate won't pass the
Budget; they won't reject the Budget; they won't suggest
any amendments to the Budget. They won't do anything
about the Budget at all. They refuse even to consider it.
In other words, the Opposition in the Senate are refusing
to do their job. They have gone on strike.
Now whenever workers go on strike for
whatever reason the Opposition are always the first to
condemn them for anti-social behaviour. But look at the
anti-social consequences of the Senate's strike. Their
strike is infinitely more disruptive and dangerous than
anything contemplated by the unions. The Opposition in the
Senate are holding the country to ransom. They aren't
just disrupting a particular industry; they are threatening
the whole nation with chaos. They are totally indifferent
to the damage and hardship they are causing to the Australian
people, to business, to industry, to the economy as a whole.
The main thing that's different about the Senate's
strike is that the Senators are getting paid for it.
It can't be emphasised too often that although
the Opposition Senators are refusing to pass the Budget
they are also refusing to reject it. And we know why
they won't reject it. They won't reject it because a
minority of Opposition Senators have made it plain to
Mr Fraser that they won't go along with rejection. So
Mr Fraser has been forced to adopt these phony stalling
tactics this repeated deferral of the Budget. And because
of this he has been forced into a monstrous inconsistency
a complete logical absurdity. The Opposition says it will
pass the Budget but on certain conditions. Remember
how they attacked and denounced the Budget when the
Treasurer introduced it? Remember Mr Fraser's words when
he announced his dangerous and irresponsible course?
He said: " The Budget has been an admitted failure." Well. the
Opposition now tell us that this same Budget will be passed
by the Opposition provided I hold an election. Suddenly
our Budget is good enough for the Liberals. It's not a
failure after all! The Opposition knows very well the great
benefits and advantages contained in the Budget the
tax cuts, the tax reforms, the benefits for children, for the
aged, for pensioners, for migrants. They don't dare reject 
these benefits f or the Australian people. In fact
only last week, the Senate passed our tax reform bills,
but won't pass the Budget which will permit the
expenditure of these taxes.
It's frightening to contemplate the havoc and
personal hardship, the business disruption, the uncertainty,
the social and economic chaos which the Opposition is
causing to the whole community. And make no mistake
these effects are already being felt. They are happening
now. They are already reflected in a downturn in consumer
spending as the Christmas holiday approaches. For who can
blame the Australian people especially public servants,
who depend on the Government for their wages and salaries
f or cutting back their personal spending when the outlook
is so uncertain? Who can blame businesses for cutting
staff when Government orders are in jeopardy? Even if
the Senate called off its strike tomorrow, irreparable
damage to the economy would already be done. In Parliament
this week, the Treasurer, Bill Hayden, drew attention to
the disastrous effects of the Senate's behaviour on rural local
government, especially on local employment projects funded
by the RED scheme. Bill Hayden made it clear that unemployment
levels early next year are bound to be higher than anticipated
because of the failure to pass the Budget. Inevitably there
will be effects on other economic indicators. The whole
difficult and delicate process of economic recovery is
being wantonly jeopardised by the Opposition. It is
heartbreaking to ministers like Bill Hayden and Jim
McClelland it is heartbreaking to me and all my colleagues
that the very real progress we've been making towards economic
recovery is being set back by weeks, by months, perhaps
even lon( 3er, by the irresponsible policies of the opposition.
I can think ot nothing more likely to cause dismay to the
business community than this needless prolongation of our
economic difficulties., Everything that business and unions
and the Government have been working for has been put at
risk. In its efforts to overturn the elected Government,
the Opposition is dragging this country to the very brink
of catastrophe. There is no other way to describe what Mr
Fraser and his cohorts are doing.
As soon as the crisis began, the Government
took stock of its responsibilities and immediately began
looking at ways of avoiding unnecessary hardship to the
public. We decided to do everything in our power to
minimise disruption and suffering to innocent people
especially to loyal public servants, who are carrying on their
work out of a sense of duty to the Australian people.
Quite plainly, it would have been a total abdication of
the Government's responsibilities if we had sat idly by and
done nothing in this emergency. Of course there are limits
to what we can do. Without the Budget being passed, the
normal conduct of Government services is impossible.
Nevertheless, we expect, with the generous cooperation
of the banks the private banks as well as the Commonwealth
and State Government banks to make arrangements that
will ensure as far as possible that public servants and
contractors receive normal wages and payments for their work.
/ 3 
I don't regard this as a solution to the crisis, Of
course it is not. These will be temporary and in some
ways awkward arrangements. They do not resolve the
underlying problem. Yet Mr Fraser went into a lather
of indignation the other day because the Government
took steps to see that public servants and others
are not made bankrupt or destitute by the Opposition's
action. I make it clear that all these emergency
arrangements will be legal and constitutional.
It is the Opposition's behaviour that is defying the
Constitution and subverting established parliamentary
convention. It is the Opposition's behaviour that is
bringing Australia to a standstill.
There is and always has been one basic
issue in this dispute: that the elected Government, the
Government in the House of Representatives, has the right
to govern for its normal three-year term. Three weeks
ago Mr Fraser wanted the Government to resign immediately.
Last week he maae another proposal. Now he's sayingthis
was his incredible proposal last week that the
Government can have another six months in office by grace
and favour of the Opposition another six months in
office providing we resign by the end of June.
Mr Fraser and his supporters dressed up this
preposterous suggestion by callirgit an " offer"; or a
11compromise"~ or a " con-cession". It was nothing of the
sort. Let's assume for the moment that the proposal was
genuine. What are its practical implications? It can
only mean this: Mr Fraser is now proposing, in the midst
of the uncertainty and hardship he has already caused,
that from this moment on, from now for the next six, seven
or eight months, the nation should be involved in a
continuing election campaign and should suffer all the
paralysis of normal administration and the normal decisionmaking
processes which inevitably comes from an election
and its aftermath. I rejected this suggestion. I shall
reject any other attempt to obscure or compromise the basic
principle for which I am fighting the right of an elected
Government to govern, the right of the House of Representatives,
the people's House, to determine the Government of this
country. I shall not yield on that principle. I shall
not give up my fight to defend and preserve our democratic
institutions. I know I can count on the support of the
overwhelming majority of typical decent Australians. 



EMBARGO: 6.00 PM
Press Statement No. 590
9 November 1975
THE BUDGET -THE SENATE DELAY
our nation is now entering the fifth week of the
Constitutional crisis caused by the action of the Senate
in blocking the Budget. Amid all the worry and anxiety
caused by the actions of the Senate, the message I wish to
bring tonight is basically one of reassurance. The really
important thing that has happened in Australia over the
last three or four weeks has been the proof of the basic
strength and steadiness of the Australian people, their
political maturity, their Common sense in circumstances
which for all of us are new, challenging and uncharted.
There has been. this paradox: that on an issue
containing the seeds of deep division and disruptin there has
been a display of national unity and common purpose from the
vast majority of ordinary Australians and from all sections
of the community such as we have not had on any issue since
the war. I have drawn great reassurance from it, and I
believe all Australians, whatever their political persuasion
and indeed whatever their opinion on this specific issue may
be, can take reassurance from it confidence about the
fundamental stability and maturity of our country.
Not the least encouraging, not the least remarkable
has been the clear support shown for the principle of
Parliamentary democracy by our fellow Australians, born
overseas. In so many cases they came here from countries
either where there was no genuine Parliamentary democracy or
where irresponsibility and factionalism made the Parliamentary
system unworkable. They are now appalled to find that.
the right of the elected government to govern twice elected
in less than three years is now being challenged in Australia.
The second ground for reas surance is the loyalty
and solidarity already shown by the Public Service throughout
Australia. Clearly the basic business of the nation cannot
continue without their co-operation. For instance, while
money is certainly available to pay all pensions, the actual
delivery of payment requires that officers can continue to.
do their job. It's because of this that the Government is
determined to do all within its Constitutional and legal
power to ensure that pensions are paid, that Public Servants
can do their job and that the Armed Forces can continue at
their posts. / 2 
Public Servants will be paid in the normal way on
13 and 27 November. Thereafter the banks -the private banks
as well as the Commonwealth Bank and the State Government
banks are concerned to ensure that their customers, whose
incomes are threatened, obtain credit during this difficult
time. The Government welcomes the statement by the banks
that they will do all they can to provide credit. We shall
co-operate with them. That is, the very least we could do
for the loyal Public Servants who are sticking by their posts.
The third ground for confidence and reassurance i~ s
the attitude of the industrial movement and increasingly,
as the implications of the Senate's conduct become clearer,
the attitude of the business community. I acknowledge that
before the Budget, most businessmen would have preferred a
change of Government. But it's been very clear for the past
month that what most businessmen now want is for our Budget
to pass and for that Budget to be given a real chance to work.
The Budget spells out the way to economic recovery the sole
but difficult, delicate path to recovery.
We emphasised the need for the restoration of investment
confidence. That's very important. But there's another side
to the coin. We seek co-operation from employees their
unions and associations and we are getting it. That
co-operation is the whole key to the chance of restoring
investment profitability. But how long can we expect it to
last if the Budget is further stalled?
It cannot be repeated too often: the Senate could
not now be doing what it is except for the death of a
Labor Senator, Senator Milliner, and the scandalous
unconstitutional appointment of a non-Labor replacement.
This whole crisis would not be happening in the way that it
is happening except for the death of Senator Milliner and
its shameful aftermath.
The people of Australia are now very properly asking
" where will it end?" It will end as soon as the Senate
stops this nonsense, abides by the Constitution and passes
the Budget and allows the duly elected government to govern.
it will end tomorrow if the Senate stops stalling and does
its Constitutional duty and its duty by Australia.
In a very real sense, this issue will be decided
by the Australian people. If we all refuse to be panicked,
if we all refuse to be blackmailed, if we hold firm together,
I cannot but believe that there are enough men and women in
the Senate who, seeing their duty and responsibility, will
also do their duty.
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



1*-
PRIME MINISTER PRESS'STATEMENT NO. 592
November 1975
PROFESSOR R. I. DOWNING
I was deeply shocked to hear of Professor Downing's
death. The loss of this outstanding Australian will be keenly
felt in his own country and abroad. There was scarcely an'area
of our intellectual and artistic life that he did not adorn
with his wisdom, his experience and with the singular
warmth and force of his personality.
I took special satisfaction from his appointment as
Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission in 1973,
He brought remarkable tolerance and sensitivity to
his guidance of the ABC and high liberal principles to the
difficult area of program standards.
For more than 20 years he was associated with the
University of Melbourne as an academic economist and administrator.
He was on the Boards of the National Gallery of Victoria
and the Melbourne Theatre Company. He made a lasting
contribution to the Arts as a member of the Australia Council.
As an economist and social critic identified with the
most enlightened causes, Richard Downing was in the great
humane tradition of Keynes and Galbraith. I extend, on behalf
of the Government, my deepest sympathy to his widow and
family and express my personal sorrow in the loss sustained
by his many friends and by all his countrymen.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.-



A~ Lv&amp; A
PRIME MINISTER PRESS STATEMENT NO. 593
NOVEMBER 1975
MEETING BETWEEN~ PRIME'MINISTER AND OPPOSITION LEADERS
Mr Fraser has asked for a meeting. As I am always
ready to discuss issues rationally and sensibly, I welcomed
the opportunity to do just that. Mr Fraser is now saying
* he will-insist absolutely on the requirements for a general
election before Christmas-. or before 30 June. He is also
insisting that Australian Government officials be present
to advise him and his colleagues..
The Constitutional dispute boils down to one simple
principle; the Party with the unchallenged majority in the
House of Representatives must be allowed to govern.
Officials give advice to the Government. The Government
advises the Governor-General as to when any election should be
held. Frank Crean, Fred Daly and I are still happy to meet
with Mr Fraser tomorrow morning, but I do not want him or anyone
else tto be under any impression that such a meeting is taking
place to permit him, as Leader of the Opposition, to either
name the date of an election or to receive advice from officials.
CANBERRA A. C. T. 


Ladies and gentleman&nbsp;, well may we say God Save the Queen&nbsp;because nothing will save the Governor-General.
The proclamation which you have just heard read by the Governor-General’s official secretary was countersigned ‘Malcolm Fraser’&nbsp;who will undoubtedly go down in Australian history from Remembrance Day 1975 as Kerr’s cur.
They won’t silence the outskirts of Parliament House, even if the inside has been silenced for the next few weeks&nbsp;.
The Governor-General’s proclamation was signed after he already made an appointment to meet the Speaker at a quarter to five.
The House of Representatives had requested the Speaker to give the Governor-General its decision that Mr Fraser did not have the confidence of the House &nbsp;and that the Governor-General should call me to form the Government. . .&nbsp;.
Maintain your rage and enthusiasm through the campaign for the election now to be held and until polling day.


I have given careful consideration to the constitutional crisis and have made some decisions which I wish to explain.
Summary
It has been necessary for me to find a democratic and constitutional solution to the current crisis which will permit the people of Australia&nbsp;to decide as soon as possible what should be the outcome of the deadlock which developed over supply between the two Houses of&nbsp;Parliament and between the Governiment and the Opposition parties. The only solution consistent with the Constitution and with my oath of&nbsp;office and my responsibilities, authority and duty as Governor-General is to terminate the commission as Prime Minister of Mr Whitlam&nbsp;and to arrange for a caretaker government able to secure supply and willing to let the issue go to the people.
I shall summarise the elements of the problem and the reasons&nbsp;for my decision which places the matter before the people of Australia for prompt determination.
Because of the federal nature of our Constitution and because of its provisions the Senate undoubtedly has constitutional power to refuse or defer supply to the Government. Because of the principles of responsible government a Prime Minister who cannot obtain supply, including money for carrying on the ordinary services of government, must either advise a general election or resign. If he refuses to do this I have the authority and indeed the duty under the Constitution to withdraw his Commission as Prime Minister. The position in Australia is quite different from the position in the United Kingdom. Here the confidence of both Houses on supply is necessary to ensure its provision. In the United Kingdom the confidence of the House of Commons alone is necessary. But both here and in the United Kingdom the duty of the Prime Minister is the same in a most important respect if he cannot get supply he must resign or advise an election.
If a Prime Minister refuses to resign or to advise an election, and this is the case with Mr Whitlam, my constitutional authority and duty require me to do what I have now done to withdraw his commission and to invite the Leader of the Opposition to form a caretaker government that is one that makes no appointments or dismissals and initiates no policies, until a general election is held. It is most desirable that he should guarantee supply. Mr Fraser will be asked to give the necessary undertakings and advise whether he is prepared to recommnend a double dissolution. He will also be asked to guarantee supply.
The decisions I have made were made after I was satisfied that Mr Whitlam could not obtain supply. No other decision open to me would enable the Australian people to decide for themselves what should be done.
Once I had made up my mind, for my own part, what I must do if Mr Whitlam persisted in his stated intentions I consulted the Chief Justice of Australia, Sir Garfield Barwick. I have his permission to say that I consulted him in this way.
The result is that there will&nbsp;be an early general election for both Houses and the people can do what, in a democracy such as ours, is their responsibility&nbsp;and duty and theirs alone. It is for the people now to decide the issue which the two leaders have failed to settle.
Detailed Statement of Decisions
On 16 October the Senate deferred consideration of Appropriation Bills ( Nos. 1 &amp; 2) 1975-1976. In the time which elapsed since then events made it clear that the Senate was determined to refuse to grant supply to the Government. In&nbsp;that time the Senate on no less than two occasions resoved to proceed no further with fresh Appropriation Bills, in identical terms, which had been passed by the House of Representatives. The determination of the Senate to maintain its refusal to grant supply war; confirmed by the public statements made by the Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition having control of the Senate.
By virtue of what has in fact happened there therefore came into existence a deadlock between the House of Representatives and the Senate on the central issue of supply without which all the ordinary services of the government cannot le maintained. I had the benefit of discussions with the Prime Minister and, with his approval, with the Leader of the Opposition and with the Treasurer and the Attorney-General. As a result of those discussions and having regard to the public statements of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition I have come regretfully to the conclusion that there is no likelihood of a compromise between the House of Representatives and&nbsp;the Senate nor for that matter between the Government and the Opposition.
The deadlock which arose&nbsp;was one which, in the interests of the nation, had to be resolved as promptly as possible and by means which are&nbsp;appropriate in our democratic&nbsp;system. In all the circumstances which have occurred the appropriate rneans&nbsp;is dissolution of the Parliament and an election for both Houses. No other course&nbsp;offers a sufficient assurance of resolving the deadlock and resolving it promptly.
Parliamentary control of appropriation and accordingly&nbsp;of expenditure is a fundamental feature of our system&nbsp;of responsible government. In consequence&nbsp;it has been generally accepted that a government that has been denied supply by the Parliarnent, cannot govern. So much at least is clear in cases where a ministry is refused supply by a popularly elected Lower House. In other systems where an&nbsp;Upper House is denied the right to reject a money bill&nbsp;denial of supply can occur only at the instance of the Lower House. When, however, an Upper&nbsp;House possesses the power to reject a money bill&nbsp;including an appropriation bill, and exercises the power by denying supply, the principle&nbsp;that a government has been denied supply by the Parliament should resign or go to an election must still apply - it is a necessary consequence jof Parliamentary cotnrol of appropriation and expenditure and of the expectation that the ordinary and necessary&nbsp;services of government&nbsp;will&nbsp;continue to be provided.
The Constitution combines the two elements of responsible government and federalism. &nbsp;The Senate is, like the House, a popularly elected chamber. &nbsp;It was designed to provide representation by States, not by electorates, and was given by Sec. 53, equal powers with the House with respect to proposed laws, except in the respects mentioned in the section.&nbsp;&nbsp;It was denied power to originate or amedn appropriation bills but was left with power to reject them or defer consideration of them.&nbsp;The Senate accordingly has the power and has exercised the power to refuse to grant supply to the Government. The Government stands in the position that it has been denied supply by the Parliament with all the consequences which flow from that fact.
There have been public discussions about whether there is a convention deriving from the principles of responsible government that the Senate must never under any circumstances exercise the power to reject an appropriation bill.&nbsp;The Constitution must prevail over any&nbsp;convention because, in determining the question how far the conventions&nbsp;of responsible government have been granted on to the federal compact, the Constitution itself must in the end control the situation.
Sec. 57 of the Constitution provides a means, perhaps the usual means, of resolving a disagreement between the Houses with respect to a proposed law. But the machinery which it provides necessarily entails a considerable time lag which is quite inappropriate to a speedy resolution of the fundamental problems posed by the&nbsp;refusal of supply. Its presence in the Constitution does not cut down the reserve powers of the Governor-General.
I should be surprised if the Law Officers expressed the view that there is no reserve power in the Governor- General to dismiss a Ministry which has; been refused supply&nbsp;by the Parliament&nbsp;and to commission a Ministry, as a caretaker ministry which will secure supply and recommend a dissolution, including where appropriate a double dissolution. This &nbsp;a matter on which my own mind is quite clear and am acting in accordance with my own clear view of. the principles laid clown by the Constitution&nbsp;and of the nature, powers and responsibility of my office.
There is one&nbsp;other point.. There has&nbsp;been discussion of the possibility that a half-Senate-election might be held under circumstances in which&nbsp;the Governement&nbsp;has not obtained supply. If such advice were given to me&nbsp;I should feel&nbsp;constrained to reject it because a half-Senate election held whilst supply continues to be denied does not guarantee a prompt or sufficiently clear prospect of the deadlock being resolved in accordance with proper principles. When I refer to rejection of such advice I mnean that, as I would&nbsp;find it necessary in the&nbsp;circumstances I have envisaged to determine Mr Whitlam's commission and,&nbsp;as things have turned out have done so, he would not be&nbsp;Prime Minister and not be able to give or persist with such advice.
The announced proposals about financing public servants, suppliers, contractors and others do not amount to a satisfactory alternative&nbsp;to supply.
Government House,
Canberra. 2600.
11 November 1975


WHITLAM:&nbsp;Clearly the great issue, almost the sole issue of this campaign will be whether the Government which the people elected with a majority in the House of Representatives will be allowed to govern from now on. The whole of this system is under challenge as we see. Now up till the very last division in the House of Representatives where, we have always believed, governments should be made and unmade. We won that division by a majority of ten votes; sixty-four for us, fifty-four for the others. And during this campaign the overwhelming issue will be, are we to have three year Governments in Australia; is the Party which gets a majority in the House of Representatives to be allowed to govern? That is, it’s the future of Parliamentary democracy as we have known it.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Mr Whitlam, do you believe that Sir John Kerr did a deal with Malcolm Fraser before today’s announcement?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I don’t know.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Prime Minister are you surprised to know that the Opposition Parties in fact knew of this decision before you went to Government House?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I don’t know whether they did know. I’m making no assumptions or at least I’m making no allegations.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Sir, in his statement, Sir John Kerr said that no other decision was open to him which would enable the Australian people to decide for themselves which was the Government. At any time over the last three or four weeks, did the Governor-General put any proposition to you as Prime Minister for a general election or an election of the House of Representatives or any other election to solve this impasse?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;There was a proposition as to the date of the half-Senate election. And it was as a result of that suggestion that I made the comments I did in Question Time last Tuesday; but there was no response from the other side to that suggestion.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;The Governor-General has stated the reason for dismissing you was that you no longer had Supply and cannot govern. At any stage did he tell you along the way that he was dismissing you before the Supply ran out on November 30? In other words tell you that if you wanted to have a half-Senate to have it done by November 30?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;No, no. That was not the advice that I gave the Governor-General, nor was it the impression that the Governor-General gave me. Supply had not run out by the time I saw the Governor-General at one o’clock today. And as we all know, about a quarter past two this afternoon the Budget Bills were passed and when Mr Fraser read portions of Sir John Kerr’s views to the House of Representatives those views were no longer well based. Because by that time Supply had been passed. The Budget Bills had been passed.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Did he tell you at any stage that he disagreed with Mr Fraser? Mr Fraser has said on a number of occasions that he feared that Labor would gain a temporary majority in the Senate at a half-Senate election at which the Labor Party would be able to pass…
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Clearly I mustn’t go into details between conversations that I have with the Governor-General or the Queen. Those ought to be confidential. But I can assure you, as is clearly the case, Supply had not run out by one o’clock today when I saw the Governor-General, and of course arrangements were being made to see that Government employees and suppliers would have their debts met by their banks. And the Governor-General had been advised that that was completely legal and constitutional.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;How does it feel being the first Prime Minister since Federation to have been sacked by the Crown?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I’m the first for 200 years since George the 3rd sacked Lord North.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Do you think in years to come that this will result in a move towards republicism in Australia.
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Don’t let me speculate on that. But what I am certain is that no Prime Minister with a majority in the House of Representatives will ever again have his commission withdrawn by the Crown or the Crown’s representative.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;What’s your view of the vice-regal position now that this current incumbent has refused to accept the advice of the Prime Minister?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I mustn’t comment on that.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Am I right in believing that when you went to Government House today the Governor-General did not wait to hear your advice before handing you your dismissal notice? And secondly, now that it seems to have been established that the Senate is the more powerful of the two Houses, do you think that the Governor-General should have commissioned Mr Withers as Acting Prime Minister?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;That would be the logical extension. But, of course, in the Senate which has just been dissolved, nobody had a majority. And it can’t be said too often, and I believe during the next few weeks of this campaign it will be made very plain, that the only majority that the Opposition secured in the Senate, on this issue of the Budget, were due to the fact that Senator Milliner, the Labor Senator from Queensland was replaced by a non-Labor Senator. If Senator Milliner had still been alive, then the motions to adjourn debate on the Budget would never have been carried. There would have been an equality of votes and those amendments would therefore have been lost. And then, 4 weeks ago, the Senate would have had to vote on the Governor-General’s message asking for the Budget to be passed. Whatever Senator Wither’s qualities may be, he doesn’t have a majority in the Senate. In the old Senate.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Could you answer the first question Sir? Did you get a chance to offer advice to the Governor-General before getting your dismissal notice?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I had spoken to him on the phone this morning; he knew what my advice was going to be. I had the advice in writing. He didn’t accept it.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;He gave you no indication of what he was going to do when you spoke to him on the phone?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;None whatever.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Mr Whitlam, are you satisfied that the former Liberal Attorney-General, who is now Chief Justice of the High Court should have been the only outside legal authority that the Governor-General consulted?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I think the Governor-General was in error on that issue. The High Court of Australia does not have the function of giving advisory opinions. Some superior courts in other countries do, for instance, the Supreme Court of Canada. The High Court does not have that function. If the views of High Court judges are relevant, then clearly the views of all 7 are equally relevant.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Are you saying that at no stage during the talks you had with the Governor-General did he leave you with an impression that he thought that a general election was the proper course?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;On the contrary. He gave me the other impression. He knew that I had and was likely to continue to have a majority in the House of Representatives. And he also knew, of course, that the Opposition didn’t have a majority in the Senate.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Are you saying, Mr Whitlam, that he misled you?
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Have you been in touch with Buckingham Palace or with London about the actions of the Governor-General?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;The Governor-General prevented me from getting in touch with the Queen by just withdrawing the Commission immediately. I was unable to communicate with the Quken, as I would have been entitled to do, if I’d had any warning of the course that he, the Governor-General, was to take.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Do you think the Queen knew about this course of action?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I shouldn’t think so, but I don’t know.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Sir, are you suggesting that the Governor-General may have misled you?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;No, I’m not saying that.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Do you think the Governor-General took any advice from Buckingham Palace…?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I don’t know. I don’t know. I was not informed that he had. I would think not.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Mr Whitlam, when you say that in the future no other Prime Minister will have his commission withdrawn, what do you mean by that?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I believe that we will win this election. The third time will prove it. My Government will be elected for the third time and in those circumstances I don’t believe that the Opposition would venture to be as obstructive again. You may say that that is an optimistic thing about them being obstructive. But it’s been quite clear that the public has been alienated by what Mr Snedden did in April last year. And the public has again been alienated by what Mr Fraser has just done. And I believe that there will be a healthy reluctance by future Liberal leaders to be as obstructive in the Senate again. What we need is a Senate which will work. For the last 3 and a half weeks the Senate has refused to vote on the Budget. The first vote that was taken on the Budget, the one at about a quarter past two this afternoon, resulted in the Budget being passed. And it’s not only in this respect that the Senate has been obstructive. The Senate has rejected more bills in the last 3 years than the Senate had rejected from 1901 to 1972 inclusive.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Mr Whitlam are you satisfied that the Governor-General had the right under the Constitution to withdraw your commission?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Oh, no, on the contrary. I’m certain the Crown did not have the right to do what the Governor-General did on this occasion.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Mr Whitlam, if you’re re-elected as Prime Minister, will you retain Sir John Kerr as the Governor-General?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Now, as I have said, what goes on between the Crown, the Queen and I, the Queen and me, or the Governor-General and me, must be confidential.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Now that the Governor-General has taken the heat off Sir Phillip Game are you technically Opposition Leader or are you merely the Member for Werriwa?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I am the twice elected Prime Minister of Australia. There is a caretaker at the moment. There is no elected Prime Minister currently recognised by the Governor-General. But we have the situation, as you know, that no decisions can be taken until the result of the election is known, because Mr Fraser has been given a commission on condition that he makes no decisions. Now that might be a visual condition for Liberal administrations, but the fact is, that he can’t do anything. It was on that condition, that he was given this commission. And then as we know it takes some weeks to count elections under our electoral laws. It took about six weeks, wasn’t it, to count the last election. And if there had been recounts sought in New South Wales for instance, it would have taken three months to count the elections, so we have to face the decisions for a couple of months and that there will be no decisions for a couple of months and that there will be no Parliament able to legislate in Australia, probably for three months.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Sir, will that affect the economy?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Well clearly it will because there are a great number of decisions which have to be made. The economy has already been damaged, unemployment has already been made worse by the conduct of the Senate over the last three and a half weeks.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Do you feel any regrets that you appointed Sir John Kerr?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Oh, please don’t.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;There has already been some industrial action as a result of today’s proceedings. I would like to ask you a two part question. Do you think that you can continue to urge the Australian union movement to adhere to indexation? And do you think the Australian union movement can regard your election for the third time, as you forecast, as being relevant anymore?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;This is a worry, obviously. A great number of people will give away the Parliamentary system in Australia if my Government isn’t re-elected. My Party has been elected to government twice. On both occasions it has only been allowed to govern for half its term. Now I have, throughout my Parliamentary life and all my senior colleagues, throughout their Parliamentary lives, have insisted that the way to bring about reform in Australia was through the Parliaments. That the was the way the one could achieve change in an orderly, peaceful, democratic fashion. Now a very great number of people are having their faith shaken. If my Government is not elected the third time, then there can be very great apprehension that people in Australia will believe the Parliament is not a vehicle for reform. They’ll try to go outside the system.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;(About republican feeling – Unclear.)
WHITLAM:&nbsp;It may but I’m too far committed to the monachy as you know to…No, I mean the Queen would never have done this, let’s be frank about this. The Queen would never have done this.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Prime Minister what were the circumstances and what’s the constitutional significance of Sir John Kerr ignoring the successful motion of no confidence carried in the Fraser government by the House of Representatives today?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I can’t understand how the Governor-General took this action. As you remember—and of course we will all be cheking this from Hansard tomorrow—somewhere before three o’clock this afternoon the House of Representatives passed the motion declaring that it had no confidence in Mr Fraser as Prime Minister, and requesting the Speak to advise the Governor-General immediately to call me to be the head of the Australian Government. This motion was carried by 64 votes to 54. the Speaker then sought an audience from the Governor-General. An appointment was made by the Governor-General for the Speaker to wait upon him at a quarter to five. At a quarter to five the Governor-General’s official secretary announced from the steps of Parliament House that both Houses had been dissolved. As you all know, somewhere about quarter past two, that is, at least half an hour before the House of Representatives declared that it had no confidence in Mr Fraser, and that it wanted the Speaker to ask the Governor-General to call me to be the Head of the Government, half an hour before that the Senate had passed the Budget Bills. Accordingly at the time that the Speaker sought an audience with the Governor-General the Budget had already been passed. The House of Representatives had already declared a majority of ten that it had no confidence in Mr Fraser. It had already declared that by the same majority that the Speaker should not request the Governor-General to call me to be the Head of Government. Now I can’t understand how, in those circumstances, the Governor-General saw fit to dissolve both Houses. Clearly the things that he had in mind when he drafted the statement he gave me at one o’clock, and Mr Fraser presumably at about half past one, the grounds in that statement no longer applied and you will notice that the Governor-General declared that the two houses were dissolved on the ground of the double dissolution Bill, he did not purport to dissolve the two Houses because the Government didn’t have Supply. Or because what the elected Government didn’t have Supply.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;That being the case, is there any course open to you, any member of the public, the State Government or anyone to clarify the situation, in the High Court?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I don’t believe that you can bring the Governor-General before the high Court.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;When the Governor-General rejected your advice for an early half Senate election did he give you any opportunity to offer alternative advice?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;No, no. That’s right, he withdrew my commission.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Prime Minister do you believe that you’ve been dismissed illegally?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;Unconstitutionally. There is no Act which says it can’t happen. But it hasn’t happened for 200 years in the Westminster system. There is no Act of Parliament which says it can’t be done. The whole trust of the Constitution is, that the Party which has the majority in the House of Representatives becomes the Government. And that a Party which is the Government doesn’t cease to be the government unless it loses its majority in the House of Representatives. You can have the situation where a government is in the minority in the Senate. But nevertheless, the government remains the government as longas it has the majority in the House of Representatives. There have been times in the past, not only since we’ve had proportional representation in the Senate and the Senate has been very evenly balanced, when of course on several occasions the Menzies Government, the Holt Government too, didn’t have a majority in the Senate. There have been previous occasions, for instance when the first Menzies Government was defeated and the Fadden Government was defeated, that that Party still had a very large majority in the Senate. But nevertheless, Curtin came in, in the House of Representatives, because a majority of the members of the House of Representatives supported him. And the fact that he didn’t have a majority in the Senate, the fact that if they’d been do disposed the Senators could have rejected the Curtin Budget, never of course occurred to anyone.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Prime Minister, you’d probably agree that you enjoy a fight. Are you looking forward to the election campaign and when will you officially launch the campaign?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;I can’t be sure when I’ll be making my first Public speech but I think I will be having something of political relevance to say at the Liverpool town Hall on Thursday when I’m at the naturalisation and at the Wollongong on Saturday night when I’m at a social function then. Certainly I like a fight. I’ve won a fair number of fights and I expect to win this one. I’ve never known so clear cut an issue. It’s not just what happens to my Government, what’s been done to my Government, it’s what can happen to any Government which thereafter is given a majority in the House of Representatives by the electors and which retains that majority in the House of Representatives. Parliamentary democracy is at stake in Australia here. The alternative is that whenever the Senate fails to pass a Bill, and the Senate fails to pass a Bill if there’s an even division. There doesn’t have to be a majority against the Government proposal in the Senate, it’s enough if the Senate is evenly divided. Now if, by being evenly divided, the Senate can take the Government of the country out of the hands of the Party which has a majority in the House of Representatives then we can have elections, not only every year and a half, as we’ve had in the case of my first two Governments, but also every six months.
JOURNALIST:&nbsp;Has Mr Fraser told you when he’s going to have an election?
WHITLAM:&nbsp;No, but it is clearly possible to have an election on the 13 December, that was the date which was shown by the Chief Electoral Officer to be feasible for the half-Senate election which I was advising for the Governor-General to suggest as the date to the State Governors. But moreover any later date like the 20th or the 27th would be very difficult because the usual polling places and the usual polling clerks would not be available. The 13th is a perfectly practicable date. It is the earliest we can have it; as far as I am concerned the sooner the better. The third time will prove it.


